UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Diagrams and Descriptions in Acquiring Complex Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4s13g11b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Heiser, Julie
Tversky, Barbara

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Diagrams and Descriptions in Acquiring Complex Systems
Julie Heiser and Barbara Tversky (jheiser,{bt}@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology
Jordan Hall, Building 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract
Complex systems such as a car brake, circulatory system,
or legislative system can be conveyed by language or
diagrams. Such systems can be presented from structural
or functional perspectives. In three experiments, we
examine communicating structure and function of
mechanical systems (bike pump, car brake, pulley
system) by text and diagrams in relation to mechanical
ability. By adding arrows, structural diagrams can be
enriched to convey functional information. Inferring
structure from function was easier than inferring function
from structure. Participants high in mechanical ability
outperformed low participants except when text
perspective matched question perspective. Those with
low mechanical ability are at a disadvantage, especially
for inferring function from diagrams. Comprehension of
complex systems depends in sensible ways on
perspective, medium, and ability.

Conveying Complex Systems
When we learn about a new digital camera, attempt to
troubleshoot a broken-down car, or try to understand a
new finding in neuroscience, we need to understand a
complex system. Despite the ubiquity of contact with
complex systems, understanding them or interacting
with them can be frustrating. The frustrations are due
not only to the complexity of the systems but also to the
inadequacy of instructions and explanations.
Effective explanations of complex systems have a
complexity of their own. Effectiveness depends on the
perspective of the information to be conveyed, on the
medium of conveying the information, and on the
ability and expertise of the learner. Some of these
complex interactions have been examined in previous
work, though finding generality in the conclusions has
been elusive (e.g., Hegarty, et al., 1990; Hegarty, et al.,
1993; Mayer & Gallini, 1990; Morrison and Tversky,
2000). More clarity may be achieved by an analysis of
the information to be conveyed relative to
characteristics of the media and to qualities of
individual differences.
Information about complex systems is of two types:
structural information, the configuration of parts or
topology of the system, and functional information, the
sequence of operations and outcomes. The
configuration of parts has a spatial or metaphorically

spatial structure, and the sequence of operations has a
temporal, causal structure. The primary media for
conveying complex systems are language and diagrams.
With an increasing emphasis on visual displays of
information, we found it important to investigate the
success that diagrams have in comparison to text in
communicating this information. Structural information
should be effectively conveyed in diagrams because
diagrams use elements and relations in space to convey
actual topology. Furthermore, arrows indicating the
sequence of operations can be added to a diagram to
convey functional information.
There are conflicting results on the relations
between medium and ability. Some studies show that
people with low ability benefit from diagrams and
others show that people with low ability have
difficulties extracting information from diagrams
(Hegarty 1992; Larkin & Simon, 1987; Mayer, 1989)
An analysis of information perspective may reconcile
these conflicting findings. In particular, low ability
participants or novices may be able to extract structural
but not functional information from diagrams.
Functional information must be inferred from diagrams,
in contrast to structural information, which is explicit.
Three experiments examine the interactions of
medium, content, and ability in the comprehension of
complex systems. We use three systems that have been
used with success in previous literature, a pulley system
(adapted from Hegarty & Just, 1993), car brake and
bicycle pump (both adapted from Mayer & Gallini,
1990).

Experiment 1:
Descriptions from Diagrams
Diagrams of complex systems are excellent for
conveying structural information as they use space and
the elements in it to convey real or conceptual elements
and the relations among them. Adding arrows may
facilitate conveying functional information as arrows
indicate the temporal sequence of operations.
Participants were asked to describe what is depicted in
a diagram of a complex system, without and with
arrows.

Method
Participants
Participants were 67 psychology students fulfilling a
course requirement. Thirty-four participants described
diagrams without arrows; 8 a car brake, 14 a bicycle
pump, and 12 a pulley system (see Figure 1 for example
of car brake diagram with arrows). Thirty-three
participants described diagrams with arrows; 8 a car
brake, 12 a bicycle pump, and 13 a pulley system.
Procedure
Participants were first asked to rate their mechanical
ability and prior knowledge of the device given to them
on a 1 to 7 scale, 1 = poor, 7 = excellent. In the 3
experiments reported here, participants self-rated their
mechanical ability and their prior knowledge of the
complex system presented. We chose a self-rated
measure as it has been found to correlate with actual
mechanical ability and spatial ability (Hegarty & Just,
1993; Heiser & Tversky, in prep).
Participants were shown one of three diagrams: a
car brake (Figure 1), bicycle pump, or a pulley system,
either without or with arrows and asked to “Please
examine the diagram above. On the lines below, write a
description of the system in the diagram.”

the features of the components (i.e. the shape of a part)
counted as structural information. Descriptions of the
function of the system, the function of individual parts
or the way the parts work together, counted as
functional information. In the previous example, the
first proposition, “the brake fluid is liquid” was coded
as structural. The second proposition, “ the brake fluid
travels down the tube” was coded as functional. Coders
agreed 94%, and disagreements were settled through
discussion.

Results and Discussion
There were no main effects for diagram content, selfrated ability or total number of propositions across
conditions.
As predicted, participants who described diagrams
with arrows produced significantly more functional
units of information (M = 2.24, SD = 1.3) than
participants who described diagrams without arrows (M
= 1.26, SD= 1.1), F (1,61) = 10.9, p < .01. Similarly,
participants who described diagrams without arrows
generated significantly more structural units (M = 1.65,
SD = 1.65), than those who described diagrams with
arrows (M = .52, SD = .62), F (1,61) = 13.67, p < .01.
The presence of arrows in a diagram of a mechanical
system indicates the sequence of operations of the
system. From the temporal sequence, participants
readily made inferences to the function of the system,
and described it in those terms.

Experiment 2:
Diagrams from Descriptions
Is the use of arrows to convey temporal, causal
sequence so established that producers of diagrams will
comply? Participants read either a structural or a
functional description of a complex system, and
produced a diagram.
Figure 1: Car brake diagram with arrows (adapted from
Mayer & Gallini (1990))
Coding
Self-rated mechanical ability and self-rated prior
knowledge of system correlated highly (r = .78, p < 01).
They were averaged to provide a single ability score,
ranging from 1-7 (poor-excellent).
Descriptions of diagrams were coded blindly. Two
coders divided each description into propositions.
Coders were told that a proposition is the smallest unit
of meaning in a sentence. For example, in the sentence
“the liquid brake fluid travels down the tube,” there are
two propositions. First, “the brake fluid is liquid” and
second, “the brake fluid travels down the tube.”
Coders categorized each proposition as structural or
functional. Descriptions of the system structure or of

Method
Participants
240 students in an introductory psychology course at
Stanford University participated for course credit.
Forty-four participants either did not draw a diagram or
did not complete the questionnaire, leaving 93
participants in the functional description group and 103
in the structural description group, distributed fairly
evenly across the three systems.
Stimuli
Structural and functional descriptions were written for
each of the three systems, the car brake, bicycle pump,
and pulley system. Those for the car brake appear in
Table 1 and 2. Structural descriptions contain details of
parts and their spatial relations, primarily using forms if
the verb “to be” or verbs of fictive motion. Functional

descriptions contain actions and
primarily using active verbs of motion.

consequences

structural descriptions were high mechanical ability
participants (see Figure 2 for examples).

Table 1: Car brake structural description
“The brake or brake drum is a circular structure. Directly inside
the sides of the brake drum are two thick semicircular structures
called the brake shoes. The brake fluid reservoir is located
above and to the side of the brake drum. From the brake fluid
reservoir, a tube runs down sideways and then down to the
middle of the brake drum. Extending from both sides of the
tube in the middle of the brake drum are wheel cylinders
surrounding small pistons. Brake fluid can move from the
reservoir through the tube to the pistons. The small pistons can
move outward toward the brake shoes. The brake shoes can
move outward toward the brake drum.”

Table 2: Car brake functional description
“From the brake fluid reservoir, brake fluid enters and travels
sideways and down the tube. As the brake fluid accumulates at
the bottom of the tube, pressure is exerted on the small pistons
inside the wheel cylinders. This causes the pistons to push
outward toward the brake drum. The outward movement of the
shoes causes friction along the inside of the brake drum,
slowing the rotation of the wheel.”

Procedure
Participants first rated their mechanical ability on a 1 to
7 scale, 1 = poor and 7 = excellent and their specific
knowledge of the depicted mechanical system on the
same scale. Participants then read a description of one
of three labeled systems (car brake, bicycle pump, or
pulley) and were asked: “In the space provid ed below
the description, please construct a diagram of what you
think the description is trying to convey.”
Coding
Self-rated mechanical ability and self-rated prior
knowledge of the device were highly correlated, r = .72,
p < 01. They were averaged to produce a single ability
score for each participant. Diagrams were coded blindly
by two coders for conventional elements, such as
arrows or lines, that conveyed either structure or
function. There were no disagreements in coding.

Results
As before, there were no effects of mechanical system
or for self-rated ability. Of the 196 depictions coded,
the only graphical element added was arrows. The
arrows were to indicate direction of motion of the
mechanical system. As predicted 62/93 (66.7%) who
depicted functional descriptions used arrows in their
depiction to indicate sequence of operation, whereas
16/103 (15.5%) participants who depicted structural
descriptions included arrows, X2 (N = 196) = 9, p <.01.
All 16 who included arrows in depictions from

Figure 2. Drawing from structural description (left) and
functional description (right) of car brake.

Discussion:
Communicating With Diagrams
Experiment 1 and 2 showed that people readily interpret
and produce arrows in diagrams to suggest functional
properties of complex systems. For a car brake, bicycle
pump and pulley system, diagrams without arrows
elicited structural descriptions. Conversely, for
structural descriptions participants drew diagrams
without arrows but for functional descriptions they
drew diagrams with arrows. Moreover, low ability
participants were as likely as high ability participants to
comprehend and produce arrows to convey function.
The finding that structural diagrams can be
effectively enriched by the simple addition of arrows is
important, as making inferences from structure to
function is one of the major difficulties of
understanding complex systems. The next study will
examine the roles of structural and functional
descriptions and diagrams with and without arrows in
comprehending and making inferences about complex
systems.

Experiment 3: Learning structure and
function from diagrams and text
Complex systems can be described from structural or
functional perspectives. The structural aspects of a
system are typically easier to convey. However, it is
often the functional aspects that are critical for
understanding how the system operates and for troubleshooting, error-recovery and high-level problem
solving. The previous experiment showed that a simple
enrichment of structural diagrams, an arrow, enable
functional inferences. Here we examine directly and in
detail the relative efficiency of structural and functional
text and of diagrams with and without arrows in
conveying structural and functional aspects of complex
systems. We do this for both high and low mechanical
ability participants. This experiment will provide
insight into the effects of medium, text or diagram;
perspective, structural or functional; and ability, high or

low, on transmission of structural and functional
information about complex systems.

Method
Participants and design
Participants were 147 students in an introductory
psychology course at Stanford University participating
for course credit. Each participant was randomly
assigned to one of 8 conditions. 31 to the no arrow
diagram condition, 40 to the arrows diagram condition,
33 to the structural text condition, and 43 to the
function text condition. Approximately equal
proportions of the participants studied the car brake and
the bicycle pump. The pulley system was not used in
this study. Study time was recorded for all subjects;
however, timing was inaccurate for 34 subjects (in
random conditions) leaving 113 study times in the
analysis.
Procedure
As in Experiments 1 and 2, participants first rated their
general mechanical ability and prior knowledge of the
specific device (car brake or bicycle pump) on a scale
from 1 to 7, 1 = poor, 7 = excellent.
Participants studied a description or diagram of either
the bike pump or car brake. In the text conditions,
participants read and studied the description four times.
In the diagram condition, participants studied the
diagrams completely four times. Study time was selfterminating. Immediately after study, participants
answered 16 true/false statements, half structural, half
functional. The questions varied in difficulty. An
example of a structural T/F statement is “The small
pistons are adjacent to the brake shoes.” An example of
a functional T/F statement is “The pistons put pressure
on the brake shoes.” Participants were told to respond
quickly and accurately.
Ability measurements
Participants’ scores from the self-rated prior knowledge
of device and mechanical ability scales correlated
significantly (r = .68, p < .01) and were averaged to
form a mechanical ability score. A median split gave
low and high ability students.

Results
Does the medium, text or diagram, or perspective,
structural/no arrow or functional/arrow affect
performance on structural and functional questions?
How does ability affect performance? Because of their
natural mapping to space, it is predicted that diagrams
will be superior to text for structural questions. In
regards to conveying structural or functional
perspectives of complex systems, it is predicted that
structural descriptions or diagrams should facilitate
structural questions and functional presentations should

facilitate functional questions. Finally, which is easier,
making inferences from structure to function or from
function to structure? To assess these effects and others,
we performed four analyses of variance on errors and
response times for structural and functional questions.
Each ANOVA had medium, text or diagrams;
perspective, structural or functional; and mechanical
ability, high or low, as factors.
Study time
There was wide variability in study time, but it did
not correlate with any of the measures of interestmedium, perspective, or ability.

Learning Structural Information
Effect of Ability
High mechanical ability participants outperformed low
ability participants on structural questions. Low ability
participants made more errors (M = 2.5, SD = 1.51)
than high ability participants (M = 1.59, SD = 1.14),
F(1, 139) = 15.7, p < .01. There were no significant
differences in response times between high (M = 4.6s,
SD = 1.5) and low mechanical ability (M = 4.5s, SD =
1.3s). There were also no significant interactions
between ability, medium, and perspective for errors on
structural questions. Figure 3 illustrates that low ability
participants perform close to that of high ability
participants when structural text was studied, however
this did not elicit a significant interaction.
Effect of Medium
There were no effects of medium for structural
questions. Fewer errors were made after a diagram was
studied (M = 1.76 out of 8, SD =1.08) than after text
was studied (M = 2.28, SD = 1.62), however this
difference was not significant, p > .1 (see Figure 3).
Structure was conveyed equally well by text and
diagrams. Response time, however, was significantly
longer on structural questions after studying a diagram
(M = 5.1s, SD = 1.4s) than after studying a text (M =
4.2s, SD = 1.3s), F (1, 131) = 13.6, p < .01. This effect
may be due to extra time required to translate a visual
representation into a sentential representation in order
to answer the verbal questions.
Effect of Perspective
There were no effects of perspective (structural or
functional) on errors or response time on structural
questions. Participants made similar numbers of errors
on structural questions if a structural perspective was
studied (M = 1.89, SD = 1.39) than if a functional
perspective was studied (M = 2.13, SD = 1.41), p > .05
Though in this analysis, diagrams have a clear
advantage because structure remains explicit in the
diagram with arrows, the interaction between
presentation and perspective was not significant, p > .1.

4

Mean Error on Structural Questions Across Subjects

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

Low

High

No arrow diagram

Low

High

Arrow diagram

Low

High

Structural Text

Low

High

Functional Text

Figure 3. Errors on structural questions by ability,
perspective and medium.

Learning Functional Information
Effect of Ability
For functional questions there was a main effect for
ability, where high mechanical ability participants made
fewer errors (M = 1.44, SD = 1.3) than low ability
participants (M= 2.75 SD= 1.6), F(1, 145) = 29.6,
p<.01. There were no significant differences in
response times between high mechanical ability (M =
5.2s, SD = 1.9s) and low mechanical ability (M = 5.3s,
SD = 1.8s), p >.1.
Mechanical ability interacted with medium. See the
following section for details.
Effect of Medium
There were no overall effects of medium on errors and
response times on functional questions. However,
medium and perspective interacted, F(1, 139) = 8.02, p
< .01. High ability participants made fewer errors on
functional questions when diagrams were studied (M =
1.1, SD = 1.1) than when text was studied, whereas low
ability participants made fewer errors when text was
studied (M = 2.6, SD = 1.6) than when diagrams were
studied (M = 3.0, SD = 1.6). This effect however,
could be driven by interaction between perspective of
study and medium, where participants performed
extremely well if functional text was studied, but not
structural text. This is further discussed in the next
section.
Interestingly, high ability participants outperformed
low ability participants on functional questions in all
conditions except when functional text was studied (see
Figure 4). These results indicate that low ability
participants have difficulties making functional

inferences from structural descriptions and diagrams,
with or with out arrows. When functional information
is presented verbally, low ability participants are no
longer disadvantaged.
Effect of Perspective
There was a slight benefit for functional questions from
studying functional material, however this effect was
only marginally significant, F (1,139) = 3.5, p = .06.
Performance was higher on functional questions after
studying functional text or diagrams with arrows (M =
1.73, SD = 1.48), than after studying structural text or
diagrams (M = 2.45, SD = 1.69). There were no
differences in response times.
There was an interaction between perspective and
medium. Errors on functional questions were higher
after studying a structural text (M=3.0, SD=1.7) than
after studying a diagram without arrows (M=1.87,
SD=1.5), functional text (M = 1.71, SD = 1.27) or
diagram with arrows (M = 1.75, SD = 1.68), F(1, 139)
= 17.48, p < .01. In general, participants were better at
making functional inferences from diagrams, than from
structural text.
4

3.5

Mean Errors on Functional Questions Across Subjects

The finding that both high and low mechanical ability
participants did not differ significantly on structural
errors regardless of study perspective indicates that they
were able to efficiently make inferences from function
to structure.

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

Low

High

No arrow diagram

Low

High

Arrow diagram

Low

High

Structural Text

Low

High

Functional Text

Figure 4: Errors on functional questions by ability,
perspective and medium.
Experiment 3 Discussion
Structural information was effectively conveyed by
well-constructed diagrams and text, from the
perspective of the system’s structure or function.
Mechanical ability of the participant, however, is
important for predicting errors on structural questions.
The results for functional information were quite
different. Again, high mechanical ability participants
outperformed low ability participants. This result was
conditional upon presentation, however, where low
ability participants performed as well as high ability
participants when functional text was studied. Low
ability participants were at their worst when functional
inferences had to be made from diagrams.
The results from Experiment 3 help to clarify the
relationship between ability and comprehension of
diagrams, illustrating the importance of the information

to be conveyed. Low mechanical ability participants
were able to learn structure from both diagrams and
text, but needed functional text to aid learning
functional information.

General discussion
Complex systems consist of structural information, a
configuration of parts, and functional information, a
sequence of operations and outcomes. The present
research investigated the effects of medium, text and
diagram, perspective of presentation, structural or
functional, and ability on acquisition of complex
systems.
Diagrams use elements and relations in space to
convey elements and relations in real or conceptual
space. Thus, diagrams are especially suited to convey
structural information. Experiment 1 and 2 showed that
a simple addition to diagrams, arrows, enables a static
diagram to convey functional information effectively.
Participants spontaneously interpreted diagrams with
arrows functionally, and produced diagrams with
arrows for functional descriptions. In global acquisition
of complex systems, however, arrows were sufficient
for participants with high mechanical ability but not for
those with low mechanical ability.
In Experiment 3, participants were more adept at
inferring structural information from functional than
functional from structural. Apparently, function
imposes more constraints on structure than structure
imposes on function, in accordance with the design
adage that form follows function. This means that
function is not necessarily transparent from form. This
fact is substantiated by the performance of low ability
participants, who, in contrast to high ability
participants, had trouble making functional inferences
from diagrams. Similarly, Suwa and Tversky (2001)
found that experienced architects were more likely to
extract functional information from their sketches than
novices. Low ability participants reached the level of
high ability participants when the perspective of the
questions matched that of the studied text. This
suggests that the text guides the learner in forming a
mental model of that information, especially for low
ability learners. For this type of complex systems,
including car brakes and bicycle pumps, the
disadvantages of low ability can be overcome by the
addition of explicit functional information.
These results have implications for theories of
diagrammatic reasoning. The findings indicate that
learners of all abilities are able to extract essential parts
and their interrelations from diagrams; however the
advantage of diagrams disappears when learners with
low mechanical ability are asked to make inferences
beyond what is conveyed explicitly in the diagram.

In addition, these results have implications for
design of instructions and explanations as well as
comprehension of complex systems. Instructions and
texts depending solely on diagrams will be ineffective
for some users, especially for functional information.
Instructional illustrations of mechanical, scientific, or
abstract systems such as governmental legislation need
to include explanatory text. Taking into account the
ability of the learner, the perspective of the information,
and the medium in which it is portrayed, will
dramatically increase the accuracy and amount of
information that can be acquired from a portrayal of a
complex system.

Acknowledgements
The first author is supported by an Eastman Kodak Inc.,
fellowship. The research is funded by Office of Naval
Research, Grants Number NOOO14-PP-1-O649 and
N000140110717 to Stanford University.

References
Hegarty, M., Carpenter, P. A. & Just, M. A. (1990).
Diagrams in the comprehension of scientific text. In
R. Barr, M. L. Kamil, P., Mosenthal, & P. D. Pearson
(Eds.) Handbook of reading research. New York:
Longman.
Hegarty, M. and Just, M.A. (1993). Constructing
mental models of machines from text and diagrams.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 717-742.
Larkin, J.H. & Simon, H.A. (1987) Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth a thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Mayer, R.E. (1989) Systematic thinking fostered by
illustrations in scientific text. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 89(2), 240-246.
Mayer, R.E. and Gallini, J.K. (1990) When is an
Illustration Worth Ten Thousand Words? Journal of
Educational Psychology, Vol. 82 (4), 715-726.
Morrison, J. B. (2000) Does Animation Facilitate
Learning? An Evaluation of the Congruence and
Equivalence Hypotheses. Unpublished Doctoral
Dissertation. Department in Psychology, Stanford
University.
Morrison, J. B., and Tversky, B. (2001). The (In)
effectiveness of animation in instruction. In Jacko,
J. and Sears, A. (Editors), Chi 01: Extended
Abstracts. Pp. 377-378. Danvers, MA: ACM.
Suwa, M.,& Tversky, B. (1997). What architects and
students perceive in their sketches: A protocol
analysis. Design Studies, 18, 385-403.

