UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do argumentation tasks promote conceptual change about volcanoes?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/52z652jf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Hemmerich, Joshua A
Wiley, Jennifer

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do argumentation tasks promote conceptual change about volcanoes?
Joshua A Hemmerich (joshh@uic.edu)
Jennifer Wiley (jwiley@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology
The University of Illinois at Chicago
1007 W. Harrison Street (MC 285)
Chicago, IL 60607, USA

Abstract
In the present studies, we assessed college undergraduate
research participants' models of the earth’s composition and
dynamics, both without and with access to a web site on plate
tectonics. In previous studies, it has been found that argument
writing tasks promote better understanding from web pages,
with the best comprehension of texts observed when students
write arguments using a two-window browser. In the present
investigation, we are interested in whether or not students in
this condition acquire more advanced conceptual models of
the subject matter than naïve students, or students in other
reading/ writing conditions.

In previous studies (Wiley & Voss, 1999; Wiley 2001) the
task of writing an argument and the presentation of web
pages in two side-by-side windows were found to lead to the
most comparison, integration and explanation in student
essays. This resulted in better understanding of the subject
matter, as measured by inference and analogy tasks.
Theoretically, presenting information in multiple sources as
well as asking students to construct their own arguments
both seem like conditions which may especially prompt
active processing, and demand that readers try to develop
their own models of the text. (Wiley & Voss, 1999, Perfetti,
1997; Kintsch, 1998). The present studies first investigated
what Earth Science concepts students held, specifically
pertaining to the causal nature of volcanic eruptions, without
receiving any instruction at all. Second, we advanced a
taxonomy of student concepts about volcanoes and plate
tectonics, and we investigated whether manipulating the
writing instruction (essay or argument), as well as the type
of web interface (one window or two windows) the
materials were presented in, had any effect on the quality of
students' causal models of a phenomenon in Earth Science,
the eruption of Mt. St. Helens
Earth Science Concepts
Students' understanding of Earth Science concepts is a
historically neglected topic that has only begun to receive
the
necessary
attention.
Consequently,
mental
representations of the complexity of our planet and the
causes of its natural phenomena is an appropriate topic for
conceptual change researchers to focus on as well as an
important goal for educators. By the age of 13, most
children have acquired a spherical earth concept. They have
developed a model of the Earth that corresponds to a planet

(a huge sphere surrounded by space). Vosniadou and
Brewer (1992) delineated a series of models that many
children hold as they approach a mature understanding of
the earth's shape. Most children will acquire a round earth
concept by fifth grade. This knowledge alone is an
important building block for understanding of many Earth
Science concepts, however, there are still important
conceptual developments in Earth models that need to occur
in order for students to understand many other topics in
Earth Science.
For many Earth Science topics, following the adoption of a
spherical Earth model, the students need to refine their
understanding of the compositional properties and surface
features of that model. Specifically, students need to
develop models that can account for rock cycles, mountain
formation, sea floor dynamics, and geological disasters such
as earthquakes and volcanoes. They need to develop
models that explain geological data relating to changes in
the Earth’s surface. This seems to be problematic for many
students as they are presented with new Earth Science
information.
Generally around fifth or sixth grade, the composition and
dynamics of the Earth are included in an Earth Science
curriculum. Ross and Shuell (1993) found that students in
grades K through 6 had many misconceptions about the
causes of earthquakes. Some examples of young children’s
misconceptions are: that earthquakes are caused by wind or
weather; that volcanoes are caused by the heat of the sun or
by mountains; and that volcanoes and earthquakes can have
animistic/humanistic explanations, like the earth is “upset”,
and that these events somehow reflect the earth’s mood or
temperament.
The American Geological Institute (1991) has prescribed the
understanding of how the Earth's crust is moving and the
Theory of Plate Tectonics as essential questions to be
answered by students in grades 9-12. However, even after
their first instruction on these topics, students have many
misconceptions about the causes of earthquakes and
volcanoes. Marques and Thompson (1997) found that
sixteen and seventeen year-old Portuguese students held
numerous misconceptions about the Earth's continents,
magnetic field, and tectonic plate movements. For instance,
some students believed that tectonic plates rotate around a

plate axis, while others believed that there is a progressive
cooling of the Earth, which causes the crust to crack.
Barrow and Haskins (1996) have shown that Earth Science
misconceptions extend beyond grade 12 and are exhibited
by college students in an introductory geology course, of
which less than 7% believed their earthquake knowledge to
be good or excellent. Many adults think that earthquakes
can be predicted by the weather or the tides. Some still have
a model of the earth’s surface with continents floating on
top of oceans, while others see volcanoes and earthquakes
as the result of the earth building up too much pressure, heat
or other internal stuff, making the Earth like a balloon or
pimple. Clearly, Earth Science is a domain where mastery
among children and young adults is rare and misconceptions
are widespread.
In one of the few investigations that have been done on
people's understanding of advanced Earth Science concepts,
Gobert (2000) has found that when younger students
attempt to produce causal explanations about Earth Science
phenomena, they tend to demonstrate incomplete or
distorted knowledge. Gobert (2000) classified student
models using typologies of the interior of the Earth and the
causal mechanisms of volcanic eruptions. Gobert's typology
of explanations for volcanic eruption consists of type 1a
models in which mechanisms are heat-related only (like the
earth core gets too hot), type 1b models, which involved
movement-related causal mechanisms and are void of heatrelated causal concepts (like the magma rises or pushes up
through the crust and causes a volcano), type 2 mixed
models, which contain some elements of heat and
movement causal mechanisms but are not elaborate or
integrated (the inside of the earth is hot, magma pushes up),
and type 3 models, which consist of multiple, well
integrated, heat-related and movement-related mechanisms.
At level 3 the idea that heat causes movement, and more
specifically that convection currents in the earth’s core
cause tectonic plate movements, is important.
Gobert's typology is a useful one in analyzing and
categorizing the models of Earth Science students. With
some minor additions and fine-tuning it is utilized in the
data analysis in the present studies.
Argumentation Tasks
It is possible that part of the problem with students
understanding of Earth Science is that they don't integrate
the information that they are presented with into a coherent
and complete model. The achievement of this goal could be
aided by encouraging students to engage in tasks that
facilitate the integration of relevant concepts that are
presented to them.
Past work has indicated that argument writing is a task that
requires students to integrate information, particularly when
it is necessary to coordinate information from different
sources to make a cohesive representation of a phenomenon.

Wiley and Voss (1999) found that when students were asked
to write arguments about the causes of the Irish Potato
Famine from multiple sources it resulted in essays with
more transformation, integration, and explanation of the
presented information, than when students were asked to
write narratives from the same set of sources. Furthermore,
students who wrote arguments were better able to identify
correct inferences and underlying principles about the
causes of the Potato Famine after the writing task. In
comparison to students who wrote narratives from textbook
chapters, students who wrote arguments from the multiple
sources in a web site demonstrated a better understanding of
the subject matter. Based on this evidence, Wiley and Voss
(1999) concluded that tasks which require students to
construct their own representation of a situation yield the
most conceptual learning in web-like environments; and the
argument writing task promoted understanding because it
required students to integrate information from across
multiple sources as they created support for a thesis. This
result is consistent with other studies demonstrating that
tasks that require learners to engage in active, constructive
and integrative tasks lead to the best understanding of text
(e.g., Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu & LaVancher, 1994; Goldman,
1997; McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996,
Scardemelia & Bereiter, 1987) as well as studies on
collaborative discourse which have found that students who
engage in more argumentation-related behaviors develop a
better understanding from peer discussion (Anderson, et al.
2001; Chinn, Anderson & Waggoner, 2000).
There has been little work studying how students use
multiple windows, or looking at optimal conditions for
multiple window use (Foss, 1989; van Oostendorp, 1996).
Recently, Wiley (2001) found that when readers were given
explicit instruction on how to use the browser there were
some learning benefits for a two-window interface, while
there was an even more resilient facilitation for
argumentation task. There appears to be growing evidence
that engaging in argumentation, and similar tasks, facilitates
conceptual learning and integration of new material.
Present Studies
In the present studies, we assessed undergraduates' models
of the Earth’s composition and dynamics. In the first study
we asked undergraduates for their understanding of what
causes volcanic eruptions without providing them with any
reading material. In a second study, we tested whether
undergraduates would display more mature models after
engaging in argumentation tasks. Undergraduates were
asked to read documents from a web site about earthquakes
and volcanoes either with the general instruction to learn the
information so that they could write an essay about what
caused the eruption of Mt St Helens, or the specific
instruction that they should read the site in order to write an
argument of what caused the eruption of Mt St Helens. In
addition, students either read the information presented in a
single-window or two-window browser. In general, past

work has found that both the two-window design of the
browser as well as the argument writing task are responsible
for promoting understanding, with the best comprehension
of the text observed when students write arguments using a
two-window browser. In the present investigation, we are
interested in whether or not students in this condition
acquire more advanced conceptual models of the subject
matter.
An accurate understanding of the nature of the eruption of
Mt. St. Helens would entail the following information: Mt.
St. Helens is a subduction zone volcano, which means that it
is located on a tectonic plate boundary and not on a hotspot.
The Earth's tectonic plates are known to move, due to
convection currents in the Earth's liquid layers. The plates
that lie underneath Mt. St. Helens pushed together, or
converge, leading to subduction.
Consequently, this
subduction (one tectonic plate sliding underneath the other)
causes solid mantle from the bottom plate to be pushed
down to areas of higher temperature. This solid mantle
melts in the high temperature and became viscous liquid
magma. Viscous magma builds up and causes an increase
in pressure, which is not released until the magma shifts and
an eruption occurs.
Study 1
Method
Participants. 28 undergraduates at the University of Illinois
at Chicago participated in this experiment.
Procedure. The participants were asked to answer the
question “What caused the eruption of Mt. St. Helens on
May 18, 1980?”. Students were asked to write at least a
paragraph.
Measures. Student concepts were assessed by coding
answers for the kind of models that students had of how
volcanic eruptions happen. The coding scheme was
originally based on Gobert's (2000) typology, but several
categories needed to be added or amended to account for the
models we observed in our protocols. The different levels of
our typology are described below.

planets, tides, faults, time, dormancy or too much lava, as
well as non-explanations. Essays that did not include any of
the major causal agents identified below received a 0.
Type 1 Local Models
Models that mentioned single, local causes of movement or
heat, as in Gobert's (2000) typology, or the concept pressure
were assigned a ‘1’. Models were given this rating if they
expressed the idea of one of these three as being the causal
agent in the eruption of the volcano. The addition of the
concept pressure as a type 1 causal agent was made because
this concept is a separate notion from heat or movement and
is relevant to the eruption of a stratovolcano, such as Mt. St.
Helens, in which no gas escapes from the volcano before a
violent eruption. A second amendment from Gobert’s
typology was splitting the movement category into two
separate categories, one specifically related to magma or
lava movement, and the second related to plate movement.
After proposing this coding analysis, none of the students
had an explanation related to magma movement alone, so a
single movement category was retained.
Explanations of Type 1A tended to mention hot, melting or
molten magma, the temperature of the magma, and the heat
of the earth’s core. Explanations of Type 1B mentioned the
movement, shifting, colliding, rubbing or interacting of
plates. Explanations of Type 1C tended to mention that the
volcano or Earth was full of gas, the magma had too much
gas, that there was pressure or that the magma was being
kept under force.
Type 2 Mixed Models
Models that included plate movement with either heat,
pressure, force or chemical processes were assigned a ‘2’.
In these models, multiple factors were mentioned but not
causally related.
Type 3 Integrated Models
Only models that causally related heat or pressure and
movement in either direction (i.e. convection currents cause
plate movement; or plate movement causes plates to subduct
and melt, forming magma that rises under volcanoes) were
coded as level 3 models.

Student Models of Volcanic Eruptions
It should be noted that some models are not necessarily
incorrect explanations of volcanic eruptions per se, because
they could account for certain types of volcanoes. But many
are not sufficient explanations of why Mt. St. Helens, a
stratovolcano, erupted as it did.
Type 0 Incorrect, Superficial Models
Students were assigned a 0 if their explanation of the cause
of volcanoes was related to an irrelevant surface feature of
the earth. Examples of explanations at Level 0 are that
volcanoes are caused by surface conditions, such as wind,
avalanches, landslides, mountains, weather, sun, the orbit of

Examples of explanations included in the naïve student
models along with frequency of occurrence are included in
Table 1.
Table 1: Frequency of Naïve Models with Examples
Model
Examples
Frequency
(%)
Type 0
I assume that the eruption was 7 (25%)
due to a geological disturbance
such as a sudden misalignment
of orbits.
Type 1A
The eruption of Mt. St. Helens 3 (10.71%)
was caused by the heat build up

Type 1B

Type 1C

Type 2

Type 3

in the earth's core…
The eruption of the volcano was
caused by a sudden shifting in
the earth's tectonic plates. This
shifting caused a disruption of
the mountain…
The eruption of Mt. St. Helens
occurred because there was an
enormous amount of pressure on
the volcano… It couldn't keep
the lava in, and erupted.
The eruption of Mt. St. Helens
was caused by movement in the
plates.... The lava is heated to
the point where it has to escape.
Volcanic eruptions are the result
of the earth's tectonic plates
shifting below the surface. As
the plates move past each other,
friction builds up and hot magma
forms.
Once the plates are
pushed to a certain point, the
magma is forced up through
volcanoes.

8 (28.57%)

7 (25%)

2 (7.14%)

1 (3.57%)

Implications
A surprising number of undergraduates have incomplete or
incorrect models of why Mt. St. Helens erupted. Consistent
with anecdotal reports, there are a number of persistent
misconceptions about why volcanic eruptions and
earthquakes occur. In study 2, we address the extent to
which students may undergo conceptual development as
they construct arguments from evidence presented in a web
site.
Study 2
Method
Participants. 40 undergraduates at the University of Illinois
at Chicago participated in this experiment.
Design. There were two manipulations in this experiment.
The first manipulation was in the instructions that students
were given. Twenty of the students were asked to read the
web site in order to “write an essay of what caused the
explosion of Mt St Helens in 1980", while the other twenty
were given the exact same instructions except the word
essay was replaced by the word argument.
The second manipulation was in the format of the browser
in which the web site was presented. In this experiment,
students either read the documents from a single-window
browser, meaning they chose documents from a document
list that was presented at the start of the experiment, and
viewed the documents one at a time. The other half of the
students were given a two-window browser, but they also
got specific instructions about why they were being given
two windows “in order to compare across documents”.

Further in this condition the list of documents was split in
half, so that in order to read all of the information readers
had to use both windows. All students received explicit
instruction on how to use the browser environment.
In each of the two presentation conditions, half the students
received an essay writing instruction while half received the
argument writing instruction. This yielded a 2x2 (writing
task x browser format) design with 10 students in each of
the four conditions.
Materials. The contents of the page were taken from the
USGS web page. Pictures and diagrams were presented
with captions, but in their own windows (as documents).
There were no hyperlinks between documents other than
navigational links back to the overview lists, and between
the overview list and the documents.
Procedure. The participants were asked to read documents
from a web page about Geological Hazards in order to write
either an essay or an argument. All participants were given
30 minutes to read the documents and write their essays.
Measures. Students' concepts were assessed by evaluating
the quality of the essays. We coded essays using the coding
scheme developed in Study 1. Two raters independently
coded each essay, blind to condition. Inter-rater reliability
was above .90. Discrepancies were resolved through
conversation.
Additionally
a
demographics
questionnaire
was
administered at the end of the experimental session that
included the question, "How much did you know about Mt.
St. Helens and its relation to plate tectonics before reading
this site?" Participants answered this question on a scale of
1-10, with 1 meaning "not much" and 10 meaning "a lot".
Examples of Student Explanations
The following examples are excerpts of the participants'
written essays. Two examples of each category are
provided. Only the portions of the essays containing
relevant ideas are included.
Type 0 Incorrect, Superficial Model
… the climate has a dramatic effect on volcanoes.
Type 1A Local Heat Model
… in certain locations around the world volcanism has been
active for a long time which means there are a hot spots
under the plates which are exceptionally hot regions that
provide localized high heat energy to use.
…Below some plates there are hot regions which give off
high heat energy, thus sustaining volcanism.
Type 1B Local Movement Model
…The earth is built around a dozen plates...As the plates
move, it causes the plates to rub against each other, causing

the explosion of the volcano.
…In the case of Mt St Helens, an oceanic-continental
boundary formed. A dense plate from the ocean floor meets
a less dense plate of continental land, creating the
mountainous area around Mt St Helens....The material of the
dense plate goes deep into the earth and eventually
transforms into magma, a product of a volcano…
Type 1C Local Pressure Model
…The fierce explosion of Mt. St. Helens was due to the fact
that gas was trapped inside the magma. This gas can't
escape until magma enters the throat of the volcano...
…Mount St Helens violent explosion was due to great
amount of silica (in the magma).... These are what stop
gases from escaping at the proper time…
Type 2 Mixed Models
…There could be several reasons why Mt. St. Helens
erupted. However, I believe a collision of oceanic and
continental plates caused the earthquake that caused Mt. St.
Helens to erupt...Eventually the Juan de Fuca plate and the
North American plate, smashed into each other, causing a
great disturbance underneath Mt. St. Helens volcano. The
gas inside the volcano could not escape... the pressure built
up inside the volcano and grew too strong and came out as
one big burst.
…Three plates come into play underneath Mt. St.
Helens...The movement of these plates and the added build
up of pressure cause a seismic zone to form under Mt. St.
Helens...
Type 3 Integrated Models
What produced the explosion of Mt. St. Helens? The
explosion could have been caused by the collision of
oceanic and continental plates... As the subducting oceanic
crust melts within the asthenosphere the new magma rises to
the top of the surface and forms volcanoes. Shallow
earthquakes are associated with high mountain ranges when
intense compression is occurring. Most volcanic eruptions
occur near plate boundaries.
The eruption of Mt. St. Helens was caused by the unsettled
magma and gas pressure. As plates meet, the denser heavier
plate will be forced to sink below the lighter plate. As it
moves below, magma is formed as extremely high
temperatures below the mantle melt the plate. Gas and
magma flow to the surface, pushing until mountains and
volcanoes, which will eventually erupt, are formed. They
erupt due to this pressure...
Distribution of Models across conditions
The distribution of models by reading, writing and window
condition are presented in Table 2. A 2x2 (writing condition
x window) ANOVA was conducted on the groups'
numerical self-ratings of previous Mt. St. Helens knowledge
and there were no significant differences across the
experimental groups, (F<1).

Table 2: Frequency of Models by Writing and Window
Condition
Model level
0
1
2
3
Narrative
1 window
3
6
1
0
2 window
1
5
2
2
Argument
1 window
1
3
5
1
2 window
1
3
4
2
Total
6
17
12
5
Reading
15%
42.5% 30%
12.5%
No Reading
25%
65%
7%
4%
Chi square analysis on the frequency of models by writing
condition indicated that models were not evenly distributed.
Narrative writers had more models at levels 0 and 1 versus 2
and 3, while argument writers had more models at levels 2
and 3 if anything (X2(1)=4.44, p<.03). (An overall chi
square analysis on the eight cells was not possible due to
low cell size). No effects of number of windows were seen
in a chi square on the frequency of models by the windows
condition, (X2<1).
Implications:
The results of this study indicate that young adults have
incomplete models of the Earth's composition and dynamics
as indicated by their observed models of the eruption of Mt.
St. Helens. Although several students were able to exhibit
some understanding of volcanic eruptions in general, many
of their models did not show any understanding of the
importance of the Theory of Plate Tectonics or that there are
different kinds of volcanoes. Generally, students could not
accurately describe Mt. St. Helens as a subduction zone
volcano, even after reading several documents about the
topic that contained all of the necessary information.
Consistent with Wiley (2001) it was found that argument
writing did facilitate better understanding and model
building from scientific electronic text, while providing a
two-window browser only showed a beneficial trend. These
results, based on a small number of participants, further
suggest that conceptual development, in a domain such as
Earth Science, is aided by tasks that encourage integration.
But the degree of learning (and the fact that not all students
achieved an understanding of plate tectonics and volcanic
eruption in this condition) suggests that there may be other
pieces of the puzzle needed to advance students beyond
their misconceptions in this domain.
It may be that in areas such as Earth Science, where students
lack concrete experience with observing and dissecting
planets, some concepts are particularly difficult to learn
about from text. Additionally Gobert (2000) asserts that
plate tectonics concepts are difficult for children to learn
due to the large size scales of the agents involved, and the

extremely long temporal scales that extend far beyond a
human lifetime. Students may also find it difficult to
integrate and visualize these concepts in order to understand
the structure and behavior of the planet. Based on the
presented studies this holds true for young adults as well.
Mastery of this domain essentially requires understanding
dynamic spatial information, which may make images,
animations and simulations quite important. Although in
general, evidence for the beneficial effects of visual adjuncts
on learning is mixed (Wiley, in press; Wiley & Hemmerich,
in press), for the mastery of these concepts such adjuncts
may be critical. We are interested in pursuing this
hypothesis, and its effects on long-term learning, in future
studies.
Acknowledgments
This research was made possible through the support of the
Office of Naval Research and the National Science
Foundation by grants to the second author. The authors
thank Rebecca Schrader for her assistance in running the
experiments.

References
American Geological Institute. (1991). Earth science
content guidelines grades K-12. . Alexandria, Virginia:
Author.
Anderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., McNurlen, B.,
Archodidou, A., Kim, S., Renitskaya, A., Tilmanns, M. &
Gilbert, L. (2001) The snowball phenomenon: Spread of
ways of talking and ways of thinking across groups of
children. Cognition & Instruction, 19, 1-46.
Barrow, L., & Haskins, S. (1996). Earthquake knowledge
and experiences of introductory geology students. Journal
of College Science Teaching, 26(2), 143-146.
Chi, M., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & LaVancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting self-explanations improves learning. Cognitive
Science, 18, 439-478.
Chinn, C. A., Anderson, R. C., & Waggoner, M.A. (2000)
Patterns of discourse in two kinds of literature discussion.
Reading Research Quarterly, 36, 378-411.
Foss, C. (1989). Detecting lost users: Empirical studies on
browsing hypertext. (INRIA Tech Report 973). Valbonne,
France: L'Institut National de Recherche en Informantique
et en Automantique.
Gobert, J. D. (2000). A typology of causal models for plate
tectonics:
Inferential power and barriers to
understanding.
International Journal of Science
Education, 22, 937-977.
Goldman, S. (1997). Learning from Text: Reflections on 20
Years of Research and Suggestions for New Directions of
Inquiry. Discourse Processes, 23, 357-398.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
comprehension. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marques, L., & Thompson, D. (1997). Misconceptions and
conceptual changes concerning continental drift and plate
tectonics among portugese students aged 16-17. Research
in Science & Technological Education, 15(2), 195-222.

McNamara, D., Kintsch, E., Songer, N., & Kintsch, W.
(1996). Are good texts always better? Cognition and
Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Perfetti, C. A. (1997). Sentences, individual differences, and
multiple texts: Three issues in text comprehension.
Discourse Processes, 23, 337-355.
Ross, K. E. K., & Shuell, T. J. (1993). Children's beliefs
about earthquakes. Science Education, 77(2), 191-205.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). Text-based and
knowledge-based questioning by children. Cognition and
Instruction, 9(3),177-199.
van Oostendorp, H. (1996) Studying and annotating
electronic text. In J.F. Rouet, et al (Eds.) Hypertext &
Cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of
the Earth: A study of conceptual change in childhood.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535-585.
Wiley, J. (2001) Supporting understanding through task
and browser design. Proceedings from the Twenty-Third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wiley, J. (in press) Cognitive implications of visually-rich
media. To appear in M. Hocks and M. Kendrick (Eds.)
Eloquent images: Writing visually in new media. MIT
Press.
Wiley, J. & Hemmerich, J. (in press) Literacy: Learning
from Multimedia Sources. To appear in the Encyclopedia
of Education.
Wiley, J., & Voss, J. F. (1999). Constructing arguments
from multiple sources: Tasks that promote understanding
and not just memory for text. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 91(2), 301-311.

