UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Conceptual Metaphors are Productive of Spatial-Graphical Expressions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mb49011

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Clausner, Timothy C

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Conceptual Metaphors are Productive of Spatial-Graphical Expressions
Timothy C. Clausner (Clausner@HRL.Com)
HRL Laboratories, LLC
Human Centered Systems Department, 3011 Malibu Canyon Road
Malibu, CA 90049 USA

Abstract
The theory of conceptual metaphors is adopted in which
conceptual relations are productive of linguistic metaphorical expressions. Conceptual metaphors vary in their
degree of productivity according to semantic principles.
Spatial-graphical expressions of non-spatial concepts are
investigated providing evidence that they are instantiations of metaphors. For three cases of differing
productivity it is argued that the same semantic principles which result in metaphor productivity for linguistic
expressions also result in spatial-graphical expressions.1

Background
Language gives us words, and constructions made of
words, to talk about abstract concepts. We find in
space, conventional shapes and organizations of shapes
which also convey abstract concepts. These representations in space are typically experienced visually, but not
exclusive of other experiential modalities. This paper
addresses the problem of how spatial-graphical representations convey abstract meanings by means of
metaphors, which allow us to understand or express
abstract concepts in terms of concrete expressions, particularly ordinary, relatively static, conventional
devices (e.g., map legends, key pads, and clocks).
Fourceville’s (1996) analysis of abstract concepts
conveyed by creative images and language in advertising, aims toward a theory of ‘pictorial metaphor’.
Tversky (2001) treats depictions, such as maps, graphics, and icons as involving spatial metaphor derived
from concrete world experience, across languages and
cultures. Zacks, & Tversky (1999) argue that systematic
correspondences between graph forms and interpretation are naturally derived, not due to knowledge of
explicit conventions. This paper takes a similar treatment of metaphor, adopting cognitive semantic theory
(Clausner, 1993, 1994; Clausner & Croft, 1997; Grady;
1997; Lakoff, 1993; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Lakoff &
Turner, 1987), which treats metaphor as conventional
schemas expressive of ordinary conventional language.
1

The author thanks the three anonymous reviewers of this
paper for their helpful comments. An earlier version of this
research was presented at the Seventh International Cognitive
Linguistics Conference, 2001, Santa Barbara, California.

In this theory of metaphor, knowledge is organized
into experientially based domains; e.g., SPACE, TIME,
LIVING THINGS (see Clausner & Croft, 1999, for an
overview of the theory of domains in cognitive semantics). A conventional metaphor is a stored relation
between two domains. Concepts from an abstract (target) domain are systematically comprehended or
expressed in terms of concepts from a different, often
concrete, (source) domain. For example, MORE IS UP
AND LESS IS DOWN is a conventional metaphor whose
source domain UP-DOWN stands in relation to the target
domain MORE-LESS. This metaphor is a semantic structure which can be instantiated as linguistic expressions;
e.g., rising prices, fell ill, high esteem, fell unconscious.
Language expresses abstract concepts metaphorically
by means of spatial and other basic perceptual concepts
(Grady, 1997). Metaphors that relate spatial source domains to non-spatial target domains can be productive
of linguistic expressions about non-spatial abstract
meanings by using words having spatial meanings. The
metaphor MORE IS UP is strongly implicated by investigations of graphs as expressions in space. Tversky,
Kugelmass & Winter (1991) found that subjects assigned interpretations to the axes of graphs, such that
increasing quantity was preferentially assigned to the
vertical axis, and temporal concepts were preferentially
assigned to the horizontal axis. Gatis & Holyoak (1996)
investigated subjects’ interpretation of graphs, finding a
significant advantage when the variable being queried
was assigned to the vertical axis. They argue that
graphing increasing quantity in terms of vertical spatial
increase is based on the metaphor MORE IS UP. Given
that there is evidence for conventional metaphor being
expressed in the construal of spatial graphs, this paper
proposes the following hypothesis: The same cognitive
principles which determine metaphor productivity for
linguistic expressions also determine metaphor productivity for spatial expressions. This hypothesis will be
tested with respect to a specific technical characterization of metaphor productivity.

Productivity in Metaphors
Clausner & Croft (1997) argue that just as
phonological schemas vary in their productivity of
base-derived relations, so semantic schemas (i.e., meta-

phor source-target domains) also vary in their productivity of metaphorical expressions. Schematicity is the
range of source (or target) domain concepts consistent
with the schema. Productivity is the proportion of a
schema’s range which can be instantiated as expressions. This translates into strength of stored
representations, called degrees of entrenchment. Relative entrenchment between a schema and its
instantiations characterizes its productivity. High productivity of a metaphor is a configuration of a strongly
entrenched schema relative to a wide range of weakly
entrenched instantiations. Whereas, low productivity of
a metaphor is a weakly entrenched schema relative to a
narrow range of strongly entrenched instantiations.
In the following sections three degrees of metaphor
productivity are considered: High productivity, Semiproductivity, and Nonproductivity. The three cases are
presented in separate sections. In each case, the section
begins with the conceptual principles by which Clausner and Croft (1997) account for how metaphors vary in
their degree of productivity for linguistic expressions.
Then evidence that spatial-graphic expressions are
metaphorical expressions is presented. Measures from
human subjects or semantic analysis are used to argue
that in each case the pattern of results is attributable to
conceptual principles of metaphor productivity.

High Productivity
The case of a metaphor having high productivity of
linguistic expressions is characterized by Clausner &
Croft (1997) as follows. The source-target domain relation [S → T], is a schema that produces instantiations.
Each instantiation [e → c] is a metaphorical expression
e whose source domain words are about target domain
concepts c (Figure 1). For example the metaphor
schema [UP/DOWN → MORE/LESS] (i.e., MORE IS UP AND
LESS IS DOWN) can be instantiated as any number of
expressions in which words about verticality (e.g., rising/falling,…, up/down) express non-spatial concepts.
Metaphor productivity is a semantic configuration of a
metaphor and its instantiations which includes the relation of schematicity between schema and instantiations
(descending arrows). High productivity is high schema
entrenchment (bold box) relative to a wide range of i
weakly entrenched instantiations (lighter boxes).

S→T

e1 → c1

e2 → c2

…

ei → ci

Figure 1: Semantic characterization for
high productivity of a metaphor.

A highly productive metaphor expresses a large proportion of concepts consistent with the metaphor
schema. Nearly any concept about quantity or quality
can be expressed in terms of spatial verticality (e.g.,
rising/falling prices,…, feeling up/.down). This characterization of high metaphor productivity for linguistic
expressions will be applied to the investigation of
metaphor productivity for spatial-graphic expressions.

High productivity (Spatial-graphical metaphorical expressions)
The vertical spatial axis of graphs can be employed to
convey quantities and this can be attributed to the
metaphor MORE IS UP (e.g., Gatis & Holyoak, 1996). If
this metaphor indeed has high productivity and the theory applies to both linguistic and spatial-graphical
expressions, then not only numerical quantities, but also
non-spatial qualities (e.g., severity) should be found
instantiated in space. Specifically, a wide range of concepts about severity is predicted to be expressed such
that great severity is expressed as high vertical space.
This was measured using assignments of severity to a
vertical map legend. The subjects were 34 graduate and
undergraduate student interns at HRL Labs. Each subject was given Figure 2 with the instructions, “This is a
legend to be used for a weather map of storm severity.
As you can see no colors are yet assigned. Assign colors to the two extremes (two boxes) of the legend. Next,
(in the blank lines) label which extreme of storm severity is which.”

Figure 2: Vertical map legend, uncolored with blanks
for labeling the two extreme values.
The aim of color assignment was to first get subjects to
commit to a particular orientation of severity (target
domain) to verticality (source domain), without having
to verbalize target domain concepts. While color names
were not expected to be sufficient evidence of any systematic conceptualization of the legend, the labeling of
storm severity was expected to evoke words that would
demonstrate a preferential orientation consistent with
the MORE IS UP metaphor.
Table 1 summarizes the range of types of responses
subjects gave as labels for the top and bottom of the
legend. The left column lists response types which assign extreme storm severity to the top of the legend
(e.g., severe and calm written in for the top and bottom

labels, respectively). The right column of response
types are those which assign extreme storm severity to
the bottom of the legend.
Table 1: Response types and percent consistent with
MORE IS UP or LESS IS UP, N=34.
MORE SEVERE IS UP /
LESS SEVER IS DOWN

LESS SEVERE IS UP /
MORE SEVERE IS DOWN

high / low
heavy / light
severe / calm
bad / good
most / least
severe / less severe
very severe / not severe
extreme / clear
hurricane / balmy
misery / balmy
stormy / fair
91%

low / high
lightest / heaviest
calm / severe

9%

Of 34 subject responses, 31 responses assigned greatest
severity to the top of the legend and 3 responses assigned the least severity to the bottom. As expected, the
assignment of severity to verticality does not occur at a
chance rate, but is significantly biased toward the assignment of greater severity to higher verticality, χ2(1,
N = 34) = 46.12, p < 0.001. It can be concluded that
something in the cognitive process of doing the task
biases the responses, and this bias is consistent with the
conventional metaphor MORE IS UP.
Color assignment is not the central task and the results were not expected to bear on the investigation;
indeed they are varied. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy
that of 34 total color assignment responses, the end of
the legend that was also labeled as the most severe (regardless of vertical assignment), was most frequently
designated “red” for 68% of color assignments. “Blue”
was the most frequent color assigned to the least severe
end of the legend for 38% of all color assignments, regardless of vertical assignment.

UP
DOWN

→

MORE
LESS

...
SEVERE

i
STORMY

→

→
CALM

FAIR

Figure 3: Graphic-spatial expressions of a highly productive metaphor.

These results suggest that understanding the vertical
spatial graphic as a legend of storm severity systematically yields interpretations of the top as an expression
of greatest severity, contra the bottom. That is, the subjects read the spatial verticality as an expression of
concepts about the abstract quality of severity, such that
a significantly large proportion of these concepts are
consistent with the up part of UP/DOWN SPACE expressing the more part of the MORE/LESS quality scale. This
characterization of the results is depicted in Figure 3 as
a case of many concepts about storm severity (e.g., severe/calm, stormy/fair, ... and others not shown) as the
meanings of the extreme ends of the legend. Each instance of the legend having a particular
conceptualization is an expression of a metaphor, as
depicted by the arrows between the metaphor
MORE /LESS IS UP/DOWN (upper bold box) and each of
the instantiations (lower lighter boxes) in Figure 3.
This is the same relation between schema and instantiation illustrated in Figure 1 for linguistic expressions
of a metaphor. Just as there are many non-spatial concepts c expressed as linguistic expressions e using
words about vertical space, there are also many nonspatial concepts expressed as spatial-graphs. A large
range of non-spatial concepts are consistent with the
target domain MORE /LESS and these are expressed by
means of a vertical graphical legend consistent with the
source domain UP/DOWN, respectively.
It can be concluded that since a large proportion of
the schema’s range can be instantiated as graphical expressions the metaphor schema is highly entrenched
relative to a wide range of weakly entrenched instantiations. The metaphor is highly productive, and of more
than the legend colorings and labelings investigated
here, but of any graphic vertical axis (e.g., mercury
thermometers). Having argued for a case of high metaphor productivity expressed in space, we will next
consider cases of lesser productivity.

Semi-Productivity
This section presents an analysis of spatial expressions and argues that they systematically instantiate a
semi-productive metaphor. First, the characterization of
semi-productive metaphors for linguistic expressions
given by Clausner & Croft (1997) is summarized. Then,
the case of spatial expressions being instantiations of a
semi-productive metaphor is made.
Clausner & Croft (1997) argue that semi-productivity
of a metaphor is the case of relatively few linguistic
expressions of a metaphor, compared with the wide
range of concepts potentially consistent with that metaphor. For example, the five idioms, spill the beans, let
the cat out of the bag, loose lips, blow the whistle, and
blow the lid off are all about revealing a secret. Lakoff
(1987) and Gibbs & O’Brien’s (1990) conclude that

these idioms are consistent with the metaphor schema
THE MIND IS A CONTAINER and IDEAS ARE ENTITIES. The
idiom expressions are transparent idioms, because most
people have some awareness of a relationship between
specific word meanings and the idiom meaning. They
know that the words for physical things (e.g., cat) escaping a container (e.g., bag) are related to an idiomatic
meaning of ideas coming out of the mind. Clausner &
Croft’s (1997) analysis of these transparent idioms argues that the metaphor schema [ENTITIES OUT OF A
CONTAINER → IDEAS OUT OF THE MIND ] is semiproductive. There are only five instantiations, each a
transparent idiom (e.g., cat out of the bag → secret revealed). The metaphor is only partly productive because
the transparent idioms express only a limited proportion
of possible instantiations that are consistent with the
metaphor. For example, *spill the peas and *let the
weasel out of the cage are expressions which are consistent with the metaphor schema, but nonetheless do
not mean, reveal a secret2. The five idioms that do have
this meaning are highly conventionalized (i.e., highly
entrenched) expressions.

any specific spatial arrangement of digits is understood
to be a meaningful ordering of incrementally successive
values. That the spatial arrangements vary widely, but
have the same interpretation as ordered values, suggests
a systematic relation between their spatial expression
and their conceptual meaning.

*

123
456
789
0

0
123
456
789

Figure 5: Phone, television, and bank ATM digit pad.

*
789
456
123
0

0
789
456
123

Figure 6: Calculator key digit pad.
1234567890

S→T

* 0123456789
e1 → c1

e2 → c2

…

eN → cN

Figure 7: Typing keyboard number order.
*

0

Figure 4: Semantic characterization for
semi- productivity of a metaphor.
They conclude that a countable number N of highly
entrenched instantiations of a relatively less entrenched
metaphor schema is characteristic of metaphor semiproductivity. Figure 4 illustrates the cognitive structure
of a lightly entrenched metaphor (lighter box) that is
consistent with a limited range of highly entrenched
instantiations (bold boxes). Given this account of semiproductive metaphors, semi-productivity for graphical
spatial expressions is investigated.

Semi-productivity (Spatial-graphical transparent idioms)
The data considered are the spatial-graphic arrangements of digits for entering numerical values, such as
those found on telephones, calculators, alphanumeric
keyboards, and rotary telephones (left side of Figures 58, respectively). Each of these four digit arrangements
is highly conventionalized. It is transparent, however,
that the digits are arranged in counting order. That is,
2

An asterisk, “*”, which begins a linguistic expression or
graphic expression denotes its infelicity as a conventional
expression of the particular semantic meaning in discussion.

9

9
8

8

7
6
5
4
3
2

7
6
5
4
3
2

1

1
0

Figure 8: Rotary Telephone digit order.
The investigation of a common semantic relation that is
consistent among these four spatial arrangements can
proceed as one would a linguistic case. Analyzing the
range of spatial expressions characterizes the schema
that might be instantiating them, just as it does for linguistic expressions. Among these four digit
arrangements, the “0” numeral occurs in two positions,
either near the “9” numeral, or near the “1” numeral.
This suggests that the shared meaning of the digit arrangements is the concept of counting, expressed with
the “0” numeral representing either the 0th or 10th
value. In fact, the first form of the rotary phone had
numbered finger holes, except the “0” was marked with
the Roman numeral “X” (Hill, 1953).
If the counting order of digits is indeed the common
meaning among the four spatial arrangements, then that
order is independent of whether the spatial configuration of the digits is rotational, horizontal, vertical, or

some combination (e.g., reading “1” to “9” successively
left-to-right and top-to-bottom, as on a phone pad).
These configurations (or combinations, of them) are
expressed, but it is the counting order, not the spatial
order, that is common across the expressions. The only
variation among digit orderings is the relative position
of “0” in the counting order.
In laying out a metaphorical system of how humans
understand abstract mathematical concepts Lakoff &
Núñez (2000) propose metaphors which fit the above
analysis. They first establish that MODULAR
ARITHMETIC IS ALGEBRAIC GROUPS and GEOMETRIC
ROTATIONS ARE ALGEBRAIC GROUPS. That is, the digits
for counting in base 10 modular math are conceptualized as rotations. Successive rotations form the basis for
counting, which they argue is the metaphor THE
INFINITE CLASS OF NUMERALS FOR THE NATURAL
NUMBERS IS AN ITERATIVE PROCESS THAT GOES ON AND
ON. For the purpose of this paper, the simpler characterization is [CYCLIC PROCESS → COUNTING WITH
DIGITS]. The spatial expression of the CYCLE in this
case is the spatial traversal of numerals in one of four
conventional arrangements. The traversal is cyclic by
means of the “0” indicating modulo 10.
Evidence that the metaphor does not express the full
range of spatial expressions consistent with its specifications comes from the absence of specific digit
arrangements. The right side of Figures 5-8, depict spatial arrangements of digits that are unexpressed as
conventional digit orders (as denoted by “*”). These
spatial arrangements are consistent with base 10
counting order, but they are not conventionalized.
Figure 9 depicts the metaphor (upper light box)
which is semi-productive of N highly conventionalized
instantiations (lower bold boxes). The N=4 spatial arrangements of numerals are understood as ordered
digits. The metaphor is semi-productive, because the
four instantiations are consistent with the metaphor,
which is not productive of other expressions.

CYCLE → COUNTING

idioms”. Transparent linguistic idioms are highly entrenched expressions of a comparatively lightly
entrenched metaphor (Figure 4). This same principle of
semi-productivity applies to spatial expressions. Only
four of the possible spatial arrangements consistent
with the metaphor domain relation are expressed. The
expressed spatial arrangements are highly conventional
and their meaning is semantically transparent.

Nonproductivity
This section investigates productivity less in degree
than semi-productive metaphor, specifically the case of
nonproductivity. Opaque linguistic idioms are very few.
For example, kick the bucket, meaning to die, and by
and large, meaning something in general. They are
semantically opaque in that most English speakers
know these linguistic expressions and know what they
mean, but do not know why they make sense. Clausner
& Croft (1997) analyze save face and lose face as
opaque linguistic expressions of an absent metaphor.
The expressions were borrowed from Mandarin Chinese. English speakers know their meaning is about
avoiding disgrace and incurring disgrace, but they do
not know why they mean this. English lacks the relevant metaphor [HAVING FACE → SOCIAL RESPECT] that
would be productive of other expressions, such as those
not borrowed into English, e.g., *give face, does not
mean, to show due respect for someone’s feelings, as it
does in Mandarin.
Figure 10 depicts the absence of an entrenched metaphor schema (light dashed box). The expression is
extremely conventional, that is, highly entrenched (bold
box), and it is opaque since there is no source-target
domain relation that would be productive of the expression e in relation to concept c. Also absent are vertical
arrows, indicative of the nonproductivity.

e→c

N=4
123
456
789
0

PHONE
→ PAD
DIGIT
ORDER

789
456
123
0

CALC.
→ PAD
DIGIT
ORDER

Figure 9: Graphic-spatial expressions of a
semi- productive metaphor.
The case of spatial expressions of semi-productive
metaphor can be called, “transparent spatial-graphic

Figure 10: Semantic characterization for metaphor
nonproductivity.
Now we turn to graphical-spatial expressions and argue
that we find the same semantic structure as for opaque
linguistic idioms.

Nonproductivity (Spatial-graphical opaque idioms)
An extremely conventional spatial-graphical expression
is the analog clock. There are clockwise clocks, but not
counter-clockwise clocks (although they exist for

amusement, but not conventional use). Most people do
not know why clocks run in the conventional clockwise
direction. It is opaque, in that there is no conventional
semantic relation between the source and target which
makes the spatial pattern make sense. That is, there is
no widespread knowledge that the sidereal rotational
direction of shadows cast by sundials in the northern
hemisphere is the basis for the rotational direction of
clocks. There is no conventional entrenched metaphor
schema. If there were a metaphor it might be something
like, PASSAGE OF TIME IS SHADOW ROTATION.
Just as there are few opaque linguistic idioms, it
should follow that there are few “opaque spatial idioms”, precisely because there is no conventional
metaphor to produce them. Another example of an
opaque spatial idiom would be the QWERTY keyboard3. The arrangement of alphanumeric keys is
widely known, but why they have this specific arrangement, among all the possible unattested ones, is
largely opaque. It is not widely known that early mechanical typewriters arranged keys in order to slow
typing speed, thus reducing the likelihood of two keys
striking together.

Discussion and Conclusion
These results point to issues of representation and
conceptual structure common to linguistic semantics
(spoken and signed), psychology, computational modeling and the role of metaphor in human-computer
interaction. Further work is required to distinguish the
theory of metaphor productivity from alternate interpretations of the results, e.g., treating conventional
correlations between the top of a spatial axis and one
pole of a semantic scale as due to salience. The top of a
legend or vertical mercury thermometer, or keypad digit
ordering may be interactions of perception and conventionality; however, conventionalized form-meaning
pairs do not obviate a conventional metaphor schema.
The theory of productivity is about contemporary conceptual structure (not historical origins of the
metaphors) and predicts the above results.
Spatial-graphical expressions are argued to be instantiations of conceptual metaphors which vary in
productivity according to the same principles which
determine productivity for linguistic expressions. The
relative entrenchment of a metaphor to its instantiations
is argued to result in varying ranges of expressions.
Three degrees of metaphor productivity were investigated. In each case the principles which are held to
explain ranges of linguistic expressions are argued to
explain evidence about spatial graphical expressions.
These are, in decreasing order: High productivity is the
case of spatial-graphical metaphorical expressions.
Semi-productivity is the case of spatial-graphical trans3

The author thanks Sarah Taub for suggesting this example.

parent idioms. Nonproductivity is the case of spatialgraphical opaque idioms. These cases are concluded to
represent three points on a continuum of metaphor productivity for spatial-graphical expressions.

References
Clausner, T.C. (1993). Cognitive structures in metaphor
comprehension. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Clausner, T.C. (1994). Commonsense knowledge and
conceptual structure in container metaphors. Proceedings of Sixteenth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clausner, T.C., & Croft, W. (1997). Productivity and
schematicity in metaphors. Cognitive Science, 21,
247-282.
Clausner, T.C. & Croft, W. (1999). Domains and Image
Schemas. Cognitive Linguistics, 10, 1-31, New
York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Forceville, C. (1996). Pictorial Metaphor in Advertising. London: Routledge.
Gatis, M. & Holyoak, K.J. (1996). Mapping conceptual
to spatial relations in visual reasoning. J. Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 231-239.
Gibbs, R.W. & O’Brien, J. (1990). Idioms and mental
imagery: The metaphorical motivation of idiomatic
meaning. Cognition, 36, 35-68.
Grady, J. (1997). Foundations of Meaning: Primary
Metaphors and Primary Scenes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California Berkeley.
Hill, R.B. (1953). The Early Years of the Strowger
System. Bell Laboratories Record. Volume XXXI
No. 3, March, 1953.
Lakoff, G. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought
(2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphorical
structure of the human conceptual system. Cognitive
Science, 4, 195-208.
Lakoff, G. & Núñez, R.E. (2000). Where mathematics
comes from: How the embodied mind brings
mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, G. & Turner, M. (1989). More than cool reason: A field guide to poetic metaphor. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991).
Cross-cultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Tversky, B (2001). Spatial schemas in depictions. In M.
Gattis (Ed.), Spatial schemas in abstract thought.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Zacks, J. & Tversky, B. (1999). Bars and lines: a study
of graphic communication. Memory and Cognition,
27, 1073-1079.

