UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Incorporating Cognitive Styles into Adaptive Multimodal Interfaces

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1zx37693

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Mammar, Halima Habieb
Bernard, Franck Tarpin

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Incorporating Cognitive Styles into Adaptive Multimodal Interfaces
Halima Habieb Mammar (habieb@ictthp.insa-lyon.fr)
Laboratoire d’Interaction Collaborative Télé-enseignement Téléactivités,
Edifice Léonard de VINCI 21 Avenue Jean Capelle INSA de Lyon 69211 Villeurbanne Cedex - FRANCE

Franck Tarpin Bernard (tarpin@gprhp.insa-lyon.fr)
Laboratoire d’Interaction Collaborative Télé-enseignement Téléactivités,
Edifice Léonard de VINCI 21 Avenue Jean Capelle INSA de Lyon 69211 Villeurbanne Cedex - FRANCE

Abstract
Many applications accessible through the web suffer
from a noticeable lack of support in adapting the
information presentation to users. The way users learn
differs from an individual to an other, if not for the same
individual from an application to an other one. These
individual differences affect the learning style of users.
They are classified into 3 categories which are: affective,
cognitive and physiologic styles. There is little research
to examine how to design adaptive systems based on
user’s cognitive styles. In this paper, we are focusing on
user cognitive styles definition and suggest a technique
in the design of an adaptive hypermedia system. We
investigate the selection of the output modality that best
tailor the user profile.
In section 1 we introduce the problematic of learning
from net-structured knowledge then we define the
cognitive styles. In section 2, we present the main
cognitive styles which are the most mentioned in
literature. The taxonomy of these cognitive styles and
techniques to assess them are detailed in section3. In the
last section, we present the structure of our site and
model. We investigate the relationship between the
cognitive style and the filtering process of the outcome
modalities. For the development of the system, we have
chosen the two technologies : XML and ASP.

Introduction
In e-learning systems, the user is confronted to lessons,
exercises, games... which, on the one hand are relevant
to his/her needs and preferences i.e. educational level,
domain knowledge (expert or novice) but which, on the
other hand, do not take into account his/her abilities for
assimilation, memorization, etc. which are parts of the
cognitive abilities (Lemaire, 1999). In some cases, the
learner gives up the game or the exercise because of the
frequent situations of defeats. In other cases, he/she
tries hard to make his/her best in order to avoid these
situations which overload his/her abilities. The aim of
our project consists in developing an adaptive
multimodal interfaces where individual cognitive styles
are considered. Indeed, the adaptation process deals
with the estimation of the document combination (in

other word, the multimodal interface) which is the most
compatible with the cognitive profile.
In the following sections, we present our site then we
define the term “cognitive styles”, assess the main
styles encountered in literature then discuss the
taxonomy of ways employed to measure the cognitive
style. Later in section 4, we describe the functionalities
of our site and the model we adopted to establish the
relationship between the cognitive style and the
filtering process of the outcome modalities.

Our Site
In collaboration with the society SBT, we work on an
interactive web site for a supervised cognitive training
(www.happyneuron.com). During each training session
(i.e. each connection), the user executes a set of
exercises that the system suggests. Presented into a
playful and cultural dimension, the exercises vary in
difficulty’s level, speed… in order to entertain the user
(Habieb-Mammar et al, 2001).
A database stores normalized data (means and standard
deviations) for each variant of exercise and family of
population distinguishing gender, level of education
and age (Tarpin-Bernard et al, 2001). The current
statistics show that since the web site has been opened
to the public, the number of performed exercises
exceeds 400.000. Comparing the trainee’s results and
the normalized data we progressively build his/her
cognitive profile. Thanks to it, the system advises the
elderly user in the choice of exercises.
In this context, we built an evaluation module
composed of ten precise exercises that allows to quickly
build a cognitive profile. Then, this profile, which is
quite stable, can be used in very different context. Our
first purpose is to elaborate an adaptive multimedia
course on the brain. Depending on one’s profile, the
lesson will be presented using the most adapted medias.
Before describing the relationship between cognitive
styles and interactive styles let start with the definition
of these cognitive styles and the methods of their
assessment.

What are Cognitive Styles?
Cognitive styles refer to a person’s habitual, prevalent,
or preferred mode of perceiving, memorizing, learning,
judging, decision-making, problem-solving (Dufresne,
1997).
Individual differences about how people carry out tasks
involving these functions may constitute a style if they
appear to be: pervasive, which means that they emerge
consistently in different contexts, independently of the
particular features of situation; or stable, that is, they
are always the same at different times.
They are one of the most stable user characteristics
overtime (Dufresne, 1997). they are consistent across a
variety of situations, as opposed to user knowledge or
experience that are more specific and evolving . Many
research have shown the importance of cognitive styles
in the area of HCI and their implication in the interface
design (Muylwijk et al, 1983).
Cognitive styles induce persons to adopt similar
attitudes and behaviors in a variety of domains they
concern (Daniels, 1996). Cognitive styles are important
in determining the most effective interface for a
particular category of user, especially in the formative
stages of an interaction (Fowler et al, 1985).
They can be conceptualized as a cross-road of thinking,
personality, and motivation. In fact they concern the
kind of strategies which an individual tends to apply
when he/she faces a situation or the preferred way of
processing information.

The Main Cognitive Styles
Field Dependence
The first style we introduce is: field-independent style.
People tend to have good analytical and cognitive
restructuring skills. They will actively reorganize
information according to contextual demands and
impose structure when necessary according to their
experience. They are likely to form a mental model of
the situation before proceeding with their task. Fieldindependent people seem to follow more easily a
restructuring approach and use internal referents in
other situations (Antonietti et al, 2000).
Field-dependent people tend to adopt a passive
approach in learning and problem solving. They prefer
to be guided and to rely on external referents.
Perception is dominated by the prevailing field.
When internal referents are less available, field
dependent people are more likely to respond to the
dominant properties of the field as given.
Lesser use of restructuring may handicap field
dependent people in unstructured situations. field
dependent people may need more explicit instructions
in problem solving strategies or more exact definitions
of performance outcome than field independent, who

may even perform better when allowed to develop their
own strategies (Witkin et al, 1981).
However, the restructuring process occurs only when
the field lacks organization. When the material to be
learned is presented in an already organized form, so
that structuring is not particularly called for, field
dependent and field independent people are not likely to
differ in their behavior and learning (Antonietti et al,
2000).
In general field independent subjects :
−
−
−
−
−

Perceive objects as separate from the field;
Can disembed relevant items from non-relevant
items within the field;
Provide structure when it is not inherent in the
presented information;
Reorganize information to provide a context for
prior knowledge;
Tend to be more efficient at retrieving items from
memory.

Conversely, field dependent subjects:
−
−
−
−
−

Rely on the surrounding perceptual field;
Have difficulty attending to, extracting, and using
non salient cues;
Have difficulty providing structure to ambiguous
information;
Have difficulty restructuring new information and
forging links with prior knowledge;
Have difficulty retrieving information from longterm memory.

The test of field dependent-independent subjects is
done through several exercises where individual are
asked to remember shapes or other types of information
whether they where presented in significant context
(Fig. 1) or not (Fig. 2) (Tarpin-Bernard et al, 2001).

Figure 1: Significant context.

few common features. Other individuals may group
objects into different categorization where the criteria
are not only the width:
−
−
−
Figure 2: Non-significant context.

Impulsive reflective style
The impulsive subject tends to put forward the first idea
that comes to him/her, whereas the reflective subject
considers alternatives. This style is generally assessed
by measuring differences in decision-making under
conditions of uncertainty. Tasks used present several
plausible choices, only one of which is correct:
−
−

analytic-descriptive style induces to include in the
same category items showing surface physicalperceptual similarities;
conceptual-inferential style induces to define
categories on the basis of similarities in objects’
functions;
thematic-relational style induces to include in the
same category disparate objects which have in
common only the fact that they occur in the same
action or situation.

Figure (Fig.4) shows an exercise where subjects are
invited to sort objects into categories suggested by the
supervisor. Firstly, the users select the category then
they sort object into this category.

who responds quickly often errs;
who pauses to reflect is more often correct.

Fig. 3 is an example of exercise where it is possible to
identify one of the following categories:
−
−
−
−

fast-responding/high-error (FH),
fast responding/low-error (FL);
slow-responding/high-error (SH);
slow-responding/low-error (SL).
Figure 4 Exercise type for the category identification

Analytic-global style

Figure 3 Exercise type for impulsive reflective
identification.

Categorization style
Other individual differences consist in giving a number
of objects and asking subjects to sort them into
categories. Some individuals place objects into a wide
number of small categories, so that each category
contains only objects sharing a high number of similar
features; other individuals place objects into a small
number of wide categories which include items with

The last style we consider is the analytic-global style
which refer to either considering the details of a
situation or the whole picture (Euzeby, 1999). Analytic
individuals have a focused attention, an interest in
operations and procedures or the ‘proper’ ways of doing
things and prefer step-by-step schemes; their thinking is
controlled and consciously directed. Global persons
tend toward scanning, leading to form overall
impressions, including entry of feelings into decisions;
their organizational schemes involve random or
multiple accessibility of components and varied
associations between them.
Some tests in cognitive styles analysis (Riding and
Rayner, 1998) allow to measure the analytic dimension
by presenting items each comprising a simple
geometrical shape and a complex figure and by asking
to indicate whether or not the simple shape is contained
in the complex figure.

How do we Assess Cognitive styles?
Three main kinds of data can be employed to measure
cognitive styles: behavioral, self-report, and
physiological (Antonietti & Giorgetti, 1998)
Behavioral data can be obtained by recording the final
result of a given task or the procedure followed in
performing the task. The task may consist in filling out
a paper-and-pencil test or a sorting test, in carrying out
trials by means of an experimental apparatus, or in
interacting with the computer like during exercise
running (Tarpin-Bernard et al., 2001). For an example,
to assess whether a person is a visualizer or a
verbalizer, it is possible to present him/her with tasks
which can be performed through both visual and verbal
strategies and to record the extent to which each of the
two kinds of procedures has been followed.
Self-reports require that people evaluate themselves by
describing by introspective manner the way in which
they performed tasks, by checking personal habits or
preferences, or by endorsing statements about what they
think of themselves. This may be done, for example, by
asking subjects to keep a diary of what occurred to
them during a period of their life, by interviewing them,
or by adopting questionnaires.
The following example is given by Antonietti
(Antonietti & Giorgetti, 1998):
In order to understand how much an individual tends to
visualize, he/she can be requested to keep a record of
the times in which he/she has experienced imagery
during the day. Information of this kind may be derived
also through questionnaires in which people are asked
to rate how frequently they create and process various
kinds of mental images. These instruments incite
subjects to consider their habitual modes of thinking as
they emerge in the complete range of mental activities
and to assess the occurrence of visual images in
different tasks, domains, contexts, and so on.
Finally, some physiological measures can be interpreted
as indices of particular cognitive preferences in
processing stimuli. Indeed, Physiological measures
observations have indicated that when someone is
asked a question requiring a little thought the eyes
make an initial movement to the left or right. Since it
was argued that the right cerebral hemisphere is
associated with the processing of visual information
and that the spontaneous lateral eye movements are
under the control of the counter-lateral hemisphere, it
was claimed that the presentation of a visual-spatial
question produces the activation of the right hemisphere
and, consequently, left lateral eye movements.
However, verbalizers should turn their eyes consistently
to the right and visualizers to the left, whatever the kind
of question. Thus, it has been suggested to use lateral
eye movements as a criterion to assess the preference
for either a visual or a verbal processing.

Relationship Between Cognitive Styles and
Interaction Styles
The most important components of HappyNeuron’s
technology are structured as follows (Fig. )5 :
First stage: User’s profile generation process (TarpinBernard et al, 2001)
− Questionnaire;
− Exercises;
− Supervision process;
− Cognitive styles
− User profile;
Second stage: Adaptation process
− Compatibility matrix;
− User profile;
− XML
(eXtensible
Markup
Language)
documents (multimodal documents );
− Text;
− Image or graphics;
− Sound;
− Video.
− Stylesheet;
Behavioral data

First Stage:
User profile
generation process

Supervision rules

User’s
profile generation
process

User Profile

Second Stage:
Adaptation process
XML Document
(gathering multimodal
document )

Stylesheet

Adaptive
Process

Final Document
Layout

Figure 5: User profile generation and adaptation
process

3-

User’s profile generation process
The user's profile generation process consists on the
one hand in executing interactive exercises then
constructing the user cognitive profile. On the other
hand, it deals with other user’s behavior such as the
time to run an exercise, performance variations for the
same exercise type, etc. This indicators are adjusted
with each other and constitute the final user profile
(Fig. 6).
Supervision process
(exercise’s rule selection)

List of
recommended
exercises

Indicators revealing some characteristics of styles
such as field dependent or independent.
These indicators are affected with some weightings and
contribute in the adaptation process. For example to
determine whether the subject is field dependent or
independent, we use the indicator which measures the
difference in performance after running the same
exercise with two different images (the first with
significant context and the second with non-significant
context) then we adjust it with other cognitive
indicators such as recent memory (verbal, visual or
musical) and comprehension.

Adaptive Process
Database

Behavioral indicators
(time to run an
exercise, connection
frequency,
performance
variation,… )

Cognitive indicators
(dispatched into the
five sectors)

User’s
Profile

Figure 6:The user's profile generation process
During each training session, the supervisor suggests a
set of three or four exercises. The user can also select
other exercises in the complete list. At any moment, the
system gives users feedback about their progression and
enables them to:
− check their performance by consulting the profile
performance page,
− have a summary of the exercises they have already
done,
−
browse some documents (news, forums,…).
Thus, the main components of the output profile are:
1- Cognitive indicators dispatched into 5 sectors:
memory, attention, executive functions, language
and visual and spatial capacities [Tarpin-Bernard
et al, 2001]. In total, 25 indicators have been
determined, we can mention several of them as an
illustration: cultural memory, old personal
memory, recent memory (verbal, visual or
musical), working memory and short term memory
with the tree modalities, lexical spelling,
categorization,
comprehension,
arithmetic,
planning, reasoning, mental imagery, form
recognition, etc ;
2- Behavioral indicators (time during exercise
running, connection frequency, etc.);

As described in figure 5, the training process yields a
user profile which constitutes the input data for the
adaptation process. Indeed, this profile enables the
selection of the outcomes style sheets. The multimodal
document is defined into an XML document.
Prior to any process, each style sheet contains the
layout of a complete page to be presented. For a
specific subject, the final layout of this page is brought
through the adaptive process. This page is the most
compatible one to the user profile.
To illustrate the adaptive process, we give hereafter an
example of a page to be presented dealing with the
following subject : “The main parts of a language : the
vocabulary and the syntax”. In the XML document, the
page falls under 2 elements. Each one could be
presented according to different modalities. (Fig.7).
Principal document
LANGUAGE

Sub-document
VOCABULARY

Text
(M1a)

Voiced
Text
(M2a)

Diagram
(M3a)

Sub-document
SYNTAX

Text
(M1b)

Image
(M2b)

Is composed of
The possible modalities are

Figure 7: XML document structure
The problem is to find the “best” combination of
modalities according to the willing of the designer and
the abilities of the reader. According to the XML
structure, the possible combinations are: (M1a, M1b),
(M1a, M2b), (M2a, M3a, M1b), etc. Then, we can build

