UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning to Solve Complex Propositions: Does knowledge of truth-values bootstrap modal
operators?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2hh530nn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Morris, Bradley J
Klahr, David

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning to Solve Complex Propositions:
Does knowledge of truth-values bootstrap modal operators?
Bradley J. Morris (bjmorris@pitt.edu)
University of Pittsburgh, LRDC, 3939 OíHara St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

David Klahr (klahr@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Evaluating complex propositions requires evaluating truthvalues and assigning modal operators. Previous research
suggested that evaluating truth-values may be the key to
assigning modal operators. This study placed 111 third and
fifth grade children in one of three training conditions: no
training, training truth-value assignment, and training truthvalue and modal operator assignment. The results indicate
that truth-value assignment training is sufficient to
significantly improve childrenís evaluations of complex
propositions.

Reasoning with complex propositions (statements using
AND, OR, NOT, IF) forms the basis of much higher-order
thinking. There are three reasoning classes associated with
processing propositions: evaluating a proposition as true or
false (truth-values), evaluating whether a conclusion follows
from the premises (validity), and judgments about
possibility and necessity (modal operators). While much
research has focused on judgments about validity (for a
recent review see Markovits & Barrouillet, 2002), we will
focus on a less-researched area: evaluating truth-values and
assigning modal operators.
The assignment of truth-values entails determining the
truth or falsity of a statement (Johnson-Laird, 1983). The
complexity of assigning truth-values depends on the number
of elements being evaluated (i.e., how many items need to
be evaluated) and the number of states under evaluation (the
number of combinations and their associated truth-values).
To better illustrate this point we will provide examples of
two representative tasks. The first is sentence verification.
In a sentence verification task, subjects typically are given a
simple proposition (e.g., the star is white) to evaluate either
with their existing knowledge or with some reference
materials (e.g., picture of a white star). There are two
possible values for each proposition: true or false. Because
there is only one element under consideration, the
evaluation is based on semantic properties (Roberts, Wood,
& Gilmore 1994). The second type of task, evaluating
complex propositions such as conjunctions and disjunctions,
is more complicated than sentence verification because it
requires the evaluation of two elements and four possible
states. For example, when evaluating a conjunction (e.g., the
star is white and the circle is blue), each single proposition

has its own truth-value (white star; blue circle).
Additionally, the statement as a whole is only true if both
single propositions are true, thus there is only one of the
four possible resulting combinations that results in an
assignment of ìtrueî for the entire statement.
Assigning modal operators is determining when a
statement is possible or necessary (Johnson-Laird, 1983).
Like the assignment of truth-values, the assignment of
modal operators differs in complexity depending on the
nature of the task. Modal operators can be assigned on
statements such as ìA brother is a boyî in which by
definition the statement is necessarily true (Miller, Custer,
& Nassau, 2000). In this task the assignment is based on
purely semantic factors. A more difficult task is assigning
modal operators for complex propositions such as
contradictions and tautologies. To determine that a
tautology is always true (possible) and that a contradiction is
always false (impossible) requires evaluating the semantics
and syntax of the statement. That is, one must consider the
truth-value of the connective and whether the semantic
elements match any of the possible truth-values. Thus, a
contradiction will always be false because one of the two
propositions will always be false and an AND statement
requires both elements to be true for the entire statement to
be true.
Development of Truth-values and Modal Operators
Very little attention has been given to how children
coordinate assigning truth-values and assigning modal
operators. That is, are these processes related and if so,
how? Perhaps gains on one phase do not correspond to gains
on the other, thus we will call this possibility the separate
phase hypothesis. Much previous research on either process
has focused on a single process without examining the other
typically reporting performance in one without respect to
changes in the other (Ruffman, 1998; Braine & Rumain,
1981; Osherson & Markman, 1976; Paris, 1974). Thus,
perhaps the two are not related.
The only theoretical position that has examined both
processes, mental logic, states that the two processes are
part of a single inferential schema that is acquired with
language (Braine & OíBrien, 1997). Once activated, these
schemas fire a series of inferential rules that produce a

correct conclusion for all types of inferences (truth-values
and modal operators). Thus this position suggests that
children should either err on assigning truth-values or modal
operators or produce correct evaluations for both, but there
should be no inconsistency. We will call this approach the
compiled phase hypothesis. Previous research demonstrates
differences in young childrenís ability to assign truth-values
and modal operators (Morris & Sloutsky, 2002; Miller,
Custer, & Nassau, 2000; Braine & Rumain, 1981; Osherson
& Markman, 1976), however, most of this research did not
look at the consistency of responses within individual
children. Two studies that examined within-participant
consistency (Morris & Sloutsky, 2002; Morris & Klahr, in
review) found large differences in childrenís performance
specifically, that children produced correct responses on
assigning truth-values before modal operators. These
differences may suggest that such coordination in these
types of inferences may occur late in development (see
Morris & Sloutsky, 2002, for a discussion).
It is also possible that the two types of inferences are
related and that knowledge about one is related to the
development of the other. We will call this the dependent
phase hypothesis. Morris & Sloutsky (2002) and Morris and
Klahr (in review) examined childrenís assignment of truthvalues and modal operators and observed that many children
erred on one while giving correct responses on the other,
providing evidence against the compiled phase hypothesis.
Further, in each case, children who correctly assigned modal
operators also assigned correct truth-values while the
converse was not true suggesting that the ability to assign
correct truth-values preceded the ability to assign correct
modal operators. The dependent phase hypothesis suggests
that children must first learn to assign correct truth-values
before they can assign modal operators because the
mappings that allow truth-value provide sufficient
information to infer modal operators.
The present study was designed to compare the three
approaches and to test the dependent-phase hypotheses. A
training study was conducted in which children were given
instruction on assigning truth-values and modal operators.
Children were randomly assigned to one of three conditions.
The first instructional condition (ìmappingî) provided
explicit instruction on evidence evaluation only. The second
instructional condition (ìnecessityî) gave children explicit
instruction on evidence evaluation and evidence requests.
The third condition (ìcontrolî) gave children no instruction.
Our first prediction is that mere exposure to logical
statements is insufficient to improve performance on any
processing phase. If all conditions show equal improvement
on the post-test, then this supports the compiled phase
hypothesis because learning was not required, only
familiarity with the type of problem. The second prediction
is that training is necessary for improvements in
performance. If the mapping and necessity conditions show
significant improvement from pre- to post-test and
childrenís performance in these conditions are significantly
better than the performance of children in the control

condition, this provides evidence against the compiled phase
hypothesis (because training was required to improve
performance) and supports the separate and related phases
hypotheses. The third prediction is that improvement is
specific to the phases on which training has been given. If
children in the mapping and necessity condition are not be
significantly different in their post-test performance levels
then this supports the dependent phase hypothesis, however,
if the mapping and necessity conditions are different on the
post-test, then this supports the separate phase hypothesis.

Method
Participants
The participants were 111 children: 60 third (mean age
8,8; 29 boys, 31 girls) and 51 fifth (mean age 10,8; 25 boys,
26 girls) graders enrolled in two public or two private
schools located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Participants
were chosen on the basis of returning a parental consent
form. Third and fifth grade children were selected because
cross-sectional studies (e.g., Morris & Sloutsky, 2002) have
demonstrated significant improvements in logical reasoning
between these ages. Children in each grade were randomly
assigned to one of the three conditions.
Design
We used a 3 (condition) x 2 (grade) x 4 (session) design
with session as within-participants measure. The three
conditions (control, mapping, necessity) differed in the
amount of explicit instruction on how to evaluate different
types of logical statements. The control group was given a
series of 12 problems formally identical to those in the
pretest in both training sessions without any instruction.
Children in the mapping condition were given explicit
instruction about rules used to evaluate evidence in logical
statements. Children in the necessity condition were given
the same evaluation rules as those in the mapping condition
and were given explicit instruction about when evidence
was necessary and unnecessary.
Each child participated in four sessions: a pre-test,
training 1, training 2, and a post-test. In the pre-test,
children were asked to evaluate the truth-status of a series of
16 statements. In the second and third sessions children
were given one of the three training conditions. In the fourth
session each child was given a post-test formally identical to
the pre-test.
Procedure
The procedure was divided into four sessions over four
days: (1) Day 1- Pre-test, (2) Day 2- Training 1, (3) Day 3Training 2, (4) Day 4- Post-test. Each session was separated
by approximately one week (M= 8.2 days). Each child was
interviewed individually in a quiet location in his or her
school. The interviewer recorded each childís responses for
all four sessions.

Session 1- Pre-test
All instructions for the experimental segment were read to
each participant and repeated if requested. The pre-test
consistent of 4 warm-up statements and 16 actual
statements. Two cards were placed in front of each child: a
statement card (face up) and an evidence card (face down).
The order of presentation of statement and evidence pairs
was counterbalanced across participants. Each child was
presented a total of 16 statements corresponding to 4 of each
of the following types: conjunctions, disjunctions,
tautologies, and contradictions. The child then read the
statement card aloud. After the child read the statement,
Question phase 1 (a priori evaluation) was then asked (ìIs
the sentence true, not true, or canít you tell?î). After the
answer was recorded, Question phase 2 was asked (evidence
request: ìDo you need to see the picture to find out?î). If
evidence was requested, the evidence card was turned over
(all were pictures) and placed in front of the participant.
Question phase 3 was then asked (evidence evaluation) in
which the child was asked to evaluate the initial statement
using the evidence requested (ìNow that you have seen the
picture, was the sentence true, not true, or canít you tell?î;
Asked only if evidence was requested). The task took
approximately 15 minutes.
Session 2- Training 1
Control Condition. The procedure used in the control
condition was identical to the procedure used in the pre-test.
Children in the control condition were given a set of 12
statements structurally identical to those in the pre-test but
with altered content. As in the pre-test children were asked
up to three questions for each statement corresponding to
the three processing phases. Children were given no
feedback or instructions after their responses. This
procedure lasted 10 minutes.
Training Warm-up Segment. Note the training warm-up
was used only with the mapping and necessity conditions.
The training warm-up segment was a brief session in which
children were given basic rules for evaluating evidence with
the connectives AND or OR. The training consisted of three
parts: (1) explanation of sentence parts, (2) explanation of
evaluation rules, and (3) rule use/feedback. Children were
first given an explanation of the ìpartsî of each sentence in
the task. Each sentence was divided into two parts (clauses
separated by the connective) and an ìimportant wordî (the
logical connective). Children were told that the important
word indicated which rule was used to evaluate each type of
statement.
Children were then asked to demonstrate the parts and
important words on a new sentence with feedback provided
for errors. Next, children were given brief instruction on
how to evaluate evidence with each type of important word.
Children were given simple rules for each connective.
Children were told that the evidence had to match both parts
for an AND sentence to be true, otherwise it is false.
Children were told that evidence had to match only one part
of the statement for an OR to be true otherwise the

statement is false. The decision to explain an OR as an
exclusive OR was made to make a clean conceptual
distinction between OR and AND.
Once the rules for important words were explained,
children were given a statement and a series of evidence
cards, presented one at a time, and asked to identify the
parts and important word then to evaluate the statement as a
whole. In total, two statements (1 OR, 1 AND) and four
evidence cards (1 true, 1 false for each statement type) were
given over the training warm-up. Feedback was provided for
incorrect responses giving the correct answer and reexplaining the evaluation rule. This procedure took 5
minutes. The warm-up was only given before Training 1.
Mapping Condition. The mapping condition provided
explicit instruction about evaluating evidence with
statements. Each child was given four statements (one of
each type) and three different pieces of evidence for each
statement. The mapping condition provided instruction for
each statement in three stages over which the scaffolding
provided by the interviewer was gradually reduced: (1)
explicit instruction, interviewer-led solution, (2) probe
questions, scaffolded solution and (3) probe questions,
child-led solution.
In the first stage of the instruction, the interviewer placed
a statement card on the table and asked the child to evaluate
the statement as true, not true, or canít tell. The interviewer
then placed the first evidence card on the table and asked the
child to evaluate the statement based on the evidence card.
The interviewer then provided explicit instruction about the
parts and important words of each statement and the correct
conclusion regardless of the childís response. The second
evidence card was then placed on the table beside the first
evidence card. The interviewer asked the child to repeat the
rule for the important word, match evidence to each part of
the sentence, and then to evaluate the sentence as a whole. If
any evaluation was incorrect, children were given
immediate feedback. The third evidence card was placed on
the table beside the first two cards. The interviewer then
asked the child evaluate each part of the sentence and
evaluate the sentence as a whole. Feedback was provided
only if the child answered incorrectly. This procedure was
repeated for each statement type and took approximately 10
minutes per child.
Necessity Condition. The procedure in the necessity
condition was identical to the mapping condition with the
addition of two probe segments after evaluating the second
and third evidence cards. After the second evidence card,
the two evidence cards (and the truth-values associated with
them) were reviewed to determine if their contents changed
the truth-values of the statement as a whole. After the third
evidence card, all cards were reviewed. The child was then
asked whether the evidence changed the statementís truthvalue. If the evidence was necessary, then the child was told
that it was necessary to first see evidence before evaluating
ìthis typeî of statement. If evidence was unnecessary, then

the child was told that no evidence would change the truthvalue of ìthis typeî of statement because, for example, the
two clauses in a contradiction can never match the same
evidence (in this case the same picture).
Session 3: Training 2
The training 2 was identical to that used in Training 1.
Session 4: Post-test
The post-test procedure was identical to the pre-test.
Materials
Pre- and Post-Test Materials. Pre- and post-test materials
were logically identical but had slightly different content.
Each session required the evaluation of four statement
types:
tautology,
contradiction,
disjunction,
and
conjunction. Each child saw four instances of each
statement type. The materials consisted of 16 unlined 3 x 9î
cards with one statement and 16 3 x 5î cards with a
corresponding piece of evidence. An additional six cards (3
statement, 3 evidence) were used as materials for the warmup items.
Control Condition.Two sets of materials (one for each
training session) were created for the control condition.
Each set contained 12 statements (3 of each type) printed on
3 x 9î cards and 12 3 x 5î evidence cards. Each set also
included three statement cards and three evidence cards for
the warm-up segment.
Training Warm-up Condition. The training warm-up (for
mapping and necessity conditions only) included two
statement cards used to demonstrate the parts of the
sentence, plus two statement cards and four evidence cards
for articulating the AND and OR rules.
Mapping and Necessity Conditions. The mapping
condition required two sets of materials, one for each
training session. Each set of materials included four
statement cards (one of each statement type) and twelve
evidence cards, three evidence cards corresponding to each
statement card.
Results
The results will be presented in two sections: (1)
aggregated analyses of the effects of training across each
processing phase separately and (2) individual strategy
analyses comparing changes in the consistency of response
patterns across processing phases. The first set of analyses
will separately examines training effects on a priori
evaluations, evidence requests, and evidence evaluations.
The second analysis examines changes in inter-phase
consistency before and after training.

Aggregated analyses
Question Phase 1: A Priori Evaluations (AP). For all a
priori evaluation phases, possible responses were ìtrue,î
ìnot true,î or ìcanít tell.î Correct responses were coded as
follows: contradictions- not true; tautologies-true;
conjunctions and disjunctions-canít tell. Correct responses
were scored as 1 while incorrect responses were coded as 0.
To determine the effectiveness of training on the number
of correct a priori evaluations, a 3 (condition) x 2 (age) x 2
(pre-test vs. post-test) ANOVA was performed with session
as a within-subjects variable. The analysis reveals a main
effect for condition, F (2, 110) = 6.1, p <.003, and age F (1,
110) = 8.9, p <.003 and no interaction between condition
and age F (2, 110) = .42, p >.65. Children in the mapping
and necessity conditions gave significantly more correct
responses in the post-test than in the pre-test. The
performance of children in the control condition did not
differ significantly from pre-to post-test. Fifth graders gave
significantly more correct requests in the post-test than third
graders.
Question Phase 2: Evidence Requests (ER). For the
evidence request phase, possible responses were ìyesî or
ìno.î Correct responses were coded as follows:
contradictions-and tautologies-No; conjunctions and
disjunctions-Yes. Correct responses were scored as 1 while
incorrect responses were coded as 0.
To determine the effectiveness of training on the number
of correct evidence requests, a 3 (condition) x 2 (age) s 2
(pre-test vs. post-test) ANOVA was performed with session
as a within-subjects variable. The analysis reveals a main
effect for condition, F (2, 110) = 3.9, p <.01, and age F (1,
110) = 10.6, p <.001 and no interaction between condition
and age F (2, 110) = .42, p >.65. Children in the mapping
and necessity conditions gave significantly more correct
responses in the post-test than in the pre-test. The
performance of children in the control condition did not
differ significantly from pre-to post-test. Fifth graders gave
significantly more correct requests in the post-test than third
graders.
Question Phase 3: Evidence Evaluations (EE). For the
evidence evaluation phase, possible responses were ìtrue,î
ìnot true,î or ìcanít tell.î Correct responses were coded as
follows:
contradictions-not
true;
tautologies-true;
conjunctions (2 true, 2 false) and disjunctions (2 true, 2
false). Correct responses were scored as 1 and incorrect
responses were coded as 0.
To determine the effectiveness of training on the number
of correct evidence evaluations, a 3 (condition) x 2 (age) x 2
(pre-test vs. post-test) ANOVA was performed with session
as a within-subjects variable. The analysis reveals a main
effect for condition, F (2, 110) = 20.8, p <.001, and age F
(1, 110) = 9.2, p <.003 and no interaction between condition
and age F (2, 110) = .25, p >.77. Children in the mapping
and necessity conditions gave significantly more correct
responses in the post-test than in the pre-test while children

in the control condition did not differ significantly from preto post-test. As in previous conditions, fifth graders gave
significantly more correct requests in the post-test than third
graders.
The aggregated analysis demonstrated that experience
with statements was not sufficient to improve performance,
at least not in the limited exposure provided during the
training period. Training effectively improved performance
for children in the mapping and necessity conditions. The
next series of analyses will examine the structure of change.
Individual Analysis
The individual analysis examined the consistency of a
childís correct response patterns within each processing
phase and across all processing phases. For example,
although the aggregated data demonstrates that fifth graders
generally outperformed third graders, these data do not
indicate the extent to which an individual fifth grader
produced correct answers for the evidence request phase or
for all question phases. We considered a pattern in which
75% of responses were correct as consistently correct. A
pattern below 75% was considered inconsistent. Tables 1
and 2 display the number of children coded as consistently
producing correct responses for each processing phase in the
pre- and post-tests.
Table 1- Percentage of Third Grade Children Giving
Consistent, Correct Responses Within Each Processing
Phase by Condition
Condition
AP
ER
EE
Control
0 (10)
0 (19)
19 (19)
Mapping
5 (30)
8 (40)
5 (85)
Necessity
5 (37)
5 (63)
11 (79)
Note. Posttest scores are presented in parentheses.
Table 2- Percentage of Fifth Grade Children Giving
Consistent, Correct Responses Within Each Processing
Phase by Condition
Condition
AP
ER
EE
Control
10 (14)
19 (29)
14 (10)
Mapping
15 (59)
10 (60)
25 (80)
Necessity
26 (62)
37 (79)
26 (95)
Note. Posttest scores are presented in parentheses.
There was a significant difference between the number of
consistent, correct responses in pretests and in the post-tests
for third and fifth graders. Third graders produced
significantly more consistent evidence evaluations χ2 (2,
40.8, p <.001) in the post-test than the pre-test. Fifth graders
produced significantly more evidence requests χ2 (2, 10.5, p
<.003) and significantly more consistent evidence
evaluations χ2 (2, 14.5, p <.001) in the post-test than the
pre-test.
These data were used to code the childís overall response
pattern (i.e., consistency measure on each of the three

processing phases) as either consistently correct (consistent,
correct responses on all phases) or mixed (inconsistent on
one or more phases). The results are displayed in Table 3.
Children in both training conditions produced significantly
more consistent correct responses than children in the
control condition, third graders χ2 (2, 4.2, p <.03), fifth
graders χ2 (2, 15.1, p <.001).
Table 3- Percentage of Children Giving Consistent Correct
Responses by Grade and Condition
3rd
5th
Condition

Pre

Post

Pre

Post

Control

0

9.5

13

13

Mapping

0

20

0

59

Necessity

0

37

11

61

Discussion
The results support the dependent phase hypothesis in
which changes in performance are due to gains on
knowledge of assigning truth-values, which then lead to
improvements in assigning modal operators. We tested three
predictions with a training study in which children were
given varying levels of instruction. These data indicate that
(1) contra the compiled phase hypothesis, a small amount of
experience with logical statements is not effective for
improving performance. Exposure to the control condition
was not related to increases in performance. Training was
related to significant increases in performance. Specifically,
(2) both training conditions were effective in improving
performance but (3) training on assigning truth-values was
sufficient to produce consistent, correct responses at levels
roughly equal to those of the necessity condition (in which
both truth-values and modal operators were trained).
Morris and Klahr (in review) examined the order in which
children make consistent correct responses on each
processing phase. In all cases, correct evidence evaluation
always preceded correct evidence requests and a priori
evaluations. The authors suggested that correctly evaluating
evidence provided sufficient knowledge from which
children could make further inferences about problem
classes.
The results can be explained by extending mental models
theory. In Mental Models theory (Johnson-Laird, 1983), for
each problem, models are created and searched for possible
solutions. Thus, to derive a valid conclusion, a set of tokens
is created and searched for possible and impossible solution
states. This constitutes a solution for a single instance. As
currently formulated, Mental Models makes no provisions
for within-subject change in processing due to learning (e.g.,
a childís performance on trial 100 should be different than
their performance on trial 1). The dependent phase
hypothesis suggests that this type of change should be
demonstrated by improvements on each phase and in the
structure of change between processing phases. As currently
formulated, mental models suggests that developmental

change is a function of increases in working memory.
Although this is likely important, such a factor would not
explain improvement derived from experience.
We suggest two possible mechanisms that may facilitate
changes in performance: discrimination and compilation.
After seeing a sufficient number of instances, a reasoner
should form expectations about a class of similar types (e.g.,
determinate statements). In this way, a reasoner does not
approach each instance as a new problem type. Rather,
increased reasoning efficiency results from (1) eliminating
redundant or unnecessary steps (Crowley, Shrager, &
Siegler, 1997) and (2) making additional inferences about
the class of similar problem types (Eisenstadt & Simon,
1997; Morris & Klahr, in review). For example, when
reasoning about two propositional classes: indeterminate
and determinate formal types, children initially confuse the
two, treating both as indeterminate (Fay & Klahr, 1996;
Morris & Sloutsky, 2002). By sixth grade, children begin to
distinguish the two forms, but often fail to correctly
determine when evidence is necessary and when
unnecessary (Morris & Sloutsky, 2002).
On first exposure to a formal type, a reasoner may make
errors at all phases. In evaluating a contradiction, for
example, a reasoner may assert that they cannot assign a
truth-value to the statement a priori, may request evidence
and then fail to evaluate this evidence correctly. Once
evidence is correctly evaluated and after several correct
conclusions have been drawn, our hypothetical reasoner
may then be able to infer that no evidence will change the
truth-value of this particular statement. Once this inference
is drawn, the reasoner may then also assert that the
statement is false a priori. The processes described may
illustrate (1) compilation, or eliminating a redundant
processing step (evidence request), and (2) discrimination,
or creating a new conceptual category for ìstatements that
do not require evidence.î Once this inference is made about
one statement, the reasoner may generalize this to other
propositions of this type: a statement of the form (A & ~A)
is false.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by a postdoctoral
fellowship from NICHHD (HD08550) to the first author and
grant HD25211 to the second author. Special thanks to Jen
Schnakenberg, Anne Siegel, and Jolene Watson for data
collection and coding and Corrine Zimmerman and four
anonymous reviewers for editorial suggestions.
References
Braine, M., & O'Brien, D. (1991). A theory of If: A lexical
entry, reasoning program, and pragmatic principles.
Psychological Review, 98, 182-203.
Braine, M. & OíBrien, D. (Eds.). (1998). Mental Logic.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Braine, M., & Rumain, B. (1981). Development of
comprehension of ìOrî: Evidence for a sequence of
competencies. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 31, 46-70.
Cheng, P., & Holyoak, K. (1985). Pragmatic Reasoning
Schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has natural
selection shaped how humans reason? Studies with the
Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-316.
Crowley, K., Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1997). Strategy
discovery as a competitive negotiation between
metacognitive and associative mechanisms.
Developmental Review, 17, 462-489.
Eisenstadt, S. A., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Logic and thought.
Minds and Machines, 7, 365-385.
Fay, A. L., & Klahr, D. (1996). Knowing about guessing and
guessing about knowing: Preschoolers' understanding of
indeterminacy. Child Development, 67(2), 689-716.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Deductive Reasoning. In J.
Spence (Ed.), Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 50
(pp.109-135). Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Markovits, H., & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The development of
conditional reasoning: A mental model account.
Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Miller, S. A., Custer, W., & Nassau, G. (2000). Children's
understanding of the necessity of logically necessary
truths. Cognitive Development, 15, 383-403.
Morris, B.J., & Klahr, D. (in review). From Empirical to
Formal: The Role of Evidence in Childrenís
Reasoning Strategies
Morris, B. J., & Sloutsky, V. (2002). Childrenís solutions of
logical versus empirical problems: Whatís missing
and what develops? Cognitive Development, 76, 122.
Osherson, D., & Markman, E. (1975). Language and the ability
to evaluate contradictions and tautologies. Cognition,
3(3), 213-226.
Paris, S. G. (1973). Comprehension of language connectives
and propositional logical relationships. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 16, 278-291.
Roberts, M.J., Wood, D.J., & Gilmore, D.J. (1994). The
sentence-picture verification task: Methodological and
theoretical difficulties. British Journal of Psychology,
85, 413-432.
Ruffman, T. (1999). Childrenís understanding of logical
inconsistency. Child Development, 70 (4), 872-886.

