UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic cues enhance the learning of perceptual cues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0ts153kr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Yoshida, Hanako
Smith, Linda B

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic Cues Enhance the Learning of Perceptual Cues
Hanako Yoshida (hayoshid@indiana.edu)
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)

Psychology Department, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-7007 USA

Abstract
Past research on children’s categorizations has centered
on the mechanism of children’s use of multiple cues in
categorization. This paper examines correlations between
perceptual cues and linguistic cues. The question asked
is a classic one in learning theory: given two redundant
cues, does the learner learn more about each than when
one cue independently predicts the category? This
question has special cogency in the context of children’s
language learning. We show that when linguistic cues
correlated with perceptual cues, children learn more
about perceptual cues.

Introduction
Two- and 3-year-old children learn new object names
rapidly, often correctly determining the range of
instances to which the name applies from just one
experience hearing the word used in a single context.
Children do this by exploiting multiple cues to
meaning. Past research indicates they use both
linguistic cues and perceptual cues to figure out the
likely meaning of a novel noun. Much of the relevant
evidence in this literature concerns the count-mass
distinction in English. Count nouns refer to entities
conceptualized as discrete objects and as countable.
Count nouns obligatorily take the plural (e.g., cups,
hopes). Mass nouns refer to entities conceptualized as
continuous substances and do not take the plural, but
rather mass quantifiers (e.g., some water, a lot of sand).
Children use linguistic cues to the count/mass status of
a noun to figure out the category to which a novel noun
refers. For example, if an entity named with a novel
name is presented in a frame that indicates it is a count
noun (e.g., “This is a mel”), English-speaking children
interpret the word as referring to a discrete entity and
typically extend the object name to a class of similarly
shaped things (Soja, Carey & Spelke, 1991; Soja, 1992;
Landau, Smith and Jones, 1988; Landau, Smith and
Jones, 1998; Imai & Gentner, 1997). When the same
noun is presented in a frame indicating it is a mass noun
(e.g., “This is some mel”), English-speaking children
interpret the word as referring to a substance and extend
its meaning to entities of the same material (Soja, Carey
& Spelke, 1991; Soja, 1992).

Children also use perceptual cues. For example,
children extend novel names to new instances by shape
when the named entity is solid and rigid (e.g., made
from wood) but extend the name to new instances by
material when the named entity is nonsolid and nonrigidly shaped. Much previous research has explored
which of these kinds of cues dominate by putting them
in conflict. In this paper, we ask whether and how they
might interact and support children’s learning of object
names. This is a relevant question for two reasons.
First, linguistic and perceptual cues are highly
correlated. This was documented by Samuelson and
Smith (1999) who studied the structure of the first 300
nouns commonly learned by English-speaking children.
Among these 300 names for common categories, solid
things tend to be named by count nouns that refer to
things of the same shape, whereas nonsolid things tend
to be named by mass nouns that refer to entities of the
same material. For learners of English, then, there is a
tight correlation between linguistic cues associated with
count/mass distinction and perceptual cues that
indicates the solidity or non-solidity of an entity.
Second, the evidence suggests that children learn the
correlations among perceptual cues, linguistic cues, and
category structure as they learn names for common
object and substance categories. Specifically, the
influence of perceptual cues on children’s noun
extensions emerges and grows stronger as vocabulary
grows. Samuelson and Smith’s (1999) data indicate that
children learning English do not extend names for solid
and nonsolid things differently until children have over
150 nouns. Similarly, English-speaking children’s
sensitivity to count/mass syntax in the novel noun
extension task emerges during this same time period
(Soja, 1992).

Two hypotheses
What is the relation between learning about perceptual
cues to category organization and linguistic cues to
category organization? One possibility is that they are
completely independent. Cross-linguistic comparisons
of English and Japanese speakers are consistent with
this view. Japanese differs from English in that it has no
obligatory plural and no counterpart to the count-mass
distinction in English. Yet, several studies suggest that

Japanese-speaking children extend names for novel
solids and non-solids in pretty much the same way as
English-speaking children (e.g., Imai & Gentner, 1997).
Thus, children’s learning about perceptual correlations
and their learning about syntactic cues to category
structure (so-called syntactic bootstrapping) may
proceed from different learning mechanisms. At the
very least, learning about perceptual correlations does
not require support from linguistic correlations.
The second contrasting possibility is that learning
about perceptual and linguistic cues to category
structure are mutually reinforcing. Imai & Gentner’s
(1997) comparisons of Japanese-speaking and Englishspeaking children’s extensions of names for novel
solids and non-solids suggest some subtle differences in
the range of items treated as objects and substances, and
also some differences in the developmental trend (see,
also Yoshida & Smith, 2001.) Further, a number of
learning models (Billman & Knutson, 1996; Medin,
Altom, Edelson and Freko, 1982; Goldstone, 1998)
suggest that the addition of correlated cues bolsters
learning about each cue.

Rationale for the experiment
In the present experiment, we examine the role of
syntax in children’s learning about perceptual cues to
category structure through a training study. We
attempted to train the solid-nonsolid distinction in
Japanese-speaking children who were too young to
robustly make the distinction in their novel noun
extensions (Shirai, 2000). The design of the four
training conditions is shown in Table 1. The linguistic
cues are hitotsu and sukoshi. In the specification of
quantitative constructions, (e.g., There is one cup)
hitotsu is used with objects and sukoshi is used with
substances. This is thus a natural and salient lexical
contrast in Japanese, yet it is one that is neither
mandatory nor particularly common. This is in contrast
to the count-mass distinction in English, which is
mandatory and pervasive. In control conditions, we
show that Japanese-speaking children are not sensitive
to this contrast, and do not know its implications
concerning objects and substances, prior to training.
During the test phase, half of the children in each
condition were tested with the linguistic cues and half
were not. Here, then, is the question: Will Japanese
speaking children show a stronger distinction in their
novel noun generalizations between solids and nonsolids if trained with these correlated linguistic cues
than if trained without them? Is this so even when the
linguistic cues are not present during testing? Because
our design involves using natural and thus potentially
meaningful lexical cues, and because we attempted to
accelerate the emergence of a distinction that children
eventually learn, we also included two control
conditions. Neither involved any training but tested

children’s sensitivity to the linguistic and perceptual
cues.

Experiment
Method
Participants Forty monolingual 2 _ year-old Japanesespeaking children residing in Niigata, Japan, were
randomly assigned to the two training conditions and
one control condition. Half of the children in each
condition participated in the novel noun generalization
test at the end of training, either with linguistic cues or
without linguistic cues in the tasks, for a total of 6
conditions.
Stimulus Training stimuli consisted of 4 training pairs,
two solids and two non-solids, as shown Figure 1. The
items in the solid pairs were the same shape but differed
substantially in material and color. The items in each
nonsolid pair were the same material but differed
substantially in color and shape. Stimuli for the test
trials consisted of novel solid items made of wood,
clay, or sponge, and novel nonsolid items made of hair
gel, hand cream, or toothpaste. During test, children
were queried about 6 unique test sets, 3 times each for a
total of 18 trials per a participant. Each of these test sets
contained one exemplar and 3 choice objects unique to
that set. One test choice object matched the exemplar in
shape only, one matched in material only, and one
matched in color only (See Figure 2.) During test, the
exemplars were named with a novel name with and
without the lexical cues hitotsu and sukoshi
corresponding to the condition to which the participants
were assigned.
Design and procedure Children participated in one of
the 6 conditions that resulted from crossing the 3 levels
of training (training with correlated linguistic cues,
training without correlated linguistic cues, and absence
of training), 2 levels of linguistic cues (with/without
linguistic cues in the task) with 2 levels of solidity
(sold/non-solid) for each condition.
Children in the Training condition participated in 10
training sessions over a period of 4 weeks. During each
session, the child was presented with the training
stimulus repeatedly with/without correlated linguistic
cues depending on the child’s condition. Each stimulus
was shown and introduced by its own novel name, and
then played with and repeatedly named for 5 minutes.
Each training session took a place for approximately 30
minutes every other day. Notice, this is an implicit
category-learning task. During training, children are not
required to discriminate between category instances,
but attend to the linguistic cues as predictive of
category membership.
All children participated in the same test trials where
the child was shown an exemplar of a test stimulus set

and told its unique novel name with and without
corresponding linguistic cues; “This is (hitotu/sukoshi)
kochi” or “This is (hitotu/sukoshi) kochi”. The child
was then presented with 3 test objects and was asked to
hand the item that can be considered as the name of the
exemplar with and without corresponding linguistic
cues; “Where is (hitotu/sukoshi) kochi?” or “Where is
kochi?” Feedback was not provided on these test trials.
Since these are novel objects and novel names, success
requires knowledge of some general principle---that
solids are named by shape and nonsolids are named by
material. Are children more likely to notice this
regularity when there are correlated linguistic cues?

personality not only communicates, but also
analyzes, notices or neglects types of relationship
and phenomena….
If correlated linguistic cues influence what is learned
about perceptual cues, Whorf will be right: the
language one learns will influence what one notices or
neglects to notice about the world.

Table
Table 1: 4 key conditions
Test with novel stimuli

Results
Each graph in Figure 3 shows the percentage of
children’s “correct novel word generalization” for solid
and non-solid items where “correct” was considered to
be shape based for the solids and material based for the
non-solids.
Two graphs in the top row represent the performance
of children without training sessions. Children
generalized all names the same---by shape---treating
solids and non-solids equally. This shows that, prior to
training, children are not sensitive to the linguistic
distinction, nor given these stimuli, to the solidnonsolid distinction. The two graphs in the bottom
represent the performance of children participated in
the training sessions with corresponding syntactic cues.
The graph on the left shows children’s performance
without the corresponding syntactic cues in the test
trials and one on the right shows children’s
performance with the corresponding syntactic cues.
Overall, children who had training sessions with the
linguistic cues generalize novel names correctly more
often than of children without the training sessions, F
(1, 28)=27.2, p< .01. The results suggest that the
presence of correlated linguistic cues enhances learning
about perceptual cues;

Syntax

No-syntax

Trained with
syntax

Correlated cues

No in task
correlated cues

No-Trained

Only in task
correlated cues

No correlated cues

Figures

Discussion
The training study revealed the importance of
correlated cues in category learning by demonstrating
how correlations between linguistic cues and perceptual
cues mutually reinforce attention to relevant perceptual
cues in the name extension task. The findings fit the
traditional idea of how language influences thought.
Whorf. (1956, p.252) wrote
And every language is a vast pattern-system,
different from others, in which are culturally
ordained the forms and categories by which the

Figure 1: Stimulus items used for the training
sessions.

Figure 2: Stimulus items used for the test trials.
Syntax
100%

90%

90%

80%

80%
% of correct answer

No Training

% of correct answers

No-syntax
100%

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%

10%

10%

0%

solid

0%

Non-solid

solid

Solidity

syntax

100%

100%

90%

90%

80%

80%
% of correct answers

% of correct answers

No-syntax

Training

Non-solid
Solidity

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

10%

0%

0%
solid

Non-solid

solid

Non-solid
Solidity

Solidity

Figure 3: Mean percentage of correct answers.

References
Bauer, P.J. & Mandler, J.M. (1989) Taxonomies and
triads: Conceptual organization in one- to two-year
olds. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 156-184.

Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997) A cross-linguistic study
of early word meaning: Universal ontology and
linguistic influence. Cognition, 62 169-200.
Landau, B., Smith, L. & Jones, S. (1998) Object
perception and object naming in early development.
Trends in cognitive science, 2, 19-24.
Lucy, J. A. (1992) Language diversity and thought: A
reformulation of the linguistic relativity hypothesis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mandler, J., M., Bauer, P. J., and McDonough, L.
(1991) Separating the sheep from the goats;
Differentiating
global
categories.
Cognitive
Development, 3, 247-264
Markman, E. M. (1991). The whole object, taxonomic,
and mutual exclusivity assumptions as initial
constraints on word meanings. In J. P. Byrnes & S.
A. Gelman (Eds.), Perspectives on language and
cognition: Interrelations in development (pp-72-106).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Quinn, P.C., & Eimas, P. D. (1996). Perceptual cues
that permit categorical differentiation of animal
species by infants. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 63, 189-211,
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B.; Gray, W. D.; Johnson, D.
M., & Boyes-Braem, P. (1976) Basic objects in
natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439
Samuelson, L. & Smith, L. B. (1999) Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category structure, and
syntax correspond? Cognition. 73, 1-33
Smith, L. B. (1995). Self-organizing processes in
learning to learn words: Development is not
induction. The Minnesota Symposia on Child
Psychology. Volume 28. Basic and applied
perspectives on learning, cognition, and development
(pp. 1-32). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Smith, L. B. (2000) Learning how to learn words: An
associative crane In Golinkoff, Roberta Michnick;
Hirsh-Pasek, Kathy; Bloom, et al. (Eds.) Becoming a
word learner: A debate on lexical acquisition. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, L. B., Colunga, E., & Yoshida, H. (in press)
Making Ontology: Cross-linguistic evidence In
Oakes, L. Rakison, D. Category Development
Soja, N. (1992). Inferences about the meanings of
nouns: the relationship between perception and
syntax. Cognitive Development, 7, 29-46.
Soja, N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children's inductions of word
meanings: Object terms and substance terms.
Cognition, 38, 179-211.
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L. B. (2001) Early noun lexicons
in English and Japanese. Cognition, 82, 63-74
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, thought and reality:
Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf (J.B.
Carroll, Ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Whitman, J & Shirai (2000) Introduction Journal of
East Asian Linguistics, 9, 315-324

