UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perspective-taking in Young Writer’s Descriptive Writing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2r28w5p6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Holliway, David R

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perspective -taking in Young Writer’s Descriptive Writing
David R. Holliway (holliway@marshall.edu)
Department of Educational Foundations and Technology, 122 Jenkins Hall, Marshall University,
400 Hall Greer Blvd.,
Huntington, WV 25755 USA

Abstract
This paper reports a perspective-taking strategy that
assisted younger writers in representing the
descriptive needs of their readers. There were 154
writers (78 5 th-graders and 76 9 th-- graders) and 52 9 th-grade readers that participated in the study. Three
conditions were contrasted: a feedback only
condition, a “rating other” condition, and a “readingas-the-reader”
condition.
Readers’
correct
description-to-tangram matches made for each of
three sessions served as the dependent measure.
Repeated measures analysis revealed both the 9 th- and
the 5 th-grade writers showed consistent significant
improvement
under
the
“read-as -the -reader”
condition when revising their essays and when
drafting anew. The results suggest that when young
writers engage in a process that mirrors their readers’
experiences, they can more accurately revise their
descriptive writing to meet their readers’
informational needs.

Theoretical perspective
Writing is simultaneously an individual struggle and a
social undertaking (Dyson & Freedman, 1991;
Fitzgerald, 1992; Florio, 1979; Flower, 1994). Writers
face the individual cognitive task of selecting what
information to communicate and how they will
communicate it. Inseparably, writers consider who their
readers will be and the context of their reading. Writing
scholars (Traxler & Gernsbacher, 1992, 1993;
Fitzgerald, 1992) theorize that to meet the informational
needs of readers, a writer must coordinate at least three
interacting mental representations: a representation of
personal communicative intent (what do I want to say?),
a representation of the text produced (what have I
written?), and a representation of the reader’s
perspective (how will the reader interpret my writing?).
Establishing reciprocity between reader, writer, and
text is the hallmark of experienced writing (Witte,
1992; Olson, 1994). Considerable research (e.g.,
Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987; Beal, 1996) has
demonstrated that young writers are particularly
challenged in learning this writer-reader-text
reciprocity. Specific instructional conditions that foster
“comprehension monitoring” (Beal, 1996; Fitzgerald &

Markham, 1987) and “knowledge -transforming”
(Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987) can help young writers
discriminate their intended message from the actual
text they have composed, thus influencing the textual
quality of their writing. Fewer studies, however, have
outlined conditions that may help improve younger
writers’ awareness of their readers’ possible
interpretations. For example, Frank (1992) found that
subtle manipulation of “audience specification” in
writing prompts led fifth-grade writers to compose
their newspaper advertisements differently for two
separate audiences. The research literature (e.g., Bonk,
1990) remains unclear about instructional conditions
that can help young writers view their text from the
perspective of their readers, and thus improve the
communicative quality of their writing.
To investigate how older students might become more
sensitive to their readers needs, Traxler and Gernsbacher
(1992, 1993) asked college students to compose and
revise descriptions of tangrams for anonymous readers.
The readers’ task was to read each description and then
select the matching tangram from a group of similarlooking tangrams. The writers who went through a
revision process identical to that of their readers
consistently wrote the most effective texts. Traxler and
Gernsbacher (1993) concluded that the reciprocity
between readers’ needs, text, and writer could be
successfully accomplished when writers read-as-theirreaders, that is, when writers learn to take the
informational perspective of their readers. If
consideration of the readers’ needs is critical to “good
thinking during composition” (Fitzgerald, 1992, p. 345),
then “reading-as -the-reader” may enable young writers
to consider the descriptive needs of their readers.
Reading-as-the-reader may be one strategy whereby
young writers can coordinate “what do I want to say?”
and “what have I written?” with “how will the reader
interpret my writing?”
This paper reports on -going research (Holliway, 2000;
Holliway & McCutchen, in press) that suggests
“reading-as -the-reader” can improve fifth- and ninthgrade writers’ ability to compose descriptive writing
consistent with their readers’ informational needs. Three
questions guide the present paper: 1) Can “reading-asthe-reader” assist young writers in composing and
revising descriptive writing that meets their readers’

informational needs? 2) What do the writers’ postexperiment reflections reveal about three contrasting
perspective-taking conditions? 3) How are the “readers’
informational needs” reflected in the descriptive
strategies used by these writers?

Methods
Participants

description creates a clearer picture in your mind?). After
finishing they revised their original descriptions.
Feedback + reading-as-the-reader condition
Writers received a feedback sentence for each
des cription indicating whether their reader had
successfully matched the description with the associated
target -gram , plus three descriptions written by another
student, and then they matched each description with
tangrams, exactly as their readers had done. After they
finished their matching, they revised their original
descriptions.

All participants came from four elementary schools and
three high schools located in a large metropolitan area.
There were 154 writers (78 5th-graders and 76 9thgraders) that came from regular language arts classes. Session three
The readers were a separate group of 52 9th-grade After finishing their task-specific activity, all writers
readers in advanced placement English classes.
received a new set of three tangrams to describe.

Design

Procedures for Readers

A written referential communicative paradigm was
adapted from Traxler and Gernsbacher (1993). The
writer communicated the details of Tangram to a reader
who chose the “target-gram” from a group of similarlooking tangrams. There were three writing sessions
each separated by one-week intervals. Each writing
session was followed on a separate day of the same week
by a reading session.

The readers received a notebook that contained typed
versions of the tangram descriptions, and a scorebook
wherein they made their description-t o-targetgram
matches. For the entirety of the experiment, the same
reader scored the same three writers, each writer
representing one of the three experimental conditions.

Materials

Quantitative analysis

The tangrams that the writers described came from a
collection of 72 figures (similar to those used by Traxler
and Gernsbacher, 1992, 1993; Clark and Wilkes -Gibbs,
1986). Tangrams were counterbalanced across sessions
and conditions.

The dependent measure for the 2 (grades) x 3 (tasks) x 3
(sessions) repeated measures analysis was the number of
correct description-to-“target-gram” matches that each
reader made for each description they read (For Mean
differences see Table 1 below).

Results

Table 1: Means and standard deviations by
Session, condition, and grade.

Procedures for Writers
Session one
All writers were given a notebook with three tangram
figures to be described. Writers had 30 – 35 minutes to
complete their descriptions.
Session two
Writers in each classroom were randomly assigned to
one of three perspective-taking conditions. The three
conditions differed in how closely the writers’ task
mirrored that of their readers.
Feedback-only condition
Writers received a sentence for each description
indicating whether their reader had successfully matched
the description with the associated target-gram. Writers
then revised their original descriptions.
Feedback + rating-other condition
Writers received a feedback sentence for each
description indicating whether their reader had
successfully matched the description with the associated
target -gram, plus three descriptions written by another
student. Writers rated the descriptions by considering the
informational adequacy of each description (e.g., which

Session 1
N M SD

Session 2
N
M SD

Session 3
N
M SD

18 2.17 .92
25 1.80 .76

18
25

18 2.28
25 1.68

Rate-Other
9th -grade
5th -grade

26 2.23 .77
30 1.87 1.04

26 2.42
30 2.00

Read-as-the
Reader
9th -grade
th
5 -grade

32 1.75 .88
23 1.57 .59

32 2.25 .84
23 2.13 1.01

Condition
Feedback
9th -grade
5th -grade

2.39 .85
2.20 .76
.76
.95

26
30

.96
.95

2.42 .70
2.27 .87

32 2.47 .67
23 2.26 .69

The between subject effect revealed a main effect of
Writer, F(1,148)=11.00, p=.001. On average, the ninthgraders scored higher than the fifth-graders throughout
all sessions and in all tasks. The within subjects effects
revealed a significant main effect of Session,
F(2,296)=8.76, p<.001, with session 1 (M = 1.88, SD =

An analysis of the writers’ open-ended free-writes about
their “reading-as -the-reader” experiences revealed that
the task was very useful for these writers. Students
portrayed their writing experiences on a variety of levels,
usually characterizing the task in some way as fun or
boring, insightful or uninspiring. The student free-write
responses were used to generate a general coding scheme
that categorized their experiences as positive or negative,
useful or not useful.
Based on the coding s cheme, the percentage of
students in each condition who characterized their
writing experience positively was calculated. Not all
students provided a free-write. Table 2 presents the
number of students responding in each condition, as well
as the percentage. The percentage of positive responses
from students in the Feedback condition was compared
to those in the Rate-Other and the Read -as-Reader
conditions. Students in the Feedback condition were
significantly less likely to characterize their writing
experiences as positive, compared with students in the
other two groups (Fisher’s Exact = 6.787, p =.005).

their comments about what they needed from their
writers revealed that a global conceptual image created
by an analogy with a balance of local shape and spatial
elaborations helped them discriminate and chose the
“target-gram” from the group of similar-looking
tangrams . For example, one reader commented: “The
descriptions that were the best were very detailed in the
shapes and what the figure looks like it’s doing.” The
readers’ profile revealed that the readers’ informational
needs were met more efficiently by writers who
elaborated on the analogical referent with a balance of
shape names (e.g., triangl e, parallelogram, square),
geometrical qualifications (e.g., zigzaggy, diagonal,
pointy) and location descriptors (e.g., to the right, on its
left, the left one).
A text analysis of the descriptions revealed that many
writers, regardless of condition and grade, began their
descriptions with analogies (e.g., “It looks like a running
fox,” “This tangram looks like a ghost flying.”) These
“spontaneous analogies” (English, 1997, p. 15) may be
one way writers are attempting to establish a common
perceptual ground with their readers. Writers varied,
however, in the way they elaborated on the spatial and
geometric qualities of the tangrams they described.
Many writers used an “object centered” strategy that
focused on the intrinsic details of each tangram. For
example this writer’s description represents a common
strategy: “It looks like a goose. It has a long zigzagging
neck. It has a small head and a pointed beak. Its body is
kinda [sic] long and it has two feet on top of each other.”
At this point in the analysis it is not easy to identify
changes in writing strategies and textual features due to
enhanced reader perspective. Initial text analyses of the
descriptive essays generated in this study reveal few
structural differences that can be associated with
condition.

Table 2: Actual number and percentage of students who
responded positively to their experimental condition.

Discussion

.86) yielding fewer matches than session 2 (M = 2.22,
SD = .87) and session 3 (M = 2.24, SD = .83). However,
the session main effect was compromised by a
significant interaction between session and condition, F
(4,296) = 2.96, p = .019. Post hoc analyses (Tukey’s
Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) approach)
established that differences between session 1 and
sessions 2 and 3 were significant only for the read-asthe-reader group (critical value = .375, p = .05). No other
interactions reached significance (F <1). These results
suggest that reading-as-the-reader helped both the 5thand the 9 th-graders in meeting their readers’
informational needs more than the other two conditions.

Qualitative analysis

Theoretical Implications
Positive Responses
All three groups of writers received feedback indicating
# Responding
% Who responded
the accuracy of their reader’s choice. The rate-other
in each condition
from each condition
group also read and evaluated descriptive tangram texts
written by other students. However, only the read-as-theFeedback
20
46.5%
reader group was asked to take their readers’ perspective
in the actual task of matching descriptions to tangrams.
Rate-Other
38
67.9%
Although the mean scores improved significantly from
session 1 to session 2, the cognitive potency of the readas -the-reader condition emerged most strikingly in the
Read-as 39
70.9%
“transfer comparison” between sessions 1 and 3. It may
Reader
be the case that the intervention duration was not
sufficient in the second session to show a significant
To investigate the “readers’ needs” a profile was revision in the original descriptions. Perhaps more than
compiled based on the readers’ open-ended comments one experience with reading-as-the-reader is necessary
made at the end of each reading session. An analysis of for younger writers to show the benefits.

study offers empirical support for the widespread
classroom practice of peer editing and peer response.
This study suggests, however, that peer response may be
more effective when peers actually use the text in some
way, because they are forced to confront the text’s
strengths and weaknesses in a concrete context, rather
than the more abstract context of giving literary
feedback.
Although the “referential communication design”
has been traditionally associated with experimental
psychology and spoken communication, similar
activities and communicative processes are found in
writing instruction literature. For example, an adaptation
of the writing/reading exercise “reading-as-the-reader”
might be added to a teacher’s repertoire of “optimal
environmental activities” (Daniles, 1990, pp. 118-121).
Daniles suggests, “lessons about effective descriptive
writing emerge from experiencing strategies in use” (p.
119). “Reading as the reader” is a perspective-taking
strategy experienced when the writer attempts to create a
specific description their readers can “see.”
Another application of “reading as the reader”
would be a perspective-taking strategy that can be added
to a “writer’s tool box” (Harper, 1997). Harper describes
five revision tools that she suggests have worked for her
as a practicing middle school writing teacher. One such
tool is the “snapshot.” Students compose written
snapshots similar to a detailed photographic snapshot.
Snapshots are writing activities that compel students to
concentrate on the physical properties and descriptive
qualities of various “objects.” “Reading-as-the-reader”
could be an instructional tool that writing teachers
incorporate into his/her repertoire of classroom activities
to help students become more efficient descriptive
writers.
Finally, “reading-as-the-reader” may help students
to make details explicit and assist students in recognizing
other text creating approaches that could be used with
other functions of writing. Composing concrete poems
and descriptive essays and then “reading as the reader”
are classroom experiences that may facilitate students
going beyond their immediate personal and social
circumstance (Cameron, Hunt, & Linton, 1996;
Elasasser & John-Steiner, 1977; Florio, 1979). If
“reading-as -the-reader” is a learning strategy that
worked for younger writers in helping them develop a
readers’ perspective in transactional writing, it might
also be a strategy transferable to other writing purposes.
Educational Implications
This research contributes to a body of literature (e.g., Not only does “reading-as-the-reader” assist writers in
Beal, 1996; Cameron, Hunt, & Linton, 1996; Frank, asking, “what do I want to write?” and “what have I
1992; Oliver, 1995) that clarifies some of the written?” , more importantly, it may assist in addressing
instructional conditions that can help young writers the more challenging task of, “How will the reader
envision how their readers’ interpret the text they have interpret my writing?”
written. Specifically, it contributes to our understanding
of how younger writers can learn of the reciprocity
between writing, reading, and text (see Witte, 1992). The

An alternative explanation involves the nature of the
writing task in session 3 compared to session 2. In the
second session (revision session), writers may have been
under the influence of the text they had already created;
the actual physical text that they composed in the first
session may have constrained the creation of a new text
fresh with detail. Bereiter and Scardamalia (1987)
suggest, “the original version of text, because it is
perceptually present [emphasis added], has a direct
claim on conscious attention. Unless the writer can
deliberately bring alternatives to mind, the original text
will win for lack of competition” (p. 87). The reading-asthe-reader condition had the greatest impact when
students were given a chance to apply and
recontextualize what they had learned from composing
one set of texts to the composition of a similar, but new
texts. That is, when writers drafted anew in the third
session, unconstrained by an existing less-effective text,
they were able to demonstrate what they had learned
from “reading-as-the-reader.”
The positive responses that students made suggests
that “reading-as -the-reader” gave these writers a
perspective on the effects of their writing that they
otherwise might not have considered. One writer
reflected “I like to read other kids’ descrip tions because
sometimes if I read other kids [sic] descriptions I can get
more ideas . . . because when I look back into the
pictures I can’t see the pictures they see.” The analysis
of the writer’s comments from the read-as-the-reader
group suggests that actually doing the task their readers
did revealed to them the necessary information they
needed to include and the unnecessary information they
needed to exclude in their descriptions.
Further research might “directly probe the ways in
which individuals cope with the items or task, in an
effort to illuminate the processes that underlay item
response and task performance” (Messick, 1989, p. 6).
By conducting protocol analysis students’ thoughts could
be assessed to reveal the kinds of decisions that writers
make and the kinds of information they chose to include
and exclude, and ultimately, the kinds of discourse
strategies that they chose to use in an attempt to meet
their readers’ informational needs. This is one approach
we might take to better understand how reading-as-thereader can assist younger writers in accomplishing the
writer-reader-text reciprocity.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Professor Deborah McCutchen at
the University of Washington, Department of
Educational Psychology for her support and advice
throughout this project.

References
Beal, C. (1996). The role of comprehension monitoring
in children’s revision. Educational Psychology
Review, 8 (3), 219 - 238.
Bereiter C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology
of written composition. Hilsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bonk, C. (1990). A synthesis of social cognition and
writing research. Written Communication, 7, (1), 136 163.
Cameron, C., Hunt, K. A., & Linton, M. (1996). Written
expression as recontextualization: Children write in
social time. Educational Psychology Review, 8 (2),
125 - 150.
Clark, H. H. & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1 - 39.
Daniles, H. (1990). Young writers and readers read out:
Developing a sense of audience. In Timothy Shanahan
(Ed.), Reading and writing together: New perspectives
for the classroom. Norwood, MA: ChirstopherGordon Publishers.
Dyson, A & Freedman, S. (1991). Writing. In J. Flood, J.
M. Jensen, D. Lapp, and J. R. Squire (Eds.), Handbook
on teaching the English language Arts . New York:
Macmillan.
Elasasser, N. & John -Steiner, V. P. (1977). An
interactionist approach to advancing literacy. Harvard
Educational Review 47 (3), 355 - 369.
English, L. (Ed.). (1997). Mathematical reasoning:
Analogies, metaphors, and images. Mahawah, NJ.
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Fitzgerald, J. & Markham, L. (1987). Teaching children
about revision in writing. Cognition and Instruction, 4
(1), 3 - 24.
Fitzgerald, J. (1992). Variant views about good thinking
during composing: Focus on revision. In, M. Pressley,
K. Harris, and J. Guthrie. (Eds.). Promoting academic
competence and literacy in school. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Florio, S. (1979). The problem of dead letters:
Perspective on the teaching of writing. The
Elementary School Journal 80, (1), 1 - 7.
Flower, L. (1994). The construction of negotiated
meaning: A social cognitive theory of writing.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Frank, L. (1992). Writing to be read: young writer’s
ability to demonstrate audience awareness when
evaluated by their readers. Research in the Teaching
of English, 26, 277 - 298.

Harper, L. (1997). The writer’s toolbox: Five tools for
active revision instruction. Language Arts, 74, 193 200.
Holliway, D. (2000). It looks like a goose: Composing
for the informational needs of readers . American
Educational Research Association (AERA), Paper
presentation for the writing and literacies special
interest group, New Orleans, LA.
Holliway, D. & McCutchen, D. (in press). Audience
perspective in children's descriptive writing: Reading
as the reader. In Linda Allal, Lucile Chanquoy, &
Pierre Largy (Eds.), Revision of written language:
Cognitive and instructional processes. Amsterdam:
Kluwer Academic Press.
Messick, S. (1989). Meaning and value in test validation:
The science and ethics of assessment. Educational
Researcher, 18 (2), 5 – 11.
Oliver, E. (1995). The writing quality of seventh, ninth,
and eleventh graders, and college freshman: Does
rhetorical specification in writing prompts make a
difference? Research in the Teaching of English, 29
(4), 422 - 450.
Olson, D. (1994). The world on paper. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Traxler, M. & Gernsbacher, M. (1992). Improving
written communication through minimal feedback.
Language and cognitive process, 7, 1 - 22.
Traxler, M. & Gernsbacher, M. (1993). Improving
written communication through perspective-taking.
Language and cognitive process, 8 (3), 311 - 334.
Witte, S. (1992). Context, text, intertext: Toward a
constructionist
semiotic
of
writing. Written
communication, 9, (2), 237 – 308.

