UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Qualitative physics as a component in natural language semantics: A progress report

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qj7q18t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Kuehne, Sven E
Forbus, Kenneth D

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Qualitative physics as a component in natural language semantics:
A progress report
Sven E. Kuehne (skuehne@northwestern.edu)
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
1890 Maple Avenue, Evanston, IL, 60201, USA

Kenneth D. Forbus (forbus@northwestern.edu)
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
1890 Maple Avenue, Evanston, IL, 60201, USA
Abstract
We propose that qualitative physics can provide an important
component of natural language semantics. Specifically, we
describe how qualitative process theory can be recast in terms
of frame semantics, as used in the Berkeley FrameNet project.
This reformulation is important because it could allow the
techniques of qualitative reasoning to be harnessed for natural
language understanding and it expands the range of
phenomena that can be described in NL semantics. We show
that these ideas can account for a large percentage of a small
corpus of explanatory text, and that they support the
construction of QP models from such texts.

Introduction
Understanding the semantics of natural language is a central
problem in cognitive science. Such an understanding must
connect fundamentals of our conceptual structure to their
realizations in linguistic forms, and thus must draw upon
both insights about language and about conceptual structure.
Significant progress is being made on the language side,
with projects such as FrameNet (Fillmore et al 2001)
developing broad systems that capture aspects of the
meaning of words and linguistic constructions in terms of
frame semantics (Fillmore & Atkins, 1994). Significant
progress is also being made on understanding aspects of
human conceptual structure, for example, the work carried
out in the qualitative reasoning community. Qualitative
reasoning focuses on the representations necessary to reason
about the physical world, ranging from everyday
phenomena to the work of scientists and engineers. While
many QR efforts are aimed at applications, some efforts are
aimed directly at modeling human reasoning about physical
systems (cf. Bredeweg & Schut, 1991; Kuipers & Kassirer
1984; Kuipers et al 1988; Forbus & Gentner 1986, 1997).
Ultimately these two lines of investigation, natural language
semantics and the understanding of human conceptual
structures, need to join forces. In the words of the
FrameNet team1: “In the end it will be necessary to express
frame notions in some formal knowledge-representation
language which will allow valid inferences to be drawn
from frame semantic representations of sentences, or which
1

The FrameNet project’s home is the International Computer
Science Institute in Berkeley, CA. A detailed description of the
project can be found at http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/~framenet

can serve in a precise way in the development of a
cumulative representation of the content of an ongoing
discourse.”
This paper is a first step in linking these investigations.
We propose that qualitative process theory (Forbus 1984)
can provide such a knowledge representation language for
aspects of frame semantics concerned with continuous
parameters and continuous causation. QP theory concerns
the structure of a class of physical theories, and has been
successfully used in a variety of reasoning systems (Forbus,
1996). The hypothesis is that many mental models of
physical phenomena can be expressed in this formalism.
QP theory has been used to develop a wide range of models
of phenomena, including economic and medical models in
addition to physical models. This makes it an excellent
candidate for a component in a larger system of natural
language semantics.
We begin by building a theoretical bridge between QP
theory and frame semantics, as exemplified in FrameNet.
We briefly review the relevant aspects of QP theory and
show how they can be recast in terms of frame semantics.
This recasting provides a means for defining frames for
physical processes and relationships involving continuous
parameters. We illustrate how these ideas can be used to
extend a natural language semantics by an analysis of flow.
With the theoretical bridge in place, we provide empirical
support for it via a corpus analysis of an explanatory text.
This analysis provides evidence concerning two questions.
First, we explore how much of the explanation these frames
can account for. Second, we analyze whether a qualitative
model can be reconstructed from the text using these
frames. Finally, we discuss some new issues raised by this
approach and plans for future work.

Qualitative physics in frame semantics
We begin by recasting QP theory in terms of frame
semantics, as used in FrameNet. We review the ontological
assumptions underlying QP theory and their implications for
the organization of the frame system. Next we discuss
physical processes and their occurrences, followed by an
analysis of how qualitative mathematics is expressed. We
conclude this section by showing that this analysis is
compatible with analyses of overlapping phenomena already
in FrameNet.

Ontological assumptions
In QP theory, physical changes in continuous properties are
caused by physical processes. Examples of physical
processes include kinds of flows (e.g., heat, liquid, gas),
phase changes (boiling, freezing), and some aspects of
motion. Ontologically, physical processes serve as the
mechanisms of physical causality: All naturally occurring
changes (and many of the indirect effects of the actions of
agents) are ultimately caused by the activity of one or more
physical processes. Instances of physical processes exist
when an appropriate configuration of participants occurs.
Such process instances are active over any span of time for
which their conditions hold. When a process instance is
active, its consequences hold. For example, two thermal
entities (i.e., having the continuous property heat) that are
thermally in contact give rise to two instances of heat flow,
one in each potential direction. Whether or not either of
these is active depends in turn on the relative temperatures
between the two bodies.
The consequences of a physical process are of three types.
First, there are direct influences that represent the direct
effects that a physical process has on the world. For
example, heat flow causes the heat of the source of the flow
to decrease while increasing the heat of the destination.
Second, there are other dynamical properties defined,
including new parameters and causal laws, which describe
how changes propagate through continuous properties. For
example, the rate at which heat flows is a continuous
property, and it is determined by the difference between the
temperatures. Third, other properties that hold while the
process is occurring, such as appearance information, can be
consequences. In everyday boiling, for instance, one
typically sees bubbles.
Two key conceptual advances in qualitative modeling are
the insights that (1) many important kinds of reasoning
about dynamical systems can be done without numerical
information or mathematical models and (2) qualitative
relationships can be formulated which explicitly capture
patterns of human causal reasoning.
These causal
connectives are summarized below; see (Forbus 1984) for
details. The values of continuous parameters tend to be
expressed in comparative terms, via ordinal relationships
constraining a parameter with respect to other relevant
properties. If an object participates in process instances of
heat flow, for example, then its temperature is defined in
terms of its relationships with the temperatures of the other
objects participating in those heat flows.
This summary highlights three important properties of QP
theory that makes it potentially a valuable component of
natural language semantics. First, the notion of physical
process it defines is psychologically plausible. Descriptions
of physical processes are abundant in language concerning
physical phenomena, and are routinely used in metaphors
(cf. Lakeoff 1980, Gentner et al 2001). Second, the causal
account QP theory provides is consistent with human causal
explanations in most physical domains (Forbus & Gentner
1986, 1997). Third, the abstract level of information that

qualitative representations support seems a natural fit for the
level of specificity commonly found in natural language
descriptions of physical principles and situations. One does
not need to understand differential equations or carry out
detailed simulations to understand physical metaphors (“her
anger mounted until she boiled over”).
Recall that in frame semantics, meaning is expressed in
terms of systems of structured representations, frames,
whose parts (called frame elements, abbreviated FE) are
bound to parts of a text and have associated with them
inferences that provide meaning (Fillmore & Atkins, 1994).
The packaging of physical knowledge and principles in QP
theory (inspired in part by Minsky’s (1975) notion of
frames) suggests a natural alignment with frame semantics.
There is a basic physical process frame, whose structure
provides the fundamental aspects of physical processes.
Subframes describe particular categories of physical
processes, with differences in their participants and
consequences being the differentia that set them apart.
Instances of these frames are combined with frames from
other aspects of the semantics to create the frame system
describing the meaning of a text. The qualitative causal
mathematics of QP theory is expressed through another
collection of frames. In addition to their role in physical
process descriptions, these qualitative causal frames can be
used for other domains with continuous parameters, such as
economics or metaphorical extensions of physical concepts.
The next three subsections outline these frame systems.

Processes and their occurrences
The PhysicalProcess frame involves four types of FEs:
• Participant specifies one of the participants in the
physical process. Example: in “Heat flows from the hot
brick to the cool room”, “hot brick” and “cool room” are
Participants in an instance of the HeatFlow frame.
• Condition specifies one of the conditions under which
the process is active. Example: in “Heat flows from one
place to another because the temperature of the two places is
different.” the Condition is the difference in temperature
values (see ordinals below)
• Status specifies whether or not the process is active.
Example: In “The radiator leak was stemmed by shoving a
cloth into it.” The word stemmed suggests that a flow which
was enabled is now stopped. We say that the Status is
active when the process is occurring, and inactive otherwise.
• Consequence specifies one of the direct consequences
of the physical process. Example: In “Water flooded into
the room when the valve broke.” the liquid flow into the
room has as one of its Consequences an increase in the
amount of water in the room.
These frame elements can be directly mapped to the formal
models that QP theory supports. For a process type or
instance, the set of participants collectively define the
collections of entities it occurs among. The union of the
conditions is the set of conjuncts that comprise the
necessary and sufficient conditions for it to be active. The

set of fillers for the consequences FEs constitute its direct
consequences.
Our analysis of the syntactic realizations of these frame
elements, and the others reported here, is work in progress,
and we plan to analyze a much larger corpus to ensure that
our results are robust. That, plus space limitations, will
limit our discussion of syntactic realizations to a few stable
highlights. Noun phrases that serve as the primary actor and
object in a sentence tend to be participants, e.g., in “A hot
brick loses heat to a cool room.” “Hot brick” and “cool
room” are participants. Certain frame elements already used
in other FrameNet frames, e.g., Source and Destination,
tend to be participants when a physical process is the actor.
The patterns that indicate conditions include “Condition
causes Process”, “Process occurs when Condition.”, and
“Process depends on Condition.” For consequences, there
are two cases: influences and other consequences.
Influences are discussed below. The other consequences,
since they can range over almost any physical statement in
principle (e.g., appearances, sounds, etc.), are difficult to
characterize concisely. Example indicators are occurrences
of the FrameNet FEs of Manner and Result.

Parameters and values
Continuous properties are represented by the Quantity
frame, which has the following elements:
• Entity specifies what this property is a property of.
Typically this is unique.
Example: “brick” in “the
temperature of the brick”
• QuantityType specifies the kind of parameter that this
is. Example: “temperature” in “temperature of the brick.”
• Value specifies the numerical value of the property.
This FE is optional. Example: “3” in “3 liters of water”.
• Units specifies the physical units of the property. This
FE is optional. Example: “kilograms” in “3 kilograms of
lead”.
Ds specifies how the parameter is changing and stands for
“sign of the derivative”. This FE is optional. Example: In
“The temperature is increasing.” the sign is expressed by the
word “increasing” which would be mapped to the value of
1. While syntactic realizations for quantity types, values and
units are fairly obvious, Ds manifests itself in the text many
different ways, e.g. -1 could show up as “falling”,
“decreasing”, etc.
Values and units are often not explicitly stated or even
filled in via default, but Ds and comparative statements
about values are common. These are expressed via the
Ordinal frame, which has the following FEs:
• Q1, Q2 specify the quantities being compared. Either is
optional. Example: “the coffee’s temperature”.
• OrdReln specifies the relationship between the values
of the quantities. It must be one of <, >, =, ≥, ≤, =. ≠, sameorder, or negligible. Example: In “Evaporation can be
ignored” the word “ignored” refers to a negligible OrdReln
of the rate of an evaporation process compared to other
processes being described.

Ordinal relations provide a useful qualitative notion of value
because they often serve as conditions for physical
processes and states (e.g., flows occur when a driving
parameter is unequal, equilibriums occur when opposing
effects are equal). Syntactic realizations of Ordinals are
usually described via explicit comparisons (e.g., “Q1 is
greater than Q2”) or as some type of comparative
construction. One very common pattern is the use of
ordered dimensional adjectives to set up a tacit comparison.
For instance, from “hot brick” and “cool room”, one knows
an ordinal relationship involving their temperature due to
the meanings of “hot” and “cool”.

Qualitative mathematics and causality
The causal relationships between quantities are expressed
via a qualitative mathematics that supports partial
information about the nature of the connections between
them. The basic frame is the Influence, whose FEs are
• Constrained specifies the dependent quantity, i.e., the
effect.
• Constrainer specifies the independent quantity, i.e., a
proximal cause for the constrained quantity.
• Sign specifies the direction, which can be + or -. It is
expressed by words such as “up”, “down”, “greater”,
“more”, “less” etc.
There are two subframes of the Influence frame,
DirectInfluence and Qprop. These correspond to the QP
theory primitives I+/I- and ∝Q+/∝Q- respectively (Forbus
1984). While the two subframes share frame elements, the
underlying semantics is quite different. For direct
influences, the constrainer is combined via addition to other
constrainers to determine (qualitatively) the derivative of
the constrained quantity, and the sign indicates whether it is
a positive or negative contribution to that sum. For Qprop,
the Constrained is functionally dependent on the
Constrainer, and perhaps on other properties as well, with
the sign indicating whether the dependence is increasing or
decreasing monotonic. This is the weakest distinction that
enables changes to be propagated through causal laws.
As their common heritage suggests, in some cases the
syntactic realizations of these two kinds of influences can be
quite close. However, many cases are straightforward.
Some realizations for Qprop include “Constrained depends
on Constrainer.” and “As Constrainer Ds, Constrained
Ds.” For example, “As the air temperature goes up, the
relative humidity goes down” is clearly a Qprop, with
Constrained = “relative humidity”, Constrainer = “air
temperature”, and Sign = -.
Syntactic realizations for DirectInfluences are more
complex. In advanced texts one can find patterns such as
“The rate of Constrained depends on Constrainer.” but
they do not seem common. In everyday texts explicit
discussions of rates seem even rarer.
Instead,
DirectInfluences tend to occur in larger-scale patterns,
often tied to a generalized notion of motion. For example,
“Most water in the air comes from evaporation.” is a

DirectInfluence, with Constrained
Constrainer = “[rate of] evaporation”

= “water in the air”,
and Sign = +. 2

Compatibility with existing frame semantics
One implication for semantics is that, in addition to the
frames associated with QP theory per se, there will be a
collection of subframes corresponding to particular kinds of
physical phenomena, such as flows, motion, and phase
changes. And indeed FrameNet already has an existing
analysis of motion that is compatible with QP theory. The
FEs of Theme, Source, Goal, and Path are finer-grained
distinctions of the FE Participant in the general
PhysicalProcess frame. In QP theory models of this kind
of motion (cf. Forbus 1984), there is a quantity Position
that is referenced to the Path from Source to Goal. A
DirectInfluence frame with Constrained = Position and
Constrainer = Velocity is a Consequence of the Motion
frame. An Ordinal frame with Q1 = Velocity, Q2 = zero,
and OrdReln = ≠ is the Condition for the Motion frame.
This compatibility is encouraging, since it means that the
implications that can be drawn from qualitative reasoning
could be made available in service of natural language
understanding.

scientific perspective (e.g., heat is not a substance), but may
be literal from a common sense perspective, depending on
the language user’s mental models. FlowStuff must be
continuous in nature (hence FlowQ must exist, even if not
explicitly mentioned) for the idea of flow to make sense.
There are two Condition FEs for Flow. The first is an
Ordinal, i.e., that the FlowQ(FlowSource(Flow)) is greater
than FlowQ(FlowDest(Flow)). The second is that FlowPath
not be blocked. The nature of being blocked depends on the
subframe of Flow. For instance, a stopper can block liquid
flow, but heat can still pass.
Flow has three Consequence FEs: a Quantity whose
QuantityType is Rate, and two DirectInfluence frames,
constraining the FlowQ of FlowSource and FlowDest via
Rate(Flow) with the appropriate signs.
More sophisticated versions of this basic pattern are
common in qualitative modeling; e.g., the rate is typically a
function of the difference between the driving quantities,
and also depends on path properties. Such elaborations do
commonly appear in explanatory texts, and consequently the
ability of qualitative modeling to support such incremental
elaboration, which can be done via additional Qprop frames
in this case, provides a necessary source of representational
flexibility for natural language semantics.

Example: An analysis of flow
Next we present an analysis of an important frame for
physical phenomena, flow. We start with well-worked out
ideas in the qualitative physics literature, using the
framework above to recast them into frame semantics. This
frame is used in our corpus analysis below.

The general Flow frame
The model of flow we are starting with is based on those in
Forbus (1984).
Several of the frame elements are
specializations of Participant:
• FlowSource specifies the starting region of the flow.
• FlowDest specifies the region where what is flowing
ends up.
• FlowPath specifies the path along which the flow
occurs
These FEs determine the overall type of flow occurring:
• FlowDriver specifies the intensive quantity (e.g.,
something like pressure or temperature) whose
difference at source and destination drives the flow.
• FlowQ specifies the extensive quantity (e.g., something
like mass or heat) that is directly influenced by the
flow. Optional.
• FlowStuff specifies the “stuff” which is considered to be
flowing. Optional.
Typically texts mention either FlowQ or FlowStuff but not
both. Many uses of the Flow frame are metaphorical from a

Some empirical evidence
Up to now we have been concerned with expressing the
concepts of QP theory in Frame Semantics, showing how
they can fit into this larger system and some of their
syntactic realizations in English. Here we examine the
utility of doing this, in two ways. First, we turn the question
around: How much do these ideas contribute to
understanding the semantics of texts involving the physical
world? Second, can we use these ideas to reconstruct from
an explanatory text the physical ideas being communicated?
We examine each in turn.
How far can a QP-based frame semantics go in
accounting for the semantics of explanatory texts? One way
to answer this question is to analyze a corpus of physical
explanations, and see what fraction of the sentences require
the frames of QP theory (and frames for mental models
expressed in QP theory) for their interpretation. We have
done this by using four chapters of a book on solar energy,
Sun Up to Sun Down (Buckley, 1979). We chose this book
because it is very clearly written, and we have been using it
for a source of examples in other projects, since it uses both
diagrams and analogies heavily.3 We chose chapters 2
through 5 because they provide a basic exposition of heat,
temperature, and types of heat flow.
Our analysis method was this. Two evaluators familiar
with the theory independently scored each sentence. Then
3

2

Note that ‘from evaporation’ refers to an internal quantity of a
process (i.e. the evaporation rate), not to a participant (as in ‘from
the ocean’). The latter would be marked as a source, not as a
constrainer.

As additional corpus material, we have selected a college
textbook on the weather as well as a children’s book on weather,
but while these have served as a source of data for our analysis of
syntactic realizations, the results in this section are based only on
the Buckley text.

they compared their results, discussing divergences until
they came to agreement.
We looked at the linguistic realizations of physical
processes in the text. Based on the QP frame semantics, we
defined nine types of information about processes: the
process name (P), information about subclasses of a process
(i.e. a specialization) (SC), participants (PA), about
conditions: antecedent activations (AA), antecedent ordinal
relations (AO), antecedent relations (AR), and finally about
consequences: indirect influences (CII), direct influences
(CDI), and consequence relations other than influences
(CR).4 Multiple pieces of information can appear within a
single sentence, so we scored number of phrases of
particular types in addition to the number of sentences that
they occurred in. Sentences can contain multiple types of
information, so the same sentence can appear in multiple
categories. We also distinguished between information
from examples (identified through a preliminary analysis)
and general information, since we have hypothesized
(Forbus & Gentner, 1997) that common sense physics arises
from within-domain analogies involving concrete
descriptions. Tables 1 (general information) and 2
(exemplar-specific information) show our results.
Type

P

SC

PA

AA

AO

AR

CR

CDI

CII

#Sentences

10

1

8

15

5

1

9

8

15

#Phrases

11

4

14

16

5

1

18

16

18

Table 1: General statements using QP theory concepts
Type
#Sentences
#Phrases

P
26
26

SC
0
0

PA
28
74

AA
15
15

AO
6
7

AR
5
5

CR
26
53

CDI
19
38

CII
14
17

Table 2: Use of QP theory concepts in examples.

The data shows that the exemplar-specific data contains
more than twice the number of processes, about five times
the number of participants and a lot more information about
the consequences of the mentioned processes. However, the
amount of information about the conditions of a process
(categories AA, AO, and AR) is nearly the same. As
expected, any information about specialization of processes
(SC) is only found in the general information.
What kind of coverage does QP theory provide? Of the
216 sentences, 94 of them mention at least one element
from the QP frame system proposed here. That means that
QP theory can account for roughly 43% of these chapters.
Let us turn to the second question, the reconstruction of a
QP domain theory from the frame semantics that one might
get from analyzing a text. Again we rely on Chapters 2
through 5 of Buckley (1979). These chapters yield six
physical processes: General models of heat flow and volume
4

Although the information involved in these categories has
varying complexity, e.g., influences and ordinal relations are more
complex than the process or participant names, we do not impose
any ordering or weighting on these pieces of information.

flow (e.g., liquid flow), and four subclasses of heat flow
(conduction, convection, radiation, and transport). Using
this data and the information about the constituents of
processes it contains, we attempted to manually reconstruct
the models of the underlying physical processes. Figure 1
shows the reconstructed model of the generic heat flow
process. One piece of information in Figure 1 marked with
a star was not part of any general description of the heat
flow process but originated from information about specific
examples. It was generalized and included into the generic
process model. By combining information from specific
examples with general information, reasonable QP theory
process descriptions of each were obtained.
These results are very encouraging. The frame semantics
based on QP theory provides significant coverage of this
corpus. The aspects that are not related to QP theory are not
themselves physical laws or behaviors per se, but require
frames of the types that would be found in other kinds of
texts. Thus these results suggest that the frame semantics
we propose using QP theory could play a useful role in a
broad system of natural language semantics.

Discussion
This paper argues that qualitative physics, specifically QP
theory, can be used as a component in a system of natural
language semantics. We outlined how QP theory can be
recast in terms of Fillmore’s frame semantics, as used in the
FrameNet project. The constructs of QP theory can be
recast in terms of a collection of frames and subframes,
which can be used to describe many causal mental models
found in explanatory texts. As the syntactic realizations of
these frames are further worked out, we believe that they
will be a valuable extension to FrameNet semantics.
In addition to broadening the coverage of FrameNet to
include a wide range of continuous phenomena and systems,
our extension also grounds these new frames in terms of a
well-worked out knowledge representation formalism
capable of supporting qualitative reasoning. The
compatibility of existing FrameNet motion descriptions with
this model, and our analysis of a QP model of flow in frame
semantics, lends support to our claim that this recasting of
qualitative modeling can productively extend frame
semantics for natural language.
The corpus analysis presented suggests that this extension
can be useful, since 43% of the material in sample chapters
from a typical science book can be captured in terms of
them. Moreover, our analysis suggests that these frames
could be composed to construct domain theories of a kind
already used in qualitative reasoning.
Our results suggest that QP frame semantics can indeed
play an important role in natural language semantics for
physical texts. More investigation is needed on several
questions, including:
• We want to refine our estimates of coverage by
analyzing a larger corpus with a broader range of materials.
These analyses are impractical by hand, so we are exploring
the use of automated tools for subsequent analyses.

Process HeatFlow
:participants
loc1 ;; FlowSource
loc2 ;; FlowDest
path ;; FlowPath
:conditions
(> (temp loc1) (temp loc2))
*(heat-aligned path)
:consequences
(from-location loc1)
(to-location loc2)
(qprop- flowrate thermal-resistance)
(I- (heat loc1) flowrate)
(I+ (heat loc2) flowrate)
Figure 1: One QP physical process description reconstructed
from the Buckley text. The line marked with “*” was derived
via generalization from specific examples.

• We view our work as complementary to that of
Narayanan (1999), who is linking FrameNet semantics with
sensory-motor schemata. Both will ultimately be needed,
and their interplay will be interesting to explore.
• The same QP analysis used for literal language could be
used to improve the productive understanding of many
metaphors. For example, the FrameNet analysis of heat in
the emotional domain has tied to it the lemma boil directly.
If QP representations for heat, heat flow, and boiling were
used instead, one could infer that making someone angry for
longer could lead to boiling, and that if someone had
“boiled over”, starting a heat flow with them as the Source,
could “cool them off”.
• A fascinating set of questions arises from crosslinguistic comparisons. Are these ideas bundled up in the
same way in all languages, or are they realized very
differently (e.g., Bowerman’s (1996) cross-linguistic
analysis of spatial prepositions, Talmy’s (1985) crosslinguistic analysis of verb semantics, and Imai and
Gentner’s (1993) analysis of the mass/count distinction)?
Another goal of our analysis is synthesis, i.e., to create a
habitable controlled language that can be used in natural
language processing systems that communicate with people
about the physical world more fluently. Such software
could be invaluable in creating new kinds of intelligent
software, such as tutoring systems and monitoring systems.

Acknowledgments
We thank Jason Trost for help with the corpus analysis, and
Larry Birnbaum and Dedre Gentner for insightful comments
on the paper. This work was supported by the Artificial
Intelligence program of the Office of Naval Research.

References

Bowerman, M. (1996). Learning how to structure space for
language: A cross-linguistic perspective. In P. Bloom,
M.A. Peterson, L. Hadel, & M.F. Garrett (eds.), Language
and space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 385-436.
Bredeweg, B. & Schut, C. (1991). Cognitive plausibility of a
conceptual framework for modeling problem solving

expertise. Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 473-479.
Buckley, S. (1979). Sun up to sun down. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Falkenhainer, B. & Forbus, K. (1991). Compositional
Modeling: Finding the Right Model for the Job, Artificial
Intelligence, 51 (1-3).
Fillmore, C. J. & Atkins, B. T. S. (1994). Starting where the
dictionaries stop: The challenge for computational
lexicography, In Atkins, B. T. S. and A. Zampolli (eds.)
Computational Approaches to the Lexicon. Clarendon
Press.
Fillmore, C. J., Wooters, C. & Baker, C. F. (2001). Building
a Large Lexical Databank Which Provides Deep
Semantics. Proceedings of the Pacific Asian Conference
on Language, Information and Computation. Hong Kong.
Forbus, K. (1984). Qualitative Process Theory Artificial
Intelligence, (24): 85-168.
Forbus, K. (1996). Qualitative Reasoning. CRC Handbook
of Computer Science and Engineering. CRC Press.
Forbus, K. & Gentner, D. (1986). Causal reasoning about
quantities, Proceedings of the Eighth annual conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, Amherst, Mass.,
August, 1986.
Forbus, K. & Gentner, D. (1997). Qualitative mental
models: Simulations or memories? Proceedings of the
Eleventh International Workshop on Qualitative
Reasoning, Cortona, Italy.
Gentner, D., Bowdle, B., Wolff, P., & Boronat, C. (2001).
Metaphor is like analogy. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, &
B. N. Kokinov (eds.) The analogical mind: Perspectives
from cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 199253
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1993). Linguistic relativity vs.
universal ontology: Cross-linguistic studies of the
object/substance distinction. Proceedings of the Chicago
Linguistic Society.
Kuipers, B. J. & Kassirer, J. P. (1984). Causal reasoning in
medicine: analysis of a protocol. Cognitive Science 8:
363-385.
Kuipers, B. J., Moskowitz, A. J. & Kassirer, J. P. (1988).
Critical decisions under uncertainty: representation and
structure. Cognitive Science 12: 177-210, 1988.
Lakeoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Minsky, M. (1975). A framework for representing
knowledge. In: P. Winston (ed.) The Psychology of
Computer Vision. New York: McGraw Hill: 211-7.
Narayanan, S. (1999). Moving Right Along: A
Computational Model of Metaphoric Reasoning about
Events. Proceedings of the National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI '99), Orlando, Florida, July
18-22, 1999, AAAI Press: 121-128.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical form, In T. Shopen (ed.), Grammatical
categories and the lexicon, Vol. 3 of Language typology
and syntactic description, CUP, Cambridge

