UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Self-Organizing Connectionist Model of Character Acquisition in Chinese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9dj74978

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Xing, Hongbing
Shu, Hua
Li, Ping

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Self-Organizing Connectionist Model of Character Acquisition in Chinese
Hongbing Xing (xinghb@blcu.edu.cn)
Center for Studies of Chinese as a Second Language
Beijing Language and Culture University
Beijing, 100083, China

Hua Shu (shuh@bnu.edu.cn)
Department of Psychology, Beijing Normal University
Beijing, 100875, China

Ping Li (pli@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond
Richmond, VA 23713, USA
Abstract
Despite growing interests in the acquisition of Chinese
orthography, few studies have modeled the acquisition
process using connectionist networks. This study uses a
self-organizing connectionist model to simulate children’s
learning of Chinese characters. There are two major goals
of our study: (1) To evaluate the degree to which
connectionist models can inform us of the complex
structural and processing properties of the Chinese
orthography. One of the most difficult tasks in achieving
this goal is how to faithfully capture the orthographic
similarities of Chinese characters. We derived our character
representations on the basis of analyzing a large-scale
character database that can be readily mapped to school
children’s orthographic acquisition. (2) To test the utility of
self-organizing neural networks in orthographic acquisition.
Most previous connectionist models of orthographic
processing have relied on the use of feed-forward networks.
Results from our simulations present positive evidence for
both of our goals. In particular, we show that our model
demonstrates early regularity effects and frequency effects
in the acquisition of Chinese characters, matching up with
acquisition patterns from empirical research.

Introduction
In recent years there have been growing interests in
the psycholinguistic study of orthographic acquisition in
Chinese (see Yang & Peng, 1997; Shu & Anderson, 1998;
Shu, Anderson, & Wu, 2000). A unique feature of the
Chinese orthography is that it uses characters rather than
alphabetic letters as the basic writing unit, in square
configurations that map mostly onto meaningful
morphemes rather than spoken phonemes. Processing or
acquisition within this “fractal” organization of characters
may differ in important ways from that of English and
other alphabetic languages (Shu & Anderson, 1998).
There are four major types of Chinese characters:
pictographic, referential, associative compounds, and
ideophonetic compounds. The last type, also known as

the semantic-phonetic compounds or, simply, phonetic
compounds, is the most interesting and important. In the
Dictionary of Modern Chinese Frequent Characters
(National Language Commission, 1988), there are 5,631
ideophonetic characters, accounting for 81% of the total
7,000 frequent characters in the dictionary (Li & Kang,
1993). Shu, Chen, Anderson, Wu, and Xuan (in press)
collected 2,570 characters listed in the Elementary School
Textbooks used in Beijing to establish the “School
Chinese Corpus”. They categorized and labeled every
character in this corpus, on dimensions such as phonetic
part, phonetic type, position of the phonetic part in the
character, age at which the character is taught, and
frequency of the character. Shu et al.’s analyses reveal
that most of the Chinese characters taught in elementary
schools are ideophonetics, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Ratios of ideophonetics in each grade
(Shu, Chen, Anderson, Wu, & Xuan, in press)
Grade
Ratio

1
.45

2
.70

3
.76

4
.84

5
.86

6
.81

Mean
.74

Given the prominence of ideophonetics in Chinese
orthography, it is thus important for us to understand the
functions of these characters. Ideophonetics consist of
two major components: the semantic part (often called a
radical) that gives information about the character’s
meaning, and the phonetic part that gives partial
information about the whole character’s pronunciation.
We say “partial”, because the phonetic radical may or
may not indicate the true pronunciation of the whole
character, in one of three ways: (a) Regular: the whole
character is pronounced the same as the phonetic radical in
isolation – that is, the same as the phonetic radical when it
is being used as a simple character; for example, “ /qing1/
and “ /qing1/”. (b) Semi-regular: the whole character is
pronounced partly as the phonetic radical, with a different

tone (e.g., “ /qing3/ and “ /qing1/”), a different onset
(e.g., “ /jing1/ and “ /qing1/”), or a different final (e.g.,
“ /sha1/ and “ /shao3/”). (c) Irregular: the whole
character is pronounced completely differently from the
phonetic radical (e.g., “ /cai1/ and “ /qing1/”). These
patterns of (ir)regularities in the pronunciations of
ideophonetics influence the recognition and processing of
Chinese characters, a phenomenon known as the regularity
effect in the literature.
Previous studies have examined regularity effects in
children’s acquisition of Chinese characters. Shu,
Anderson, and Wu (2000) showed that children display
regularity effects when they are required to write down
the pronunciations of Chinese characters: they perform
better on regular characters (type a discussed above) than
on irregular characters (types b and c). When children see
unfamiliar characters, they often exploit the
pronunciation of the phonetic radical as a possible
reading of the whole character, and this ability increases
with school grade. Yang and Peng (1997) also found
regularity effects in children’s speed of naming
characters: children in Grade 3 name regular characters
more rapidly than irregular characters, but by Grade 6,
they name both types of characters equally quickly.
Frequency also plays an important role in interacting with
the regularity of characters; for example, Shu and Wu
(1996) showed that children in Grade 3 display no
regularity effects on characters of low frequency, while
children in Grades 4 and 6 do. Finally, Shu, Zhou and Wu
(2000) found that young children develop from early on
phonological awareness of the structures of characters
and the functions of the phonetic and semantic radicals.
Some 4th graders already start to acquire the awareness of
the consistency of phonetic radicals, and by Grade 6 this
awareness becomes more transparent.
The above-mentioned properties of Chinese
characters and the acquisition profiles therein lend
themselves naturally to connectionist modeling. Given
the discrepancy between regular and irregular characters,
do we need to assume dual mechanisms to handle the two
types of characters in acquisition (as symbolic theorists
would like to argue)? Or rather, can we assume a
connectionist learning mechanism that can capture the
acquisition of both types of characters? Previous research
in English has examined these issues in language
acquisition and orthographic processing (e.g., Plaut,
McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996; Seidenberg
& McClelland, 1989). However, due to the difficulty in
representing the complex structure of the Chinese
orthography, there has been very little research in this
domain in Chinese. In this study, we make an initial
attempt to model the acquisition of Chinese orthography,
in particular, the regularity effect in acquisition (as
reported in empirical studies) with a neural network.

Method
Architecture

Most previous connectionist models of orthographic
processing have relied on the use of feed-forward
networks, typically with the back-propagation learning
algorithm (e.g., Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989).
Recently, a number of studies have explored selforganizing neural networks as viable models of language
processing and language acquisition (Anderson, 1999;
Miikkulainen, 1993, 1997; Li, 1999, 2000). Selforganizing networks are particularly well suited for the
study of language acquisition, due to their biological
plausibility, unsupervised learning, and the ability to
develop semantic structures (Li, 2002).
In this study, we use a self-organizing feature map
model developed by Miikkulainen (1997), originally for
modeling disordered lexicons (DISLEX). DISLEX relies
on principles of self-organization and Hebbian learning. In
this model, different feature maps dedicated to different
types of linguistic information (orthography, phonology, or
semantics) are connected through associative links via
Hebbian learning. To model orthographic processing, an
input pattern activates a group of units on the orthographic
input map, and the resulting bubble of activity propagates
through the associative links and causes an activity bubble
to form in the other map (semantic or phonological). Fig. 1
presents a diagrammatic sketch of the model’s reading
process from seeing the orthographic representation of dog
to the comprehension of the word’s meaning.

Fig.1 Reading comprehension of dog in DISLEX
(Miikkulainen, 1997; reproduced with author’s permission)

If the direction of the associative propagation is from
orthography to semantics, comprehension is modeled, as
shown in Fig. 1; production is modeled if it goes from
semantics to orthography. In our simulations, we examine
the associative propagation from orthography to phonology
to model the character naming process in the acquisition of
ideophonetics by Chinese-speaking children. At this stage
our model has not yet included semantic information.

Input Representation
There are a few general properties of Chinese
characters that are important for us to consider for their
accurate representations. (1) They are structurally complex.

The basic units of characters are strokes and components. A
few simple strokes can make up a component, or a
character; (2) They are combinatorially complex.
Compound characters have two to over ten components,
and these components combine to form a character
according different rules in a hierarchically organized
structure; (3) The majority of Chinese characters are
ideophonetic compounds, as discussed in Introduction; and
(4) One character corresponds to one monosyllable in
spoken language.
Phonological Representation. According to
traditions in Chinese linguistics, the monosyllable of each
character consists of three parts: initial, final, and tone
(see Table 2). Initial is usually a consonant. Final consists
of at least the nucleus vowel, sometimes with or without
a head vowel or a tail vowel. The nucleus vowel may be
one single phoneme or a diphthong (two phonemes).
Lexical tones are supra-segmental, imposed on the initial
and the final. In our representation scheme, we represent
each phoneme (consonant or vowel) by 5 dimensions or
features, and each feature by the phoneme’s articulatory
properties on a continuous scale from 0 to 1 (Table 3).
The overall method of representation is similar to PatPho,
a phonological representation scheme for English
described by Li and MacWhinney (2002).
Table 2 Structure of the syllable and representation
Initial

Head
Vowel
5 dim

5 dim.

Final
Nucleus
Vowel
5 +5dims

Tail
Vowel
5 dim

Tone
5 dim.

With this method we can represent all Chinese
monosyllables with tone (a total of 1,335), each of which
on a 30-dimensional feature vector. Table 3 lists the
articulatory features we used to represent the Chinese
phonemes.

proven a very challenging task, and this may have been
the primary reason for the lack of modeling research in
this domain, as we pointed out earlier. The only largescale attempt in this respect was Chen & Peng (1994).
They used 30 feature units to represent the various
components of about 1,108 Chinese characters. Their
representation scheme, however, is still insufficient for
our purposes of modeling children’s development in
character acquisition. To overcome this bottleneck
problem, we did a detailed analysis of all the characters
in the UCS Chinese Character Database (Standards
Press, 1994) and examined the strokes, components, and
structures of these characters.
The UCS Chinese Character Database contains
information about the structure and components for each
of the 20,902 Chinese characters used in China, Japan,
and Korea. This information includes the hierarchically
ordered sequences of each component when characters
are decomposed into smaller units of strokes. Other
information includes pronunciation of the character, firstlevel categorization of the character, number of
components, number of strokes, and frequency of usage.
The database lists 560 basic components for the 20,902
Chinese characters, including the character’s structural
features, shape features, position of components, number
of component strokes, etc. Most relevant for our study is
the information about phonetic radicals in ideophonetic
characters. This includes the position of the phonetic
radical in the character, whether the position of the
radical is fixed, and the relationship between the
pronunciation of the phonetic radical and that of the
character. Finally, the database contains information
about the frequency of each character in elementary
school texts, as well as some of the original texts.
On the basis of our analyses of this database, we
represented each ideophonetic Chinese character with a
60-unit feature vector, along the dimensions as depicted
in Fig.2.
ideophonetic
characters

Table 3 Articulatory features on 5 dimensions (D1-D5)
for the representation of Chinese phonemes*
D1
D2
D3

sound of the
sound of t
character

vowel voiced voiceless
0.1

0.75

1.0

bilabial Labiodental

front

0.143 0.286

0.429

round nasal

stop

0.143 0.286

0.429

high

mid

0.333 0.666

D5

front central centralback
0.5

back

palatal

velar

0.572

0.715

0.858

1.0

0.572

0.715

0.858

1.0

1.0

0.75

components

fricative affricate retroflex lateral

low

D4

0.25

central

sound of the
phonetic

back
1.0

* Numbers indicate dimensional values for each feature

Orthographic Representation. To accurately
represent Chinese orthography in feature vectors has

features

shape

structure

position

stroke

Fig. 2 Orthographic representation of characters

The first 6 units represent the sound of the
character, while the second 6 units represent the sound of
the phonetic radicals. The purpose of these phonological
units is to see how much overlap there is between the

pronunciation of the phonetic radical and that of the
whole character. The next 48 units are used to represent
component features, shapes, stroke structures, position of
radicals, and stroke numbers. For example, component
features include single, separate, crossing, and
connecting; position of radicals includes top, bottom, leftside, right-side, middle, and inner, etc. The last unit is
used for stroke numbers, and to determine the value of
this unit, we analyzed the number of strokes of characters
in our database. Given that most of the characters are
between 1 to 10 strokes, characters with 10 or more
strokes are represented as 1.0, and the rest as values (in
decrements of .1) corresponding to the number of strokes
(i.e., 0.9 for characters with 9 strokes, 0.8 for characters
with 8 strokes, and so on).

Materials and Procedure
Materials. The basic training materials consist of
groups or families of Chinese characters – characters in
the same family have the same phonetic radicals,
sometimes including the radical itself as a character.
Because we are modeling elementary school children’s
acquisition of characters, the amount of character families
differ for different grades, and the same family may also
contain different numbers of family members, according
to our analysis of the School Chinese Corpus (Shu et al.,
in press). We selected families of characters from the
elementary textbooks for Grades 1, 3, and 5 as the basic
materials in our training. Characters are selected as our
input materials (a) if they have been learned in or before
this grade, or (b) if the family includes all ideophonetic
characters that have been learned before. Table 4 shows
the composition of our training materials, based on depth
of learning in school grades.
Table 4 Selected characters and family compositions
Grade
One
Three
Five

Total
characters
306
305
300

# of
families
214
139
113

Mean members
of a family
2.35
4.33
5.64

Training. Each batch of characters corresponding to
each grade was submitted to the model, trained for 350
epochs for the self-organization of phonological
representations and of orthographic representations. Upon
training of the network, a phonological representation of
a character was inputted to the network, and
simultaneously, the orthographic representation of the
same character was also presented to the network. By
way of self-organization, the network formed an activity
on the phonological map in response to the phonological
input, and an activity on the orthographic map in
response to the orthographic input. The phonological

representation of the character was also co-activated with
its orthographic representation. As the network received
input and continued to self-organize on each map, it
simultaneously learned associative connections between
maps through Hebbian learning: initially, all units on the
phonological map were fully connected to all units on the
orthographic map; as learning continued, only the units
that were co-activated in response to the inputs were
associated. As the end of learning, the network should
have created compressed new representations in the
corresponding maps for all the inputs and linked the
phonological representation to its orthographic pattern.
All simulations were conducted with the DISLEX
simulator (Miikkulainen, 1999).
Testing. Once the network has completed selforganizing on the phonological and orthographic inputs
and has learned the associative connections, we tested the
model’s performance by presenting the network with 16
ideophonetic characters. We inputted the orthographic
and phonological patterns of these 16 characters to the
trained and well-settled network to test the output
pronunciations of the characters in the model (see Fig. 1).
No learning takes place at this stage. For each grade, a
total of 48 characters was tested in the model, in three
batches: 16 high frequency characters, 16 low frequency
characters, and 16 new characters that have not be
learned by the grade being tested.

Results and Discussion
Table 5 shows the overall performance of the
network after it was trained for 350 epochs on all
characters corresponding to each of the three grades
being considered. These results show that the network
achieved an average of 76% accuracy for orthographic
representations; for phonological representations, it
reached an average of 79% accuracy, and for the
associative connections from orthography to phonology it
achieved an average of 93% accuracy, a highly successful
naming ability.
Table 5 Percent accuracy on orthography, phonology,
and associative connections in the model after training
Grade
One
Three
Five

Ortho.
map
75.6
71.7
80.2

Phono.
map
78.4
76.2
82

Associative
ortho.->phono.
90.5
93.7
95

Thus, after training, the model developed clearly
structured representations for both the phonological and
orthographic input patterns. Fig. 3 shows an example
from the orthographic map trained on Grade 5 characters
(only a portion of the entire map is shown here due to
space limit).

Table 6 Interaction between regularity and frequency

Frequency
Low frequency
New characters

Fig. 3 Orthographic map trained on Grade 5 characters

In Fig. 3, it can be seen that clear families of
characters emerged in the map after the network was
trained for 300 epochs on the Grade 5 characters. For
example, one group of characters on the lower right-hand
corner represents the “ /bian3” family with “ /pian4”
,“ /bian1”, “ /pian1”, “ /bian1”, “ /pian”, while the
other group on the upper right hand of the map represents
the “ /he2” family with “ /he2” ,“ /ge1”, etc.
To see the model’s ability in character naming, we
tested the accuracy of its naming of regular and irregular
characters for Grades 1, 3, and 5, with regular character
being one that has exactly same pronunciation as its
phonetic radical (see Introduction). The ratios of naming
accuracy are presented in Fig. 4, on which we can make
several observations: (a) the model’s naming accuracy
increases over time for both regular and irregular
characters; (b) the difference in naming accuracy between
regular and irregular characters also increases across
grade; and (c) regularity effect does not exist for Grade 1
but becomes transparent for Grades 3 and 5. These results
match up well with the empirical patterns observed by
Shu et al (2000).

1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.75

0.79

0.54

0.58

0.41
0.33

regular
irregular

0.2
grade1

grade3

grade5

Fig. 4 Naming accuracy for regular and irregular characters

Interestingly, the regularity effect shown in Fig. 4 is
modulated by character frequency. Ample empirical
evidence suggests that frequency effect interacts with
regularity effect in character acquisition (Shu, Anderson,
& Wu, 2000). Table 6 shows that regularity effect in the
model is only marginal for high frequency characters, but
is much clearer for low frequency characters and novel
characters (whose frequency is unknown to the network).
Finally, we analyzed the network’s error types in
naming irregular characters. In naming ideophonetic
characters, children as well as our network could use a

Regular
.88
.75
.33

Irregular
.83
.46
.17

variety of methods to get at the pronunciation of the
irregular character. These methods allow us to discern
regularity effects in reading acquisition. There are
basically three major methods they could use: (1) reading
the irregular character as the pronunciation of its phonetic
radical (e.g., “ /cheng2” as “ /deng1”); (2) reading the
character as another character having a similar
orthography/radical in the same family (e.g., “ /bian1”
as “ /pian1”); and (3) reading the character as other
irrelevant characters (e.g., “ /zong1” as “ /kai3”).
Table 7 shows the ratio of the network’s erroneous
naming of irregular characters for each grade, as a
function of naming methods (M1 = Method (1); M2 =
Method (2); and M3 = Method (3)).
Table 7 Network’s naming for irregular characters

Grade
One
Three
Five

Irregular Character Naming Errors
M1
M2
M3
.06
.25
.69
.36
.46
.18
.30
.50
.20

Table 7 shows several interesting patterns. First, for
Grade 1 the network’s errors are mainly based on Method
3, i.e., reading characters as irrelevant characters. This
shows that regularity effect has not played much of a role
yet in the naming of irregular characters. For Grades 3
and 5, however, the error types shift more toward
Methods 1 and 2, showing that the model is exploring
orthographic and phonological similarities of the radical
to give possible pronunciations of the irregular character.
These developmental patterns of regularity effect are
consistent with empirical data from Shu et al (2000),
according to which children, although in principle can
utilize ideophonetic information early on, show regularity
effect only after they have learned a relatively large
number of items in the ideophonetic families.

Conclusion
This study uses a self-organizing connectionist
model to simulate children’s acquisition of Chinese
characters. There are two major goals of our study. First,
we wanted to see if connectionist models can be applied
successfully to model the learning process in the
acquisition of Chinese characters, a topic that has not
been touched on in the literature. Given the complex
structural and processing properties of the Chinese
orthography, it is only natural that we examine this

domain with systematically varying modeling parameters.
One of the most difficult tasks in achieving this goal is
how to faithfully capture the orthographic similarities of
Chinese characters, as discussed in Method. We derived
our character representations on the basis of analyses of a
large-scale character database that can be readily mapped
to school children’s orthographic development.
The second goal of our study is to test the utility of
self-organizing neural networks. Most previous
connectionist models in this domain have relied on the
use of feed-forward networks, typically with the backpropagation learning algorithm. In previous research,
Miikkulainen (1993, 1997) explored self-organizing
neural networks as plausible models of language and
memory processing, and Li (1999, 2000, 2002) showed
these networks as viable models of language acquisition.
We wanted to see if such models can be used successfully
to examine orthographic acquisition. Our initial
simulations as presented here seem to provide positive
evidence in this respect. In particular, we showed that our
self-organizing network demonstrates regularity effect
and frequency effect in the acquisition of Chinese
characters, and that these results match up with
developmental patterns observed in empirical research. In
future studies, we will continue these lines of
experiments to examine frequency effect, phonological
consistency effect, and their interaction with regularity
effect in character acquisition, addressing other relevant
theoretical issues in connectionist language acquisition.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from Natural
Science Foundation of China #60083005 to H.S., and in
part by an NSF grant #9975249 to P.L. while the first
author was visiting the Cognitive Science Lab at the
University of Richmond. We would like to thank Risto
Miikkulainen for making available the source code of the
DISLEX program, and Igor Farkas for helping with the
set-up of the simulations.

References
Anderson, B. (1999). Kohonen neural networks and
language. Brain and Language, 70, 86-94.
Chen, Y., & Peng, D. (1994). A connectionist model of
recognition and naming of Chinese characters. In H-W.
Chang, J-T. Huang, C-W Hue, & O. Tzeng (eds.),
Advances in the study of Chinese language processing
(Vol.1, pp. 211-240). Taipei: National Taiwan
University Press.
Li, P. (1999). Generalization, representation, and
recovery in a self-organizing feature-map model of
language acquisition. In M. Hahn & S.C. Stoness
(eds.), Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp.308-313). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Li, P. (2000). The acquisition of tense-aspect morphology
in a self-organizing feature map model. In L. Gleitman
& A.K. Joshi (eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd Annual

Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.304309). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Li, P. (2002). Language acquisition in a self-organizing
neural network model. In P. Quinlan (ed.),
Connectionist models of development. Philadelphia and
Briton: Psychology Press.
Li, P., & MacWhinney, B. (2002). P a t P h o: A
phonological pattern generator for neural networks.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers. (in press)
Li, Y. & Kang, J. S. (1993). Analysis of phonetics of
the ideophonetic characters in Modern Chinese. In Y.
Chen (ed.), Information analysis of usage of characters
in Modern Chinese (pp. 84-98). Shanghai: Shanghai
Education Publisher. (in Chinese)
Miikkulainen, R. (1993). Subsymbolic natural language
processing: An integrated model of scripts, lexicon,
and memory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miikkulainen, R. (1997). Dyslexic and category-specific
aphasic impairments in a self-organizing feature map
model of the lexicon. Brain and Language, 59, 334366.
Miikkulainen, R. (1999). The DISLEX simulator (new
version).
Av a i l a b l e
on-line
at
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/nn/pages/software/.
National Language Commission of China (1988).
Dictionary of Frequent Characters in Modern Chinese.
Beijing: Yuwen Press.
Plaut, D., McClelland, J., Seidenberg, M., & Patterson,
K. (1996). Understanding normal and impaired word
reading: Computational principles in quasi-regular
domains. Psychological Review, 103, 56-115.
Seidenberg, M., & McClelland, J. (1989). A distributed,
developmental model of word recognition and naming.
Phonological Review, 96, 523-568.
Shu, H., & Anderson, R. C. (1998). Learning to read
Chinese: The development of metalinguistic
awareness. In J. Wang, A. W. Inhoff, H.-C. Chen (eds.).
Reading Chinese script: A cognitive analysis (pp. 118). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shu, H., Anderson, R. C., & Wu, N. (2000). Phonetic
awareness: Knowledge of orthography-phonology
relationships in the character acquisition by Chinese
children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 5662.
Shu, H., Chen, X., Anderson, R. C., Wu, N., & Xuan,
Y. (in press). Properties of School Chinese:
Implications for learning to read. Child Development.
Shu, H., Zhou, X., & Wu, N. (2000). Utilizing
phonological cues in Chinese characters: A
developmental study. Acta Psychologica Sinica, 32,
164-169. (in Chinese)
Standards Press of China (1994). Information Technology
– UCS: Universal Multiple-Octet Coded Character Set
(Part 1 : Architecture and Basic Multilingual Plane).
Beijing.
Yang H, & Peng, D. L. (1997). How are Chinese
characters represented by children? The regularity and
consistency effects in naming. In H. C. Chen (ed.). The
cognitive processing of Chinese and related Asian
Languages. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press.

