UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity and Difference Judgments Under Perceptual and Non-Perceptual Conditions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wq188c9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Hasson, Uri
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity and Difference Judgments Under Perceptual
and Non-Perceptual Conditions
Uri Hasson (uhasson@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

Vladimir Sloutsky (Sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science & School of Teaching and Learning, The Ohio State University
21 Page Hall, 1810 College Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
It has recently been suggested that knowledge is
represented in the form of perceptual symbol systems
(Barsalou, 1999). According to this view, perceptual
states may be used to support higher cognitive processes
without being transduced into a representational
language. Since the ability to recognize difference and
similarity is fundamental for cognition, we examined to
what extent it might be based on perceptual information.
In three experiments, participants made judgments of
similarity and difference for simple items under three
presentation conditions: Words Only, Words and
Pictures, and Pictures Only. Reaction times for
judgments in the Words-Only condition were
consistently slower than in the other presentation
conditions. However, judgments of perceived similarity
and perceived difference did not markedly differ
between presentation conditions. The results suggest that
participants recruited perceptual information when
evaluating similarity in the Word-Only condition.
Additionally, presentation condition had an effect on the
relation between the similarity and difference scales: for
a given degree of similarity, more extreme difference
judgments were found under those conditions where
words were displayed. We offer an explanation for this
effect, and present a further research program.

Introduction
Similarity, or psychological resemblance of entities,
is a fundamental aspect of cognition. Similarity plays a
critical role in perception, memory, learning and
transfer, categorization, analogical reasoning, problem
solving, and language comprehension. It has also been
suggested that recognizing differences between entities
is fundamental to cognition; for instance, in
discriminating category members from non-members.
An extensive body of research then has outlined the
processes for which similarity and difference are
important. However, much less is known about that
nature of the information recruited for evaluating
similarity and difference themselves.
Some theories of similarity hypothesize a process
whose inputs are representations in the form of feature

lists with most of the properties represented as unitary
attributes (Nosofsky, 1986; Tversky, 1977). According
to others, conceptual knowledge plays such an
important role in similarity, that similarity is taken to be
akin to analogy; operating on an interconnected system
of relations and their arguments (Gentner & Markman,
1997). The crux of this view is that processes of
similarity, as well as difference (Markman, 1996),
operate by aligning the structures of the compared
entities. The structures themselves are described as a
system of relational predicates and their attributes. The
research program of structural alignment (see Gentner
& Markman, 1997) convincingly demonstrated that the
use of structural knowledge is an integral part of
making similarity judgments.
It is an open question, however, whether the only
kinds of information used for these judgments are in the
form of such a-modal representations as relations or
feature lists. A recent proposal (Barsalou, 1999),
suggests that perceptual states - modal and analog
forms of representation - are also used to support higher
cognitive processes. Perceptual states are taken to
maintain a part of the perceptual nature of their
referents, without being transduced into a
representational language. If this is the case, judgments
of similarity and/or difference might make use of
perceptual information, in addition to other forms of
knowledge.
We examined this issue by evaluating the effects of
various types of presentation conditions on similarity
and difference judgments, which were made for a
variety of natural stimuli. We presented participants
with pairs of items for similarity and difference
judgments under three presentation conditions which
were manipulated between groups: pairs were presented
as Words-Only (WO), as words accompanied by
pictures (WP) or as pictures only (PO). The instructions
given to all three groups were the same, and did not
make any reference to speed of response. Most
critically, the instructions given to participants in the
Word-Only condition did not mention envisioning the
objects depicted by the words. If participants in this

group took longer to reach their decision, but ultimately
made judgments resembling those made in the picture
conditions, this would suggest that perceptual
information was recruited when making these
judgments.
The reported research has two major goals: (1) to
estimate effects of perceptual and non-perceptual
aspects of the stimuli on making judgments of
similarity and difference; and (2) to examine whether
perceptual and non-perceptual aspects of the stimuli
affect the relation between the similarity and difference
scales.

Calibration Experiment
The purpose of the calibration study was to choose
pictorial material that would be easily and
unambiguously recognized as typical examples of the
intended items. Twenty-seven undergraduate students
from the Ohio State University participated in the
study. The photographs chosen corresponded to 100
items, taken from 10 categories of Battig and
Montague’s (1969) category norms with 10 items being
selected from each category. The ten categories
belonged to two ontological domains, living things and
artifacts, with five categories in each domain. In
addition to the experimental items, 25 items that
appeared to be bad examples of their types were also
added as negative anchors. Participants were presented
with photographs of objects followed by words
denoting these objects, and decided whether the
photographs were good examples of the entities
depicted by the words ("something that immediately
reminds you of that thing"). For example, a picture of a
car was displayed, followed by a blank screen and then
by the word CAR. Participants pressed 1 if the photo
was indeed a good example and 0 if it was not.
The proportion rating for the experimental items was
0.85. We included only those photographs that were
found to be good depictions by more than 67% of the
participants. This procedure resulted in the removal of
10 items.

Pair-type
(same-superordinate,
within-ontological
domain or across-ontological domains) as a withinsubjects variable. The 90 items chosen from the
calibration test were used. Items were paired to
construct 240 pairs of items such that: (a) 80 pairs were
of items from the same superordinate category, (b) 80
pairs were of items from different superordinate
categories but from the same ontological domain (i.e.,
both were either artifacts or living things) and (c) 80
pairs were of items belonging to different ontological
domains. We decided to use such pairs since there was
ground to suppose that they differ considerably in their
perceived similarity (see Markman & Wisniewski,
1997).
Procedure The participants worked alone in an
experimental room. Participants making similarity
judgments were told that their task was to decide how
similar these items were. They were instructed to press
3 if items were very similar, 2 if they were not so
similar, and 1 if they were not similar at all. Participants
making difference judgments were told that their task
was to decide how different these items were. They
were instructed to press 3 if items were very different, 2
if they were not so different, and 1 if they were not
different at all. The experiment was run in three blocks,
with a 1-minute break between blocks. The experiment
began with a few practice pairs, which were followed
by 14 hidden practice pairs whose purpose was to bring
participants up to speed. Practice items were not
analyzed.

Results and Discussion
Reaction time data and ratings for
difference judgments are presented in
that ANOVA results will be presented
analysis section, whereas the results
presented in Table 1.

Table 1. Reaction times and ratings for similarity and
difference judgments in the Word-Only condition
Reaction Time

Experiment 1a: Judging Similarity and
Difference of Objects Denoted by Words
Method
Participants There were 29 participants in the
similarity-judgment condition and 25 participants in the
difference-judgment condition. The participants in both
conditions, and in all following experiments, were
undergraduate students from the Ohio State University
who participated to fulfill a psychology course
requirement or in return for payment.
Design and Materials The experiment had a mixed
design with Judgment type (similarity judgment or
difference judgment) as a between-subjects variable and

similarity and
Table 1. Note
in the overallof t-tests are

Ratings

Pair type

Sim

Dif

Sim x

Dif y

Across-domain
Within-domain
Withinsuperordinate
Average

1232a
1315b
1400c

1245a
1317b
1511c

1.04a
1.20b
2.32c

2.99a
2.90b
2.06c

1315

1358

1.52

2.65

Note. Numbers with different subscripts in a given column
differ at p < .0001.
x
High numbers reflect greater similarity
y
High numbers reflect greater difference

As expected, similarity and difference ratings for the
different pair types were different, with Within-

Superordinate pairs (e.g., dog – cat) being more similar
than Within-Domain (e.g., shark – horse) pairs, and the
latter being more similar than Across-Domain (e.g.,
cow – spoon) pairs. The difference ratings showed the
same pattern. More importantly, reaction times in both
the similarity and difference judgment groups were
fastest for Across-Domain pairs, slower for WithinDomain pairs and slowest for Within-Superordinate
pairs. As will be shown, this pattern of results
replicated in the Word-Picture and Picture-Only
presentation conditions as well.

Experiment 1b: Judging Similarity and
Difference of Objects Depicted by Words
and Pictures
Method
Participants There were 18 participants in the
similarity-judgment condition and 18 participants in the
difference-judgment condition.
Design, Materials and Procedure Design, Materials,
and Procedure were identical to those in Experiment 1a,
except that items were denoted by words and by
pictures, such that the words were printed above the
pictures.

Results and Discussion
Reaction time data and ratings for similarity and
difference judgments are given in Table 2. The overall
pattern of reaction time and rating results was similar to
that in experiment 1a.
Table 2. Reaction times and ratings for similarity and
difference judgments in the Picture-Word condition
Reaction Time

Ratings

Pair type

Sim

Dif

Sim x

Dif y

Across-domain
Within-domain
Withinsuperordinate
Average

1002a
1123b
1270c

1180a
1177b
1376c

1.04a
1.23b
2.37c

2.96a
2.84b
1.82c

1131

1211

1.55

2.54

Note. Numbers with different subscripts in a given column
differ at p < .0001.
x
High numbers reflect greater similarity
y
High numbers reflect greater difference

Initial inspection demonstrates that reaction times in
this presentation mode were faster than in the WordOnly presentation condition. Though several theoretical
explanations for this may exist, it was important to
examine one in particular; namely, that participants
were ignoring the words and basing their decisions
solely on the pictures.

To examine whether participants were reading the
words, we modified the experiment slightly to include
12 inconspicuous spelling mistakes. If participants were
paying attention to the words, reaction times for these
changed items should be higher than reaction times to
the same items in the original experiment. Thirteen
participants participated in the modified version of the
similarity-judgment condition. The average reaction
time for the modified items (1453 ms) was significantly
higher than for the original, items (1170 ms.; onetailed t-test, t22 = 2.37, p < .01). In addition, we asked
participants whether they had noticed anything during
the study. All but two noticed a few spelling mistakes.
The results indicate that participants were indeed
reading the words presented above the pictures, and that
the reduced reaction times could not be attributed to
such neglect.

Experiment 1c: Judging Similarity and
Difference of Objects Depicted by Pictures
Method
Participants There were 25 participants in the
similarity-judgment condition and 26 participants in the
difference-judgment condition.
Design, Materials and Procedure Design, Materials,
and Procedure were identical to those in Experiment 1a
and 1b, except that items were now depicted only by
pictures. Participants were told that they would be
presented with pictures referring to objects in the world,
and that their task is to determine how similar these
objects are.

Results and Discussion
Reaction time data and ratings for similarity and
difference judgments are given in Table 3. The overall
pattern of results was as in experiments 1a and 1b. The
fact that the similarity ratings increased and difference
ratings decreased the more conceptually related the
objects were, testifies to the fact that participants used
conceptual knowledge in their judgments of pictorial
material, and did not rely exclusively on perceptual
information. Reaction time data and ratings of
similarity and difference are given in Table 3.
Table 3. Reaction times and ratings for similarity and
difference judgments in the Picture-Only condition

Pair type
Across-domain
Within-domain
Withinsuperordinate
Average

Reaction Time
Sim
Dif
1067a 1159a
1154b 1171b
1334c 1316c

Ratings
Sim x Dif y
1.03a
2.92a
1.21b
2.74b
2.22c
1.85c

1185

1.49

1215

2.50

Note. Numbers with different subscripts in a given column
differ at p < .0001.
x
High numbers reflect greater similarity
y
High numbers reflect greater difference

Combined Analysis of experiments 1a – 1c
Analysis of Response Times for Difference and
Similarity Judgments Under Three Presentation
Conditions.
The data from all experiments were combined to
assess the effects of the presentation-mode on reaction
times in the similarity- and difference-judgment tasks.
Average response times were calculated and entered
into a 3 (Presentation) X 2 (Judgment) X 3 (Pair-Type)
mixed ANOVA, with Presentation (Word-only, WordPicture and Picture-only) and Judgment (Similarity and
Difference) as between subjects variables, and PairType (Across-domain, Within-domain, Withinsuperordinate) as a within subjects variables.
As expected, the main effect of Pair-Type was
significant, F(2, 250) = 251.5, p < .0001. More
important, the main effect of Presentation was
significant, F(2,125) = 10.91, p < .0001. Reaction times
in the Word-Picture condition (1138 ms) were faster
than in the Picture-Only condition (1183 ms) and the
latter were faster than reaction times in the Word-Only
condition (1337 ms). Scheffe's post hoc analysis
revealed that reaction times in the WO condition were
significantly slower than reaction times in the PO and
WP presentation conditions (p < .001). Judgments in
the WO condition were slower than in the other
conditions even though the WP condition presented
participants with more information, and the PO
condition amounted to a naming task. There are several
explanations for this effect: it might be that under the
different presentation conditions, participants made
differential use of perceptual and conceptual
information in their judgments; relying more heavily on
pictorial data whenever it was available, thus being
faster in those conditions that contained pictures. If this
is the case, then judgments in the PO and WP
conditions should be more similar to each other than to
the WO condition. The second possibility, which is
consistent with the perceptual-symbols hypothesis, is
that participants under the three presentation conditions
eventually constructed the same representation, but that
this process took longer in the Word-Only condition. If
so, judgments in all three modes are expected to be
quite similar. An analysis of the similarity and
difference judgments was conducted to test these
possibilities.
Analysis of Similarity and Difference Judgments
Under Three Presentation Conditions.
We now examined the effects of presentation mode
on (a) judgments of similarity and difference and (b)

the relation between the similarity and difference
scales. We separately analyzed similarity and difference
judgments given under the three presentation
conditions. Due to the ordinal nature of the response
scale, we used the variance of response proportions as
the measure of test in the following ANOVAs.
However, since the data are more easily encapsulated in
the form of averages, we present them in Table 4.
Table 4: Mean similarity and difference ratings under
three presentation conditions.
Condition
Picture Only
Word Picture
Word Only

Mean Similarity
1.489
1.548
1.522

Mean Difference
2.507
2.543
2.654

We first analyzed responses given in the similarityjudgment groups. The proportions of 1, 2 and 3
responses were analyzed in 3 separate one-way
ANOVAs, with Presentation as a grouping factor and
response proportion of each response as the dependent
variable. No effect was found in any of these analyses
(Fs < 1). There were practically no differences in the
response proportions in the three presentation
conditions. Proportions of the three responses varied
minimally between presentation conditions; in the range
of 1.5%.
A similar analysis was performed on the response
proportions in the difference-judgment groups. The
proportions of 1 and 2 responses did not vary
significantly
between
presentation
conditions.
However, an ANOVA of ‘3’ responses was significant,
F(2,62) = 5.08, p < 0.01. In the WO condition, there
were more ‘3’ responses (74%) than in the other WP
and PO presentation conditions (69%, 68%
respectively).
The similarity-rating data are congruent with the
hypothesis that participants in all presentation
conditions performed the similarity judgment on the
same representation. Note however that while
judgments across all conditions were similar,
participants in the WO condition, who were not
presented with the perceptual component in the stimuli,
were slower to make their judgments.
In addition to this converging measure, the data that
are perhaps most suggestive of the use of perceptual
information in the WO condition is the fact that
participants in the WO condition were also slowest in
judgments of Across-domain items (e.g., Pan-Dog).
One does not need to envisage a Pan and a Dog in order
to determine that they are not similar at all, or very
different. Such a decision could easily be made on the
basis of categorical knowledge alone. However,
judgments of similarity and difference for such pairs in
the WO condition were slower than such judgments in

the WP and PO conditions (1232, 1002, 1067 and
1245,1080,1059 ms. for similarity and difference
judgments respectively). The difference-judgment data
are also congruent with the possibility that participants
evoked perceptual data. As reported, difference
judgments to Across-domain items in the WO condition
were slower than in the other presentation conditions,
suggesting that perceptual information was used here as
well. However, the slight tendency to find more items
‘very different’ in the WO conditions may suggest that
another mechanism was also at work here. We discuss
the issue subsequently.

.05. Delta measures, the number of pairs on which
Delta was greater than zero and the number of pairs on
which Delta was lower than zero for each presentation
condition are given in Table 5.

Analysis of Scale Equivalence Under Three
Presentation Conditions
We also computed a measure relating the similarity
and difference ratings under the three presentation
conditions. To recap, in this analysis we are interested
in the relation between an items’ perceived similarity
and its perceived difference under the three presentation
modes. Since it is only sensible to talk of a degree of
similarity in cases where similarity was found, we
included in this analysis only items whose average
similarity was greater than 1.
To compute this measure, for each item whose
average similarity score was greater than 1, we
compared its location on the similarity scale to its
location on the difference scale. Let Si and Di denote,
respectively, the distance of an item from the “least
similar” end of the similarity scale and the “most
different” end of the difference scale, in units of
standard deviation. In the case of equivalence of the
similarity and different scales, the items' difference
between Si and Di should be equal to 0 (i.e., an item that
was judged “most similar” should be also judged “the
least different”).
Delta, a measure of deviation from scale equivalence,
is the average of the differences between these two
parameters when computed across all items. The total
deviation from equivalence between the scales then is
[ ∑ (S i - D i )] N . If scales are equivalent, Delta is

Note. Numbers with different subscripts in a given column
differ at p < .05.

equal to 0. Delta is greater than 0 when the judgment
of similarity is more conservative than the judgment of
difference (e.g.,, if a pair is judged as "somewhat
similar" and also as "very different"). Delta is less than
0 when the judgment of difference is more conservative
than the judgment of similarity (e.g., if a pair is judged
as “somewhat similar” and also as “least different”).
Delta measures for all items, under the three
presentation conditions were subjected to a one-way
ANOVA with Presentation as a between-groups factor.
The main effect of Presentation was significant,
F(2,511) = 40.3, p < .001. Scheffe' s post hoc
comparisons revealed that all Delta measures differed
significantly both from each other and from zero, p’s <

Table 5: Delta ratings and proportions for three
presentation conditions.
Condition

Delta

Pairs where
Delta > 0

Pairs where
Delta < 0

Picture-Only
Word-Picture
Word-Only

- 0.08a
0.09b
0.16c

57
109
146

108
54
38

In the Picture-Only condition, items tended to be
located ‘farther’ from the “very different” end of the
difference scale than they were from the “not similar”
end of the similarity scale. However, for the WordPicture condition, and especially the Word-Only
condition, items tended to be ‘closer’ to the “very
different” end than they were to the “not similar” end.
In short, negative Deltas in the Picture-Only conditions
stem from more conservative ratings of difference
compared to the similarity ratings given.
A possible explanation is that the presence of words
resulted in more weight being given to conceptual
knowledge in judgments. It has been suggested that in
certain conditions, difference judgments are based on a
comparison that involves aligning the structure of the
items in the pair (Markman, 1996). Since conceptual
knowledge affords a basis for structural alignment, it
might be that the presentation of words resulted in
enhanced attention to these differences. For instance, a
pair such as ‘dog – cat’ might be judged highly similar
when presented under all presentation conditions.
However, when greater weight is given to conceptual
knowledge, one might remember that dogs bark and
cats meow, that dogs can become attached to people
and cats are territorial, and that dogs bite and cats
scratch. Minding these differences could lead to more
extreme difference ratings.

General Discussion
We set out to examine the effects of various
presentation modes on perception of similarity and
difference in order to establish what information is used
in such judgments, and how the presentation modes
affect the similarity and difference scales themselves.
We used Reaction times, and similarity and difference
ratings to address the first issue, and used Delta, a
measure of asymmetry between the scales to address
the second.
In short, two major findings stem from the three
reported experiments: (1) When pictures were not

present, reaction times were slower than in the other
presentation conditions, but the judgments were
comparable with them and (2) Deltas were positive
whenever words were present, and were negative
whenever words were absent. These data may be
indicative of several important regularities.
First, people may rely on both perceptual and
conceptual input when making similarity/difference
judgments. In particular, their responses are faster
when words are accompanied by pictures than when
words are presented alone. It seems reasonable to
hypothesize that they try to envision objects when those
are depicted by words alone. Particularly suggestive of
this, is the fact that compared to the Picture-Only and
Picture-Word conditions, participants in the Word-Only
condition were also slower in responding to Acrossdomain pairs. Other research on the role of perceptual
information in higher-level cognitive tasks supports this
possibility. Recent studies have demonstrated that
accessing perceptual knowledge is an integral part of
such tasks as property generation and property
verification (Solomon & Barsalou, 2000; Wu &
Barsalou, 2001). Though the data support the
hypothesis that people did use perceptual information,
the issue can be conclusively resolved by obtaining
activation measures from brain areas implicated in
imagery during the performance of this task.
Second, the Delta measure refers to what may be
different processing considerations under the WordOnly and Word-Picture conditions, on the one hand,
and the Picture-Only condition on the other.
Particularly, in the former two conditions, Deltas were
largely positive, whereas in the latter condition they
were largely negative. Recall that the more that
difference is underestimated per a given similarity
rating, the larger the Delta. Therefore, negative Deltas
in the Picture-Only condition stemmed from more
conservative ratings of difference compared to
respective similarity ratings. These data may point to
the effect of knowledge on the perception of difference.
They also indicate that regardless of the pair type,
judgments of similarity and difference are affected by
the modality of input.
Overall faster response times for different pairs than
for similar pairs are indicative of the fact that
judgments “not similar” or “very different” are made
whenever no sufficient similarity is found. At the same
time, computation of the degree of similarity is a more
lengthy process. The results reported here seem to
establish a boundary condition for situations where
alignment is used in similarity and difference
judgments. Participants were faster to decide that
objects are not similar than to decide that they are;
suggesting that judgment of difference was not based
on finding specific differences. We are currently in the
process of setting up research for examining brain

activity under the conditions reported here to evaluate
whether brain areas involved in imagery are recruited
during similarity judgments to words only.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577-660.
Battig, W. F., & Montague, W. E. (1969). Category
norms of verbal items in 56 categories: A replication
and extension of the Connecticut category norms.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 80(3/2), 1-46.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Similarity
mapping in analogy and similarity. American
Psychologist, 52(1), 45-56.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the nonindependence of
features in similarity judgments. Cognitive
Psychology, 23, 222-262.
Markman, A. B. (1996). Structural alignment in
similarity and difference judgments. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 3(2), 227-230.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100,
254-278.
Markman, A. B., & Wisniewski, E. J. (1997). Similar
and different: The differentiation of basic-level
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23(1), 54-70.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115(1), 39-57.
Solomon, K. O., & Barsalou, L. W. (2000). Grounding
concepts in perceptual simulation: II. Evidence from
property verification, Cognitive Psychology. 43(2),
129-169
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity.
Psychological Review, 84(4), 327-352.
Wu, L. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (2001). Grounding
concepts in perceptual simulation: I. Evidence from
property generation, Under Review

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Zachary Estes, Phil JohnsonLaird and two anonymous reviewers for their comments
on this paper. This research has been supported in part
by grants from the James S. McDonnell Foundation and
the National Science Foundation (BCS # 0078945) to
Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

