UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Analogy in Teaching Middle-School Mathematics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/05x008qw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Engle, Lindsey K
Holyoak, Keith J
Stigler, James W

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Analogy in Teaching Middle-School Mathematics
Lindsey K. Engle (Lengle@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563

Keith J. Holyoak (Holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563

James W. Stigler (Stigler@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563
Abstract
Analogies produced in twenty-five US eighth-grade
mathematics classroom lessons were analyzed according to
their frequency and structure. Frequency findings suggest
that analogies are a common part of mathematics classroom
learning, and a component analysis revealed regular structural
patterns in the way these analogies are produced. Teachers
tended to organize the analogies by producing the target,
source, and mapping steps before students become active
participants. Students were most likely to then make
inferences, adapt them to the target context, and solve target
problems. Student participation was either independent or coconstructed with a teacher or other students. Findings address
an important correlate with experimental research on
analogical reasoning.

The United States’ educational system is presently
struggling to find teaching programs that facilitate
mathematical understanding that goes beyond algorithmic
knowledge. Standardized test results recently released in
California indicate that despite improvements, the
educational system remains far below state goals in
mathematics (STAR, 2001). One major component of this
difficulty is a lack of knowledge about how to teach abstract
concepts so that students are able to transfer this learning
across contexts.
Systematic use of analogy may be integral to a teaching
program that meets that goal. Analogy is a comparative
structure that highlights abstract structural relations
(Gentner, 1983), and facilitates schema acquisition and
transfer across problems (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). Learning
mathematics requires development of generalized concept
representations that can be applied across contexts
(Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 1999).
Cognitive scientists have argued for decades that analogy
plays a central role in human cognition, learning and
problem solving (e.g., Holyoak, Gentner & Kokinov, 2001;
Kolodner, 1997; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995; Gentner &
Toupin, 1986; Piaget, 1950). However, there have been
paradoxical findings in analogy research. While analogy
has been demonstrated to be used in several everyday

contexts (e.g. Dunbar 1995, 2001), most laboratory studies
show low rates of spontaneous noticing and use of analogies
for problem solving (e.g. Gick & Holyoak, 1980, 1983). It
is necessary to understand this discrepancy between
observed patterns of analogical reasoning in the laboratory
and in everyday contexts, termed the analogical paradox
(Dunbar, 2001), in order to design meaningful interventions
to promote educational usage of analogy.
We suggest that in order to clarify the paradoxical
findings concerning analogy use, detailed analysis of
everyday analogy usage is essential, because important
aspects of analogy use can only be understood through
online analysis of the pragmatics governing analogy
production. The current study uses discourse analytic
techniques to explore analogy production in the context of
teaching mathematics in eighth-grade mathematics
classrooms.

Methods
Sample and Coding
Twenty-five videotaped eighth-grade mathematics lessons
were analyzed to examine analogy activities. The lessons
were randomly selected from a larger random probability
sample collected as part of the Third International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) directed by Jim
Stigler (see Stigler, Gonzales, Kawanaka, Knoll, & Serrano,
1998). All selected classrooms were videotaped on one
occasion. The classrooms were selected from US public,
private, and parochial? schools in both urban and rural
areas, and videotaping was conducted throughout the school
year. The lesson content was not constrained, but most
lessons drew from number theory, geometry, or algebra
domains. Teaching styles similarly were not constrained
and thus reflected a range of techniques and perspectives.
Lessons were analyzed using V-Prism, a computer
software package designed to allow simultaneous viewing
of a digitized video and its typed transcript on a computer
screen. In the program, the video’s transcript is time-linked
so that the lines of text move temporally with the video.

The transcript may be marked with codes to designate when
an episode begins and ends.
Six levels of analysis were developed such that every
lesson was coded in six passes. Each pass was conducted
by at least two coders and intercoder reliability was
assessed. Codes and frequency data are presented below.
1. Identifying analogies
The definition of analogy used in this study was based on
Gentner’s structure mapping model (1983). Analogy was
operationalized as a comparative structure between familiar
objects, termed the source (or base) of the analogy, and
relatively unfamiliar objects, termed the target of the
analogy. Objects were defined as entities that function as
wholes at a given level of analysis. The source and target
objects are aligned according to their predicate, or
relational, structure such that inferences are drawn from the
source predicate structure to explain the target predicate
structure. Mapping is defined as the process of aligning and
drawing inferences between the source and target objects.
Inferences are then drawn from the source structure and
used to derive novel knowledge about the parallel target
structure. Several constraints govern which mappings are
made in each analogy, since all possible mappings are not
typically completed (see Holyoak & Thagard, 1989).
Coders used a conservative measure of analogy, marking
only units where a source, a target, and clear structural
mapping between the source and target could be identified
in discourse or explicit gestures. Two examples illustrate
typical analogies. Reliability between the two coders was
calculated on 105 protocols in 4 lessons (18% percent of the
total sample). Agreement was 86%. Differences were
resolved in discussion and consensus between the coders.
Figure 1 provides an illustration of the type of analogy
typically identified in the data. This is a transcript of an
analogy presented by a teacher to a whole class. The
teacher is standing at the board, where the formula for
circumference and a drawing of a circle is projected behind
him.
Construction of
Source object:
Highlighting the
predicate
structure:
External layer
of (peel, orange)

Mapping:
orange peel to
circumference

Teacher:

Now here’s how I
alway’s looked at
it. We’re gonna
say this- this
circle right here
is an orange
Its an orange
Alright?
Its an orange
Now lets say we’re
gonna take - stick
a needle in the
orange n’ suck
out everything
inside except for
the peeling of the
orange.
((demonstrates gesturally)).
Okay we’re goswe’re gonna
pretend like
that’s our

Adapting the
inference (this
object will be an
external layer) to
the context of a
geometric circle

circumference
right there.
((teacher uses a pointer to
run along the outside edge of
the circle on the overhead
projector))

Figure 1: Example Analogy
A total of 103 analogies were identified as verbally
produced by classroom participants. Lesson included a
mean of 4.1 analogies (SD = 2.6). The range for individual
lessons was between 1 and 11 analogies. Thus in every
lesson examined, at least one explicit analogy unit was
coded.
2. Participant Organization.
Each analogy unit was examined to record the roles
played by teachers and students. Based on empirical and
computational models of analogy, coders specifically
determined whether a teacher, a student, a group of students,
or no one generated the four steps of analogical reasoning
demonstrated above in figure 1 (source, target, mapping,
inference and adaptation, and problem solving).
Findings revealed that most analogies were initiated by
teachers, and those produced by students tended to be highly
superficial and only occurred in two classrooms (3% of the
total number of analogies coded). Teachers produced 84%
of sources, 77% of targets, and 89% of mappings. Students
had a comparatively more active role in developing
inferences and adapting them to target contexts, produced
27% alone or collaboratively with the teacher. Finally,
students were most active in completing computations to
provide final answers to target problems. Although only
42% of analogies had an explicit answer, students supplied
38% of those answers.
3. Source Structure
In order to examine the types of sources and targets
produced typically in these mathematics analogies, the
structure of the source and the target were independently
coded for each analogy unit. Five classification categories
were used. There were: 1) decontextualized math problem,
2) contextualized math problem (i.e., a word problem set in
a non-math context), 3) schema (general rule, no surface
features), and 4) outside math phenomena. If more than one
source was used to explain the same target, or the target was
stated in two ways, the source was coded " multiple." See
Figure 2 for sample analogies of each structure.
Intercoder reliability was calculated separately for coding
source and target. 22 protocols were used from 3 lessons
(approximately 15% of the analogies coded). Reliability
was calculated to control for chance using Cohen’s Kappa,
yielding k=72 and k=81 for source and target reliability
(acceptable to good levels).
Both the sources and targets displayed significant
differences between the frequency with which each structure

category was used, χ2 (4) = 26.5; 68.4; p <.001 in both
cases. While both sources and targets were most likely to
be decontextualized math problems (40% and 44%), all four
categories were represented. The next largest proportion of
targets were math schemas (33%), suggesting that teachers
were using analogies not only to prompt solutions to single
problems, but also to aid in developing more general
schemas. The most substantial distinction occurred between
objects outside the domain of mathematics used as sources
and targets. 15% of sources were outside the domain of
mathematics, while only 1 out of 103 targets was a nonmath phenomenon. This is not entirely unexpected since the
math classroom is oriented towards mathematics learning,
but it is conceivable that mathematics classrooms would
discuss how to apply math structures to understand realworld problems. Finally, there were more multiple sources
used (16%) than multiple versions of the target (5%).
Table 1: Structural composition of analogy sources and
targets
STRUCTURE
Not math
Contextualized
Decontextualized
Schema
Multiple
Total

Source
15
19
41
12
16
103

FREQUENCY
Target
1
18
45
34
5
103

1

2

Target

Outside-math
phenomena:
It s like balancing a
scale, matter doesn t
disappear, so to keep
it balanced, whatever
we do to undo one
side we have to do to
the other.
Contextualized math
problem:
Lets say you ve got
money. If you lost 88
cents and then you
lost 5 cents more,
would you add or
subtract to find out
the total amount you
lost?

Decontextualized
math problem:
It is divided by
negative sixty, so
we multiply by
negative sixty on
both sides.
Math schema
When you have a
negative number
minus another
number, do you
add or subtract?

Decontextualized
math problem:
Ok, don t put all that
other stuff. What if it
was just 16/20. How
would you reduce it?

4

Decontextualized
math problem:
How would you
multiply these?
(x + 2y)(x + y)

Decontextualized
math problem:
Now lets change
the integers to
monomials with
variables. So
then how would
we reduce
15xy2z4/25x3y?
Decontextualized
math problem:
In that case, how
would you
multiply (5x+
y)(x + 3y)

Low
similarity

High
similarity

Figure 2: Analogy structure and surface similarity
Table 2 shows the frequencies of the surface similarity
between analogy sources and targets. There were no
significant frequency difference among the four categories,
χ2 (3) = 3.058 p=.3, indicating that all four types of analogy
constructions were regularly used.
Table 2: Surface similarity between source and target

The overall level of similarity between the surface
features of the source and the target was coded on a four
point scale, as suggested by research indicating that this
relationship governs the reasoning used to solve an analogy
(e.g. Ross, 1987; Gick & Holyoak, 1983).
Source

3

Surface
Similarity
Far
distance

Schema
involved

SURFACE SIMILARITY
Schema involved
Far distance// outside-math
source/target involved
Low surface similarity
High surface similarity
Total

FREQUENCY
28
19
31
25
103

4. Function
The function of each analogy unit was coded to examine
the context and purpose for analogy use. Primarily, this
code examined whether the analogy was directed toward
explaining a concept, a procedure, or a combination of the
two. Additionally, a separate code marked whether the
analogy was implemented following evidence of a student
having trouble with a problem or concept.

30

Code
1

Code
2

Code
3

Code
4

Mathematical
Function
Being a math
student.

Teach concepts
only.

Teach concepts
and procedures

Teach
procedures
only.

Paraphrased Examples
Remove the parentheses, very
carefully. Kind of like if you were
a bomb squad called in to diffuse
a bomb. If you mess up the first
step, the whole problem will blow
up in your face at the end!
When you’re adding fractions,
think about your denominators as
units, like centimeters or feet.
When you add length, the units
must be the same in order to add
them.
Ok do you remember how we
found the perimeter and area of
polygons last week? This time it
is the same concept but we are
going to use the formulas to solve
for circumference and area of a
circle.
What were the steps we used to
solve the last example? OK lets
do the same thing in this problem.
First lets factor the numerator
and denominator and then we’ll
see what we can cancel..

Figure 3: Analogy Function
The mathematical function of each identified analogy
revealed that some functions were more frequent than others
χ2 (3) = 20.1, p<.001. The raw frequencies are shown in
Table 3. Teachers were most likely to use analogies to
teach procedures only. The frequency distribution may be
related to the tendency of US teachers to teach more
procedures than concepts during a single lesson (Stigler et.
al, 1998).
Table 3: Frequency of mathematical analogy functions.
FUNCTION
Being a math student
Concepts only
Concepts and Procedures
Procedures only
Total

20

Source Structure
non-math
10

schema
multiple
contextuualized

0

decontextualized
concept present

procedures only

Figure 4: Source structure according to math teaching
function.
Second, in order to determine whether the structure of the
whole analogy is related to the function, a Pearson chi
square was performed to compare the surface similarity
between the source and target of each analogy with its
function. This test revealed that there was a significant
relationship between these variables, χ2 (3) = 37.5 p<.0001.
Far distance analogies were almost exclusively used to
explain concepts or concepts paired with procedures. In
contrast, relational mappings with high surface similarity
between sources and targets were almost exclusively used to
teach procedures only. Schemas were more likely to be
used in analogies demonstrating concepts, but were also
regularly used to teach procedures. Low surface similarity
analogies, and mappings based on a decontextualized
mathematics object, were used more frequently to teach
procedures than concepts.
30

20

FREQUENCY
12
19
30
42
103

We were interested in whether the function or purpose of
the analogy was related to the type of analogy produced.
Two steps were taken to investigate this question. First, a
Pearson chi square was performed to compare analogy
function with the structure of source generated. This test
revealed that there is a significant relationship between the
source generated and the structure of each analogy, χ2 (12)
= 35.8, p<.001.

Surface similarity
10

Schema involved
far distance
low similarity
high similarity

0
concept present

procedures only

Figure 5: Surface similarity according to math teaching
function.

Discussion
The present findings suggest that analogies are regularly
produced in US mathematics classrooms, and are generated
in reliable structural patterns. These patterns vary as a
function of the immediate context and purpose of the
analogy. The specific nature of these relationships suggest
that analogy generation is highly constrained and organized
by the goal of the analogy. When the goal of the analogy
was to teach conceptual information, teachers were more
likely to use distance analogies, schemas, and lower surface
similarity than when they were teaching math procedures
alone.
Patterns of analogy usage also revealed interesting
associations between teachers’ analogy practices and
previous research. Teachers frequently presented multiple
sources, techniques that have been demonstrated to facilitate
schema acquisition and transfer (e.g., Gick & Holyoak,
1983). Thus it is possible that teachers may be using
intuitive theories of analogy to guide their analogy
production towards an effective teaching tool.
In addition, teachers provided substantial structure for
each analogy, perhaps because they are aware that noticing
analogies is a difficult task, as has been frequently
demonstrated experimentally.
While the teachers
assistance makes the analogy more likely to be completed
successfully than if students were responsible for generating
more components, however, this design provides little
information to the teacher about whether students are
actually performing analogical reasoning when analogies
are produced in this way. Although teachers frequently
asked students to participate in producing analogies, they
may not be aware that the way most students participate
does not require that they perform higher order comparative
reasoning.
Further, educational research suggests that enabling
students to generate predictions and inferences about
unknown problem types can be highly beneficial for their
transfer performance (e.g. Carpenter, Fennema, Fuson &
Hiebert, Human, Murray, Olivier & Werne, 1999). These
findings therefore suggest that teachers might be reducing
the learning benefits of analogy by highly structuring the
comparisons for students. This is an empirical question that
is currently under investigation.

Acknowledgments
Development of the TIMSS database was funded by the
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), the US
Department of Education, and the National Science
Foundation (NSF) grants to James Stigler. This research
was additionally supported by an National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) Developmental Cognitive Science
Training Grant to Lindsey Engle.

References
Bassok, M. (2001). Semantic alignments in mathematical

word problems. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N.
Kokinov (Eds.) The analogical mind: Perspectives from
cognitive science (pp. 401-433). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Brown, A. L., & Kane, M. J. (1988). Preschool children can
learn to transfer: Learning to learn and learning from
example. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 493-523.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R.R. (1999).
How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
National Research Council, Commission on Behavioral &
Social Sciences & Education. Committee on
Developments in the Science of Learning. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
Carpenter, T., Fennema, E.,; Fuson, K, Hiebert, J. Human,
P., Murray, H., Olivier, A., & Wearne, D. (1999).
Learning basic number concepts and skills as problem
solving. In E. Fennema & T. Romberg (Eds.)
,Mathematics classrooms that promote understanding
(pp. 45-61). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J. Sternberg
&J. E. Davidson (Eds),. The nature of insight (pp. 365395) Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: On-line creativity
and conceptual change in science. In T. B. Ward, S. M.
Smith, & J. Vaid (Eds.), Creative thought: An
investigation of conceptual structures and processes (pp.
461-493). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological
Association.
Dunbar, K. (2001). The analogical paradox: Why analogy is
so easy in naturalistic settings yet so difficult in the
psychological laboratory. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, &
B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The analogical mind: Perspectives
from cognitive science (pp. 313-334). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: a theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Gentner, D., Holyoak,, K. J.& Kokinov, B. (2001). The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: a theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and
learning by analogy: Introduction. American
Psychologist, 52, 32-24.
Gick, M.L.,& Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 306-355.
Gick, M.L. & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Holyoak & Thagard (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 332-340.
Holyoak, K., Novick, L., Melz, E.R. (1994). Component
processes in analogical transfer: Mapping, pattern
completion, and adaptation. In 2. K. J. Holyoak & J. A.

Barnden (Eds.), Advances in connectionist and neural
computation theory, Vol 2: Analogical connections (pp.
113-180). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kazemi, E., & Stipek, D. (2001). Promoting conceptual
thinking in four upper-elementary mathematics
classrooms. Elementary School Journal. 102, 59-80.
Novick, L. (1988) Analogical transfer, problem similarity,
and expertise. Journal of Experimental psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 510-520.
Novick, L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 398415.
Reed, S. K., & Demptster, A., & Ettinger, M. (1985).
Usefulness of analogous solutions for solving algebra
word problems. Journal of experimental psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 11, 106-125.
Reed, S. K. (1987). A structure-mapping model for word
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13, 124-139.
Ross, B. (1987). This is like that: the use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13, 629-639.
California Standards Testing and Reporting Program
(STAR) (2001). Stanford 9 and California Achievement
Test results. http://star.cde.ca.gov/star2001/
Stigler, J.W., Gonzales, P., Kawanaka, T., Knoll, S., &
Serrano, A. (1998). Methods and findings of the TIMSS
videotape classroom study. Washington, DC: US
Government Printing Office.

