UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Goal Constrains on Strategy Generation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5kf152kt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Charman, Suzanne C
Howes, Andrew

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Goal Constraints on Strategy Generation
Suzanne C. Charman (CharmanSC1@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3YG, Wales, United Kingdom

Andrew Howes (HowesA@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3YG, Wales, United Kingdom

Abstract
Given practice, people generate new more efficient
strategies for achieving desired goals. However, some
researchers have observed that even experienced users of
computer systems persist with relatively inefficient
strategies. One reason for these findings may be a
reduced opportunity to use efficient strategies in tasks
where higher goal constraints are present. In this study
half of the participants completed a drawing task in
Microsoft PowerPoint in which they had to design the
layout of a computer room and study area; the other half
completed an equivalent drawing task that involved no
higher goal constraints.
Those with higher goal
constraints were slower to generate more efficient
strategies. This can be accounted for by a reduced
opportunity to use ‘efficient’ strategies. Experience in
other computer packages and strategic knowledge also
influenced strategy generation.

Introduction
When people learn a new skill they often move through
a series of progressively more efficient strategies.
Practicing a task does not only result in faster
performance, but also leads to the generation of new
strategies (Delaney, Reder, Staszewski and Ritter, 1998;
Charman and Howes, 2001). For example, Charman
and Howes (2001) found that people can successfully
generate more efficient drawing strategies when using
Microsoft PowerPoint as a result of practice on
component procedures.
However, Carroll and Rosson (1987) observed that
the skills of computer users “tend to asymptote at
relative mediocrity” (p.1). Similarly, Bhavnani and
John (1997) reported that even after a number of years
of experience and formal training in a computer aided
design package, many users had not adopted more
efficient strategies. The reason, they suggest, was not
related to the standard of interface design or experience
with the package, but to an absence of strategic
knowledge. Bhavnani, John and Flemming (1999)
found that people stay with inefficient methods unless
they are taught efficient strategies explicitly.
One explanation for the conflicting observations of
Charman and Howes (2001) and Bhavnani and John
(1997) is that participants had different primary goals.
Whereas the task used by Charman and Howes (2001)

involved participants reproducing simple pictures in
Microsoft PowerPoint, Bhavnani and John (1997)
observed CAD users completing real work tasks, which
would have imposed higher goal constraints. It is
possible that the presence of higher goal constraints
inhibits the generation of more efficient strategies
and/or reduces the opportunity to use them. Higher
goal constraints when preparing a report or
presentation, for example, might concern syntax and
semantics, and when designing a building they might
concern functionality and aesthetic quality.
Higher goal constraints may hinder strategy
generation by changing the user’s focus. This is
consistent with the observations of Carroll and Rosson
(1987). They found that people were unwilling to take
time out to read a manual because they were ‘endproduct’ focused, i.e. their paramount concern was with
completing the tasks at hand. It is possible that
Bhavnani and John’s (1997) participants failed to
generate more efficient strategies because they were
focused on meeting higher goal task constraints derived
from the work domain. The focus in Charman and
Howes’ (2001) study however was on the method for
which more efficient strategies were available.
In addition, the presence of higher goal constraints
may reduce the opportunity to use efficient strategies.
When taking into consideration higher goal constraints,
sub-goals tend to be smaller, and so strategies that
exploit the iterative power of the computer package are
not as beneficial. When working with higher goal
constraints computer users may generate strategies that
are efficient given the sub-goal structure of the task, but
which appear inefficient when viewed from the
perspective of the end product. E.g. It is possible to
imagine an efficient way of drawing a given floor plan,
but when a person is designing a plan they do so
interactively, using the device as repository for partial
solutions.
While, substantial efforts have been made to model
strategy change (e.g. Shrager and Siegler, 1998), these
models do not address the issue of when people deploy
strategy generation mechanisms. These models instead
have addressed details of the mechanisms by which
new strategies are generated from existing strategies.
For example, Crowley, Shrager and Siegler (1997)

proposed that people use both a metacognitive and an
associative mechanism. The metacognitive mechanism
is of particular interest here because it requires
deliberate and resource intensive problem solving. Our
interest in this paper is in the extent to which higher
goal constraints moderate ability or opportunity to
beneficially deploy metacognitive problem solving.
We predict that there will be a negative impact of
higher goal constraints on the generation of efficient
strategies. In the following experiment, whether or not
participants had a higher level goal to meet was
manipulated. The higher-goal task was to design the
layout of a computer room and study space. In the nohigher-goal task participants copied and pasted an
equivalent number of computers and desks into a large
blank area. To complete the tasks a range of strategies
varying in efficiency, with the same component
procedures, could be used. Participants could copy and
paste just one item (a computer or a desk) at a time, or
could copy and paste multiple items at once. Previous
experience and strategic knowledge were also examined
as factors affecting strategy generation.

Method
Participants
Twenty-four undergraduates who were regular
computer users, ranging in age from 18 to 26, took part
in the experiment for 1½ hours of course credit or for
payment of £6. All participants were given the same
amount of credit or payment to take part in the study,
no matter how long they took, in order to encourage
efficient completion of the tasks.

Jerabek, 2000), which consisted of ten questions, giving
a score out of 100. Participants were then asked to
complete a short questionnaire that asked about prior
experience with Microsoft PowerPoint, as well as other
software packages with drawing functions and
Microsoft Word.
The tuition phase was then
completed, which ensured that the participants mastered
basic drawing skills (drawing, moving, altering, fencing
to select, copying and pasting a single shape). The
participants were informed that they should only use
functions identified in the tutorial stage.
These
included fencing, copying and pasting, but, for
example, excluded duplication and grouping.
After the tuition phase the participants completed an
open-ended questionnaire designed to assess knowledge
about the device. Ten questions relevant to the key
concepts particular to working with more than one item
at a time were included. Five questions related to
fencing multiple shapes with space between them and
five related to the manipulation of multiple shapes.
The participants then completed a pre-test stage
where they were asked to draw eight 2-shape items in
as few moves as possible (Figure 1). The strategy used
by the participant was coded and scored (1-7) according
to the relative efficiency of the strategy based upon the
coding framework outlined in Charman and Howes
(2001). For example, participants were given a score of
1 if they drew each shape one by one, and a score of 7 if
an exponential copying strategy was used
(exponentially increase the number of items made each
time copy and paste are used). This score was taken as
a measure of strategic knowledge.

Design
The study involved three between-subjects factors. The
first was task type. In one condition participants were
given a higher goal, where they were asked to design
the layout of a computer classroom and a study area
(see Appendix I). This higher goal gave rise to several
design constraints that determined the manner in which
the desks and computers could be arranged. The goal
for these participants was to take into consideration the
constraints outlined and also to consider the best use of
space. In another condition participants did not have a
higher goal in mind, they were asked to copy and paste
an equivalent number of computers and study desks
into a large blank space. A median split (over both task
type conditions) on two pre-test measures, experience
and strategic knowledge, created two more between
subjects factors.

Procedure and Materials
The participants completed an informed consent form
and then a short online spatial IQ test (Crampton and

Figure 1: Pre-test task.
The main task of the experiment was then conducted.
Participants were informed that there was an online
help facility that they could choose to consult if they
wished (this was available freely to the participants and
could be accessed by selecting an open Internet
Explorer window). For the main task, the no-highergoal condition participants were given a key with
sample desks and computers in it, and asked to
reproduce 54 study desks and 148 computers in the
space provided. The participants were all instructed
that they could fence (to select), copy and paste the
computers and study desks provided in the key.
In the higher-goal condition, participants were asked
to plan the layout of a new extension to the Psychology
building (Appendix I). In the proposed extension there
was a study area where study booths were to be placed,
and a computer classroom where computers were to be

placed. Participants were given design constraints for
which visual measures were provided, such as making
sure that there were gangways, access to desks and
space between computers. Although participants were
told that a design could include 148 computers and 54
desks, the task was over when the participant felt they
had finished their design, with the constraints met.
Participants were instructed to complete the task in as
few moves as possible. Finally participants filled in
another device representation questionnaire. Microsoft
PowerPoint 97 was used to carry out the drawing tasks.

score achieved. The main analysis used was a between
subjects 2x2x2 ANOVA with task type, experience and
strategic knowledge as factors.

Strategies

Excess Moves as a Proportion of Total Moves The
fact that there were fewer moves made in the no-highergoal condition may have been due either to reduced
opportunity or to task focus. In order to further
investigate strategy change as a function of opportunity
we analyzed the excess moves as a proportion of total
moves. For each task type the mean optimal number of
moves was calculated (145 for higher-goal; 46 for nohigher-goal) and subtracted from each participants total
number of moves to give the excess moves. The excess
moves as a proportion of the total moves made was then
calculated for each participant.
There was no
significant difference between the higher-goal group
(M=0.45) and the no-higher-goal group (M=0.49) [F(1,
16)=0.363, p=0.555, MSE=0.05].

To complete the task, several strategies could be
employed. It was possible to work with an individual
shape, as the composite parts of each item (a computer
or desk) were not grouped together. A better way to
complete the task was to draw a fence around one item
and then copy, paste and move the item. An even better
strategy was to work with more than one item at a time.
In order to do this a participant needed to know that
multiple items with space between them could be
selected at once (by drawing a fence around them, see
Figure 2) and then manipulated (copied, pasted and
moved) simultaneously.
Finally, the exponential
copying strategy allowed very fast completion of the
task. Here the number of copies produced at once
increases exponentially.
Cursor
start point
End point
Figure 2: Fencing, by using the mouse to click and
drag from the start point and releasing at the end point.

Results
Each move made by a participant was recorded,
allowing a fine-grained analysis of performance. An
individual move was taken to be either a key-stroke
(e.g. delete) or a purposeful mouse-click (e.g. copy or
select shape). Creating a fence was also counted as one
move (although to do this one must click and drag).
Using efficient copying strategies did save time. The
total time taken was negatively correlated with the
proportion of moves where multiple items were worked
with at once (rs=-0.672, p<0.001).
Only three
participants visited the on-line help facility, for less
than forty seconds each, so these results are not
included in the analyses.
For analysis, participants were split into high and low
experience groups based upon the experience
questionnaire data, and also high and low strategicknowledge groups based upon the pre-test strategy

Task Type
Total Moves Those in the no-higher-goal condition
(M=116.8) made fewer moves in total than the highergoal condition (M=323.2) [F(1,16)=51.168, p<0.001,
MSE=7916.1], and took fewer moves to make each item
(M=0.6) than those in the higher-goal condition
(M=1.9) [F(1,16)=37.444, p<0.001, MSE=0.4].

Strategy Generation Higher goal constraints impacted
upon how soon strategies were generated. Participants
occasionally started to complete the task by working
with individual shapes. Most however started working
with one item (computer or a desk) at a time. A better
strategy was to work with more than one item at a time.
The move on which this strategy was first used was
recorded. The higher-goal condition (M=197.9) worked
with more than one item significantly later on than
those in the no-higher-goal condition (M=41.0),
F(1,16)=18.729, p<0.001, MSE=17227.6.
The final progression in strategy use was to use an
exponential copying strategy. A main effect of task
type on the move when this strategy was first used was
found [F(1,16)=13.820, p<0.01, MSE=21072.3]; those
with a higher goal (M=229.8) generated the strategy
later on than those with no higher goal (M=85.2).
However, while in both tasks the earliest opportunity
to use each of the strategies was the same (move 7), the
overall opportunity to use the strategies differed
between tasks. These results may therefore reflect
either reduced opportunity or a different task focus.

Experience
At the start of the experiment participants had either no
experience, or very little experience, with the drawing
functions in Microsoft PowerPoint.

Table 1: Interaction between task type and experience.
Measure
Total time taken to complete the task
Total moves taken to complete the task

High-Experience
Higher-Goal
No-Higher-Goal
1060.5
384.3
279.0
116.0

Low-Experience
Higher-Goal
No-Higher-Goal
1630.7
458.2
750.0
118.0

Performance A median split placed participants in
either a high-experience or low-experience group, based
upon their experience questionnaire score.
A main effect of experience on time taken to perform
the task was found [F(1,16)=18.102, p<0.001,
MSE=57457.4].
Unsurprisingly those with high
experience (M=696.4s) performed the task faster than
those with low experience (M=1097.7s).
Highexperience participants (M=191.2) also performed the
task using fewer moves than those in the lowexperience group (M=254.0), F(1,16)=9.395, p<0.01,
MSE=7916.1.

p<0.05] where participants were given a higher goal.
However, this interaction may have been due to a
ceiling effect in the performance of the no-higher-goal
condition.
Similarly there was an interaction between task type
and strategic knowledge (see Table 2) for the number of
moves taken to complete the task [F(1,16)=7.544,
p<0.05, MSE=7916.1]. Simple effects tests revealed
that strategic knowledge had a greater effect where
participants were given a higher goal to consider
[FA@b1(1,16)=4.509, p<0.05]. However, again this
interaction may be due to a ceiling effect.

Strategy Generation More interestingly, experience
had an effect on how soon efficient strategies were
generated. There was a main effect of experience on
the move participants first worked with multiple items
[F(1,16)=7.024, p<0.05, MSE=17227.6].
Highexperience participants generated this strategy
(M=87.1) earlier than those who had low experience
(M=157.7). Those with high experience (M=122.2)
also generated the exponential copying strategy earlier
than those with low experience (M=199.3),
F(1,16)=5.856, p<0.05, MSE=21072.3.

Table 2: Total moves taken to complete the task.

Strategic Knowledge
Performance A median split placed participants in
either a high-strategic-knowledge or low-strategicknowledge group, based upon their pre-test strategy
score.
A main effect of strategic knowledge
[F(1,16)=19.321, p<0.001, MSE=7916.1] found that
high-knowledge participants (M=199.3) performed the
task using fewer moves than those in the lowknowledge group (M=240.8).

Interactions
There was a significant interaction between experience
and task type for the total time taken to perform the task
[F(1,16)=12.906, p<0.01, MSE=57457.4] and also for
the total number of moves taken to perform the task
[F(1,16)=7.956, p<0.05, MSE=7916.1] (see Table 1).
Simple effects tests revealed that where experience was
low, the presence of higher goal constraints had an
effect on the time taken [FB@a2(1,16)=6.575, p<0.05]
and moves made [FB@a2(1,16)=11.457, p<0.05].
Simple effects tests also found that experience had a
greater effect on time taken [FA@b1(1,16)=8.350,
p<0.05] and moves made [FA@b1(1,16)=12.382,

Higher-Goal
No-Higher-Goal

High-StrategicKnowledge
262.6
72.5

Low-StrategicKnowledge
444.3
139.0

Spatial IQ
A regression found that spatial IQ had a significant
influence on the total number of deletes and undos used
by a participant, (β=-0.477, p<0.05). This suggests that
those with a high spatial IQ perform the task more
accurately than those with a low spatial IQ, and
therefore do not need to undo or delete as often. Those
with a high spatial IQ may be better able to plan their
actions, and so make fewer mistakes.

Mental Representation of the Device
The amount of experience a participant had on other
drawing packages had a significant influence on their
first device representation questionnaire score
(β=0.554, p<0.01).
A regression found that a
participant’s score on the first device representation
questionnaire (DRQ) had a significant influence on the
time taken to perform the pre-test (β=-0.484, p<0.05).
The score that participants gained on the first DRQ also
exerted influence on early improvement in the number
of moves made to make each item in the main task
(β=0.611, p<0.01).
From these data we can suggest that previous
experience allows more accurate hypotheses about the
operation of the device to be developed while the
participant answers the questionnaire.
This
representation then supports the generation of faster and
more efficient methods.

Case Study
One case study demonstrated a particularly strong effect
of having a higher goal. Initially the participant had
low device knowledge, but had an average spatial IQ
and previous experience with computer packages. The
participant completed the pre-test task very quickly and
used a very good strategy. The strategy used in the pretest involved the participant fencing, copying and
pasting four items at once. However during the main
task where the participant had to design the layout of
the computer room and study areas, he did not use this
strategy or the exponential copying strategy. Instead he
fenced, copied and pasted each item one by one, this
taking him 417 moves (M=220) and 1465 seconds
(M=880). In this case it seems that the presence of a
higher goal actually inhibited the use of a known and
previously used strategy.

Discussion
When higher goal constraints were present participants
made more moves and generated new strategies more
slowly. Those with higher goal constraints made at
least four times as many moves before generating more
efficient strategies. In addition, those with low strategic
knowledge or experience suffered diminished
performance and took nearly twice as long to generate
efficient strategies.
Our analysis indicated that the effect of higher goal
constraints was entirely due to the way in which the
design task reduced the opportunity for the use of the
more efficient strategies.
Once opportunity was
accounted for, higher goal constraints had no significant
effect on the number of moves made. This suggests that
higher goal constraints might not change the ability of a
user to generate an efficient strategy, rather they may
change the problem such that the opportunity to use
efficient strategies is reduced. Users with a higher goal
may have demonstrated adaptivity to opportunity.
As opportunity could account for the difference in
performance between the higher-goal and no-highergoal conditions, we found no evidence that a higher
work goal might inhibit strategy generation. We found
no support for the hypothesis that users become so
focused on meeting higher goal constraints that they do
not concern themselves with the efficiency of the
methods by which they complete the task. However,
further study is required to assess the extent to which
strategy generation might be inhibited by focus on
higher goal constraints when opportunity is held
constant.
We also found no evidence that higher goal
constraints inhibited users from taking time out to learn
about the device (following from Carroll and Rosson,
1987), as participants very rarely used the on-line help
and all groups concluded the experiment with similar

levels of device knowledge. More importantly, all the
strategies were composed of the same known
component procedures.
While the rate at which participants generated new
strategies was slowed by a reduction in opportunity in
the higher-goal condition, most participants showed a
marked improvement in the efficiency of the strategies
that they were using as the experiment progressed.
Further, as participants made little use of the on-line
help and did not stop performing the task to explore the
package, the acquisition of device knowledge must
have occurred while the task was being completed.
Together, our results suggest that it may be necessary
to qualify the claim that people are unwilling to take
time out learn (Carroll and Rosson, 1987). Our
findings, while laboratory bound, indicate that people
are willing to invest in the generation of more efficient
strategies within the bounds of what they discover
while using the device. They may not go to a manual,
but they do think about the way that they achieve tasks,
they do attempt to explain what they observe, and they
do adapt their methods accordingly.
Finally, our findings suggest that Bhavnani, John and
Flemming’s (1999) conclusion that people do not
generate efficient strategies without instruction may be
premature.
Our participants generated efficient
strategies within the bounds of what the higher goal
constraints allowed. These findings suggest that it may
be beneficial, instead of teaching strategies explicitly, to
encourage strategy generation during task performance.
While Bhavnani, John and Flemming (1999) argue that
strategies need to be taught, it may be better, in the long
term, to ensure that users actually generate the strategy
themselves. Evidence in the psychological literature
suggests that there are substantial advantages to selfgeneration and self-explanation (Chi, Bassok, Lewis,
Reimann and Glaser, 1989; Bielaczyc, Pirolli and
Brown, 1995).

References
Bhavnani, S. K., & John, B. E. (1997). From sufficient
to efficient usage: An analysis of strategic
knowledge. Proceedings of CHI '97, 91-98.
Bhavnani, S. K., John, B. E., & Flemming, U. (1999).
The strategic use of CAD: An empirically inspired,
theory-based course. Proceedings of CHI '99, 183190.
Bielaczyc, K., Pirolli, P. L., & Brown, A. L. (1995).
Training in self-explanation and self-regulation
strategies: Investigating the effects of knowledge
acquisition activities on problem solving. Cognition
and Instruction, 13(2), 221-252.
Carroll, J. M., & Rosson, M. B. (1987). The paradox of
the active user. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Interfacing
thought: Cognitive aspects of human-computer
interaction. Cambridge, M.A.: The MIT Press.

Charman, S.C., & Howes, A. (2001). The effect of
practice on strategy change. In J.D. Moore & K.
Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
(pp. 188-193). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P. &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self –explanations: how students
study and use examples in learning to solve
problems. Cognitive Science, 15, 145-182.
Crampton, A., Jerabek, I. (2000). Spatial IQ Test.
Available:
http://www.queendom.com/tests/iq/spatial_iq.html
(31.01.02).

Computers

Desks

Crowley, K., Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1997).
Strategy discovery as a competitive negotiation
between metacognitive and associative mechanisms.
Developmental Review, 17, 462-489.
Delaney, P. F., Reder, L. M., Staszewski, J. J., & Ritter,
F. E. (1998). The strategy-specific nature of
improvement: The power law applies by strategy
within task. Psychological Science, 9, 1-7.
Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1998). SCADS: A model
of children's strategy choices and strategy
discoveries. Psychological Science, 9(5), 405-410.

1. 0.5m behind each computer
2. 0.25m between each computer
3. 0.5m behind each study desk

4. Study desks side by side
5. 0.5m for gangways
6. Allow space around doors

0.5m
Study Area

0.25m

148 computers
54 desks

Computer Room

Appendix I: The higher goal task. Participants were required to plan the layout of the computer room and study area
using the items provided in the key.

