UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Importance of Starting Blurry: Simulating Improved Basic-Level Category Learning in
Infants Due to Weak Visual Acuity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mc6w9bf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
French, Robert M
Mermillod, Martial
Chauvin, Alan
et al.

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Importance of Starting Blurry:
Simulating Improved Basic-Level Category Learning in Infants
Due to Weak Visual Acuity
Robert M. French, Martial Mermillod,

Paul C. Quinn

Quantitative Psychology and Cognitive Science
Psychology, U. of Liège, Belgium
{rfrench, mmerm illod}@ulg.ac.be

Psychology, Washington & Jefferson College
Washington, PA, USA
pquinn@washjeff.edu

Alan Chauvin ,

Denis Mareschal

Psychology, University of Grenoble, France
chauvin@lis -inpg.fr

Psychology, Birkbeck College,
London, UK
d.mareschal@bbk.ac.uk

Abstract

a dog as a novel stimulus, whereas an infant
familiarized on the more variable category, Dog,
would tend to perceive a cat exemplar as simply
belonging to the already -familiar Dog category. This,
we claimed, explained the asymmetric levels of
attention that Quinn et al. (1993) had observed. To
further test this hypothesis, French et al. (2001)
artificially reversed the inclusion relationship by
carefully selecting breeds of dogs that were relatively
similar (i.e., low variance) and highly variable breeds
of cats. The connectionist computer model predicted,
and the experimental results with infants subsequently
confirmed (French et al., 2001), a reversal in the
categorization asymmetry observed by Quinn et al.
(1993).
However, one outstanding question remained.
Even though, intuitively, the variability of the Cat
category appears to be less than that of the Dog
category, how could one be sure of this in any
quantifiable way? Mareschal and French (1997) and
Mareschal et al. (2000) handled this as follows. They
originally selected ten features common to both cats
and dogs (head length, head width, eye separation, ear
separation, ear length, nose length, nose width, leg
length, vertical extent, and horizontal extent) and
measured the values associated with these features for
each of the photos of the 18 Cat exemplars and 18
Dog exemplars used in their experiments. Even
though this choice of features was based on
experimental data where infants typically look at the
head and face region of the stimulus when they
observe an animal (Quinn & Eimas, 1996; Spencer,
Quinn, Johnson, & Karmiloff -Smith, 1997), how
could we be sure that the set of perceptual features
that we had chosen corresponded to those features to
which the infants were actually attending? Further,
the claim was that at 3-4 months of age infants were
not making use of previously acquired perceptual
information (i.e., prior categorical knowledge of dogs
or cats or, for that matter, ears, noses, legs, etc.);
rather, they were simply relying on statistical pattern
recognition. Under these circumstances, using a set of
measurements of specific high -level perceptual

At the earliest ages of development, perceptual
maturation is generally considered as a functional
constraint to recognize or categorize the stimuli of the
environment. However, using a computer simulation
of retinal development using Gabor wavelets to
simulate the output of the V1 complex cells (Jones &
Palmer, 1987), we showed that reducing the range of
the spatial frequencies from the retinal map to V1
decreases the variance distribution within a category.
The consequence of this is to decrease the difference
between two exemplars of the same category, but to
increase the difference between exemplars from two
different categories. These results show that reduced
perceptual acuity produces an advantage for
differentiating basic-level categories. Finally, we
show that the present simulations using Gabor-filtered
input instead of feature-based input coding provide a
pattern of statistical data convergent with previously
published results in infant categorization (e.g.,
Mareschal & French, 1997; Mareschal et al, 2000;
French et al, 2001).

Background
This paper builds on earlier work by Quinn, Eimas,
and Rosenkrantz (1993), Mareschal and French
(1997), Mareschal, French, and Quinn (2000) and
French, Mermillod, Quinn, and Mareschal (2001).
Quinn et al. (1993) reported the following
categorization asymmetry. Infants familiarized with a
number of exemplars of cats show significantly
increased interest when subsequently tested on an
exemplar of a novel dog compared to a novel cat.
Howeve r, if the infants are first familiarized with
images of dogs and then tested on a novel dog and a
novel cat, there is no significant difference in interest
between the two test stimuli. Mareschal and French
(1997) and Mareschal et al. (2000) attributed this to
the greater variance of the “dog” stimuli set compared
to the “cat” stimuli set, the interpretation being that
the Dog category largely subsumed the Cat category.
Thus, an infant familiarized on the less variable
category, Cat, would, in general, view an exemplar of

features to characterize the input seemed, if not

low freq.

high freq.

spatial-frequency map

original image

Figure 1: Transformation of the original image into a spatial-frequency map

low freq.

high freq.

spatial-frequency map
Figure 2. Once we have the map of spatial frequencies, we “cover” this map with spatial-frequency ovals along
various orientations of the image. (Each of the ovals are normalized to have approximately the same energy.)
necessarily incorrect, at least somewhat inappropriate.
We therefore decided to attempt to examine this
problem in a more neurobiologically plausible
manner, one which sidestepped the difficulties
inherent in selecting and measuring various
perceptual features of the cat and dog stimuli. The
dog/cat stimuli used in the simulations reported in this
paper were those used in French et al. (2001), all of
which had been normalized to have approximately the
same size.

Organization of the present paper

We will attempt to answer two questions in the
present paper.
The first is: Can we avoid the use of explicit
feature coding in our autoencoder model of infant
categorization and replace this coding with Gaborfiltered input known to have a neurophysiological
counterpart in the infant visual system? We will
show that this can, indeed, be done successfully.
The second issue that we will address starts from
the well-known fact that the 3-4 month old infant
visual system is not sensitive to high spatial frequency
information (Banks & Salapatek, 1981; Dobson &
Teller, 1978). However, instead of this being a
disadvantage for the infant, we will show that,
somewhat counter-intuitively, this low visual acuity is

actually an advantage in learning basic-level
categories. The claim is that high spatial frequency
information in the input signal produces an
“information overload” in the infant cognitive system,
adding information that is not necessary for correct
categorization but that must, nonetheless, still be
processed. In other words, when the infant is
attempting to learn basic-level categories, high spatial
frequency information in the input is very much like
noise (Turkewitz & Kenny, 1982; Turkewitz &
Kenny, 1985) and, as such, the less there is, the better.

Spatial frequency maps
It is well known that different columns in V1 are
sensitive to different ranges of spatial frequencies (De
Valois & De Valois, 1988; Tootell, Silverman, & De
Valois, 1981). A scene reconstructed from only low
spatial frequency information (i.e., with fine details
blurred out) appears to us to be blurry. On the other
hand, an image composed of high spatial frequencies
would show only the fine details and would have no
global perspective (rather like seeing many individual
trees, but having no sense of the global entity, a
forest). In any case, in order to have an optimal
perception of a scene, we need the entire range of
spatial frequencies. Therefore, by means of a 2D

Fourier transform, we first decomposed each of the
images in the stimulus set into its component spatial
frequencies and plotted them on a spatial frequency
map (see Figure 1).
We then covered the frequency diagram with a
“flower-petal” arrangement of 26 oval spatial
frequency areas (“filters”) corresponding to various
orientations emanating from the center of the spatialfrequency diagram (Figure 2). Gabor functions were
used to simulate the 2D spatial and spectral structure
of simple cells in visual primary cortex. (Jones &
Palmer, 1987; Jones, Stepnowski, & Palmer, 1987).
The smaller petals near the center of the map
encompass the low frequencies, while the larger ovals
further from the center group toget her high spatial
frequencies. For each of these 26 filters, we calculate
an “energy” value based on the local energy spectra,
thereby simulating the activity of V1 complex cells
(Sakaï & Tanaka, 1999). This value determines the
importance of that particular filter. If there are many
spatial-frequency points that fall in a particular oval,
it is given a high energy value; few points in a
particular oval mean a low energy value.
Recall that in prior experiments and simulations
(Mareschal et al., 2000; French et al., 2001), the
dog/cat stimuli were characterized by a vector of ten
values, with each value corresponding to a particular
“high -level” feature. Now, instead of using ten
features, we characterize each of the images by a
vector of 26 values, each of which corresponds to the
weighting of a group of spatial frequencies along
various orientations of the image.

Visual acuity in infants
We know that the visual acuity in infants is not the
same as that of adults (Banks & Salapatek, 1981;
Dobson & Teller, 1978). In particular, infants do
not perceive high -spatial frequencies (i.e., fine
details), or perceive them only poorly. Certain authors
(Turkewitz & Kenny, 1982; Turkewitz & Kenny,
1985) have claimed that, rather than being a problem,
this reduced visual acuity may actually improve
perceptual efficiency by eliminating the “information
overload” caused by too many extraneous fine details
likely to overwhelm their cognitive system. An
implication is that basic-level category learning may
be facilitated by red uced visual acuity.
In both of the simulations below we removed
most of the high spatial frequencies from the input
given to the autoencoder network that was used in
Mareschal and French (1997), Mareschal et al.
(2000), and French et al. (2001). This was done by
weighting the contribution of each of the spatial
frequencies according to a normal distribution (with
the low spatial frequencies at the center) and cutting
off all spatial frequencies above 7.1 cycles/degree.
The spatial frequencies are Gaussian-filtered in such a
way that spatial frequencies above 3-4 cycles/degree
contribute very little to the input vector associated

with each image; the cut-off of 7.1 cycles/degree
completely removes the highest spatial frequencies.

Overview of the simulations
The 26-16-26 autoencoder network used in the two
simulations presented in this paper is based on a
simple encode-compare-adjust principle (Sokolov,
1963; Charlesworth, 1969; Cohen, 1973): When an
infant sees a perceptual stimulus, this stimulus is
encoded as an internal representation, which is
continually compared to the external stimulus and
adjusted to match it. As long as there is a significantly
large discrepancy between the internal representation
and the external stimulus, the infant continues to look
at the external stimulus. As this discrepancy falls, the
infant becomes less interested in the external
stimulus. In the autoencoder model, this is equivalent
to the network’s correctly generalizing on output to
match the network input (i.e., if the error on each of
the 26 outputs is less than 0.5). In particular, we will
use this criterion of generalization to measure the
network performance on the category-learning task in
Simulation 2.
In the simulations reported here we hope to
establish two claims – namely:
i) Simulation 1: that the use of a vector of 26
weighted spatial-frequency values, as described
above, does, indeed, produce autencoder
network results that are similar to those
produced by infants tested on the same images
and
ii) Simulation 2: that the reduced visual acuity
produced by largely eliminating high-spatial
frequency information from the input (i.e.,
“blurry” vision) actually significantly improves
the network’s ability to categorize the images
presented to it.

Simulation 1: The ade quacy of Gaborfiltered spatial-frequency input
In the first simulation we used the dog/cat stimulus
set used in French et al. (2001). These authors used an
encoding technique developed in Mareschal and
French (1997) and Mareschal et al. (2000) in which
10 features of the animal images were measured and
used as input to a 10-8-10 autoassociative network.
Using feature-based input to this autencoder, we
obtained categorization results that qualitatively
matched experimental data with infants. In contrast,
in the present simulation, we decomposed each image
into a vector of values consisting of the energy values
from each Gabor filter for a given orientation and
spatial frequency. These values correspond, at least
approximately, to what V1 neurons are known to
“perceive.”
Each value of the 26-element vector represents an
“energy” level associated with that particular spatial
frequency. For this simulation, frequencies above 3-4
cycles per degree of visual arc are given a very low

energy value (very high frequencies, i.e., those above
7.1 cycles/degree are simply removed), which means
that they contribute very little to the overall input
vector (i.e., they contribute very little to the overall
characterization of the image). The removal of this
high spatial-frequency information was done to
simulate the reduced visual acuity of 3-4 month old
infants (Courage & Adams, 1995).
The simulation reported here was done on a
standard 26-16-26 feedforward backpropagation
autoencoder network (learning rate: 0.1, momentum:
0.9, Fahlman offset: 0.1). The stimulus set and the
training regime was identical to that used in French et
al. (2001). (It is important to recall that in French et
al., 2001, the Dog stimuli were selected to be the less
varied category, while the exemplars making up the
Cat category were chosen to be considerably more
varied than the dogs.)
Networks were trained in batches of 2 patterns
for a maximum of 250 epochs. This simulated
familiarization with pairs of pictures for a fixed
period before being presented with a new
familiarization pair. All results were averaged over
100 runs.
novel cats
novel dogs
error

0.35
0.3
0.25

Cats

Dogs
Familiarization

Figure 3a: Network generalization errors on novel
cats/dog exemplars as a function of familiarization
category.
novel cats
novel dogs

attention

80
60
40
20
0
Cats

Dogs
Familiarization

Figure 3b: Corresponding results for 3-4 month old
infants
Figure 3a shows the model’s generalization error
to novel exemplars of cats and dogs as a function of
whether they were trained on cats (the broad
category) or on dogs (the narrow category). Networks
trained (i.e., familiarized) with cats show very little
difference in error (hence predict little difference in

infant looking times) when tested with a novel cat or a
dog. In contrast, networks originally trained with dogs
show significantly more error (F(1, 198)=13.4
p<0.0005) when tested with a novel cat than when
tested with a novel dog (suggesting a preference for
looking at a novel cat vs. a novel dog). Figure 3b
shows the corresponding attentional asymmetry in 3-4
month old infants, as reported in French et al. (2001).
These simulation results using Gabor-filtered
spatial frequency data allow us to conclude that the
use of this type of spatial frequency data produces a
reasonable fit to data. Most importantly, this result
allows us to circumvent the thorny issue of using a
particular set of “high -level” feature measurements
(ear length, eye separation, etc.) to characterize the
images used in the simulations.

Simulation 2. Improved categorization
with reduced visual acuity
Does the autoencoder model of infant categorization
(Mareschal & French, 1997; Mareschal et al., 2000)
show improved categorization performance (at least
on the dog/cat basic-level category images used in
French et al., 2001) when “reduced acuity” input is
used compared to “full acuity” input? The answer is
that categorization performance is, indeed, enhanced,
as we will show below.
To reiterate, the key idea of this simulation,
which at first blush seems rather counter-intuitive:
categorization performance for basic-level categories
(Rosch et al., 1976) should be better without high
spatial frequency information. This information is
rather akin to noise in the input since, while it does
indeed add information to the signal, it is not needed
for accurate basic-level categorization. This
extraneous information thus makes it more difficult
(for the infant or for the network) to make use of the
lower spatial frequency information that is, in fact,
essential to basic-level categorization.
We used the same network as in Simulation 1,
with an identical parameter set. We first ran the
network (100 independent runs) with input data that
contained all of the spatial-frequency information in
the images. We then ran the network again (100
independent runs) with input data from which most of
the high -spatial frequency information had been
removed, as described above. The network was
trained for 250 epochs on the training stimuli, as in
Simulation 1.
As can be seen in Figure 4, whether the network
was trained on Cats or Dogs, whether it was tested on
novel dogs or novel cats, its categorization
performance is significantly poorer when the input
signal also contains high spatial frequency
information compared to input with the high spatial
frequencies removed.
It is also important to note that in the reduced
visual acuity condition, we continue to see a
significant difference in error (corresponding to

% Correct
categorization

100

HF removed
All Frequencies

95
90
85
80
75
70
Cats:
Cats:
Dogs:
novel cat novel dog
novel cat

Dogs:
novel dog

Familiarization + test stimulus

Figure 4. More information is not always better
information, at least for basic-level categorization.
The addition of high spatial frequency information
makes correct basic-level categorization more
difficult for the network.
attention in infants) when the network is trained first
on dogs (in these experiments, the narrow category)
and then sees a new cat, compared to when the
network is first trained on cats (the broad category)
and then sees a new dog.

Basic-level categories and incrementally
increasing cognitive load

It is important to note that reduced acuity should
improve categorization learning in the case of basiclevel categories, but not subordinate-level categories.
To see why this would be true we need to refer to
Rosch et al.’s (1976) definition of “basic-level”
categories. This level of categorization is the level for
which the ratio of between-category variance to
within-category variance is the highest. In other
words, between-category variance is high with respect
to within-category variance, which is generally
relatively low. Within-category variance increases as
fine-grained details of category exemplars increase.
But these finer details are revealed only by the high
spatial frequencies. For this reason, a decreased visual
acuity that consists of partially or completely
removing high-spatial frequency information, will
decrease within-category variance and leave betweencategory variance largely unchanged. This would
improve the learning of basic level categories, but
would make it difficult, if not impossible, for 3-4
month old infants to learn categories that depend on
high spatial frequency information. This applies, in
particular, to subordinate-level categories.
Having already learned a certain number of
basic-level categories under conditions of reduced
visual acuity, when the high spatial frequency

apparatus does begin to come on-line at around 7 to 8
months of age (Kellman & Arterberry, 1998), the
infants will be in a better position to then do more
refined (i.e., subordinate-level) category learning.
Thus, rather than having to confront all of the
information associated with a particular category at
once, the limitations of visual acuity of the infants’
immature visual system first helps the infant to
distinguish broader categories. Once these have been
learned (or partially learned), then their
visual/cognitive apparatus is then ready to build on
this knowledge by incorporating the fine-grained
details, perceived through high spatial frequency
perception, that characterize subordinate expert -level
categorization. The overall results of the simulations
are thus consistent with a differentiation-driven view
of early category development (Quinn & Johnson,
1997, 2000).
Furthermore, these results are entirely consistent
with Archambault, Gosselin, & Schyns (2000), who
showed that basic-level categorization seems to be
more resistant to changes in viewing distances than
that of subordinate-level categorization. This is
because of the fact that as an object recedes from the
viewer, information about details (i.e., high spatial
frequency information) is lost, whereas low-spatial
frequency information is not.
Since basic-level
categorization is largely based on the latter, we would
expect more resistance to change of this type of
categorization
compared
to
subordinate-level
categorization, where features are, indeed, essential.

A Prediction of the Model
A simple prediction emerges from these results. By
manipulating the amount of high-frequency
information in test images, it should be possible to
vary infants’ responses to these items after
familiarization on a standard set of basic-level
categories. So, for example, consider the Dog/Cat
stimuli from the experiment by Quinn et al. (1993), in
which the Dog category largely subsumes the Cat
category. Under normal circumstances when infants
are familiarized with cats, then shown a novel dog
and a novel cat, they devote significantly more
attention to the novel dog than to the cat. But were we
to choose a novel dog and a novel cat whose
differences were based largely on high spatial
frequency information, we would expect the
previously observed novelty preference to disappear,
even if for us, adults, the two animals were quite
different, one clearly being a dog, the other, clearly a
cat.

Conclusion
In an extension of work done by Mareschal & French
(1997), Mareschal et al. (2000) and French et al.
(2001), we have been able to show that there is no
need to use feature-based characterizations of the
stimuli presented to the encoder network.
Autoencoder results using Gabor-filtered input

corresponding approximately to the set of frequencies
that the human visual system is known to use also
produce a good approximation to categorization
results in infants. We have also modeled a rather
counter-intuitive learning advantage for basic-level
categories that arises from reduced acuity input.
Finally, based on the results of our autoencoder model
of infant categorization and on the results we obtained
using reduced acuity input, we have suggested
experiments that might be performed on infants to
further examine the validity of this model.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by Grant HPRN-CT 2000-00065 from the European Commission to R.
French, ESRC (UK) Grant R000239112 to D.
Mareschal, and by Grant BCS-0093600 from the
National Science Foundation to P. C. Quinn.

References

Archambault, A., Gosselin, F., & Schyns, P. (2000).
A natural bias for the basic level? Proceedings of
the 22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, NJ:LEA, 585-590.
Banks, M.S., & Salapatek, P. (1981). Infant pattern
vision: A new approach based on the contrast
sensitivity function. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 31, 1-45.
Charlesworth, W. R. (1969). The role of surprise in
cognitive development. In D. Elkind & J. Flavell
(Eds.), Studies in cognitive development. Essays
in honor of Jean Paiget, pp. 257 -314, Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Cohen, L. B. (1973). A two-process model of infant
visual attention. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 19,
157-180.
Courage M.L., Adams R.J. (1995). Infant peripheral
vision: the development of monocular visual
acuity in the first 3 months of postnatal life. Vision
research, 36, 1207-1215.
De Valois, R.L., De Valois K.K. (1988). Spatial
Vision. Oxford University Press. New York.
Dobson, V., & Teller, D. Y. (1978). Visual acuity in
human infants: A review and comparison of
behavioral and electrophysiological studies. Vision
Research, 18, 1469-1483.
French R. M., Mermillod M., Quinn P. C. &
Mareschal D. (2001). Reversing category
exclusivities in infant perceptual categorization:
simulations and data. Proceedings of the 23th
Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference,
LEA, 307-312.
Jones, J.P. & Palmer L.A. (1987). The twodimensional spatial structure of simple receptive
fields in cat striate cortex. J Neurophysiol. 58(6),
1187-211.
Jones, J.P., Stepnoski A. & Palmer L.A. (1987). The
two-dimensional spectral structure of simple

receptive fields in cat striate cortex. J
Neurophysiol. 58(6): p. 1212-32.
Kellman, P. J., & Arterberry, M. E. (1998). The
cradle of knowledge: Development of perception
in infancy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mareschal, D., & French, R. M. (1997). A
connectionist account of interference effects in
early infant memory and categorization. In
Proceedings of the nineteenth annual conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 484 -489).
London: Erlbaum.
Mareschal, D., French, R., & Quinn, P. (2000). A
connectionist account of asymmetric category
learning in early infancy. Developmental
Psychology, 36, 635-645.
Quinn, P. C. & Johnson (2000). Global before basic
object categorization in connectionist networks
and 2 month-old infants. Infancy, 1(1), 31-46.
Quinn, P. C., & Eimas, P. D. (1996). Perceptual cues
that permit categorical differentiation of animal
species by infants. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 63, 189-211.
Quinn, P. C., & Johnson, M. H. (1997). The
emergence of perceptual category representations
in young infants: A connectionist analysis. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 66, 236-263.
Quinn, P., Eimas, P., & Rosenkrantz, S. (1993).
Evidence for representations of perceptually
similar natural cat egories by 3- and 4-month-old
infants. Perception, 22, 463-475.
Rosch E., Mervis C.B., Gray D.G., Johnson D.M. &
Boyes -Braem P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Sakaï K. & Tanaka S. (1999). Spatial pooling in the
second-order spatial structure of cortical complex
cells. Vision Research, 40, 855-871.
Solokov, E. N. (1963). Perception and the
conditioned reflex. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Spencer, J., Quinn, P. C., Johnson, M. H., &
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1997). Heads you win, tails
you lose: Evidence for young infants categorizing
mammals by head and facial attributes (Special
Issue:
Perceptual
Development).
Early
Development and Parenting, 6, 113 -126.
Tootell, R. B., Silverman, M. S., De Valois, R. L.
(1981). Spatial frequency columns in primary
visual cortex, Science, 214, 813-815.
Turkewitz G., Kenny P. A. (1982). Limitations on
input as a basis for neural organization and
perceptual development: a preliminary theoretical
statement Developmental Psychobiology, 15(4),
357-368.
Turkewitz G., Kenny P. A. (1985). The role of
developmental limitations of sensory input on
sensory/perceptual organization. Journal of
Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics: JDBP,
6(5), 302-306.

