UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Diagrams and Diagrammatic Affordances in Analogy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6t4808sk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Craig, David Latch
Nersessian, Nancy J
Catrambone, Richard

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Diagrams and Diagrammatic Affordances in Analogy
David Latch Craig (david.craig@arch.gatech.edu)
College of Architecture, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0155 USA

Nancy J. Nersessian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280 USA

Richard Catrambone (rc7@prism.gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA

Abstract
We argue that problem solvers can, in certain cases,
solve target problems by transforming perceptual
simulations of solutions to analogous source problems.
We further argue that source diagrams may facilitate the
process, but only if they convey physical affordances
consistent with the necessary transformations. We
conducted an exploratory study in which participants
were asked to solve a source and a target problem. We
identified two properties of extemporaneously drawn
source diagrams – view and configuration – that were
highly correlated with the production of analogous
solutions to the target problem. We speculated that view
and configuration influenced the ease with which certain
simulated transformations were performed. The results
of two additional experiments in which the view and
configuration of source diagrams were independently
controlled further support the claim.

Introduction
In this paper we explore the functioning of diagrams
in analogical problem solving. Specifically, we
investigate how contextual aspects of diagrams – things
ranging from depicted physical details to intrinsic
properties like perspective, orientation and scale –
might afford the kind of simulated physical
transformations needed to convert a solution to one
problem into a solution to another. In the next two
sections we briefly outline our claims concerning
diagrams, simulations and affordances, and how they
might relate to analogy. In the remaining sections we
present the findings of three experiments designed to
both illustrate and test those claims.

Diagrams, Simulations and Affordances
One way external diagrams can function in problem
solving is by scaffolding perceptual, or analog,
simulations in the perceptual and motor cortices of the
brain (Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 1997). Perceptual
simulations have been found to facilitate spatial
reasoning (e.g., Kosslyn, 1994) as well as various forms
of conceptual reasoning (e.g., Barsalou, Solomon &
Wu, 1999; Glenberg & Robertson, 2000; Stanfield &

Zwaan, 2001; Fincher-Keifer, 2001). They could
potentially benefit problem solving by facilitating the
testing and general exploration of candidate solutions.
We argue that the way a diagram is drawn affects not
only what is perceptually simulated but also how the
resulting simulation can be perceptually transformed. A
long history of findings, dating back to Cooper and
Shepard’s (1973) chronometric studies of mental
rotation, support the basic premise that simulations are
transformed through simulated motor activity. More
recently, researchers have found that simulated
transformations are motorically structured and
constrained. The ease with which imagined body parts
are mentally rotated, for example, parallels the ease
with which those parts can be rotated in actuality
(Parsons, 1987). In addition, concurrent motor activity
consistent with simulated transformations of imagined
objects tends to make those transformations faster and
more accurate, while inconsistent activities produce
interference (Wexler, Kosslyn & Berthoz, 1998).
Generally speaking, simulated transformations appear
to be constrained in the same way real interaction with
the physical world is constrained. Insofar as contextual
aspects of diagrams would help determine the physical
properties of simulated objects (e.g., texture, shape,
mass, etc.) and the context in which they are perceived
(e.g., perspective, orientation, scale, etc.), those aspects
act as transformational affordances by facilitating
certain simulated transformations and inhibiting others.
A finding that illustrates the idea that diagrams
convey transformational affordances comes from a
study by Schwartz and Black (1996) in which people
were shown a diagram of two gears meshed together,
one larger than the other, and asked whether two marks,
one on the circumference of each gear, would
eventually line up if the gears were rotated. By
comparing response times against the initial angular
disparity of the marks, Schwartz and Black were able to
identify different strategies used to complete the task,
one of which appeared to be perceptually simulating the
two gears rotating together. Ultimately, Schwartz and
Black were able to constrain the strategy people used

by manipulating the gear diagrams. In particular they
found that the simulated-rotation strategy was most
likely to be used when the contacting surfaces of the
gears were depicted as rough rather than smooth, as if
roughness made it easier to imagine one gear driving
the other. In this case a physical property depicted in
the diagram appears to have affected the ease with
which associated perceptual simulations were
subsequently transformed.

Analogical Problem Solving
In analogical problem solving, problem solvers start
with a solved “source” problem that is similar in some
way to an unsolved “target” problem. If a problem
solver is aware that the two are related, he or she will
need to map the source problem onto the target, thus
identifying which problem elements and constraints are
identical, which are comparable, and which are
irrelevant. Ideally, a mapping will be formed that
allows the problem solver to transfer additional aspects
of the source to the target, producing a target solution.
Although most accounts of analogy are based on
perceptually neutral representations (e.g., Gentner,
1983; Gick and Holyoak, 1983), we argue that people
can, in certain situations, perceptually simulate source
solutions and transform the simulations into solutions to
target problems. Following the hypothesis presented in
the previous section, we further argue that affordances
associated with source diagrams might influence the
likelihood that an analogical solution is produced by
constraining what transformations can be executed.

Experiment 1
To explore how diagrams influence analogical
problem solving we devised an open-ended experiment
in which participants were given two superficially
dissimilar but analogous problems and asked to 1)
consider possible links between them, 2) list whatever
similarities they found, and 3) try to solve them. The
first problem was written to be easier than the second,
the hope being that participants would solve it and thus
have a source they could apply to the second problem.
No independent variables were controlled. Instead,
variations in solutions to the easier problem – in
particular variations in the contextual aspects of
spontaneously produced sketches – were analyzed after
the fact. Correlations between various contextual
properties and the production of analogous solutions to
the harder problem were then sought.
The easier of the two problems – the one written to
be a potential source for the harder problem – involved
designing a door system for a laboratory that would
give workers free access to the lab space while keeping
the air outside the lab from contaminating the air inside.
It was assumed that most participants would come up
with a redundant-door solution, one that involved either
two sets of doors on either side of a vestibule or a
revolving door. The harder problem – the one written to

be the target – involved designing a pole that suspended
a device several feet off the side of a truck. The pole
was described as sticking out in such a way that it ran
into signposts on the side the of the road (Figure 1). The
problem was to design the pole so that it could pass
through signposts at a right angle. Ideally, if
participants came up with a redundant-door solution to
the door problem they would use it to come up with a
redundant-pole solution to the pole problem. They
might, for example, specify two poles, one that moved
out of the way while the other stayed in place and vice
versa.
To form an analogy between the door problem and
the pole problem requires overcoming not only
superficial differences (e.g., differences in objects and
object attributes) but also a key structural difference in
their respective perceptual contexts. In the door
problem, passing through the door is natural; the
problem is that it lets bad air in and good air out. In the
pole problem, by contrast, passing one object through
the other is not natural, and the problem is to make it
so. Furthermore, the pole problem involves modifying
the thing in motion, while the door problem involves
modifying the thing being passed through. Thus, to map
a simulated redundant-door solution onto the pole
problem ultimately requires a shift in one’s physical
frame of reference. One must either 1) imagine that the
sign post in the pole problem is the lab worker in the
door problem, or 2) imagine that the lab boundary in
the door problem is the pole in the pole problem. The
latter means imagining an otherwise rooted lab
boundary in motion, while the former means imagining
an otherwise rooted sign post in motion.

Figure 1 The pole problem: Participants are asked to
design a pole that can pass through a signpost.
Transforming the motional context of a simulated
redundant-door solution may not be easy. Such a shift
might depend on what sort of transformational
affordances are present, which might, in turn, depend
on the contextual properties of an external diagram. We
argue that a diagram of a redundant-door solution
might, by scaffolding a perceptual simulation, facilitate
the use of such a solution in solving the pole problem,
but only if the contextual properties of the diagram
afford the shift in motional context required to align the
two problems.
Materials and Procedure
The experiment was administered in booklet form. The
door problem was printed at the top of the first page

and the pole problem just below it. Instructions on the
first page asked participants to write down as many
similarities between the two problems as they could in
4 minutes. The second page of the booklet was divided
vertically, the top containing instructions asking
participants to write down a solution to the door
problem, the bottom containing instructions asking
participants to write down a solution to the pole
problem. The instructions specified that they would
have 5 minutes total. As participants were led through
the booklet they were reminded to carefully read the
instructions before starting each task. When they turned
to the second page they were verbally told they could
draw pictures if it helped them articulate their solutions.
Participants
Two hundred and nine participants were recruited from
an introductory psychology class at Georgia Tech to
participate in exchange for class credit. The experiment
was administered in one large group during a regularly
scheduled class session.
Results and Discussion
We first analyzed similarities participants reported prior
to solving the problems. Most participants reported
superficial similarities, such as that both problems
involved engineers. A few also reported highly abstract
similarities, such as that both problems involved an
obstacle that prevented a device from working. More
interestingly, some participants reported that both
problems involved something passing through a solid
barrier. Although the requirement that something pass
through a barrier is clearly stated in the pole problem, it
is not stated at all in the door problem. The objective in
the door problem is, in fact, opposite that of the pole
problem: Something with a penetrable (as opposed to
solid) boundary needs to be redesigned to prevent
something from getting through (as opposed to allow
something through). Despite the implicit nature of the
pass-through similarity, 60 of the 209 participants
(29%) reported it.
We next analyzed solutions produced for the two
problems. Solutions to the door problem were classified
as either redundant-door solutions or non-redundantdoor solutions, the former being those that included one
or more of the following: 1) a verbal reference to two
doorways, 2) a verbal reference to an airlock, 3) a
verbal reference to a revolving door, 4) a diagram
showing two doorways, 5) a diagram showing an
airlock, or 6) a diagram showing a revolving door. As
expected most participants (184, or 88%) produced
some kind of redundant-door solution.
Fewer students, by contrast, were successful in
solving the pole problem. Solutions to the pole problem
were first classified as either analogous to the door
problem or non-analogous. Analogous solutions were
those that made use of redundancy. Specifically, a
solution was deemed analogous if one part remained in
place while another part moved out of the way and vice

versa. Such solutions included those with multiple
latches (with one latch opening at a time), multiple
poles (with one pole retracting at a time), or rotating
devices (with one end swinging out of the way as the
other end swung into place). Of the 209 participants, 33
(16%) produced analogous solutions to the pole
problem. An example of an analogous solution is
shown alongside a non-analogous solution in Figure 2
Not surprisingly, participants were more likely to
generate an analogous solution to the pole problem if
they generated a redundant-door solution to the door
problem. Of the 184 participants who generated
redundant-door solutions, 31 (17%) produced
analogous solutions to the pole problem, while only 2
of the other 25 participants (8%) produced them.
Analogous solutions to the pole problem were also
correlated with the reporting of pass-through
similarities. Of the 60 participants who reported passthrough similarities, 17 (28%) produced analogous
solutions to the pole problem, compared to 16 of the
149 (11%) who did not.

Figure 2 A solution to the pole problem that is
analogous to a redundant-door solution to the door
problem (left) and one that is not (right).
The remaining analyses concern the diagrams
participants drew to illustrate their solutions to the door
problem. Of the 184 participants who produced
redundant-door solutions, 131 drew at least one
diagram. Diagrams alone were not correlated with
analogous solutions to the pole problem. Of the 131
who drew diagrams, 22 (17%) produced analogous
solutions to the pole problem, while 9 of the remaining
53 participants (17%) also produced them. This is not
inconsistent with the argument made earlier about the
role of diagrams in problem solving. Of interest is not
whether diagrams in general help but whether certain
types of diagrams are more highly correlated with the
production of analogous solution than others.
To roughly classify diagrams according to
transformational affordances we looked at two diagram
properties: view and configuration. View was coded as
either plan (viewed from above), elevation (viewed
from the side), perspective, or ambiguous (either plan
or elevation). Configuration was more varied. After
reviewing all redundant-door diagrams, 17 distinct
configuration types were identified based on the spaces
that were depicted and their organization. From these
17 types, two higher-level categories were defined: 1)
single-space diagrams, or those in which the only space

depicted was the space between the redundant doors
and 2) multiple-space diagrams, or those in which
additional spaces were depicted. A space, in this case,
was defined as any convex area bounded by at least
three walls. An example of each type is shown in
Figure 3.

Figure 3 A multiple-space diagram of a redundant-door
solution (left) and a single-space diagram (right).
Participants who drew single-space diagrams were
significantly more likely to produce analogous solutions
to the pole problem than those who drew multiple-space
diagrams. Of the 131 participants drawing redundantdoor diagrams 26 drew single-space diagrams, and of
those 12 (46%) produced analogous solutions to the
pole problem. By contrast, only 10 of the 105 (10%)
participants who drew multiple-space diagrams
produced analogous solutions. The percentage of
participants who produced analogous solutions to the
pole problem in each of the two main configuration
types is listed in Table 1.
Participants who drew diagrams in plan were also
much more likely to produce analogous solutions to the
pole problem than those who drew diagrams from other
views. Of the 131 participants who drew redundantdoor diagrams, 58 drew diagrams in plan, 14 (24%) of
whom went on to produce an analogous solution to the
pole problem. Of the 73 who drew redundant-door
diagrams from other views, only 8 (11%) produced
analogous solutions. The percentage of participants
who produced analogous solutions to the pole problem
in each view is listed in Table 2.
Table 1 Number of redundant-door diagrams drawn in
each configuration type, and the percentage of those
followed by an analogous solution to the pole problem.
Single-space
Multiple-space
N

N
26
105
131

Analogous solutions
46%
10%
17%

Table 2 Number of redundant-door diagrams drawn in
each view, and the percentage of those followed by an
analogous solution to the pole problem.
Plan
Elevation
Perspective
Ambiguous
N

N
58
42
22
9
131

Analogous solutions
24%
10%
9%
22%
17%

There are at least two explanations for why
participants were less likely to produce analogous
solutions to the pole problem when drawing multiplespace diagrams than when drawing single-space
diagrams. One is that additional spaces meant that there
were additional unalignable features in the source that
could have interfered with a successful mapping.
Although this possibility is hard to assess, it should be
noted that there were a number of other randomly
distributed unalignable features in the diagrams that
could have countervailed those associated with multiple
spaces.
A second explanation, and one that is more in line
with our original hypothesis, is that additional spaces
made it more difficult to transform a perceptual
simulation of a redundant-door solution into a
perceptual simulation of a redundant-pole solution. This
explanation rests on three assumptions: first, that the
diagrams scaffolded simulations of physical objects
with particular transformational affordances; second,
that using a redundant-door solution to solve the pole
problem required imagining the door system in motion;
and third, that a simulated door system might have been
rooted via a kinesthetic sense of inertia that would
make it difficult to imagine motion. If so, whether a
redundant-door diagram facilitated the production of an
analogy would have depended on the diagram’s
affordances. Specifically, the depiction of additional
spaces could have caused the door system to seem more
physically encumbered and hence harder to simulate in
motion as required for a successful mapping.
The fact that view was also correlated with the
production of analogous solutions to the pole problem
further supports the idea that diagrams both scaffolded
and constrained perceptual simulations. Participants, for
example, would have likely been able to visualize doors
swinging open more easily in plan than in other views
(the motion being orthogonal to such a view), making it
easier to simulate the actions needed to solve the pole
problem. In addition, plan-view simulations may have
been more easily transformed because they were not
constrained by gravitational affordances, gravity being
orthogonal to spatial relations depicted in plan view
(Franklin and Tversky, 1990; Rock, 1973). The idea
that view and configuration may have influenced
perceptually simulated transformations is, of course,
speculative. The next two experiments attempt to
provide more support for the claim.

Experiment 2
One of the findings from Experiment 1 was that the
configuration of source diagrams was correlated with
the production of analogous solutions to a target
problem. We argued that the diagrams scaffolded
perceptual simulations, which could have then been
transformed to fit the physical context of the target
problem if the diagrams afforded those transformations.

Although Experiment 1 helped illustrate this argument,
the analysis was primarily post hoc. The experiment
discussed in this section is designed to test the claim in
a more controlled way.
A two-condition variation of Experiment 1 was
designed. Participants in both conditions were given the
door problem with a redundant-door solution already
specified and a diagram illustrating it. They were then
given the pole problem and asked to solve it, along with
the hint that the solution to the door problem might help
them. The independent variable was the type of
diagram shown with the door problem, while the
dependent variable was the type of solution participants
produced for the pole problem.
In one condition (the afforded condition) participants
were given a redundant-door diagram showing a door
vestibule bisecting a wall bounding the lab. In the other
condition (the unafforded condition) participants were
given a diagram showing the same door vestibule
abutting the wall (Figure 4). The number and type of
elements were the same in both diagrams, ensuring that
differences in performance could not be attributed to
differences in the number or type of unalignable
objects. Although both diagrams are single-space
configurations according to the coding scheme used in
Experiment 1, they differ in their physical affordances,
particularly in how the vestibule is perceived in relation
to the wall. In the afforded condition, the wall and the
vestibule are meant to be perceived as overlapping,
following the Gestalt law of continuation. In the
unafforded condition, by contrast, the vestibule is
meant to be seen as resting up against, or attached to,
the wall. The diagram in the unafforded condition
should thus be harder to imagine moving because it is
encumbered by (or anchored to) the lab space, in turn
making it harder to align with the pole problem.
Following this reasoning, we predicted that participants
in the unafforded condition would be less likely to
produce an analogous solution to the pole problem than
those in the afforded condition.

Figure 4 Diagrams used in the afforded condition (left)
and the unafforded condition (right) of Experiment 2.

Materials and Procedure
The door problem and the pole problem used in
Experiment 1 were printed on a single sheet of paper.
Just below the door problem was written, “Have
workers enter a vestibule space before entering the lab,”
along with one of the two diagrams shown in Figure 4,

depending on the condition. Instructions printed at the
top of the page and just below the two problems asked
participants to carefully read them and write down a
solution to the second one. Participants were given 7
minutes to complete the task.
Participants
Twenty-eight students enrolled in undergraduate
psychology classes at Georgia Tech participated in
groups of 2 to 6 each, 14 in the afforded condition and
14 in the unafforded condition. All received class credit
for participating.
Results and Discussion
Solutions to the pole problem were categorized as either
analogous or non-analogous to the door problem using
the criteria established in Experiment 1. Of the 14
participants in the afforded condition, 10 (71%)
produced analogous solutions, compared to only 5 of 14
participants (36%) in the unafforded condition. As
predicted, configuration was a significant predictor of
whether participants produced analogous solutions
(χ2=3.82, p<.05). The results are shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Participants producing analogous solutions to
the pole problem in Experiment 2.
Afforded diagram
Unafforded diagram

Analogous solutions
71%
36%

N
14
14

Experiment 3
Another notable finding in Experiment 1 was that
participants who drew plan diagrams were more likely
than those who drew diagrams from other views to
produce analogous solutions to the pole problem. We
argued that it was easier to perceptually simulate doors
opening in plan and hence easier to simulate the action
required to solve the pole problem. We also argued that
it might be easier to transform a simulation of a
redundant-door solution if the simulation was not
perceptually structured in relation to gravity, or, in
other words, if all spatial relations were orthogonal to
gravity. To test this claim, we repeated Experiment 2
with two new redundant-door diagrams: one drawn
from the side (unafforded condition) and one drawn
from above (afforded condition) (Figure 5). Consistent
with the arguments put forth in Experiment 1, we
predicted that participants in the afforded condition
would be more likely to produce an analogous solution
to the pole problem.

Figure 5 Diagrams used in the afforded condition (left)
and unafforded condition (right) of Experiment 3.

Materials and Procedure
The same materials and procedure used in Experiment 2
were used except that the diagrams accompanying the
redundant-door solution were either elevation or plan
diagrams, depending on the condition (Figure 5).
Participants
Twenty-two students enrolled in undergraduate
psychology classes at Georgia Tech participated in
groups of 2 to 6 each, 11 in the afforded condition and
11 in the unafforded condition. All received class credit
for participating.
Results and Discussion
Solutions to the pole problem were categorized as either
analogous or non-analogous to the door problem, using
the criteria established in Experiment 1. Of the 11
participants in the afforded condition, 7 (64%)
produced analogous solutions, compared to only 2 of
the 11 participants (18%) in the unafforded condition.
Consistent with our prediction, diagram view was thus
a significant predictor of whether participants produced
analogous solutions (χ2=5.43, p<.05). The results are
shown in Table 4.
Table 4 Participants producing analogous solutions to
the pole problem in Experiment 3.
Afforded diagram
Unafforded diagram

Analogous solutions
64%
18%

N
11
11

Conclusions
The studies reported here begin to shed light on what
might make a diagram useful for constructing an
analogy. They results strongly suggest that aspects of
diagrams like view and configuration can influence the
ease with which diagrammed solutions can be used to
solve analogous problems, possibly by regulating
simulated transformations. The studies also lend
support to the more general idea that analogies can be
constructed via perceptual simulations, as opposed to
predicate-based, or otherwise perceptually neutral,
representations. And finally, although just a start, the
results reported here help illustrate an expanded role for
drawings as cognitive tools. Drawings might now be
seen not only as a means for recording ideas for future
reference but also as a means for exploring the
transformational affordances of problem spaces in
search for those that will ultimately lead to more
promising solution paths. Problem solvers might, from
this point of view, actually learn to manipulate problem
spaces via diagrammatic affordances just as they might
learn to navigate problem spaces using conventional
reasoning strategies.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Barsalou, L. W., Solomon, K. O., & Wu, L. L. (1999).
Perceptual simulation in conceptual tasks. In M. K.
Hiraga, C. Sinha, & S. Wilcox (Eds.), Cultural,
typological, and psychological perspectives in
cognitive linguistics: The proceedings of the 4th
conference of the International Cognitive Linguistics
Association, (209-228). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Cooper, L. A., & Shepard, R. N. (1973). The time
required to prepare for a rotated stimulus. Memory &
Cognition, 1, 246-250.
Fincher-Kiefer, R. (2001). Perceptual components of
situation models. Memory & Cognition, 29, 336-343.
Franklin, N., & Tversky, B. (1990). Searching imagined
environments. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 119, 63-76.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155170.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema
induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 1-19.
Glenberg, A. M., & Robertson, D. A. (2000). Symbol
grounding and meaning: A comparison of highdimensional and embodied theories of meaning.
Journal of Memory & Language, 43, 379-401.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994) Image and Brain. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Parsons, L. M. (1987). Imagined spatial transformation
of one’s body. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 116, 172-191.
Rock, I. (1973). Orientation and Form. New York:
Academic Press.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996). Analog imagery
in mental model reasoning: Depictive models.
Cognitive Psychology, 30, 154-219.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on
picture recognition. Psychological Science, 121, 153156.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M., & Berthoz, A. (1998).
Motor processes in mental rotation. Cognition, 68,
77-94.

