UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thinking by Doing? Epistemic Actions in the Tower of Hanoi

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jq2t0sz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Neth, Hansjörg
Payne, Stephen J

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thinking by Doing?
Epistemic Actions in the Tower of Hanoi
Hansjörg Neth (NethH@Cardiff.ac.uk)
Stephen J. Payne (PayneS@Cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University
Cardiff CF10 3YG, Wales, United Kingdom

Abstract
This article explores the concept of epistemic actions in
the Tower of Hanoi (ToH) problem. Epistemic actions
(Kirsh & Maglio, 1994) are actions that do not traverse
the problem space toward the goal but facilitate subsequent problem solving by changing the actor’s cognitive state. We report an experiment in which people repeatedly solve ToH tasks. An instructional manipulation
asked participants to minimize moves either trial by trial
or only on the last three of six trials. This manipulation
did not have the predicted effect on the trial-by-trial move
counts. A second, device manipulation provided some
participants with an “exploratory mode” in which move
sequences could be tried then undone without affecting
the criterion move count. Participants effectively used
this mode to reduce moves on each trial, but there was no
clear evidence that they used it to learn about the problem
across trials. We conclude that there is strong evidence
for one sub-type of epistemic action (acting-to-plan) but
no evidence for a second sub-type (acting-to-learn).

Introduction
How do we learn to solve a problem? The most popular view within the Cognitive Science community is that
we do so by solving the problem. Anzai and Simon’s
(1979) theory of ‘learning by doing’ marks a major
breakthrough in research on learning through problem
solving. They proposed an adaptive production system
which mirrored the strategy transformations of a human
participant as she solved the Tower of Hanoi (ToH) problem, and in so doing provided the impetus for many subsequent theories of the mechanisms by which problem
solving leads to learning (e.g. Klahr, Langley & Neches,
1987).
All learning-by-doing accounts share the assumption
that learning about a particular problem occurs as an automatic by-product of problem solving activity. However, in many problem solving situations learning may be
more deliberate than the learning-by-doing account implies. We suggest that problem solvers may sometimes
orient themselves to learning goals rather than solution
goals (O’Hara & Payne, 1998; Trudel & Payne, 1995).
In relation to the ToH task, this position is encouraged
by VanLehn’s (1991) re-analysis of the original Anzai &
Simon (1979) protocol, in which he notes that the participant was “acting like a scientist” (p. 16) and repeatedly
suspended her problem solving activity to acquire new
strategic knowledge.

Further general support for a deliberate learning mode
nested within problem solving activity can be derived
from the work of Kirsh and colleagues (1995, Kirsh
& Maglio, 1994), who have explored a distinction between goal-directed pragmatic actions and epistemic actions whose primary purpose is to improve cognition by
changing an agent’s computational state. Although epistemic actions are not immediately goal-directed, they
may improve subsequent performance through their cognitive effects.
The primary goal of this article is to seek experimental evidence for the use of epistemic actions in problem
solving with the ToH puzzle. Identifying epistemic actions in ordinary problem solving activity is difficult, because they are only distinguished by their cognitive motivations and consequences rather than directly observable
characteristics (and not all actions that do not successfully move toward the goal are epistemic!). We use two
manipulations that may allow participants to utilise epistemic actions, and at the same time facilitate their detection. The first manipulation is instructional: participants
were asked either to optimize their performance on every
problem solving trial, or on trials 4, 5 and 6 of a series of
six repeated problems. We hypothesize that delaying the
enforcement of the performance criterion will encourage a learning orientation, and the use of epistemic actions, during the early first trials. The second manipulation is to provide device support that enables participants
to separate pragmatic from epistemic actions. Thus, our
computer-based version of ToH allowed participants to
switch into an “exploratory mode” in which they could
make move sequences that were later undone and were
not counted towards the performance criterion.
These twin manipulations allow us to refine Kirsh’s
formulation of pragmatic and epistemic actions by distinguishing between two kinds of epistemic action: those
that have only immediate within-problem effects (actingto-plan) and those that have longer-term cognitive consequences (acting-to-learn). If the exploratory mode is
used merely as an external support for look-ahead or
planning, motivated by questions such as ‘Is this a good
sequence of moves?’, we would regard such usage as
acting-to-plan. On the other hand, if additional actions
on earlier trials are shown to lead to better problem solving on later trials we would have evidence for acting-tolearn.

To anticipate our conclusions, we find strong support
for acting-to-plan, but no decisive support for acting-tolearn.

Method
Participants
Forty-four Psychology undergraduates (with a mean age
of 20.7 years) took part in the experiment to receive
course credit. Participation was restricted to first year
undergraduate students who reported no prior exposure
to the task. All participants were familiar with graphical
user interfaces and did not suffer from any perceptual or
cognitive impairments.

Apparatus
The experiment used a graphical software version of the
ToH problem which was programmed in Visual Basic 6
and displayed on a 17” screen. A disk could be transferred between towers by indicating its source and target locations using a drag-and-drop procedure. In case
of an illegal move there was an auditory warning signal
and the selected disk slid back to its original position. A
counter showing the current number of pragmatic moves
was displayed in the top right hand corner of the screen.

Materials
Participants had to solve a sequence of 5-disk ToH puzzles in the standard tower-to-tower version. To prevent
improvements due to superficial rote memorization we
used six simple isomorphs, which were created by systematically switching the source and target towers.

Design
As we wanted to test participants’ spontaneous use of
epistemic actions we did not want to specifically encourage them to explore the problem, but rather provide subtle opportunities that may be used or ignored.
The instructional manipulation consisted of two levels. Participants were either instructed to optimize their
performance (i.e., minimize the number of pragmatic
moves needed to solve the puzzle) on each of several
problems, or asked to optimize their performance on the
last three of six problems. Hence, whereas the first group
of participants was implicitly discouraged from using
epistemic actions by the instruction to be performance
oriented throughout an unspecified number of trials, the
second group was presented with an opportunity to be
learning oriented in the first three of six trials.
The second experimental manipulation consisted in
withholding or providing device-support for epistemic
actions. Two different versions of the device were distinguished:
In the standard pragmatic moves only condition, each
move of a disk on the screen counted towards the performance criterion of minimizing the number of (pragmatic)
moves.

1.
2.
3.
4.

Device-support
pragmatic mode only
pragmatic mode only
pragmatic+epistemic mode
pragmatic+epistemic mode

Instruction
‘minimize on trials 1–6’
‘minimize on trials 4–6’
‘minimize on trials 1–6’
‘minimize on trials 4–6’

Table 1: Overview of the two experimental factors and
four groups.

In a second pragmatic plus epistemic moves condition
two different device modes were introduced to the participants. Whilst having to solve the puzzle in so-called
“solution mode”, participants had the option to switch
into an “exploration mode” at any point by pressing and
holding down the Shift key. Whereas in both modes disks
could be moved in an identical fashion, moves made
in exploration mode were not added towards the total
performance score and always reversed when switching
back into “solution mode” by releasing the Shift key.
Note that the specific design of exporatory mode addresses the difficulty of detecting epistemic moves by effectively creating an operational definition: Since participants are aware of the mandatory reversal of all moves
made in exploratory mode, entering the mode signals the
use of epistemic moves.
One way of characterizing both the instructional and
device manipulation is that they do not prevent learning
by doing, but provide additional opportunities for learning by not solving the puzzle. A combination of both experimental factors yielded the four experimental groups
shown in Table 1.
As each participant had to solve a total of six ToH
puzzles the experiment employed a mixed design, with
device-support and instruction as between-subjects manipulations and trial as a within-subjects factor.

Procedure
Each participant was assigned to one experimental group
according to the order of arrival at the laboratory. After reading a generic description of the Towers of Hanoi
puzzle participants were introduced to the graphical user
interface. To demonstrate that they had understood the
task constraints and to familiarize themselves with the
user inteface they solved a simple two-disk version of
the puzzle.
Participants then received their respective minimization instructions and were told that the experiment normally takes around 45 minutes regardless of their individual performance.
After each successful completion of a problem, participants received a brief message reminding them of their
respective minimization instruction before starting the
next trial.
On average, participants completed the experiment
within 40 minutes.

Predictions
Our primary predictions refer to comparisons between
and within experimental groups (rather than assuming a
2x2 factorial design; in particular Group 4 plays a subsidiary role in the study, and will only be analysed in
relation to first-order findings).
The main predictions concern the number of pragmatic moves needed to solve the puzzle. As we expect all
groups to learn throughout the course of the experiment,
we predict a gradual reduction of the mean number of
pragmatic moves required to solve the puzzle. This familiar practice effect constitutes the baseline which we
expect to be modulated by the experimental factors of
instructional goal orientation and device support.
If the instructional manipulation encourages members
of Group 2 to invest additional moves in trials 1–3 and
this in turn results in better learning, they ought to need
fewer moves on trials 4–6. Thus, we predict an interaction of instruction and trial for Groups 1 vs. 2.
Next, if participants are spontaneously capable of using the exploratory device mode to improve their performance, Group 3 should need fewer pragmatic moves
than Group 1 in all trials. Hence, we predict a main effect
of device support on the number of pragmatic moves for
Groups 1 vs. 3.
Our secondary predictions involve Groups 3 and 4
and address different possible motivations for epistemic
moves:
If the exploratory device mode is primarily used for
learning purposes (acting-to-learn) we should find an instant use of epistemic moves in both Group 3 and 4.
If learning actually occurs, the frequency of epistemic
moves should decrease over time. If, on the other hand,
epistemic moves are used primarily for online planning
within a trial (acting-to-plan) we expect a more opportunistic use due to the instructional manipulation. In
this case, we expect the frequency of epistemic moves
in Group 3 and 4 to display an interaction over trials.
Finally, if the use of epistemic mode is unselective,
and predominantly due to affordances created by the design of our device we should find a constant use of epistemic moves throughout all trials and similar usage patterns in Groups 3 and 4.

Figure 1: Mean number of moves for each of the four
groups on each of six trials. For Groups 1 and 2 the
number of pragmatic moves corresponds to the number
of total moves, whereas Groups 3 and 4 had the option of making epistemic moves in addition to pragmatic
moves. (Note: The minimum possible number of pragmatic moves to solve the task is 31.)

As all groups were instructed to minimize the number of
moves to solve the ToH puzzle our comparative analysis of their performance will be based on the number of
pragmatic moves per trial.

as within-subjects factor confirms the overall learning effect [F(5,200)=16.3, p=.000, MSE=260.4] and indicates
that there were differences between groups [F(3,40)=5.8,
p=.002, MSE=489.2], but the interaction between the
two factors did not reach significance [F(15,200)=1.5,
p=.13, MSE=260.4].
Whether an individual group has significantly improved over time can be assessed by conducting simple effect tests within groups by trial. These show that
Groups 1, 2 and 4 significantly reduced their number of
pragmatic moves over the course of the experiment. The
means for Group 3 were low even at the first trials, suggesting that it did not improve significantly because it
consistently performed at a high level.
On trials 4–6, in which all groups were instructed to
minimize the number of pragmatic moves, both Group 2
and 3 outperformed Group 1 by taking fewer pragmatic
moves (p=.003 and .008 respectively).
Thus, the overall results seem promising: With respect
to the performance criterion Groups 1, 2 and 4 improved
over time and Groups 2 and 3 managed to solve the ToH
puzzle in fewer moves than Group 1 in the second half of
the experiment.

Overall learning effects Before we consider the comparisons between individual groups, we will examine the
expected overall effects of learning. Figure 1 displays the
mean number of pragmatic moves for each group from
trials 1 to 6. A mixed ANOVA of pragmatic moves with
group membership as between-subjects factor and trial

Effects of Instruction (Groups 1 vs. 2) Our first specific prediction concerned Groups 1 and 2, neither of
which had the epistemic device mode at their disposal,
but differed in their instructions: Whereas Group 1 was
instructed to minimize the number of moves in each trial,
Group 2 was only asked to optimize their performance in

Results
Numbers of Moves

To interpret this difference in performance the number of epistemic moves of Group 3 has to be taken into
account as well. (The number of epistemic moves is represented by dotted lines in Figure 1).
If we add the epistemic moves carried out by Group 3
to their pragmatic moves, Group 3 used more total moves
on average than Group 1 (mean total moves=68.7 and
55.1 respectively), but this difference is not statistically
significant [F(1,20)=.11, p=.12, MSE=2165.3].
This demonstrates that Group 3 spontaneously managed to use the device-supported option of epistemic
moves to improve their performance with respect to the
criterion. However, it leaves open exactly why and how
members of Group 3 used the exploratory mode. We will
address these issues after assessing the effects on solution latency.
Figure 2: Mean number of moves for Groups 1 and 2
on trials 1–3 and 4–6. (Note: The minimum possible
number of moves is 31.)
the last three of six trials. As the scope of this experimental manipulation juxtaposed trials 1–3 with trials 4–6 it is
appropriate to collapse the data across each triple of trials
by computing the respective means.
Figure 2 shows the mean number of moves for
both groups on trials 1–3 and 4–6. It illustrates that
there is no hint of the predicted crossover interaction
[F(1,20)=.44, p=.51, MSE=72.6]. Instead, the predicted
learning effects over both test halves [F(1,20)=35.4,
p=.00, MSE=72.6] are combined with an unexpected
main effect of group [F(1,20)=8.1, p=.01, MSE=119.0].
While successfully predicting that Group 2 would use
fewer moves on trials 4–6 [F(1,20)=8.9, p=.01] it is immediately obvious that this advantage in performance
cannot be attributed to its members using epistemic actions in the initial trials: they clearly have not invested
additional moves on trials 1–3.
One plausible, if rather annoying explanation for this
pattern of data, is that, by an accident of assignment,
Group 2 might comprise more able problem solvers than
Group 1. (We will briefly consider an alternative account
below.)
Effects of Device Support (Groups 1 vs. 3) Groups 1
and 3 shared the same instructions (to minimize the number of moves on each trial) but differed in the options provided by the user interface (device). Specifically, members of Group 3 had the “exploratory mode” at their disposal which supported the use of epistemic moves.
In the overview of the number of pragmatic moves of
all four groups we have already established that Group 3
performed better than Group 1 on trials 4–6. A mixed
ANOVA of pragmatic moves by group membership and
trial confirms the predicted main effect of group over all
six trials [F(1,20)=18.0, p=.000, MSE=359.9]. Thus,
Group 3 consistently performed better than Group 1 with
respect to the criterion.

Solution Times
Although participants had been told that the total experiment took a standardized length of time—hence could
not assume that by being quick or slow they would alter
the overall duration of their experimental session—their
latencies to solve a problem can be used as an alternative
indicator to assess their performance.
Overall effects As one might expect solution latencies over the course of the experiment decreased for
all groups. An overall mixed ANOVA on the effects
of group membership and trial on the total time required to solve each task yields a main effect of trial
[F(5,200)=16.9, p=.000, MSE=13352.7] but no differences between groups. However, a significant interaction of the two factors [F(15,200)=1.8, p=.038,
MSE=13352.7] drew attention to the possibility that different groups might have exploited time selectively to
optimize their performance.
Subsequent simple main effect tests confirm that while
the total solution times of Groups 1 and 3 significantly
decreased over repeated trials, this was not the case for
Groups 2 and 4. This suggests that the instructional manipulation had a selective effect on solution time, and in
particular raises the possibility that the improved performance of Group 2 over Group 1 on trials 4–6 was caused
in part by Group 2 exerting greater effort on these trials.
Effects of Instruction (Groups 1 vs. 2) The suggestion that Group 2 outperformed Group 1 in trials 3–6 by
exerting extra effort (rather than the hypothesized investment of epistemic moves) is supported by an analysis of
move rates, i.e. the number of moves made per second.
Figure 3 shows the mean move rates of Group 1 and 2
over both test halves. A corresponding ANOVA on move
rate by group and test half yields a highly significant interaction [F(1,20)=18.3, p=.000, MSE=.002].
If we interpret an increase in move rate (as seen in
Group 1) as signalling the necessity of less effort per individual move, the absence of an increase in Group 2
suggests that its members invested relatively more effort
in the second half of the experiment.

Figure 3: Mean move rates for Groups 1 and 2 on trials 1–3 and 4–6.

Effects of Device Support (Groups 3 and 4)

Figure 4: Mean number of epistemic moves for Groups 3
and 4 on trials 1–3 and 4–6.

One of the questions raised above was: How did Group 3
use epistemic moves to outperform Group 1? As the
total solution times for Groups 1 and 3 did not differ
[F(1,20)=.38, p=.54, MSE=66525.2] recourse to latency
data does not resolve this issue.
Although the present experiment does not allow us to
answer questions about possible causes and effects of
device-supported epistemic moves conclusively, we can
provide tentative evidence for some of the related issues:

temic moves [F(1,20)=.5.4, p=.03, MSE=572.7]. The
same pattern can be observed when we consider the
relative frequency of epistemic moves: Whereas the
use of epistemic moves for Group 3 decreases over
time, members of Group 4 increase their use of epistemic moves in the second half of the experiment. This
suggests that exploratory mode was used opportunistically to meet the instructional constraints, i.e., for
online-planning (acting-to-plan) on the current trial,
rather than as a prospective investment into learning
(acting-to-learn).

Did the use of epistemic moves actually lead to better learning? The fact that Group 3 continued to use
epistemic moves until the last trials suggests that they
probably did not learn more about the ToH puzzle than
Group 1, but used the exploratory device mode as a
tool to optimize their performance. However, our design allows for the alternative explanation that the continued use of epistemic moves might have been due to
a conservative strategy.

Were epistemic moves used because they were available, i.e., was the usage of exploratory mode simply a
task-demand like artifact, prompted by our device manipulation? The strategic use of epistemic moves observed by Group 4 attenuates this concern. Rather than
being a mere device affordance, exploratory mode was
used selectively to achieve online planning.

Did the use of epistemic moves become more effective
over time? An index of the effectiveness of each epistemic move can be computed by dividing Group 3’s
mean savings of pragmatic moves (compared with
Group 1) by the number of epistemic moves invested
on each trial. As the six corresponding ratios (0.5, 0.3,
1.0, 0.2, 1.1, 0.7) do not show any obvious trend, we
conclude that the use of exploratory mode did not become more effective over time.
Were epistemic moves used to learn or to plan? Even
without evidence for superior learning due to devicesupport of epistemic moves we can address the question of participants’ motivation to use exploratory
mode by comparing the usage patterns of Group 3
and 4. Figure 4 shows a clear interaction of group
membership and test half on the mean number of epis-

Discussion
Participants in the exploratory mode conditions spontaneously and effectively used the device-support to
achieve a performance criterion, and in so doing they
demonstrated capability for using epistemic actions to
improve immediate performance.
However, both the observed unwillingness to invest
additional moves in early trials and the selectivity of usage patterns suggest that participants were only willing
to invest epistemic moves when they stood to gain an
immedate benefit from so doing. There was no clear sign
of increased learning through use of exploratory mode
or willingness to use epistemic moves for learning purposes. Instead, the selective use suggests that epistemic
actions were mainly serving the function of look-ahead
(acting-to-plan) rather than learning prospectively about
the ToH task (acting-to-learn).

Our instructional manipulation did not have the predicted effect. This may have been due to an unfortunate
mismatch between the experimental groups, or it may be
that our initial hypotheses about an interesting distinction between problem-solving and learning orientations
are unfounded, at least for Tower of Hanoi. Perhaps more
likely still is the possibility that our instructional manipulation was too subtle to invoke any change in orientation.
In Kirsh’s writing on epistemic actions and related
themes, which was one of the sources of inspiration for
the current study, an additional concept is introduced by
contrast with goal-directed behaviour, namely “complementary strategies” (Kirsh, 1995, 1996). It is not clear to
us how precise a distinction Kirsh is promoting between
“complementary” and “epistemic”: indeed there is a hint
in his writings of mere terminological evolution. Nevertheless, we suggest that there is an important distinction
that might be sketched. As defined above, epistemic actions have their effect by modifying cognitive structures
in the actor. By contrast, consider such example complementary strategies as moving coins in order to count
them, or marking numbers in order to add them (Kirsh,
1995, 1996; Neth & Payne, 2001). Such operations work
by modifying the problem so as to be more compatible
with cognitive capabilities, rather than changing the cognitive state of the actor. We agree with Kirsh that complementary strategies of this kind are ubiquitous in human
behaviour.
The case for ubiquity is less clear for epistemic actions. In this article we have sketched a distinction between two kinds of epistemic actions, actions-to-learn
and actions-to-plan. We have found evidence for the latter, but none for the former.
One reason that acting-to-learn may be relatively less
common than complementary strategies and than actingto-plan, is the success of learning-by-doing. A second
reason, ironically, is that acting may sometimes compete
with learning. As shown by O’Hara and Payne (1998),
and Trudel and Payne (1995), internalising problem solving activity and planning (doing more mental look-ahead
or reflection) can itself increase learning in a problem
solving context. For example, when exploratory learners
had their interactions with a digital watch rationed, they
learned more successfully how to use the watch (Trudel
& Payne, 1995).
Despite these arguments, we are confident that, as defined in the introduction, actions-to-learn (i.e. actions
that are not intended to solve the current problem but
only to learn about the current problem) are indeed an
important aspect of problem solving and learning. However, such actions may be less widely and spontaneously
available and harder to study in conventional puzzlesolving domains.
Turning from the philosophical to the practical, one
very concrete contribution of the current article is the
idea of incorporating an exploratory mode, with instant
undo, into the user interface. Undo functions are, of
course, well-established and universally acknowledged
contributors to device usability (although some thorny

technical design issues are still debated). What is novel
about our exploratory mode, we believe, is that it guarantees a very rapid return to particular user-chosen system
states. It can accomplish this because the user makes a
specific commitment to undoing subsequent actions. Although this might seem counter-indicated in mundane
HCI contexts, we suggest related designs may be worth
pursuing in any domain where people stand to benefit
from “thinking by doing”.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Will Reader for helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft. This research
was supported by ESRC Research Studentship Award
No. R00429934325 to HN.

References
Anzai, Y., & Simon, H.A. (1979). The theory of learning
by doing. Psychological Review, 86, 124–140.
Kirsh D. (1995). Complementary Strategies: Why we
use our hands when we think. In J.D. Moore &
J.F. Lehman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the environment instead of
oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4, 415–452.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18,
513–549.
Klahr, D., Langley, P. & Neches, R. (1987). Production
System Models of Learning and Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Neth, H. & Payne, S.J. (2001). Addition as interactive
problem solving. In J.D. Moore, & K. Stenning (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-third Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 698–703). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
O’Hara, K.P., & Payne, S.J. (1998). The effects of operator implementation cost on planfulness of problem
solving and learning. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 34–
70.
Trudel, C.I., & Payne, S.J. (1995). Reflection and goal
management in exploratory learning. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 42, 307–339.
VanLehn, K. (1991). Rule acquisition events in the discovery of problem-solving strategies. Cognitive Science, 15, 1–47.

