UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When the fly flied and when the fly flew: the effects of semantics on the comprehension of
past tense inflections

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3729t08t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Ramscar, Michael

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When the Fly Flied and When the Fly Flew: The Effects of Semantics
on the Comprehension of Past Tense Inflections
Michael Ramscar (michael@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
Division of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, Scotland.
Abstract
Although previous theories of past-tense verb inflection
have considered phonological and grammatical
information to be the only relevant factors in the
inflection process (e.g. Bybee & Moder, 1983;
Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986; Kim, Pinker, Prince &
Prasada, 1991), Ramscar (in press) demonstrated the
importance of semantics in processing inflectional
morphology. This paper presents an experiment that
demonstrates the on-line effects of semantics on
inflection. These findings indicate that regular and
irregular inflections are determined by semantic and
phonological similarities in memory, and furthermore
that people are not responsive to the kind of grammatical
distinctions amongst verb roots that default rule theories
of inflection (Pinker, 1999) presuppose.

Introduction
In most theories -- and studies -- of past-tense verb
inflection, phonological and grammatical information
have been considered to be the two relevant factors in
the inflection process (e.g. Bybee & Moder, 1983;
Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986; Kim, Pinker, Prince &
Prasada, 1991; Pinker, 1991; 1999). However, in some
models of inflectional processing (MacWhinney &
Leinbach, 1991; Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1999),
semantic processes have been included to help explain
the processing of homophone verbs (e.g. brake/break).
Since brake and break both sound the same, phonology
alone cannot distinguish which of broke or braked is to
be the correct past tense form for the input breIk.
Although using semantic information to guide this
process appears intuitively plausible, this suggestion
has been fiercely criticised by Pinker and colleagues
(Kim et al, 1991; Pinker, 1999), who put forward an
alternative, nativist account of homophone inflection
(Pinker, 1991; 1999). This predicts that the
regularisation of irregular sounding verb stems is driven
by innate grammatical sensitivity: verbs that are
instinctively perceived to be denominal will be
automatically regularised. This account was supported
by results reported by Kim et al (1991) which indicate
that grammatical factors correlate better than semantic
factors with people's ratings of the acceptability of past
tense forms in context, although these results did not
rule out any semantic role in inflection.

However, a recent series of experiments, Ramscar (in
press) has demonstrated that the assumption that
inflection is driven purely by grammar and phonology
is flawed. A series of elicited inflection tasks showed
that the semantic context in which a novel verb
occurred influenced the forms participants later
produced to mark the past tense of that verb. If
participants first encountered the novel verb sprink in a
context that involved consuming large quantities of fish
and vodka (semantically similar to drink), they were
likely to produce an irregular past tense form for it
(sprank). But if they first encountered sprink in a
context which presents as a verb to describe symptoms
associated with a disease that involve rapid movements
of the eyelid (semantically similar to blink), they were
likely to go on and produce a regular past tense form
(sprinked). Further, a comparison of the forms
participants produced for the nonce verbs sprink and
frink in a sparse, ëneutralí context (70% irregular) to
those produced in the context involving rapid
movements of the eyelid (70% regular) showed that the
production of regular past tense forms increased when
the semantic similarity between sprink and frink and the
regular verbs blink and wink was increased. From these
results it appears that not only irregular forms can be
produced by analogy, but regular forms as well.

Semantics versus grammar in homophone
inflection
Evidence that semantics affects inflection offers a
solution to the homophone problem: different forms of
homophone verbs are distinguished and computed by
reference to their different meaning. Further, Ramscar
(in press) contrasted the semantic account of
homophone inflection with a nativist attempt to solve
this problem put forward by Pinker and colleagues
(Kim et al., 1991; Pinker, 1991, 1999, 2001) which
predicts that the regularization of irregular sounding
verb stems is driven by innate grammatical sensitivity:
that any verb that is perceived to be denominal will be
automatically regularized, resulting in different
inflection patterns for denominal verbs that are
phonologically identical to irregular deverbal verbs.
Ramscar (in press) found that participantsí sense of the
semantic similarities between verb forms correlated
strongly with participants preference for a regular or

irregular past tense form of a homophone verb in
context (after partialling out the effects of grammar,
r=.723), whereas participants perception of the
grammatical origins of verbs correlated poorly with
their references for irregular versus regular past tense
forms (after partialling out semantics, r=.066). Further
experiments showed that on both nonce and existing
verbs, if the semantics of the verb were similar to those
of an existing phonologically similar irregular,
participants would favor irregular inflections even when
they perceived the verbs to be denominal. Ramscar (in
press) concluded that in fact, the grammatical origins of
verbs had no effect on inflection, which was entirely
governed by phonology and semantics.

One or two routes to inflection?
A further implication of these findings is that they
undermine the one in principle objection to modeling
past tense inflection using a single mechanism
(Ramscar, in press). Pinker and colleagues (e.g. Pinker
& Prince, 1988; Pinker, 1991, 1999, 2001) have
claimed that the systematic regularization of verbs
based on nouns would require two mechanisms for
determining inflections, one method using phonological
analogy (to explain cluster effects in inflection,
resulting in forms such as spling/splang), and another
method using grammatical information (i.e. a rule) to
explain how verbs based on nouns are automatically
regularized. The findings that semantics is used to
distinguish homophone verbs and that the grammatical
origins of verbs do not determine their past tense forms
(Ramscar in press; see also examples such as shoe/shod
versus shoo/shooed where the denominal verb is the
irregular) obviate any requirement for models to
account for this second, grammatically determined
method of inflection.
Since it appears that single-route models may be
entirely capable of modeling inflection patterns based
on phonological and semantic properties (see e.g.
MacWhinney & Leinbach, 1991; Joanisse, &
Seidenberg, 1999) it appears that Rumelhart and
McClellandís (1986) claim that single-route accounts
provide ìa distinct alternative to the view that children
learn the rules of English past tense acquisition in any
explicit senseÖî merits further investigation. As Pinker
(1991, 1999, 2001) has argued, the peculiarities of the
irregular past tense system are best explained by an
associative system based on analogy to stored forms,
and not by rules: but if regular and irregular past tense
forms are produced by the same mechanism ñ based on
semantic and phonological analogy ñ then it may well
be that learning the English past tense really does not
involve acquiring a rule in any explicit sense.
The experiment described in this paper was
designed to further probe this question. It was designed
to examine the way in which semantics affects the
comprehension of existing past tense forms. The dualroute model of past-tense inflection claims that regular
inflection is unaffected by meaning or associative

factors in memory (Pinker, 1991, 1999, 2001). In this
experiment the meanings of existing verbs were
manipulated to examine the effects of this on both their
regular and irregular forms.

Experiment 1
This experiment was designed to test whether meaning
has an effect on the comprehension of past tense verb
forms by measuring the reading-times of regular and
irregular forms of existing verbs in different semantic
contexts. The dual-route model of inflectional
morphology claims that the processing of regular pasttense inflection is unaffected by meaning or associative
factors in memory:
ì[Regular inflection] is modular, independent
of real-world meaning, non-associative
(unaffected by frequency and similarity)
sensitive to abstract formal abstractions (for
example, root versus derived, noun versus
verb), more sophisticated than the kinds of
ìrulesî that are explicitly taught, developing
on a schedule not timed by environmental
input, organized by principles that could not
have been learned, possibly with a distinct
neural substrate and genetic basis.î (Pinker,
1991, p. 534; see also Pinker 1999, 2001)
Accordingly, the dual-route predicts that semantic
factors can only affect the comprehension of irregular
forms. In line with the findings of Ramscar (in press,
Experiments 2, 3 and 4), where semantics appeared to
affect regular production, it was expected instead that
semantics would affect the comprehension of all simple
past tense forms. The contrasting single-route
prediction tested here was that a regular past-tense form
should be easier to read in a context that is semantically
dissimilar to the ordinary usage of a phonologically
identical irregular verb and an irregular past-tense form
should be easier to read in a context that is semantically
similar to the ordinary usage of a phonologically
identical irregular verb.

Participants
Participants were 36 undergraduate students from
Edinburgh University. All participants took part
voluntarily in the study.

Materials
Four sets of materials examined four existing verb
forms (sink, fly, drink and food-drive).
Each verb was presented in one of two contexts. In
each context, the verb examined was introduced as a
noun (to distinguish its meaning from ordinary uses of
the corresponding irregular verb), and then later used as
a verb. The contexts in which the verbs were presented
were identical apart from a single semantic
contextualizing sentence (shown in italics in Table 1)

that was varied across the contexts to manipulate the
degree of semantic similarity between the verb and the
ordinary irregular verb from which it was derived.
Table 1 - Example Context (The denominal verb is
highlighted).
To promote business, the pesticide shop
always stands a man in a giant fly
costume at the entrance of their shop, to
greet customers. This is especially fun
for children. Whenever a child enters the
shop, the greeter performs “the fly”. The
greeter tells the children jokes and
gives out prizes. In the shop, the term
to
describe
how
the
greeter
greets
children in this way is “to fly them”.
One hot day in June, sweating in his fly
costume, I saw the greeter fly 40
children in a single afternoon. The look
of tiredness on his face was really
something.

Alternate context sentence
The child sits between the wings on the
greeter’s back, and they buzz up and down
the aisles, ducking and swooping.

The two contextualizing sentences are italicized in
table 1. The first context described an action that had
some semantic similarity to flying simpliciter. The
second context was semantically dissimilar to flying
simpliciter. In order to obtain independent confirmation
of the predicted semantic similarities, three naive raters
were presented with the contexts on cards in
randomized order and asked to order the contexts in
each set according to how much the actions described in
them matched the action they normally associated with
the appropriate irregular verb (fly, drink, sink, and
drive). The raters concurred with the ordering assigned
to the contexts in the experiment, and inter-rater
agreement was 100%.

Procedure
Participants told they were taking part in a memory
study. Passages were presented on-screen and
participants were instructed to memorize them. After
memorizing a particular passage, participants were
asked to indicate whether five sentences relating to the
context passage were ìTrue or Falseî by pressing the
appropriate button on a computer keyboard as quickly
as they could whilst concentrating on accuracy. The
correct answer to three of these questions was ìFalseî
(e.g., in relation to the example in Table 1 participants
were asked to state whether "The greeter was dressed as
a pig" was true or false). The other two questions
checked that participants remembered the noun use of
the verb in question (e.g. ìThe greeter performs ëthe
Flyíî) and also that they had remembered the semantic
reinforcement sentences in the context. The correct

answers to these questions were always ìTrue.î The
presentation order of these five preliminary questions
was randomized.
A final, sixth sentence presented to participants
was also true, but it presented a fact stated in the initial
context in a passive voice as an active past tense. This
tense took either a regular or irregular form, e.g. in
relation to ìOne hot day in June, sweating in his fly
costume, I saw the greeter fly 40 childrenÖ" the fact
was presented in an actively voiced manner, e.g.: "The
greeter flew 40 children." or "The greeter flied 40
children."
The delay in milliseconds between the presentation
of this sentence on-screen, and the onset of participants'
responses was recorded.
Each participant was presented with one training
item, followed by one context from each of the four sets
of stimuli. Each participant completed one from each of
the four conditions of the experiment (e.g. a context
describing an action that was semantically similar to
that implied by an existing irregular verb, with the verb
inflected regularly in the target sentence (e.g. fly ñ
flied), similar context / irregularly inflected verb,
dissimilar context / irregularly inflected verb and
dissimilar context / regularly inflected verb).
The experimental task was embedded in a series of
unrelated tasks that participants also completed.
Table 2 - Mean reading times in milliseconds for the
target sentences in Experiment 1.

drank
drinked
food-drove
food-drived
flew
flied
sank
sinked

Semantically
Semantically
similar
to dissimilar
to
irregular
irregular
1490
2084
2759
1642
1781
2166
2435
1577
2483
3051
2776
1686
1342
2890
1873
1582

Results
The mean reading time for each item is given in Table
2. Two unrelated t-tests showed that as predicted by
single-route models (and in contrast to dual-route
predictions) the target sentences containing the regular
past tense forms of the verbs were processed faster in
the dissimilar context (mean sentence reading time =
1622 ms) than in the similar contexts (2461 ms);
t(70)=3.282, p<0.001. Irregular past-tense forms were
processed more easily (1774 ms) when they had first
been presented in an uninflected form in a context that
was semantically similar to their ordinary usage as

opposed to a dissimilar context
(2548 ms);
t(70)=2.178, p<0.02.
Two-way repeated measures analyses of variance
(ANOVAs) were conducted on the reaction time data,
treating both subjects (F1) and items (F2) as random
effects. There were no reliable main effects of either
Meaning, F1(1,35)=0.23, p>0.87; F2(1,3)=0.22, p>0.89,
or Grammaticality (Regular versus Irregular verb types)
F1(1,35)=.235, p=<.63; F2(1,3)=.309, p>.6. The lack of
a Meaning main effect indicates that, collapsing over
the paragraph contexts in which the verbs were
embedded, meaning did not produce a processing bias
for the verbs. The lack of a main effect of
Grammaticality indicates an analogous absence of bias
for regular or irregular verbs forms.
There was a significant Meaning × Grammaticality
interaction:
F1(1,35)=12.911,
p<0.001;
F2(1,3)=156.978, p<0.001. As indicated by Figure 1,
the interaction was due to Meaning effects at each level
of Grammaticality (Regular versus Irregular verb
types).
Figure 1. Overall reaction times in Experiment 1.

Context semantically similar to irregular
Context not semantically similar to irregu

3500

3000

RT (ms)

2500

2000

1500

1000

rate for the target sentences was 12.5% and the
inconsistent error rate = 9.7%. The error rates for
particular tenses of the target verbs were 12.5% for
irregulars and 9.7% for regular). Further ANOVAS
were calculated considering only the ìTrueî responses
to the tests sentences containing the target verbs, which
again showed no main effects of Meaning,
F1(1,35)=0.138,
p>0.71;
F2(1,3)=0.000,
or
Grammaticality F1(1,3)=1.131, p=0.3; F2(1,3)=.519,
p>.5, but did show a significant Meaning ×
Grammaticality interaction: F1(1,35)=10.635, p<0.005;
F2(1,3)=99.047, p<0.005.
Discussion
Consistent with findings in ratings and elicitation tasks
(Ramscar, in press), it appears from the results of this
experiment that semantics affect the on-line
comprehension of both regular and irregular past tense
forms. Strikingly, the on-line processing of regular
forms was significantly affected by semantics: if
participants had to read ìthe greeter flied 40 childrenî
in a context where to ìdo the flyî involved something
like ordinary flying while dressed in an insect costume,
it took longer to process than when ìdoing the flyî
involved telling jokes and giving out prizes clad in the
self-same fly outfit. This was despite the fact that the
participants behavioral responses were identical in
either instance: participants agreed in each case that it
was true that ìthe greeter flied 40 children.î
These findings are difficult to reconcile with the claim
that the processing of regularly inflected forms is
entirely ìindependent of real-world meaningî (Pinker,
1991). Further, the interaction between meaning and
past tense form (i.e. whether a verb takes a regular or
irregular inflection) in this experiment is hardly
suggestive of a model in which two independent
mechanisms are separately responsible for regular and
irregular past tense processing, with one element ñ the
regular ñ encapsulated and insensitive to the semantic
factors that affect the other. Rather, it appears that both
regular and irregular past tense comprehension relies
upon a common, semantically ñ and phonologically ñ
sensitive process.

General Discussion

500

0

Regular (e.g. flied)

Irregular (e.g. flew)

There were no significant increases in the error rate
(participants answering "false" to statements that were
assumed to be true) across all of the test sentences. For
the true test sentences that were common to each
context (the denominal and semantic reinforcement
sentences) it was 10.4%. When the semantic context
was consistent with the predicted verb tense the error

For more than two decades the question of how
inflectional morphology is processed has served as a
battleground for conflicting theories of language,
knowledge representation, and cognitive processing.
On one side of the debate have been similarity-based or
single-route approaches that propose that all past tenses
are formed simply through phonological and semantic
analogies to existing past tenses stored in memory. On
the other side of the debate are rule-based or dual-route
approaches which agree that phonological analogy is
important for producing irregular past tenses, but which
also argue that regular inflection can only be explained
in terms of symbolic processing.
Ramscar (in press) has shown that the one in
principle objection against single-route accounts of

inflection ñ that homophone verbs based on nouns are
processed on the basis of their grammatical origins, and
not according to their phonological properties ñ is
empirically unjustified: grammatical origin does not
predict the past tense form of verbs, whereas phonology
and semantics does. This paper has taken one of the
strong claims for the dual-route theory of inflection ñ
that the regular past tense rule is an informationally
encapsulated module (see Fodor, 1983) ñ and subjected
it to empirical scrutiny. Pinker and colleagues (e.g.
Pinker, 1991, 1999, 2001; Clahsen, 1999; Kim, Pinker,
Prince & Prasada, 1991) have claimed that the
processing of regular inflection is driven by an innate
mechanism that is unaffected by phonology, frequency
or semantics. Results from the two experiments
reported here fail to support this claim. Rather, they
have shown conclusively that semantics does affect
regular past tense comprehension, both of existing
forms that may have been stored in memory, and of
novel forms that needed to be interpreted on-line.
As Pinker (1999) observes, it is more than
reasonable to assume that the same basic process (or
processes) are responsible for both past tense
production and comprehension. Ramscar (in press)
showed that regular past tense production ñ in elicited
inflection tasks ñ was apparently affected by semantics.
The results reported here complement these findings,
and extend them in that they provide an objective online measure of the effects of semantics on inflection
(most previous studies of inflection have relied on
subjective judgments and ratings to measure inflection
processes, e.g. Ramscar, in press; Ullman, 1999;
Prasada & Pinker, 1993; Kim et al, 1991). The results
of this experiment show that ñ objectively ñ participants
found regular past tense forms easier to process when
the semantic contexts they were related to supported a
regular form even though their subjective responses to
regular forms were the same as when they were not
supported by semantic context (i.e. in both cases, they
considered the information carried by the regular forms
to be true).
The pattern of results reported here is easily
compatible with a model of inflection that assumes that
past tense forms are computed (in both comprehension
and production) by a process of comparison to
previously stored forms, taking into consideration
factors such as phonological and semantic similarity
and frequency.
That these results are not compatible with the idea
that regular inflection is processed independently from
the contents of memory, and that it is entirely
unaffected by factors such as phonological and
semantic similarity and frequency (see Pinker, 1991,
1999, 2001) does not, of course, mean that the dualroute model is necessarily wrong (these results no more
disprove the idea that some regular inflection is carried
out in this context-independent manner than does the
existence of still more white swans disprove the idea of
orange swans). However, insofar as Ramscar (in press)

has shown that one of the key reasons for positing a
context-independent regular past tense rule (to deal with
denominal verbs, which were supposedly regularized
irrespective of their phonological and semantic
properties) is unjustified, and insofar as the experiments
reported here suggest that semantic and phonological
comparisons in associative memory (a component that
even the dual-route model accepts is necessary to model
inflection) affect even the comprehension of novel
inflected forms, it does seem worth considering what
role it is that a context-independent rule is supposed
play in a scientific account of inflection. There is an
increasing body of evidence suggesting that a contextindependent rule does not add anything substantive to
our understanding of inflection (see e.g. Hahn &
Nakisa, 2000; Ramscar, in press), and further, it appears
that any inflection can be processed in associative
memory (see Ramscar, in press and the experiments
reported here) a component that even dual-route models
accept is necessary to modeling inflectional
morphology (see Pinker, 1991, 1999, 2001).
This evidence (and on a more mundane level,
Occamís razor) militates against the inclusion of an
explicit, context-independent rule in any psychological
theory of inflection. At present, it appears that a
similarity-based, single-route account of inflection ñ in
which forms are processed by matching and analogous
generalization according to factors such as phonological
ands semantic similarity and frequency ñ provides a
more economical explanation of, and a better fit to, the
available data. To return to Rumelhart and
McClellandís (1986) claim, it appears that children (and
adults) may well not need to learn the rules of the
English past tense in any explicit sense. As far as the
English past tense system goes, it appears that the
parser does not make ìbasically the same distinctions as
the grammarî (Clahsen, 1999, p. 995). While the
ìgrammarî of English may distinguish between
irregular and regular past tense forms, these results
suggest that the corresponding psychological processes
that govern parsing do not make these explicit
distinctions at all.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Lera Boroditsky, Will OíConnor, Malte
Huebner and Daniel Yarlett for comments on, and
discussions of, this work.

References
Anderson, S. R. (1992). A-Morphous Morphology,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berent, I., Pinker, S. and Shimron, J (1999) Default
nominal inflection in Hebrew: evidence for mental
variables. Cognition, 72, 1-44.
Bybee, J. L. (1988). Morphology as lexical
organization. In M Hammond & M Noonan (eds.)
Theoretical morphology, 119-141. San Diego:
Academic Press.

Bybee, J. L. (1995) Regular morphology and the
lexicon, Language and Cognitive Processes 10, 425455.
Bybee, J. L. and D. I. Slobin. 1982. Rules and Schemas
in the development and use of the English past tense.
Language 58:265-289.
Bybee, J. L. and Moder, C. L. (1983). Morphological
classes as natural categories. Language, 59, 251-270.
Clahsen, H. (1999). Lexical entries and rules of
language: a multi-disciplinary study of German
inflection. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):
991-1013.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The Modularity of Mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hahn, U & Nakisa, R. C. (2000). German inflection:
Single-route or dual-route? Cognitive Psychology.
41(4), 313-360.
Harm, M.W. & Seidenberg, M.S. (1999) Phonology,
reading acquisition, and dyslexia: Insights from
connectionist models. Psychological Review, 106(3),
491-528.
Joanisse, M.F., Seidenberg, M.S. (1999). Impairments
in verb morphology following brain injury: a
connectionist model. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 96(13), 7592-7597.
Kim, J. J., Pinker, S., Prince, A. and Prasada, S. (1991)
Why no mere mortal has ever flown out to center
field, Cognitive Science, 15, 173-218
MacWhinney, B., and Leinbach, J. (1991).
Implementations are not conceptualizations: Revising
the verb learning model. Cognition, 40, 121-157.
Pinker, S. (1991) Rules of language. Science, 253, 530535
Pinker, S. (1999) Words and Rules, New York: Basic
Books.
Pinker, S. (2001) Four decades of rules and
associations, or whatever happened to the past tense
debate? In E. Dupoux (Ed.), Language, the brain, and
cognitive development: Papers in honor of Jacques
Mehler. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pinker, S. and Prince, A., (1988). On language and
connectionism: Analysis of a parallel distributed
processing model of language acquisition. Cognition,
28, 73--193
Plaut, D. C. and Booth, J. R. (2000). Individual and
developmental differences in semantic priming:
Empirical and computational support for a singlemechanism account of lexical processing.
Psychological Review, 107, 786-823.
Plunkett, K., and Marchman, V. (1993). From rote
learning to system building: Acquiring verb
morphology in children and connectionist nets.
Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Prasada, S. and S. Pinker (1993) Generalization of
regular and irregular morphological patterns,
Language and Cognitive Processes, 8, 1-56
Ramscar, M. J. A (in press). The role of meaning in
inflection: Why the past tense doesn't require a rule.
Cognitive Psychology.
Rumelhart D. E. and McClelland J. L (1986) On
learning past tenses of English verbs. In Rumelhart
D.E. and McClelland J.L (eds) Parallel Distributed

Processing: Vol 2: Psychological and Biological
Models. Cambridge, MA: MIT press
Ullman, M. T. (1999) Acceptability ratings of regular
and irregular past-tense forms: Evidence for a dualsystem model of language from word frequency and
phonological neighbourhood effects. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 14, 47-67

