UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When participants are not misled they are not so bad after all: A pragmatic analysis of a rule
discovery task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2p36c3wj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Van der Henst, Jean-Baptiste
Rossi, Sandrine
Schroyens, Walter

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Participants Are Not Misled They Are Not so Bad After All:
A Pragmatic Analysis of a Rule Discovery Task
Jean-Baptiste Van der Henst (jvanderhenst@hotmail.com)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, K.U. Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
Leuven, 3000 Belgium
Institut Jean Nicod, 1 bis avenue de Lowendal
Paris, 75007 France

Sandrine Rossi (rossi@scvie.unicaen.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive et Pathologique, Université de Caen, Esplanade la Paix
Caen, 14032 France

Walter Schroyens (Walter.Schroyens@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, K.U. Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
Leuven, 3000 Belgium

Abstract
In this paper we present a pragmatic analysis of a widely
used task in the field of hypothesis testing: the 2-4-6
problem (Wason, 1960). In this task participants have to
discover the rule “three increasing numbers” by testing
triples of numbers and are given the “2-4-6” as an
example of triples compatible with the rule. We argue
that most people fail because the givens of the task are
conversationally misleading: first because the 2-4-6 is
communicated and is thus presumed to be relevant
(Sperber & Wilson, 1995) and second because the rule to
be discovered is too simple in the context of the task. In a
first experiment we showed that providing the triple
without communicating it improved performance in the
task. In a second experiment we contextually increased
the relevance of the rule and observed that people were
thus more inclined to discover it.

Introduction
Imagine that you have to discover a rule that
generates triples of numbers. Some triples are
consistent with the rule and some are not. Now,
somebody who knows the rule – a trustworthy person
like an experimental psychologist – is telling you that
‘2-4-6’ is a triple that is consistent with the rule. Will
you consider this as helpful information or not? Surely,
you will and you will also probably think that the
experimental psychologist would expect you to regard
this triple as helpful in order to succeed in the task.
Hence, you will consider that the salient properties
conveyed by ‘2-4-6’ (like “evenness” or “increase by
2”) must be taken into account in order to discover the
rule. However, considering that these properties are
important is in fact deceptive since the rule to be
discovered does not relate to them: the rule is simply
“three increasing numbers”. Focusing on 2-4-6’s most

salient properties is thus not the good way to solve such
a task!
This task is the well-known ‘2-4-6’ problem
designed by Peter Wason more than forty years ago
(Wason, 1960) in order to investigate hypothesis testing
ability (see Gorman, 1995 and Poletiek, 2001 for
reviews). It has become the most commonly used task
by researchers in the field of hypothesis testing. In its
standard version, it consists in proposing sequences of
triples to discover a rule the experimenter has in mind.
For each triple, the experimenter indicates whether or
not it is consistent with the rule. Participants have to
test triples until they are sure of having discovered the
rule. As for the other famous Wason’s task, namely the
selection task (Wason, 1968), one stimulating aspect of
the ‘2-4-6’ problem is that few people succeed in it
despite of its apparent simplicity. In the initial study
(Wason, 1960), only 21% of participants succeeded in
discovering the rule in their first announcement.
Typically, the rules proposed by participants inherit the
salient properties of ‘2-4-6’ and are more specific than
the rule to be discovered. For instance, they propose
rules such as “three even numbers”, “numbers
increasing by 2”, “even numbers increasing by 2”.
The failure in the 2-4-6 task has often been viewed
as a sign of irrationality. Wason argued that participants
exhibited a “confirmation” bias, and Evans (1983;
1989) argued that people exhibited a “positivity” bias.
The protocols indeed reveal that people tend to propose
instances of triples compatible with their hypothesis
whereas the most efficient strategy consists of
proposing instances inconsistent with the held
hypothesis. It is commonly accepted that people overly
rely on a positive testing strategy and focus on too
narrow hypotheses (Poletiek, 2001). What is the reason
for this? Researchers assume that positive testing is

simply a natural way of thinking typical of human
beings (Evans, 1989; Klayman, 1995) and that the
consideration of restrictive hypotheses is due to the
salient properties of 2-4-6. In contrast, we think that the
incidence of positive testing and the size of
“restrictiveness” bias (Poletiek, 2001) have been
overestimated. We believe that one of the most
important analysis required for understanding the
psychological mechanisms underlying the task has been
systematically overlooked, namely the pragmatic
analysis. In the present paper, we argue that a key cause
of the failure in the 2-4-6 problem derives from
communication. In particular, we claim that the task is
difficult precisely because the triple 2-4-6 is obtained
by communication.

The pragmatics of the 2-4-6 problem
Nobody can contest that conversation plays an
important role in the task. First, like many reasoning
tasks, the 2-4-6 problem sets up a situation of
communication. The experimenter communicates the
givens of a problem to a participant and the participant
has to communicate the experimenter a conclusion in
order to provide him with some information about his
or her inferential skills. The participant tries to
determine the experimenter’s communicative intention
and has some expectations about what he or she is
interested in. She or he may thus tailor her/his answer
according to these expectations. Second, and more
importantly, communication is noticeably misleading in
the 2-4-6 problem. In Gricean terms, one can view the
experimenter as being uncooperative (Grice, 1975)
since the triple he/she intentionally choose is overly
specific and does not illustrate the level of generality of
the rule. Communicating the triple ‘2-4-6’ to illustrate a
typical example of the rule is thus a violation of the
second maxim of quantity which stipulates that the
speaker should not make his/her contribution more
informative than required (Grice, 1975). Of course
choosing a triple whose most salient properties are
consistent with much more specific rules than the one to
be discovered was done in purpose. Wason and other
subsequent researchers wanted to see if people were
able to come up with general hypotheses by attempting
to falsify specific hypotheses drawn from the triple 2-46. However, what has been neglected is the fact that the
consideration of specific hypotheses is made on the
basis of a triple that is communicated. Giving the
participant a specific triple has not been seen as a
violation of a rule of communication but rather as a way
to suggest specific hypotheses. Consequently,
researchers have not assessed the impact of misleading
communication on weak performance in the task. To
which extent does the fact that 2-4-6 is communicated
contribute to the restrictiveness bias? In this paper, we
aim at investigating this issue.

Our pragmatic analysis of the 2-4-6 relies on
relevance theory (Sperber and Wilson, 1995). The
concept of relevance is characterized by cognitive
effects and cognitive effort, and the degree of relevance
relies on these two factors: on one hand, the greater the
cognitive effects resulting from processing an
information, the more relevant the information; on the
other hand, the greater cognitive effort required to
achieve these effects and process that information the
lesser its relevance. Sperber and Wilson (1995) argue
that human communication is governed by a
communicative principle of relevance. According to this
principle, each utterance conveys a presumption of its
own relevance. This makes an important difference
between information received from a communicator
and information not obtained by communication. A
communicated information raises expectations of
relevance. The communicator manifestly intends the
information to be relevant enough to deserve the
consideration by the addressee. Presuming that the
information is relevant implies first that the effects will
be sufficient to offset the effort required to process the
communicated information. Second, it implies that the
effort required is presumed to be minimal to reach the
level of expected effects given the communicator’s
ability. The presumption of relevance sets up a
comprehension strategy, which consists in following a
least-effort path: considering cognitive effects in order
of accessibility and stopping the processing effort when
the level of expected relevance is met.
Let’s now turn to the task itself. When the
experimenter gives the participant ‘2-4-6’ as an
example consistent with the rule to be discovered, this
triple is accompanied by a presumption of relevance. In
other words, the addressee should presume that this
triple is relevant to discover the rule. What type of
cognitive effects may the addressee expect to draw
from processing the triple? She/He will expect that the
triple will look as having been generated by a rule and
thus will search for properties common to the three
numbers or for properties about the way these numbers
are ordered. There are many properties that can be
attributed to the 2-4-6 triple, but some of these
properties are much more salient (i.e. they immediately
come to mind with minimal processing) than others.
Given the presumption of relevance, the properties to be
considered in order to discover the rule are those that
are easily accessible from processing 2-4-6 (for instance
“evenness” and “increase by 2”).
This does not necessarily mean that the rule should
correspond exactly to one or several of the most salient
properties but this means that these properties indicate
the directions to investigate in order to discover the
rule. Actually, the rule may still be quite hard to
discover and integrate many other characteristics than
the one conveyed by the triple, but what is saliently

given in the triple is relevant to discover it. Hence,
because the triple is presumed to be relevant, the most
accessible properties it conveys cannot be considered as
inappropriate clues to discover the rule. When the
experimenter communicates the triple ‘2-4-6’ while he
wants the participant to discover the rule “three
increasing numbers”, he violates the participants’
expectations of relevance.
Another cause that may contribute to mislead
participants is the rule to be discovered itself. When a
person is taking part in a reasoning experiment she/he
should normally expect to provide the experimenter
with some information about her/his inferential skills.
Trivial tasks and trivial answers are not well suited for
this: they require little cognitive competency and should
not interest the experimenter. In order to provide an
answer relevant to the experimenter, the participant will
probably expect the task to be of a certain level of
difficulty. Faced with a task consisting of discovering a
rule about numbers, participants should thus think that
this rule should be a bit challenging to discover.
However, “increasing numbers” is actually one of the
most obvious rules applied to order numbers and in
daily life we very often encounter set of numbers sorted
according to it. Consequently, participants may be
reluctant to think of discovering such an undemanding
and widespread rule and may try to achieve relevance
by seeking for more difficult rules. As he/she is
misleading in communicating the triple, the
experimenter is also misleading about his own
expectations since he actually expects the participants
to find out one of the less relevant (i.e. the simplest)
rule to discover in the context of the task.
In our experiments we aimed at showing that
misleading participants in their expectations of
relevance influence task performance. We used a less
deceptive way to convey the givens of the problem
while still keeping the same provided example (i.e. 2-46) and the same target rule (i.e. increasing numbers). In
the first experiment, the presumption of relevance,
which accompanies the triple 2-4-6 in the standard
version of the task, was removed: 2-4-6 was given but
not communicated. In the second experiment, we
increased the relevance of the target rule “three
increasing numbers”.

Experiment 1
In this experiment, there was no presumption of
relevance accompanying the triple 2-4-6 in one of the
two conditions. Before receiving the instructions of the
rule discovery task, participants had to manipulate a
“jackpot” generating triples of numbers at random.
After several trials, the experimenter gave the
participant the instructions about the rule discovery
task. He/She then asked the participant to trigger the
jackpot for a last time and told him whether or not the

obtained triple was compatible with the rule. However,
the jackpot was biased in such a way that the sequence
2-4-6 came out on this trial. The participant obviously
did not know that we rigged the jackpot on this trial and
she/he could expect the triple to be consistent or
inconsistent with the rule. Hence, from the participant’s
perspective, the salient properties of the 2-4-6 just result
from chance. Even if this triple suggests specific
hypotheses, the participant cannot consider them as
ones the experimenter necessarily wanted him/her to
think about. This because the triple has not been chosen
intentionally, in contrast with the standard version of
the task. Participants should rely much less on the
salient properties of the 2-4-6 and should perform better
than in the standard version. We predict that subjects
would focus less on the specific properties conveyed by
the triple. Consequently, they should test a greater
variety of triples: we should thus observe a greater rate
of triples increasing in an irregular way (i.e. triples
whose numbers do not increase with the same interval,
see also Vallée-Tourangeau, Austin & Rankin, 1995) or
counterexamples of the rule to be discovered (i.e. triples
which are not increasing).

Participants
Fifty-eight undergraduate psychology students from
the University of Caen (France) participated in this
experiment. They were tested individually.

Procedure and materials
In the control condition (N=29) participants
received the task with the standard instructions. They
were required to discover a rule the experimenter had in
mind by proposing sequences of three numbers and
were given ‘2-4-6’ as an example of triples compatible
with the rule. To make sure that the participant well
understood the instructions, which were printed on an
instruction sheet, the experimenter re-explained them
and asked the subject if he/she had any questions.
Participants kept a written record of the triples they
proposed, their hypothesis about the target rule, as well
as the experimenter feedback.
In the “jackpot” condition (N=29), participants were
faced with a computer screen resembling a jackpot
machine. Participants were informed that it randomly
generates sequences of three numbers. The
experimenter asked the participants to trigger the
jackpot by pressing the key “ENTER”. After five trials,
the experimenter stopped the “jackpot” session. At this
point, the participant did not know yet the purpose of
the task and did not know what the use of the jackpot
was for. After the jackpot session, the participant was
given the rule discovery task as in the standard version.
However, instead of receiving an example
communicated by the experimenter, he/she had to

trigger the jackpot for a last trial. The experimenter
would thus tell him/her whether or not the triple
supposed to be randomly generated was consistent with
the rule. For each participant, the sequence 2-4-6 came
out at this trial and the experimenter told the subject
that it was consistent with the rule to be discovered. The
participant subsequently had to generate triples by
herself/himself, like in the standard version. The
jackpot was thus not used to generate triples after “2-46” was obtained.

Results
Performance As predicted participants performed
better in the jackpot condition than in the control
condition: Only 24% of participants gave the correct
rule on their first announcement in the control condition
(21% in Wason’ study) while 55% did so in the jackpot
condition ( 2 (1) = 5.84, p <.02). Moreover, the mean
number of rules announced to reach the correct solution
was higher in the control condition than in the jackpot
condition (2.38 vs. 1.59; Mann-Whitney U29,24= 214,
Z=2.39, p<.01) ; for the five participants of the control
group who failed in the task, the mean number of
proposed rules was 2.6).
Number and types of triples Participants tested more
triples before proposing a rule in the jackpot condition
than in the control condition. The mean number of
proposed triples per rule by participants who succeeded
in the task was higher in the jackpot condition than in
the control condition (8.15 vs. 6.11; U29,24=202, Z=-2.6,
p<.009). The mean proportion of counter-examples (i.e.
triples that received negative feedback) for successful
subjects was lower in the control condition than in the
jackpot condition (0.17 vs. 0.25; U29,24=207.5, Z=-2.51,
p<.01; this rate is equal to 0.06 for the 5 participants
who failed in the control condition). Similarly, the
mean proportion of irregular increasing triples was
lower in the control condition than in the jackpot
condition for these subjects (0.18 vs. 0.29; U29,24=218,
Z=-2.32, p<.02; this rate is equal to 0.02 for the failing
participants). These results indicate that subjects in the
jackpot conditions were more prompt to explore a
greater variety of triples than subjects in the control
condition who focused more on triples exhibiting the
salient properties of the 2-4-6.

Discussion
Removing the presumption of relevance of the triple
‘2-4-6’ was helpful: twice as many subjects discovered
the correct rule in a single annoucement when the triple
2-4-6 was provided without any presumption of
relevance and 83% of participants in the jackpot
condition succeeded in the task in no more than two
announcements. Moreover, even though giving 2-4-6 in

the jackpot condition may still suggest specific
hypotheses related to the salient features of this triple,
the fact of removing its presumption of relevance
entails that these features do not necessarily have to be
taken into account in order to succeed in the task.
Consequently, participants in the jackpot condition
were more inclined to consider alternative properties
and thus tested a greater variety of triples than in the
control condition.

Experiment 2
In contrast with the Wason selection task literature,
in which the content question has led to a vast amount
of research, no study has ever investigated content
effects with the 2-4-6 problem. That is in the earlier
experiments, numbers in the triples proposed by
participants or given by the experimenter never referred
to real quantities. However, when we use numbers in
daily life, we most of the time refer to concrete
quantities like books, people, dollars, reasoning errors
and so on. We conjectured that framing the task with a
real content situation might influence performance. In
particular, we think that using an appropriate content
and context can enhance the relevance of the rule “three
increasing numbers”.
In a previous section, we claimed that the rule of
increase was too simple to deserve the interest of the
participant in the context of an experimental task.
However, in real life situations people definitely not
avoid looking for an information for the reason that it is
too easy to access. They try to look for information that
matters for them. We believe that in some contexts,
searching for a rule of increase is likely to be
cognitively efficient. Indeed, in many real life
situations, following a rule of increase is actually highly
relevant. A paradigmatic example is economic activity.
An economic agent always aims at following such a
rule: he or she wants his/her turnover, sailings,
productivity, profits, or market scope to increase over
the time. Hence, we framed the 2-4-6 task in the context
of economic activity. In such a context, the task was to
discover not a rule an experimenter
who studies
human reasoning and hypothesis testing had in mind
but a rule about car sailings that a garage owner
imposes to his new employee. From the participant’s
perspective, what is relevant for an experimental
psychologist who studies cognitive skills is likely to be
different from what is relevant for a garage owner.
Indeed, searching for the most common way to order
numbers (i.e. rule of increase) may be seen as too
simple in one case, whereas it becomes highly relevant
in the other. Hence, we predict that people will discover
the rule “three increasing numbers” more often when
the search for such a rule occurs in the context of
economic activity.

Participants
One hundred and twenty undergraduate psychology
students from the University of Leuven (Belgium)
participated in this experiment.

Procedure and materials
The procedure used in this experiment substantially
differed from the one we used in Experiment 1. Indeed,
participants did not interact with the experimenter. The
instructions were given via a computer and participants
had to enter the triples they wanted to propose in the
computer. The feedback about the triple proceeded in
the following way: when the proposed triple was
consistent with the rule it appeared in green and when it
was inconsistent it appeared in red. The
consistent/inconsistent triples remained on the screen
where they were presented. After each trial participants
had the press the [1] key when they wanted to test
another triple, and the [2] key when he/she was sure of
having discovered the rule, after which he/she had to
type in the rule. After one rule announcement, the
experiment ended. This contrasts with Experiment 1 in
which participants could propose rules until they
discovered the target rule. Participants were tested in
groups of ten to twenty people each on their individual
computer. In the control condition (N=62), participants
had to discover a rule implemented by the experimenter
in the computer. In the “economic” condition (N=58)
participants received the following real life context:
“Mister Jansens is a prosperous garage owner. He
has recently posted an advertisement in order to recruit
a car salesman. Bert answered the ad and obtained an
interview with Mr Jansens, he told him that he was very
motivated for the job but he also informed Mr Jansens
that he never sold any car before. Mr Jansens had a
good feeling about Bert, but he thinks that an interview
is not enough to decide if Bert will be a good car
salesman. Hence, Mr Jansens offers Bert to work in his
garage for three months as a sale-training period. If Bert
does a good job, then he will decide to hire him. In
particular, in order to be recruited, Bert’s sales during
these three months have to follow a rule required by
Mr. Jansens. Bert willingly accepts the proposition.
Three months later… It’s time for balance! The first
month, Bert has been able to sell 2 cars, the second
month 4 cars and the third 6 cars. The verdict of Mr.
Jansens is very clear: “Perfect! Your sales have well
respected the rule. So, I can hire you!”

Results and discussion
In line with our prediction, more participants
discovered the rule in the economic condition than in
the control condition (3.2% vs. 29.3%; 2(1)= 15.3,
p=.0001). Moreover participants proposed a greater
number of triples in the economic condition than in the

control one (2.45 vs. 3.73; Mann-Whitney U62,58=
1121.0, Z = -3.645, , p <.05). This indicates that people
abstract more beyond the hypotheses suggested by the
2-4-6 triple and thus tested a greater variety of triples.
In particular, the mean proportion of irregular
increasing triples was higher in the economic condition
than in the control one (.090 vs. .125, Mann-Whitney
U62,58= 1553.5, Z = -1.689, p < .05 one-tailed). The
mean rate of counter-examples was also higher in the
economic condition than in the control one but this
difference was not significant (.10 vs. .12). Hence, the
results reveal that increasing the relevance for searching
the rule “three increasing numbers” improved
performance and thus show that people adapt their
cognitive skills in order to maximize relevance (Sperber
& Wilson, 1995): on one hand, it is indeed not really
relevant for a participant to search for a trivial rule like
“increasing numbers” in order to exhibit to a cognitive
psychologist her/his own cognitive skills, especially if
the experimenter provides an example which does not
suggest such a rule; on the other hand, it becomes much
more relevant to search for a rule of plain increasing in
the context of economic activity.

General discussion
In this study we provided the first extensive
conversational analysis of the 2-4-6 problem. We
argued that communication was highly misleading in
this task and that this explains why people focus on
overly narrow hypotheses. We claimed that being
misled is not a clue of irrationality. We showed that
when participants were not misled, they were not so bad
after all. In the standard task, people are misled because
they rationally consider that the givens of the problem
are relevant to solve the task.
Our experiments aimed at providing less deceptive
tasks and show that this increased performance. In
Experiment 1, we designed a task in such a way that
there was no presumption of relevance accompanying
the triple 2-4-6. This implied that the salient properties
of the 2-4-6 did not have necessarily to be considered
by the participant in order to succeed in the task. The
results showed that participants performed better when
the salient characteristics of the 2-4-6-triple resulted
from a random procedure (a jackpot) than when a
presumption of relevance accompanied such a triple (as
in communication). In Experiment 2 we manipulated
the content of the task: triples did not refer to abstract
numbers as it has always been the case in previous
studies but to numbers of cars sold within a three
months period. We framed the task within the context
of economic activity in order to increase the relevance
of searching for the rule “three increasing numbers”.
Our study shows that participants tailor the search of
their hypotheses according to what they expect to be
relevant in the task. When expectations of relevance

coincide with the correct rule, they are more prone to
discover it. This is line with the pragmatic analysis of
the Wason selection task made by Sperber, Cara and
Girotto (1995). According to them, performance in this
task is determined by expectations of relevance.
Subjects fail in this task because intuitions of relevance
do not coincide with the logical answer. Increasing the
rate success consist in constructing a context in which
intuitions of relevance will match with the logical
answer.
A pragmatic analysis of the conversational structure
of a cognitive task may be highly helpful in assessing
the quality of participants’ skills. There is now an
increasing body of research in the domain of high-level
cognitive processes revealing that lack of rationality is
mistakenly attributed on the basis of misleading tasks
(for reviews see, Politzer, 1986; Hilton, 1995; Politzer
& Macchi, 2000). These studies as well as ours should
alert psychologists that weak performance in a task
might be overestimated in the absence of a pragmatic
analysis.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Professor D. Trotoux and his
students of the University Institute of Technology of
Caen for the design of the “jackpot” we used in
Experiment 1.

References
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1983). Selective processes in
reasoning In J. St B. T. (Ed.), Thinking and
Reasoning: Psychological Approaches. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Evans, J.St.B.T. (1989). Bias in human reasoning :
Causes and consequences. Hove, UK : Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole,
& J.L. Morgan (Eds), Studies in syntax, Vol 3: Speech
acts. New York: Academic Press.
Gorman, M. E. (1995). Hypothesis testing In S. E.
Newstead & J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on
Thinking and Reasoning. Essays in honour of Peter
Wason. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hilton D.J. (1995) The social context of reasoning:
Conversational inference and rational judgment.
Psychological Bulletin, 118, 248-271.
Klayman J., Ha Y.W. (1987) Confirmation,
disconfirmation and information in hypothesis
testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Klayman, J. (1995). Varieties of Confirmation Bias In
J. R. Busemeyer, R. Hastie, & D. L. Medin (Eds.),
Decision Making from the Perspective of Cognitive
Psychology . New York: Academic Press.
Poletiek, F. (2001). Hypothesis-testing behaviour.
Psychology Press/Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia.
Politzer G. (1986) Laws of language use and formal
logic. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 15, 4792.
Politzer, G. & Macchi, L. (2000). Reasoning and
pragmatics. Mind and Society, 1, 73-93.
Sperber D., Cara F., Girotto V. (1995) Relevance theory
explains the selection task. Cognition, 57, 31-95.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance:
Communication and Cognition, Oxford, Blackwell.
2nde Edition.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Austin, N. G., & Rankin, S.
(1995). Inducing a Rule in Wason's 2-4-6 Task: A
Test of the Information-Quantity and GoalComplementarity Hypotheses. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48, 895-914.
Wason, P.C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate
hypotheses in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 12, 129-140.
Wason, P.C. (1968). Reasoning about a rule. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20, 273-281.

