UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Who says models can only do what you tell them? Unsupervised category learning data, fits,
and predictions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vn7h806

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Gureckis, Todd M
Love, Bradley C

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Who says models can only do what you tell them? Unsupervised
category learning data, fits, and predictions
Todd M. Gureckis (gureckis@love.psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology; The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Bradley C. Love (love@psy.utexas.edu)

Department of Psychology; The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
Abstract
How do people learn and organize examples in the
absence of a teacher? This paper explores this question through a examination of human data and computational modeling results. The SUSTAIN (Supervised and Unsupervised STratified Incremental Network) model successfully fits human learning data
drawn from two published studies. The first study
examines how correlations between features can facilitate unsupervised learning. The second set of
studies examines the role that similarity and attention play in unsupervised category construction
(i.e., sorting) tasks. Importantly, SUSTAIN suggests two novel behavioral predictions that are confirmed.

Introduction
The study of human category learning has focused
on supervised learning. Researchers typically utilize
a experimental procedure in which the participant
must learn to classify a set of stimuli while receiving
corrective feedback on every trial. Certainly, there
are many other ways to learn about the world. Our
environment does not always provide us with explicit
feedback and thus, some learning is better characterized as unsupervised. For example, we routinely
categorize incoming email as “junk mail” in the absence of a teacher. A great deal of human learning
may be unsupervised. The goal of this paper is to
expand our understanding of how humans learn from
examples without supervision.
To achieve this goal, we fit the SUSTAIN model of
category learning to Billman and Knutson’s (1996)
studies concerning how humans learn correlations
through observation and to Medin, Wattenmaker,
and Hampson’s (1987) data on unsupervised category construction (i.e., sorting) behavior. SUSTAIN
successfully accounts for human performance in both
of these studies with one set of parameters. Importantly, SUSTAIN’s account of these studies suggests
novel predictions which are subsequently tested (and
confirmed) with human subjects.

The Modeling Approach
SUSTAIN has been successfully applied to an array
of challenging human data sets spanning a variety

of category learning paradigms including supervised
classification (Love & Medin, 1998), inference learning (Love, Markman, & Yamauchi, 2000), and unsupervised learning (Gureckis & Love, 2002). One
primary goal of our modeling approach is to address
multiple forms of category learning (both supervised
and unsupervised) with one consistent set of principles. After a brief introduction to the operation of
SUSTAIN, these core principles will be discussed.

Introduction to SUSTAIN
SUSTAIN is a clustering model of human category
learning. The internal representation of the model
consists of a set of clusters. Category representations
consist of one or more associated clusters. At the
start of learning, the network has a single cluster
that is centered in this representational space upon
the first input pattern.
When a new stimulus item is presented, SUSTAIN
attempts to assign the item to the most similar existing cluster. This assignment is unsupervised since
it is based only on the similarity between item and
cluster. If a surprising event occurs, such as a misprediction in supervised learning or a stimulus is encountered in unsupervised learning that is not similar to any existing cluster, SUSTAIN creates a new
cluster to encode the current stimulus. This new
cluster is centered in the representational space on
the misclassified item.
When a stimulus is not surprising, the item is assigned to the most similar existing cluster and this
cluster updates its internal representation to become
more similar to the current item (a process somewhat analogous to prototype formation). Classification decisions are based on the cluster to which a
stimulus instance is assigned. Like other models of
category learning (e.g., Kruschke, 1992), SUSTAIN’s
selective attention mechanism learns to selectively
weight stimulus feature dimensions that are most
useful for categorization.

The Principles of SUSTAIN
With this general understanding of the operation of
the model, we now examine the six key principles
that underly SUSTAIN.

Principle 1, SUSTAIN is directed towards
simple solutions SUSTAIN is initially directed
towards simple solutions. At the start of learning,
SUSTAIN has only one cluster which is centered
on the first input item. It then adds clusters (i.e.,
complexity) only as needed to accurately describe
the category structure of the learning task. Its selective attention mechanism further serves to bias
SUSTAIN towards simple solutions by focusing the
model on the stimulus dimensions that provide consistent information.
Principle 2, similar stimulus items tend to
cluster together In learning to classify stimuli as
members of two distinct categories, SUSTAIN will
cluster similar items together. For example, di↵erent instances of a bird subtype (e.g., sparrows) could
cluster together and form a sparrow cluster instead
of leaving separate traces in memory for each instance. Clustering is an unsupervised process because cluster assignment is done on the basis of similarity, not feedback.
Principle 3, SUSTAIN relies on both unsupervised and supervised learning processes
As discussed above, SUSTAIN can cluster based on
similarity (an unsupervised process). SUSTAIN’s
operation is also a↵ected by supervision (when available). Consider the example of SUSTAIN learning
to classify stimuli as members of the category mammals or birds. Let’s assume that a cluster representing four-legged, hairy, land creatures is already acquired, as well as another cluster representing small,
winged, creatures that fly. The first time SUSTAIN
is asked to classify a bat, the model will predict that
a bat is a bird because the bat stimulus will be more
similar to the existing bird cluster than to the existing mammal cluster. Upon receiving corrective
feedback (supervision), SUSTAIN will note its error
and create a new cluster to store the anomalous bat
stimulus. Now, when this bat or one similar to it
is presented to SUSTAIN, SUSTAIN will correctly
predict that the bat is a mammal. This example
also illustrates how SUSTAIN can entertain more
complex solutions when necessary through cluster
recruitment (see Principle 1).
Principle 4, Clusters are recruited in response
to surprising events As the previous example illustrates, surprising events lead to new clusters being recruited. In unsupervised learning, a surprising
event is simply exposure to a stimulus that is not sufficiently similar to any existing cluster (i.e., a very
novel stimulus).
Principle 5, the pattern of feedback matters
As the bird-mammal example above illustrates, feedback a↵ects the inferred category structure. Prediction failures result in a cluster being recruited, thus
di↵erent patterns of feedback can lead to di↵erent
representations being acquired. This principle al-

lows SUSTAIN to predict di↵erent acquisition patterns for di↵erent learning modes (e.g., inference versus classification learning) that are informationally
equivalent but di↵er in their pattern of feedback.
Principle 6, cluster competition Clusters can
be seen as competing explanations of the input. The
strength of the response from the winning cluster
(the cluster the current stimulus is most similar to)
is attenuated in the presence of other clusters that
are somewhat similar to the current stimulus (compare to Sloman’s, 1997, account of competing explanations in reasoning).

Model Fits and Predictions
In the following sections, Billman and Knutson’s
(1996) results are described, fit, and SUSTAIN’s
novel predictions are tested. Following Billman and
Knutson, Medin et al.’s (1987) work is given similar
consideration.

Modeling Billman and Knutson’s (1996)
Billman and Knutson’s experiments tested the prediction that category learning is easier when certain stimulus feature dimensions are predictive of
other feature dimensions (e.g., “has wings”, “can
fly”, “has feathers” are all inter-correlated features
of birds) than when correlations are unrelated or are
not numerous. Their studies evaluate how relations
among stimulus feature dimensions a↵ect learning
in an unsupervised task. SUSTAIN has successfully fit Billman and Knutson’s (1996) Experiment 2
and 3 (Gureckis & Love, 2002). Here, we focus on
Experiment 3.
Fitting Billman and Knutson’s (1996) data
Subjects studied stimulus items that depicted imaginary animals made up of of seven feature dimensions:
type of head, body, texture, tail, legs, habitat, and
time of day pictured. Each dimension could take on
one of three values. For example, the time of day
could be “sunrise”, “nighttime”, or “midday”. The
correlational structure of the feature dimensions varied according to which of two conditions (either the
Structured or the Orthogonal condition) the subject
was randomly assigned. The abstract structure of
the two conditions is shown in Table 1. In the Structured condition, the first three stimulus dimensions
are intercorrelated (for a total of three correlations),
while the remaining four dimensions vary freely. The
Orthogonal condition’s structure also contains three
correlations (the first and second dimensions are correlated, as are the third and fourth, and the fifth and
the sixth), but the correlations are isolated (e.g., the
first and third dimension are not correlated).
In the learning phase for both conditions, subjects
were told that they were participating in a visual
memory experiment and viewed 27 stimulus items
for four blocks (a block is a single pass through all
training items). Each of the 27 items appeared once

Table 1: The logical structure of the stimulus items
for the Orthogonal and Structured conditions in Experiment 3 of Billman and Knutson (1996). The
seven columns denote the seven stimulus dimensions.
Each dimension can display one of three di↵erent
values, indicated by a 1, 2, or 3. An x indicates that
the dimension was free to assume any of the three
possible values.
Structured Condition
111xxxx 222xxxx 333xxxx
Orthogonal Condition
111111x 221111x 331111x
111122x 221122x 331122x
111133x 221133x 331133x
112211x 222211x 332211x
112222x 222222x 332222x
112233x 222233x 332233x
113311x 223311x 333311x
113322x 223322x 333322x
113333x 223333x 333333x

per block in a random order. The only di↵erence
between the Structured and Orthogonal conditions
was the abstract structure of the stimuli that were
shown during the learning phase.
In the test phase of the experiment, subjects
viewed a novel set of 54 stimulus pairs. Each member of the pair had two of the seven feature dimensions obscured (e.g., the locations where the tail and
head should have been were blacked out) so that information about only one correlation was available
for each item in test pair. One item in the pair
preserved the studied correlation, while the other
item violated the correlation. Subjects were asked
to choose the stimulus item in the pair that seemed
most similar to the items studied in the learning
phase (a forced choice procedure). The item that
preserved the studied correlation was considered the
correct choice. For example, in the isolating condition the correct item of the pair might have the
abstract structure [1 1 m 1 m 1 2] because it preserves the correlation between the first and second
dimensions (the ’m’ represents a dimension that was
blocked). The incorrect item of the pair might then
be [1 2 m 1 m 1 2] which breaks the correlation
present in the training items between the first and
second dimension.
The basic result from Experiment 3 was that the
“correct” item was chosen more often in the Structured condition than in the Orthogonal condition
(77% vs. 66% from Table 2). This finding supports
the hypothesis that extracting a category’s structure
is facilitated by intercorrelated dimensions.

Table 2: The mean accuracy for humans and SUSTAIN in Billman and Knutson’s (1996) Experiment 3.
Orthogonal Structured
Human
.66
.77
SUSTAIN
.60
.77

Table 3: SUSTAIN’s best fitting parameters for the
studies considered. SUSTAIN’s parameters are not
discussed in this paper, but this table is included for
readers who wish to replicate our results.
function/adjusts
symbol value
learning rate
⌘
0.0966
cluster competition
6.40
decision consistency
d
1.98
attentional focus
r
10.0
threshold
⌧
0.5

Modeling Results SUSTAIN was trained in a
manner analogous to how subjects were trained by
using four randomly ordered learning blocks. No
feedback was provided as all stimulus items were
encoded as being members of the same category.
New clusters were recruited according to the unsupervised notion of surprise. In order for SUSTAIN
to mimic the forced choice nature of the test phase,
a response probability was calculated for each of the
two items. The ultimate response of the network was
biased towards the item in the forced choice that had
the strongest response probability.
SUSTAIN was run numerous times on both conditions in both experiments and the results were averaged. The best fitting parameters are shown in Table 3. SUSTAIN correctly predicts greater accuracy
in the Structured condition than in the Orthogonal
condition (see Table 2).
In Experiment 3, SUSTAIN’s most common solution in the Orthogonal condition was to partition
the studied items into three clusters. However, the
nature of the three partitions varied across runs.
SUSTAIN tended to focus on one of three correlations present in the Isolated condition and ignored
the other two. For instance, during training SUSTAIN might create three clusters organized around
the first two input dimensions (one cluster for each
correlated value across the two dimensions) and ignore the correlation between the third and fourth
dimensions and the fifth and sixth dimensions.
SUSTAIN also recruited three clusters in the
Structured condition. The same dynamics that lead
SUSTAIN to focus on only one correlation in the Orthogonal condition leads SUSTAIN to focus on all of
the interrelated correlations in the Structured condition. When SUSTAIN learns one correlation in the

Structured condition, SUSTAIN necessarily learns
all of the pairwise correlations because of the way
clusters are updated (i.e., three clusters are formed
that capture the three basic subtypes of stimuli).
This type of learning in the Structured condition is
what lead to the higher accuracy levels.
SUSTAIN’s solution to Experiment 3 suggests
some novel predictions: (a) When correlations are
not interrelated, learning one correlation should
block the learning of other correlations, and (b)
When correlations are interrelated, either all of the
correlations are learned or none of the correlations
are learned. These predictions are explored in the
following section.
Testing the Predictions In the original Billman
and Knutson article, accuracy was considered in aggregate for all three correlations. Here, we reanalyze Billman and Knutson’s data by considering each
subjects’ performance on each correlation (i.e., each
subject contributes three scores to the analysis instead of one). SUSTAIN predicts that human subjects will learn only one of the three correlations in
the Orthogonal condition, but will learn either all
or none of the correlations in the Structured condition. If this is true, the mean variance of subjects’
accuracies for the three correlations should be higher
in the Orthogonal condition than in the Structured
condition. This was indeed the case. The mean
variance of each subject’s three accuracy scores was
0.030 for the Orthogonal condition, but only 0.010
in the Structured condition (t(46) = 2.76, p < .001).
Discussion Due to the way SUSTAIN organizes
its clusters, it predicts that learning one correlation in the Orthogonal condition blocks the learning of other correlations (which should result in a
high within subject variance), whereas in the Structured condition learning one correlation is tied to
learning all three correlations (which should result
in a low within subject variance). These predictions
were made prior to obtaining access to Billman and
Knutson’s data. The combined results of the original
Billman study and the subsequent analysis, suggest
that people find categories that are organized around
highly correlated features to be easier to learn because correlations enable the transfer of knowledge
across features. The mechanism that supports this
operation may bare a strong resemblance to SUSTAIN.

Modeling Sorting Behavior with
SUSTAIN
Billman and Knutson’s (1996) studies suggest that
subjects prefer stimulus organizations in which the
perceptual dimensions are intercorrelated. However,
studies in category construction reveal a contrasting
pattern — subjects tend to sort stimuli along a single
dimension. This behavior persists despite the fact

Table 4: The logical structure of the perceptual dimensions in Medin et al. (1987) sorted in two ways.
In the family resemblance table, the stimuli with a
preponderance of 1’s can be seen as forming one family, while the stimuli with a preponderance of 2’s can
be seen as forming a second family or covert category. In the one-dimensional sort table, the same
stimuli items are grouped on the basis of a single
dimension (the first dimension).
Family Resemblance
1111
2222
1112
2221
1121
2212
1211
2122
2111
1222

One-dimensional Sort
1111
2222
1112
2221
1121
2212
1211
2122
1222
2111

that alternate organizations exist that respect the
intercorrelated nature of the stimuli, such as an intercorrelated family resemblance structure (Medin,
Wattenmaker, & Hampson, 1987).
SUSTAIN was applied to the sorting data from
Medin et al.’s (1987) Experiment 1 in hopes of reconciling the apparently contradictory findings. In Experiment 1, subjects were instructed to sort ten stimuli into two equal sized piles. Stimuli were cartoonlike animals that varied on four binary-valued perceptual dimensions (head shape, number of legs,
body markings, and tail length). The logical structure of the items is shown in Table 4. The basic finding is that subjects sort along a single dimension (the
one-dimensional sort in Table 4) as opposed to sorting stimuli according to their intercorrelated structure (i.e., the family resemblance structure shown in
Table 4).
In these simulations, SUSTAIN was constrained
to create only two piles (i.e., clusters) like Medin at
al.’s subjects. This was accomplished by preventing
SUSTAIN from recruiting a third cluster. SUSTAIN
was presented with the items from Table 4 for 10 random training blocks to mirror subjects’ examination
of the stimulus set and their ruminations as to how
to organize the stimuli. To evaluate the performance
of the model, we looked at how SUSTAIN’s two clusters were organized. Using the same parameters that
were used in the Billman and Knutson (1996) studies listed in Table 3, SUSTAIN correctly predicted
that the majority of sorts (99%) are organized along
one stimulus dimension.
SUSTAIN’s natural bias to focus on a subset of
stimulus dimensions (which is further stressed by
the selective attention mechanism) led it to predict
the predominance of one-dimensional sorts. Attention is directed towards stimulus dimensions that
consistently match at the cluster level. This leads

to certain dimensions becoming more salient over
the course of learning (i.e., the model’s attention
value along that dimension becomes larger). The
dimension that develops the greatest salience over
the course of learning becomes the basis for the onedimensional sort.
Which dimension provides consistent information
during the course of learning will, in part, be determined by the order in which the stimulus items are
presented to the model. Thus, SUSTAIN predicts
that the order of card consideration in a sorting task
might constrain which dimension human subjects focus their sort on. If card ordering has no e↵ect and
subjects randomly choose a dimension to sort on or
choose due to individual di↵erences in the salience
of a particular dimension, then SUSTAIN’s account
should be insufficient.

Testing the Prediction
The following study tests this prediction by creating
a modified version of the Medin, et al. sorting experiment in which the order that subject may consider
cards is manipulated. Our interest was to test if the
dynamics that led SUSTAIN to choose a particular
dimension to sort on were the same dynamics that
constrained subjects’ sorting strategies.
Procedure Stimuli in our experiment were geometric shapes, printed on laminated cards, that varied on four of five binary valued dimensions (one
dimensions value was held constant and thus had
no influence on subjects sorting decisions). The dimensions were size (big or small), color of border
(white or yellow), main color (blue or purple), a slash
across the shape (present or absent), and texture
(smooth or rough). Each dimension is independent
and equally salient (as verified by multi-dimensional
scaling of subjects’ pairwise similarity ratings).
Participants were given a large board that was divided in half with a dark line (see Figure 1). Each
side of the board had five positions in which to place
cards. Before the start of an experiment trial, two
“guide” cards were placed on the board that had opposing values along each dimension. Figure 1 shows
an empty board with the abstract structure of these
two guide cards. The particular values and meaning of each stimulus dimension was random for each
subject (i.e., the values of the stimulus dimensions
such as size and color were randomly assigned to one
column of the abstract structure shown).
During the experiment, participants were given
one new card at a time by the experimenter and
were asked to place the card in an empty position
on one side of the board according to what seemed
most natural or sensible given the other cards on
that side. The first two cards actually handed to
subjects were constrained so that they mismatched
on one dimension from the guide cards already on
the board. For example, given the two cards in Fig-

0000

1111

Figure 1: The layout and initial configuration of the
board given to subjects is shown.
ure 1 the abstract structure of the first two cards
actually handed to the subjects might be [0 0 0 1]
and [1 1 1 0].
The final 6 cards given to subjects were drawn
from the remaining possible. Cards were randomly
chosen but came in pairs of opposing values. For example, if the fourth card had the abstract structure
[0 0 1 0], the fifth might be [1 0 1 1]. This manipulation also helped to encourage subjects to fill the
board up in a more or less even fashion rather than
filling up one side completely, then having no choice
as where to place the remaining cards.
Our hypothesis was that subjects would, like SUSTAIN, place the first two cards on the board on the
basis of overall similarity to the guide cards as opposed to randomly choosing a single dimension on
which to focus their sorting strategy. Thus in our
example, [0 0 0 1] would be placed under the [0 0
0 0] prototype and [1 1 1 0] would be placed under the [1 1 1 1] prototype. If subjects allocated
attention to dimensions that provide consistent information like SUSTAIN, then attention would be
increased on only the dimensions that matched the
guide cards (all but the fourth dimension in this
case). This initial attentional disadvantage on the
fourth, mismatched dimension would prevent subjects from sorting on that dimension.
Results Twenty-eight psychology undergraduate
students participated in the study for course credit.
The results collected for this study are show in Table 5. Of the 28 subjects, 23 subjects performed a
one-dimensional sort while 5 used an alternate sorting strategy. Of the 23 subjects that performed a one
dimensional sort, only 2 of these 23 subjects sorted
the cards using the mismatched dimension as their
basis for organization. If subjects had no particular
preference for any dimension and the manipulation
of the cards had no e↵ect, then the probability of
getting 21 out of 23 subjects to sort on a dimension other than the one mismatching dimension is

Table 5: The results of the sorting study.
Subjects using a 1D sort
—Mismatched Dimension
—Other Dimensions
Subjects using a non 1D sort
—Family Resemblance
—Unknown Strategy
Total Subjects

Number of Subjects
23
2
21
5
3
2
28

less than .05 as given by a two-tailed binomial trial
(n=23, p = .25). Of the five subjects that did not
perform a one-dimensional sort, three performed a
family resemblance sort and two performed a sort
using an undecipherable sorting strategy.
SUSTAIN was simulated using the same parameters used for the Billman and Knutson studies (Table 3) and using the same conditions from the Medin,
et al. sorting simulation, but with the specific card
orderings that subjects were given in our experiment. In 100% of the trials, the model used a dimension other than the mismatched dimension as
the basis for a one-dimensional sort.

Discussion
The dimension that subjects choose to sort in this
task cannot be explained as random choice. The results presented in our experiment provide evidence
that the order of card presentation plays a role in influencing subjects to sort on a particular dimension.
Specifically, sorting behavior is influenced by the
way we perceive similarity between stimuli. In this
unsupervised task, attention is allocated such that
the similarity space changes during the course of
learning. At the start of learning, each dimensions
is more or less equally important, but as learning
proceeds, certain dimensions become more salient
(because they are more informative) while others
become less. This warping of the similarity space
is what ultimately causes judgments in this type of
task to become based on a single dimension, rather
than on the overall similarity between items. The
fact that SUSTAIN predicted this behavior gives additional support to the notion that it’s principles
reflect some of the true operational principles of human learning.

Conclusions and Implications
SUSTAIN’s combined account of Billman and Knutson’s (1996) studies and Medin et al. (1987) suggest
that the salience of stimulus dimensions change as
a result of unsupervised learning and that the correlated structure of the world is more likely to be
respected when there are numerous intercorrelated
dimensions that are strong. In cases where the total

number of correlations is modest, and the correlations are weak and not interrelated (such as in the
Medin et al. stimuli), SUSTAIN predicts that stimuli will be organized along a single dimension.
The ability of SUSTAIN to account for two diverse
unsupervised learning data sets with a single set of
parameters demonstrate how it’s formulation positions it as a robust model of category learning. In
addition to the studies reported here, SUSTAIN’s
principles has been shown to generalize across a
number of other forms of category learning (such
as supervised learning and inference learning). It is
these well-defined principles and the transparent operation of SUSTAIN that allow it to make the two
predictions which have been successfully confirmed
here.

Acknowledgments
We would like to o↵er our sincere thanks to Dorrit
Billman for providing access to her data and to Rob
Goldstone for motivating the sorting study. This
work was supported by AFOSR Grant F49620-01-10295.

References
Billman, D., & Knutson, J. (1996). Unsupervised
concept learning and value systematicity: A
complex whole aids learning the parts. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 22 (2), 458-475.
Gureckis, T. M., & Love, B. C. (2002). Modeling
unsupervised learning with sustain. (In Press,
FLAIRS 2002 Special Track: Categorization
and Concept Representation: Models and Implications)
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplarbased connectionist model of category learning. Psychological Review, 99, 22–44.
Love, B. C., Markman, A. B., & Yamauchi, T.
(2000). Modeling classification and inference
learning. Proceedings of the Fifteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 136-141.
Love, B. C., & Medin, D. L. (1998). SUSTAIN:
A model of human category learning. In Proceedings of the fifteenth national conference on
artificial intelligence (p. 671-676). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Medin, D. L., Wattenmaker, W. D., & Hampson,
S. E. (1987). Family resemblance, conceptual
cohesiveness, and category construction. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 242-279.
Sloman, S. A. (1997). Explanatory coherence and
the induction of properties. Thinking & Reasoning, 3, 81-110.

