UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Working Memory Capacity and the Nature of Generated Counterexamples

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4g95084b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Verschueren, Niki
De Neys, Wim
Schaeken, Walter
et al.

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Working Memory Capacity and the Nature of Generated Counterexamples.
Niki Verschueren (Niki.Verschueren@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Wim De Neys (Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Géry d’Ydewalle (Géry.Dydewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
University of Leuven
Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
This article presents a taxonomic system for generated
disablers (based on Elio, 1998) and generated alternatives.
Based on the taxonomy, we distinguish three different types of
knowledge that are advocated during generation tasks (1)
situations that are semantically strongly related to the content
of the premises (2) more remote situations and (3) the invalid
or low quality counterexamples. Second, we look at the effect
of working memory capacity on the nature of generated
counterexamples. We found that participants with a high
working memory capacity can generate more counterexamples
and are flexible in their search process. Participants with low
working memory generate less counterexamples and restrict
themselves to the first type of counterexamples.

Introduction
Deductive reasoning with causal propositions is one of the
core activities of human cognition. The prototypical causal
rule is formulated as an ‘if-then’ sentence. The if-part of the
conditional expresses the cause and the then-part contains the
effect. The four reasoning problems that are traditionally
used to investigate causal reasoning are (1) modus ponens MP: does the effect follow when the cause is present (2)
denial of the antecedent - DA: does the effect follow in
absence of the cause (3) affirmation of the consequent - AC:
did the cause occur when the effect is observed (4) modus
tollens - MT: did the cause occur although the effect did not
occur. The answers participants produce to these problems
are classically discussed in terms of conditional answers.
Schematically, the reasoning problems and answers look as
follows. The conditional sentence is: ‘If cause, then effect’
MP
DA
AC
MT

Categorical premise
The cause occurs.
The cause does not occur.
The effect occurs.
The effect does not occur

Conditional answer
The effect follows.
The effect does not follow.
The cause preceded.
The cause did not precede.

Cummins (Cummins, Lubart, Alksnis, & Rist, 1991;
Cummins, 1995) found that the tendency to deduce AC and
DA is related to the number of alternative causes the
reasoner can activate from background knowledge. The
number of disabling conditions, on its turn influences the
making of MP and MT. Alternative causes is a cause other
than the one given, that is capable of evoking the effect.
Disabling conditions is an event that can prevent an effect
from occurring in the presence of the given cause.

For each of these four reasoning problems Markovits
(2000) gives a detailed description of the underlying
cognitive mechanism. His theory is based on the mental
model theory (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). The mental model theory assumes that reasoners build
internal models representing the premise content, and
through manipulation and extension of these models they
generate a conclusion. We will briefly discuss Markovits’
(2000) account of how the four reasoning problems are
solved (applied to causal reasoning).
The mental model theory assumes that (1) reasoners start
by representing the content of the conditional sentence in an
economical way, for instance ‘cause→effect’. This model
represents a possible situation and is often called the initial
model. Other possible models of situations are left implicit.
When they are asked what follows from the categorical
premise reasoners verify whether they can produce a
conclusion based on the initial model. In case of MP they can
initially conclude that the effect occurs, and for the AC they
can conclude that the cause preceded. For the other two
reasoning forms, there is no explicit information regarding
the absence of effect or cause, so no conclusion can initially
be generated. (2) In case of DA and MT, reasoners create
explicit models of other possible situations. According to
Markovits (2000) the preferred second model is ‘no
cause→no effect’. Based on this extra model it is possible to
generate an initial conclusion for DA (the effect does not
follow) and for MT (the cause did not precede). At this point,
a first conclusion is formulated for all four reasoning
problems; this conclusion corresponds to the conditional
answer. (3) Most reasoners will then validate their initial
conclusion by searching for possible counterexamples. For
MP and MT, the falsifying model is ‘cause →no effect’
(disabler). For AC and DA, the falsifying situation is ‘no
cause→effect’ (alternative). If a counterexample is found,
reasoners become aware that there is more than one
conclusion possible, and reject the initial conclusion. When
no counterexamples are found, reasoners give conditional
answers to all four reasoning forms. Hence, the probability
of finding counterexamples informs us about the probability
of giving conditional answers.
The probability that reasoners find a counterexample
depends on the number of counterexamples that are present
in semantic memory. When there are many counterexamples,
the probability of retrieving at least one is higher than when
there are only few counterexamples. In order to check how
many counterexamples reasoners can retrace from memory,

researchers ask participants to generate possible alternatives
and/or disablers for a conditional sentence. The number of
counterexamples generated in this way reflects the number of
counterexamples present in background knowledge, thus
reflecting the probability that reasoners find at least one
counterexample during reasoning.
Previous research has focussed on specific characteristics
of generated counterexamples: the absolute number of
counterexamples (see e.g., Cummins et. al., 1991; Cummins,
1995), the salience of counterexamples (Markovits, 2000),
and the strength of association between (alternate) causes
and a consequent (Quinn & Markovits, 1998). For disablers,
Chan and Chua (1994) and De Neys, Schaeken &
d’Ydewalle (2001) described the importance of the perceived
strength of the connection between cause and effect.
Dieussaert, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle (2002) investigated the
differential effect of disablers referring to the item itself or to
speaker control.
Another important characteristic is the type of the
generated counterexamples. It is possible that some
counterexamples are considered to be of greater importance
regarding their falsifying strength, than others are. A first
step in this research domain is to develop a taxonomy, which
enables us to distinguish different types of disablers and
alternatives. Elio (1998) has proposed a taxonomy of
‘disablers’. Although she constructed this taxonomy from the
perspective of belief revision, we consider this taxonomy
also useful for research on ‘deductive’ conditional reasoning.
Elio (2001) herself points out that both research area’s are
complementary, as ‘endorsement and entrenchment of a
conditional are opposite sides of the same coin’. No
taxonomy has been lined out for alternatives. Developing a
taxonomy for alternatives will be the first aim of the present
study.
Furthermore, we presume that the ability of generating
counterexamples is influenced by working memory capacity.
Retrieving a counterexample is considered to be a semantic
search process (Markovits, Fleury, Quinn & Venet, 1998)
and since the efficiency of a semantic search process is
linked to working memory capacity (Rosen & Engle, 1997)
we deduce that the retrieving of counterexamples is linked to
working memory capacity (see also De Neys, et al., 2002).
The present study will provide some preliminary data on this
topic. Secondly, we will investigate whether there are
differences in the nature of generated counterexamples
corresponding to differences in working memory capacity.

TAXONOMY
Disablers
Elio (1998) proposed her taxonomy for disablers in the
context of belief-change. She first induced a belief-state
about the rule by presenting an MP problem and its
conditional answer. Then, the participant finds out that this
stated conclusion is contradicted by observed facts and is
asked to give some sort of rationalisation. Elio (1998; 2002)
distinguishes seven categories of disablers. We will illustrate
these categories for the sentence: ‘If a plant is watered well,

the plant stays green’. A disabler for this sentence explains
why the plant doesn’t stay green although it is watered well.
The first category contains the ‘real’ disablers (1), e.g.
‘there is no sunlight’. These answers state that normally the
cause produces the effect but in the situation under
description there is an extra conditon present which prevents
the effect from occuring. Instances of the second category,
demote to default (2) merely indicate that the given rule is
probabilistic in nature, e.g., ‘in most cases the plant stays
green, but there are exceptions’. The next category contains
the missing enablers (3), e.g., ‘the plant received too little
water’. These responses indicate that a condition necessary
for the cause to take effect is absent. The fourth category
holds generalisations (4) of the effect, e.g., ‘the plant stays
healthy’. The rationale behind this kind of disabler is that the
cause produces an effect, but not specifically the effect
mentioned in the rule. Another category contains responses
that indicate an invalid relation (5) between cause and effect;
e.g., ‘water is not enough for the plant to stay green’. The
sixth category contains exceptional instances (6), e.g., ‘the
plant is an oak with brownish leaves’. The rule remains
valid, but the participants lists an instance to which the rule
exceptionally doesn’t apply. The last category contains
answers which make reference to intervening variables or
the passage of time (7), e.g., ‘the plant was watered well
until last month’. These responses indicate that the cause was
indeed followed by the effect, but something happened that
cancelled the effect.

Alternatives
In line with the categories proposed by Elio for disablers,
we can construct a taxonomy for alternatives. We will use
the same sentence to illustrate the different types of
alternative causes, ‘If a plant is watered well, the plant will
stay green’. An alternative explains why the plant stays
green, even when he is not watered well.
A first category contains the ‘real’ alternatives (1), e.g.,
‘the plant receives a lot of fertilizer’. These are causes, which
can also produce the effect, even when the given cause is
absent. The second category is called demote to default (2),
e.g., ‘normally the plant needs water to stay green, but not
always’. This category contains answers that point out that
normally the cause produces the effect, but there are some
exceptions, which are not explicitly mentioned. The third
category contains non-missing enablers (3), e.g., ‘the plant
needs practically no water’. This category mirrors the
missing-enabler category of the disabler taxonomy. The fact
that the plant does not need a lot of water is no cause of the
plant staying green. It just enables the effect to occur even if
the required cause is absent. A fourth category contains the
generalizations (4), e.g., ‘if you take good care of a plant, the
plant stays green’. Watering a plant well is an instantiation of
the superordinate category ‘taking good care of a plant’. The
fifth category is the invalid rule (5); e.g., ‘a plant does not
need water to stay green’. This ‘alternative’ cancels the
stated relation between antecedent and consequent. The sixth
category contains the exceptional instances (6), e.g., ‘the
plant is a Mexican cactus’. Instances of this category point
out that the conditional sentence is valid, but for this

particular example of a plant, the rule does not apply.
Finally, the seventh category contains alternatives referring
to intervening variables or passage of time (7), e.g., ‘after a
while the plant learned to live on little water’.
In addition to these 7 parallel categories, we distinguish
three extra categories. The first extra category contains
answers referring to luck or magic (8), e.g., ‘Harry Potter
came by and the plant turned green’. The second category
contains answers for which the conditional sentence is read
in its non-literal meaning (9), e.g., ‘the plant sees that other
plants receive water and turns green with envy’. A last
category is reserved for invalid answers (10), e.g., 'the plant
stays green by its photosynthesis’, ‘the plant does yoga’, ...
In most experiments where participants are asked to generate
disablers or alternatives, these answers are excluded from the
analysis. From the perspective of building a taxonomic
system, we preferred to put them in a special category. As
with Elio’s (1998) taxonomy for disablers, we assume that
some of these categories have fuzzy boundaries. The
category ‘luck or magic’ is related to ‘demote-to-default’ and
‘exceptional instances’.
The extra three categories are also valid for disablers. They
cannot be reduced to one of the seven categories Elio
proposed, so for sake of completeness, we will add them to
her taxonomy. Since the taxonomy for disablers then fully
parallels the taxonomy for alternatives, we can compare the
distribution of the answers.
Overall, for disablers as well as for alternatives, we can
say that the categories labeled ‘disablers’ and ‘alternatives’
contain the ‘real’ counterexamples. Instantiations of this
category appear to be semantically closely related to the
content of the premises. The categories ‘demote to default’,
‘(non)missing enabler’, ‘generalization’, ‘invalid rule’,
‘time’ and ‘exceptional instance’ are more remote. They
either refer to exceptional situations or some of the basic
assumptions of the conditional sentence are denied. The
categories of ‘luck or magic’, ‘non-literal interpretation’ and
‘invalid answers’ contain counterexamples that can be given
to any kind of sentence, regardless of the exact semantic
content. We consider these counterexamples to be of low
quality.

Experiment
Applying the Taxonomy
First of all, we will apply the two taxonomic systems on
generated counterexamples. This way we can get some
indication of which type background knowledge participants
use when asked to produce counterexamples.
Method We used twenty causal ‘if-then’-sentences. The
sentences covered a broad range of semantic domains. Based
on previous research we choose an equal proportion of
sentences for the four categories: (1) many disablers and
many alternatives, (2) many disablers, few alternatives, (3)
few disablers, many alternatives, and (4) few disablers and
few alternatives. Our generation task was similar to the one
used by Cummins (1995). First, we presented the participants
with a causal rule. Subsequently we stated that the cause

occurred but it did not produce the effect (disablers) or that
the effect occurred in absence of the given cause
(alternatives). Participants were then asked to write down as
many explanations as possible (maximum 5). It was
explicitly mentioned that the given explanations had to be
different from the stated cause, different from each other,
and that they could only give valid answers, answers such as
‘the person came from Mars’ are not tolerated.
Sixty-two subjects participated in the experiment as part of
course requirements. Thirty-two subjects were given the
disabler-generation task, while thirty other subjects received
the alternative-generation task. Each participant generated
either disablers or alternatives for each of the 20 sentences.
The order of the sentences was randomized over participants.
The participants were given 15 to 20 minutes to complete the
task. For each situation that participants generated, two
independent raters determined to which category type the
answer belonged. Interrater reliability was .93 for the
alternative and .84 for the disabler generation task.
Results and Discussion Both for the alternative and disabler
generation task we first divided the sentences into two
groups. For one group of sentences (n=10) there are few
alternatives or disablers (dis/alt) generated, while in the other
group (n=10) there are many dis/alt. The few-group contains
sentences for which the total number of generated
counterexamples for the sentence is less than the overall
mean of all sentences. For the sentences of the many group
the number of generated counterexamples for each sentence
is higher than the overall mean.
For the alternatives as well as for the disablers, we
determined the number of times each category type occurred,
this separately for the few and the many sentences. Table 1
gives an overview of the results.
Table 1: Proportion of answers for different categories.
Disablers
Category
Few
Many
1. real alt/dis
76.8
81.9
2. demote to default
0.6
3.1
3. (non)missing enabler 12.4
7.1
4. generalization
0.6
2.2
5. invalid rule
6. exceptional instance
4.1
3.6
7. time/ intervening
3.6
1
8. luck/magic
0.8
9. non-literal
10. invalid
1.9
0.2
Total N 531
869

Alternatives
Few Many
74
94.5
3.6
1.5
1.9
2.1
3
10.6
0.1
0.4
3
0.2
0.4
3.8
0.6
470
976

Within the many-group there are relatively more ‘real’
dis/alt generated then in the few-group. This difference is
significant for disablers (p1=.768, n1=531 versus p2=.819,
n1=869, p<.0209) as well as for alternatives (p1=.74; n1=470
versus p2=.945, n1=976, p<.0001). Additionally, we found
that for the few disabler group, more missing enablers are
generated than for the many group (dis: p1= .124, n1=531 vs.
p2=.071, n1=869, p=.0008). For alternatives we observe that

in the few group participants more often list exceptional
instances than in the many group (p1=.106, n1=470 vs. p2=
.01, n1=976, p<.0001). All other differences between
proportions are non-significant.
We assume that when participants are asked to generate
dis/alts they start to look for straightforward examples,
namely the ‘real’ dis/alts (category 1). This is because the
‘real’ counterexamples are semantically strongly related to
the content of the conditional sentence. In addition to these
‘real counterexamples’ participants dispose of another pool
of possible counterexamples, namely, the more remote
situations. Instantiations of this type are semantically not
directly linked to the premise content. They refer to
exceptions to the normal situation (category 2,6) or to
conversational implicatures that are suspended (category
3,4,7). The assumptions that are normally valid, such as
‘promises are kept’, ‘birds can fly’, ‘coffee contains caffeine’
are examined in order to account for the apparent
contradicting premises. In general, this more remote category
contains counterexamples sprouting from suspended
conversational implicatures (Levinson, 2000).
For some assumptions you find that when the assumption
not holds, the relation between antecedent and consequent
changes, and can account for the apparent contradiction.
When only few dis/alt can be found, it is harder to find a
full range of ‘real’ counterexamples. As a result, participants
search also for the more remote type of disablers and
alternatives.
Conclusion The two taxonomic systems can be used to
categorize the answers participants give when asked to
generate disablers or alternatives. Although some of the
presented categories are conceptually related, the raters
consistently classified the answers.
By applying the taxonomy we found that more ‘real’
alternatives and disablers were generated in the many groups
than in the few groups. This difference is compensated by a
shift to the more remote types. We assume that participants
start searching for counterexamples from the pool of ‘real’
counterexamples, because these counterexamples are

semantically close to the content of the premises. In addition,
the search can be directed to the more remote categories.
In the second part of this experiment we will investigate
whether working memory capacity affects the type of the
generated dis/alts.

Working Memory Capacity
Double task experiments showed that working memory
capacity puts a constraint on the ability to generate
counterexamples (De Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2002).
First, we will investigate the effect of working memory
capacity on the number of generated counterexamples. We
expect that participants with high working memory capacity
generate more counterexamples than those with low working
memory capacity. We expect this difference to be larger for
sentences with few counterexamples. For the many sentences
we assume that the difference may be blurred due to a ceiling
effect. Second, we will look at the effect of working memory
on the type of generated counterexamples. Do differences in
working memory capacity affect somehow the sort of
counterexamples participants come up with?
All first year psychology students had fulfilled a Dutch
version of the OSPAN test (La Pointe, & Engle, 1990; Dutch
version: De Neys et al., 2002) for measuring working
memory capacity. As such, we can link the number and
nature of the generated answers to differences in working
memory capacity.
Results and Discussion The subjects are divided in three
groups depending on their working memory capacity. The
high participant group consists of the top third (dis: Min: 37;
Max: 54 - alt: Min: 39; Max: 54). The low group contains
participants with scores of the bottom third (dis: Min: 18;
Max: 24 - alt: Min: 39; Max: 54). Table 2 displays the
distribution of the relative proportion of answers.
Participants with high working memory capacity generate
more disablers than participants with a low working memory
capacity (dis: p1=.45; n1=964 versus p2=.55; n1=964,
p<.0001). This difference is not significant for alternatives.

Table 2: Proportion of generated counterexamples for each category (numbers refer to categories of Table 1). The shaded regions
refer to the three types category 1 equals Type 1, category 2 to 7 corresponds to Type 2, categories 8 to 10 are labeled Type 3.
Disablers
Category
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total N

Few
82.5
5.8
3.9
0.6
3.3
3.3
0.6
154

Low
Many
86.4
2.9
5.7
1.4
2.5
1
279

Total
85
3.9
5.1
1
2.8
1.2
0.7
0.2
433

Few
71.7
0.9
14.6
0.5
5
3.7
3.7
219

Alternatives
High
Many
80.1
4.2
8.7
2.9
2.6
0.6
0.6
0.3
312

Total
76.7
2.8
11.1
1.9
3.6
1.9
0.4
1.7
531

Few
79.4
6.1
1.8
5.5
0.6
4.2
2.4
165

Low
Many
95.2
1
3.2
0.3
0.3
375

Total
90.4
2.6
0.6
2.2
1.9
0.2
1.3
0.9
540

Few
76.7
2.8
4.4
1.1
0.6
8.9
2.8
0.6
5
180

High
Many
93
1.5
3.5
0.5
0.3
1.5
371

Total
87.7
1.8
0.5
2.7
0.2
2.9
1.3
0.4
2.5
551

We will now discuss the effects of working memory
capacity separately for the sentences with few and many
disablers.
A first important result is that the observation that
participants with high working memory capacity generate
more disablers than those with low working memory
capacity, is only found on the sentences with few disablers
(p1=.413; n1=373 vs. p2= .587; n1=373, p<.0001). This
finding can be explained as follows. For sentences with only
few disablers, it is inevitably harder to generate
counterexamples than for sentences with many disablers. In
general, for sentences with only few disablers most
participants quickly run out of inspiration (only in 5% of the
trails there were more than 3 disablers given). Because
participants with low working memory capacity experience
more difficulty in generating disablers, we can expect that
their searching process takes more time than that of
participants with high working memory capacity. For
sentences with many disablers, we assume that there is a
ceiling effect. As participants can choose from a large pool
of possible counterexamples, the differences in working
memory capacity on the generated number of
counterexamples does not show.
A second striking finding is that participants with a low
working memory seem to restrict themselves to a single type
of counterexamples. Participants with a high working
memory capacity generate overall more ‘real’ disablers, this
group represents a larger proportion of the generated
responses of the participants with low working memory (p1=
.85; n1=433 vs. p2= .77; n1=531, p<.0013). This decrease in
‘real’ disablers is mirrored by a significant increase in the
proportion of disablers of the ‘remote’ type. Participants with
a high working memory score generate more missing
enablers (category 3) than participants with low working
memory capacity (p1=.051, n1=433 versus p2=.111, n1=531,
p<.0009). As stated above we assume that participants start
their search for counterexamples by checking situations,
which are semantically related to the content of the premises.
In addition, reasoners can check situations that are
semantically more remotely related to the premise content.
Thus, the results suggest that participants with a high
working memory capacity can more easily shift from the
straightforward type of counterexamples to the more remote
type. Participants with a low working memory capacity are
rather conservative in their search for counterexamples. It
can be argued that the flexibility to change from one
semantic domain to another yields a substantial profit in
finding counterexamples. Based on our results we can add
that working memory capacity is a crucial mediator of this
flexibility.
The significant effects on disablers are paralleled by nonsignificant trends for alternatives. The absence of any
significant working memory effects on alternatives can be
explained with reference to the structural difference between
the two types of counterexamples. When you are asked to
generate a disabler, you have to find a situation in which the
effect does not occur in presence of the given cause. The
presence of the given cause constitutes an important element
of the situation you have to generate. As a result you have to

maintain two different propositions, the cause as well as the
effect, in memory. For alternatives it is not necessary to
maintain the given cause in memory. You just need to look
for some alternate causes, and maintain the effect in
memory. Markovits argues that for young children, it is
harder to search for disablers than to search for alternatives
(Jeanveau-Brennan, & Markovits, 1999; Markovits, 2000).
We assume that his finding can be generalized to adults. No
effect of working memory capacity is observed on
alternatives because the generation of alternatives does not
challenge working memory capacity in the way that the
generation of disablers does.

General Discussion
This article addressed four main issues. First of all, we
applied Elio’s (1998) taxonomic system for disablers in
belief-revision to data gathered in a conditional reasoning
perspective. The described system was equally valid for
categorizing disablers, as almost all the answers could
readily be categorized. Elio (1998) pointed out that belief
revision and deductive reasoning are complementary fields
of research. This experiment proves that the use of her
taxonomic system can be generalized to the domain of
conditional reasoning.
Second, we constructed a taxonomic system for generated
alternatives. By applying this categorization system we can
distinguish different types and categories of alternatives.
Although some categories are interrelated, only few answers
were subject to discussion. Hence, we conclude that the
taxonomy serves its purpose well. In line of Elio’s (1998)
proposal we suggest that this taxonomic system can also be
used for categorizing the alternatives generated in the context
of belief-revision. By applying this system researchers are
able to shed light on the type of knowledge that is used
during the process of belief revision, or in terms of Elio
(1998), on the belief-revision operators that people use for
resolving everyday contradictions.
Recent research emphasizes the importance of pragmatic
and semantic aspects in theories on conditional reasoning
(see e.g., Chan & Chua, 1994; Newstead, Ellis, Evans, &
Dennis, 1997; Quinn & Markovits, 1998). By outlining two
taxonomic systems we provide researchers with an additional
methodological weapon for disclosing how the search for
counterexamples takes place. These taxonomic systems can
also be used for categorizing counterexamples for other types
of conditionals than causal ones.
Third, we used the categorization of alternatives and
disablers to examine the sort of background knowledge that
is advocated during the search for alternatives or disablers.
Three broad types of counterexamples were distinguished.
The first type contains the ‘real’ disablers or alternatives.
These are descriptions of situations that are semantically
close to the stated premises. The second type of answers is of
a more ‘remote’ type. They include answers in which the
normal conversational implicatures are suspended.
Participants go beyond the usual scheme’s (Chan & Chua,
1994) that the premises refer to, in order to find some
condition that could not apply (enabler, truthfulness of the
speaker, …). A third category contains answers that are

given just to lengthen the list of alternatives. They include
answers referring to some magical interference, plain luck, a
non-literal reading or just invalid responses. For a possible
rule to decide to start looking in another pool, we can refer to
the stopping rule proposed by Johnson-Laird (1994); when it
gets too hard to generate another imagined situation,
participants stop their search (for alternative stopping rules,
see Elio, 2002).
Fourth, we looked at the effect of working memory
capacity on the taxonomic distribution of the generated
disablers and alternatives. We found that reasoners with high
working memory retrieve more disablers and are more
flexible in their search. They tend to retrieve different types
of disablers while reasoners with low working memory
capacity are more conservative. Reasoners with low working
memory capacity generated more ‘real’ disablers then
reasoners with high working memory capacity. This result
suggests that reasoners with low working memory capacity
start by searching the pool of semantically related disablers
and are conservative in their search. In contrast, reasoners
with high working memory capacity are more flexible in
redirecting their search.
We like to add that asking participants to generate as many
disablers or alternatives as possible could reflect a somewhat
different cognitive process than the process active during the
validation phase of reasoning (see also Markovits, Fleury,
Quinn & Venet, 1998).
In sum, participants with a high working memory capacity
can retrieve more counterexamples and are flexible in their
search process. Participants with low working memory
generate less counterexamples and restrict themselves to
counterexamples of the first type. We find that considering
qualitative aspects of generated counterexamples provide
valuable information on the underlying cognitive search
process. In this study we describe three different types of
counterexamples. Furthermore, we argue that working
memory capacity is not only a crucial mediator for
maintaining and searching information but determines also a
reasoner's flexibility to search different semantic domains.

Acknowledgments
This work is carried out thanks to the support of the Fund for
Scientific Research Flanders.

References
Chan, D., & Chua, F. (1994). Suppression of valid
inferences: syntactic views, mental models and relative
salience. Cognition, 53, 217-238.
Cummins, D.D. (1995) Naïve theories and causal deduction.
Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Cummins, D.D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991).
Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory and
Cognition, 19, 274-282.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2000).
Causal conditional reasoning and strength of association:
the disabling condition case. Psychological Report N°:

271. Leuven: University of Leuven, Laboratorium of
Experimental Psychology.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2001). Does
pure water boil, when it’s heated to 100°C?’: The
associative strength of disabling conditions in conditional
reasoning. Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 249-245.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2002).
Working memory capacity and causal conditional
reasoning. Manuscript in preparation.
Elio, R. (1997) What to believe when inferences are
contradicted. The impact of knowledge type and inference
rule. Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, 211-216. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Elio, R. (1998). How to disbelieve p=>q: Resolving
contradictions. Proceedings of the Twentieth Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, 315-320. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Elio, R. (2002) Belief revision and plausible inference..
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F.J. (1997). Belief revision as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 4, 419-460
Jeanveau-Breannan, G., & Markovits, H. (1999). The
development of reasoning with causal conditionals.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 904-911.
Johnson-Laird P., Byrne, R., Schaeken, W. (1992).
Propositional reasoning by model. Psychological Review,
99, 418-439.
La Pointe, L. B., & Engle, R. W. (1990). Simple and
complex word spans as measures of working memory
capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 16, 1118-1133.
Markovits, H., (1984). Awareness of the ‘possible’ as
mediator of formal thinking in conditional reasoning
problems. British Journal of Psychology, 75, 367-376.
Markovits, H. (2000). A mental model analysis of young
children’s conditional reasoning with meaningful
premises. Thinking and Reasoning, 6, 335-347.
Markovits, H., Fleury, M., Quinn, S., & Venet, M. (1998).
The development of conditional reasoning and the
structure of semantic memory. Child Development, 69,
742-755.
Newstead, S. E., Ellis, M. C., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Dennis,I.
(1997). Conditional reasoning with realistic material.
Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 49-76.
Quinn, S., & Markovits, H. (1998). Conditional reasoning,
causality, and the structure of semantic memory: strength
of association as a predictive factor for content effects.
Cognition, 68, 93-101.
Rosen, V. M., & Engle, R. W. (1997). The role of working
memory capacity in retrieval. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 126, 211-227.
Thompson, V. (1994). Interpretational factors in conditional
reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 22, 742-758.
Thompson, V., (2000). The task-specific nature of domaingeneral reasoning. Cognition, 76, 209-268.

