UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A belief-updating model of adaptation and cue combination in syntactic comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qm5v571

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kleinschmidt, Dave F.
Fine, Alex B.
Jaeger, T. Florian

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A belief-updating model of adaptation and cue combination in syntactic
comprehension
Dave F. Kleinschmidt1 , Alex B. Fine1 , and T. Florian Jaeger1,2

{dkleinschmidt, afine, fjeager} @ bcs.rochester.edu
of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14607 USA

1 Department

Abstract

Thus, behavioral evidence seems to suggest that adaptation, qualitatively speaking, is a very general feature of perception and cognition. A question that arises from all of this
previous work is whether adaptation observed across all of
these domains can be modeled within a single framework.
The goal of this paper is to take a step in this direction. In
particular, we model adaptation in syntactic comprehension
in terms of Bayesian belief update. Modeling syntactic adaptation in a Bayesian framework is appealing because the same
basic computational approach has been successfully pursued
in a variety of perceptual and motor domains (e.g. Koerding et al., 2007) and, more recently, in speech perception
(Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, 2011; Sonderegger & Yu, 2010).
Moreover, Bayesian belief update is ideally suited to explicitly model the fact that syntactic comprehension involves
the combination of multiple cues. This offers the advantage
of suggesting a single computational framework for adaptation and cue combination, since Bayesian approaches to cue
combination have been successful in a number of domains
including visually-guided grasping, audio-visual cue combination, and the weighting of cues to phonetic category. In
particular, Bayesian approaches to cue combination in perception have provided a formal means of capturing the fact
that humans are able to weight multiple cues (e.g., multiple
cues to object depth, such as shading and texture) according
to how reliable those cues are. We return to the relationship
between adaptation and cue combination in the discussion.
The goal of the current study is to ask whether a rational
model of adaptation–implemented in the form of Bayesian
belief update–can account for behavioral evidence for adaptation in the syntactic domain. Here we model behavioral data
originally reported in Fine and Jaeger (2011), which concerns
how subjects adjust their expectations about different syntactic structures conditioned on lexical information. Specifically,
we exploit temporary syntactic ambiguities as a window onto
syntactic expectations. In sentences such as (1), the syntactic assignment of the noun phrase the judge is temporarily
ambiguous, since it can be parsed as either the subject of a
sentence complement (SC) clause, as in (1a), or as the the
direct object (DO) of acknowledged (as in 1b).

We develop and evaluate a preliminary belief-updating model
which links intermediate-term (i.e., over several days) syntactic adaptation to the joint statistics of syntactic structures and
lexical cues to those structures. This model shows how subjects differentially depend on different cues to syntactic structure following changes in the reliability of those cues, as shown
by Fine and Jaeger (2011). By relating syntactic adaptation and
cue combination to rational inference under uncertainty, this
work links learning and adaptation in sentence processing with
adaptation in speech perception and non-linguistic domains.
Keywords: sentence processing, adaptation, Bayesian modeling, cue combination, rational analysis

Introduction
Humans must maintain a stable representation of the environment despite the fact that available sensory input changes
across time: for example, over the course of a day, we recognize and grasp objects in a variety of lighting conditions;
we execute accurate motor commands despite changes in our
own motor systems due to fatigue, over-caffeination, etc.; and
during linguistic communication, we process rapidly unfolding acoustic information that varies from talker to talker.
Variability within each of these different modalities
changes the correlation between cues—whether visual, haptic, or linguistic—and the things in the world we wish to make
inferences about based on those cues. How do our brains
make use of these cues in spite of variability in the environment? One possibility, suggested by research across a number
of domains, is that humans deal with variability in the environment by adapting to changes in the statistical properties
of the environment (for examples from vision, motor planning, and speech perception, see respectively: Blakemore &
Campbell, 1969; Koerding, Tenenbaum, & Shadmehr, 2007;
Norris, McQueen, & Cutler, 2003).
While most work on adaptation has been concentrated in
perception, the question of whether adaptation is operative in
higher level cognition has recently received more attention,
particularly in language processing research. For instance, a
number of researchers have shown that, when given sufficient
experience with a structure initially judged to be ungrammatical, listenders come to subsequently comprehend (Luka &
Barsalou, 2005), generalize, and even produce (Kaschak &
Glenberg, 2004) that structure. Similarly, recent work has
shown that we fine-tune our expectations about which syntactic structures are likely to occur in a given context based
on recent experience (Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008; Farmer,
Fine, & Jaeger, 2011).

(1)

The lawyer acknowledged the judge . . .
disambiguation

z }| {
a. . . . had been unfair to the defendant.
b. . . . in the black robe.
The sentence is disambiguated towards the latter reading at

599

The procedure at each of these five visits is outlined below,
and the overall experimental regimen is visualized in Figure
(2), where each box corresponds to a different day in the experiment.

had been. A great deal of previous work suggests that reading times at had been are a function of subjects’ expectations
about which syntactic structure is likely to occur, based on
previous cues in the sentence, such as the verb, the combination of the verb and post-verbal noun phrase (e.g., Garnsey,
Pearlmutter, Myers, & Lotocky, 1997), and whether or not the
complementizer that occurs after the verb (e.g., The lawyer
acknowledged that the judge had been unfair to the defendant). More recent work has explicitly quantified syntactic
expectations in probabilistic terms (Hale, 2001; Levy, 2008).
In other words, reading times at the disambiguating region
(had been) provide information about subjects’ subjective beliefs about the relative probability of the SC vs. the DO structures: If reading times are high, this indicates that subjects
had assigned a relatively low probability to the SC structure;
if reading times are low, then subjects had likely assigned a
relatively high probability to the SC structure.
We model changes in reading times at the point of disambiguation as a consequence of syntactic expectation adaptation. Assuming that reading times in the disambiguating region in sentences such as (1a) reflect subjects’ beliefs about
the relative probabilities of different syntactic structures, we
can interpret changes in reading times as changes in subjects’
beliefs about the distribution of syntactic structures (at least
in the context of the experiment, a point to which we return in
the discussion). Syntactic adaptation, construed as the incremental adjustment of the subject’s representation of a probability distribution over linguistic events, can therefore be naturally modeled in terms of Bayesian belief update.
In the following section, we briefly describe the behavioral
data we set out to model. Next we present a Bayesian belief
update model of this behavioral data, and assess the quality of
the model’s fit to the behavioral data. We conclude by summarizing the model’s results and providing a discussion of the
implications of this modeling work for our understanding of
adaptation and cue combination.

Low
Low
Low
Reliability Reliability Reliability
Exposure Exposure Exposure
Visit 1:
SPR task

Visit 5:
SPR task
High
High
High
Reliability Reliability Reliability
Exposure Exposure Exposure

Figure
exposure phase
used
Figure2:1: Schematic
Schematicillustration
illustrationofofthe
experimental
procedure
in the experiment
Visit 1: Pre-training
self-paced
reading task 2009).
Participants
Christiansen,
Race, Acheson,
& MacDonald,
Subjects
were
randomly
assigned
to
either
the
low
reliability
or high
in both groups completed identical self-paced reading
tasks
reliability
During
visit, participants
in both
in
the first group.
and final
visits.the
A first
schematic
representation
of the
groups completed
the same
reading1.task.
Thethe
ma-deexperimental
procedure
is self-paced
given in Figure
Given
terials
for
the
self-paced
reading
task
comprised
a
subset
sign of the experiment, if reading behavior changes from of
visit
those used in (Garnsey et al., 1997). Participants read 36 tar1 to visit 5 differentially across the groups, we can attribute
get sentences containing DO/SC verbs, as well as 72 filler
this difference to the distributional properties of the exposure
sentences containing a variety of syntactic structures.
phase
within each group.
To maximize the temporary ambiguity effect, the DO/SC
This
experiment
allows us
First and
verb was
always followed
by to
anask
NPtwo
thatquestions.
made a plausible
foremost,
do comprehenders
track the
distributionaccepted
of syntacDO continuation
(e.g. The talented
photographer
tic
in not
a given
environment?
That is, do
comprethestructures
money could
be spent
yet). Target sentences
occurred
henders
to the statistical
properties
in one ofadapt
2 (temporarily
ambiguous
vs. not) of
x 3novel
(verb linguisbias)
tic
situations? Second, given the distributional properties of
conditions.
thatInlinguistic
environment,
do comprehenders
combinethat
multhe unambiguous
condition,
the complementizer
tiple
cues
to
syntactic
structure
in
a
way
that
is
rational
(i.e.,
was present, as in (2a). In the ambiguous version, the complementizer
wasaccording
absent, asto
in their
(2b), where
the temporarily
by
weightingthat
cues
reliability;
cf. Bates &
ambiguous NP1987;
(the money)
and disambiguating
regionfor
(had
MacWhinney,
Anderson,
1990)? Specifically,
subbeen)inare
jects
theunderlined.
50-50 group, all verbs participating in the ambiguity
(1) talented
become—in
the experimental
(2) in The
photographer
accepted . .context—equally
.
likely to occur with an SC or a DO. Thus the verb becomes,
a. . . . that the money could not be spent yet.
for this group, a very unreliable cue to syntactic structure.
b. . . .according
the money to
could
not bemodels
spent yet.
Qualitatively,
rational
of cue combination,
this
should
lead
subjects
in
the
50-50
groupontonormdepend
Verb-bias was manipulated between items. Based
more
on
the
complementizer
that
in
the
post-exposure
reading data from Garnsey et al. (1997), 12 target verbs were clasing
task
relative to 12
subjects
in the and
All-SC
That is,
sified
as SC-biased,
as EQ-biased,
12 asgroup.
DO-biased.
goal of
visit was to provide
initial,
base-intheThe
presence
ofthe
thefirst
complementizer
should an
more
strongly
line measure
of the
effects
of prior
verb
bias and
fluence
reading
times
for the
50-50
group.
In aambiguity
regression
(complementizer
presence/absence)
participants
in eachbeframework,
we therefore
predicted on
a 3-way
interaction
group, time
to which
post-exposure
self-paced reading
times
could
tween
(prevs. post-exposure),
ambiguity
(presence
be compared
the effect of exposure.
vs.
absence to
ofassess
the complementizer
that),Specifically,
and group we
(Allexpect
during
the ambiguous
and was
disambiguatSC
vs. reading
50-50).times
This
three-way
interaction
significant
ing=regions
money
not . . . )into
reflect2 (light
the
(β
2.4, SE (e.g.
= .9, .p. .<the
.05),
and could
is visualized
Figure
group
manipulation.
bars). This figure shows the decrease in ambiguity effect
from pre-test to post-test as a function of training: there is a
greater decrease after high-reliability, All-SC training, where
subjects do not need to rely on the complementizer as much.

Methods and Summary of Behavioral Results
The data we use to test the hypothesis that syntactic adaptation can be understood in terms of incremental Bayesian
belief update comes from (Fine & Jaeger, 2011). We briefly
describe the design of that experiment.

Experimental Procedure
In a between-subjects, multi-visit self-paced reading experiment, (Fine & Jaeger, 2011) investigated whether comprehenders update their estimates of the probability of the syntactic
structures in (1) conditioned on the verb used in the sentence
and the presence of the complementizer that. The All-SC
group received evidence that SC-taking verbs always occur
in sentences like (1a), while the 50-50 group was exposed
to a 50/50 mix of SC (1a) and DO (1b) structures. For both
groups, that occurred in 50% of all SC sentences. The experiment consisted of a pre-exposure session, three exposure
sessions over at least 6 days, and a final post-exposure session at least 2 days after the last exposure session (cf. Wells,

Modeling framework
In constructing a belief updating model of syntactic adaptation and cue combination, there are two main considerations.

600

Visits 2-4: E
lab, participa
to DO/SC ve
reading task
exposure pha
8 were DO-b
of the verbs
specificity of
At each vi
tal of 64 sent
16 verbs app
64 sentences
interspersed
tained a vari
DO/SC verb
sentences an
the same sen
DO/SC verb
semantic con
(i.e. the enti
pants pressed
sentence).
Participan
high reliabili
saw these 16
same fillers.
exposure lis
DO/SC verb
sus SC conti
reliability gr
curred with S
DO/SC verb
of the time w
(3)

The
ing].

(4)

The
swea

For both g
plementizer

Visit 5: Post
participants i
the exact sam
visit 1. Add
tal list they
the same con
reading time
By hypoth
group, an es
bility of the S
in the expos
of the input
reliability gr
p(SC|that) =

First, how can syntactic expectations be quantified, and second, how are those expectations related to the cues present
in the linguistic environment and updated based on linguistic
experience? In our model, syntactic expectations are quantified as discrete probability distributions over syntactic structures. In this case, the relevant syntactic structures are possible completions of sentences like (1), which we assume are
limited to sentence complement completions (SC) and direct
object completions, etc. (DO).
Syntactic expectations are related to relevant cues and in
turn to linguistic experience via the conditional probability.
SC completions are more common for some verbs than others, and are more common when the complementizer that is
present. This dependence is captured by the conditional probability of p(S = SC|T,V ), where T indicates the presence
or absence of that and V indicates the identity of the main
verb of the sentence. The conditional probability of S = SC
is closely related to the joint probability via the base probability of the various possible combinations of cue values:
p(S, T,V ) = p(S|T,V )p(T,V ).
We can model this joint distribution of syntactic structures and cues via a multinomial distribution. A multinomial distribution assigns a probability to a group of observations, each of which is, in our case, a triplet of the form
S = i, T = j,V = k, each with a known probability of p(S =
i, T = j,V = k) = θi, j,k . The likelihood of making a group of
observations X, where each outcome occurs ni, j,k times, is

Under this model, the conditional probability of SC, given
specific V = v and T = t is
p(SC|V = v, T = t, θ) = θSC|v,t =

It can be shown that θSC|v,t (and by definition θDO|v,t =
1 − θSC|v,t ) follows a Beta distribution with parameters
(αSC,v,t , αDO,v,t ). Marginalizing over the distribution of θi, j,k ,
the conditional probability of SC given verb v and complementizer cue t is:
p(SC|v,t) =

Z

p(SC|v,t, θ)p(θ|α)dθ =

αSC,v,t
αSC,v,t + αDO,v,t

This conditional probability is the major predictor of syntactic expectation and associated comprehension difficulty.
In order to make quantitative predictions from this general
framework, it is necessary to specify the parameters of the
prior distribution (αi, j,k ) and likelihood function (ni, j,k ), and
to relate the model output (conditional probability) to the behavioral measure (reading times). These are addressed in the
next sections.

Determining the likelihood
The parameters of the likelihood function are the counts ni, j,k
of how often each unique combination of syntactic structure
S = i, verb V = j, and complementizer presence/absence T =
k was observed during training, and were set to the counts of
the training phase.

n

p(X|θ) ∝ ∏ θi,i,j,kj,k
i, j,k

Determining the prior

This provides a way of capturing syntactic expectations
when the probability of each outcome is known with certainty. However, if the subject is truly certain about the probability of each outcome, then no adaptation should occur.
Thus, in order to capture adaptation, or change in expectations, we must capture uncertain beliefs about such expectations, via a prior distribution over the probabilities θi, j,k .
The most natural choice is the conjugate prior for multinomial probabilities, the Dirichlet distribution:
p(θ) ∝ ∏ θi, i,j,kj,k
α

θSC,v,t
θSC,v,t + θDO,v,t

The prior parameters are the pseudo-counts αi, j,k which are
proportional to the joint prior probabilities. These probabilities are estimated based on a combination of corpus and
norming data. The joint probability of syntactic structures,
verbs, and complementizer presence p(S, T,V ) can be factored as
p(S, T,V ) = p(T |V, S)p(S|V )p(V )
The verb frequency p(V ) is estimated from the British National Corpus, while the SC-bias of each verb (probability of
SC completion) p(S|V ) and that-bias (probability of complementizer presence for SC completions of each verb) p(T |V, S)
are estimated based on a sentence-completion norming study
(Garnsey et al., 1997).
Together, these factors provide an estimate of the relative
prior frequency of each outcome, and thus the relative magnitudes of the αi, j,k Dirichlet prior parameters, but say nothing about their absolute magnitude. The absolute magnitude
A = ∑i, j,k αi, j,k , corresponds to the degree of confidence in
the prior beliefs: the higher A, the more the distribution over
the modeled probabilities θi, j,k is peaked around the estimated
prior frequency, and the less new observations will influence
these beliefs. Since there is no way to determine the strength
of the prior beliefs a priori, we treat A as a free parameter,
which controls the degree of adaptation but does not change

−1

i, j,k

The primary advantage of using this prior distribution is
that, after making observations X, the posterior is also Dirichlet, with parameters αi, j,k + ni, j,k :
p(θ|X) ∝ p(X|θ)p(θ) ∝ ∏ θi, i,j,kj,k
α

+ni, j,k −1

i, j,k

The parameters (αi, j,k ) of the Dirichlet prior can thus be interpreted as the number of times each outcome was observed in
prior experience. Intuitively, this can be seen just by looking
at the equations for the prior and likelihood and noting that α
and n appear in the same places.

601

Decrease in ambiguity effect (ms)

Model (adds)
(1|Subj)+ (1|Verb)
Verb Freq.
Time (pre/post)
That presence
Verb SC Bias
Training Group
(interactions)

10

5
Data
BBU predictions
0

High reli.

Deviance
28066
28059
27452
27448
27438
27432
27216

∆Dev.
195
195
25
15
18
15
7

df
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

p(χ2 )
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0006
0.0001
0.0005
0.03

Table 1: Results of linear mixed-effects regression analysis of belief-updating model predictions of self-paced reading times. Each row reports the goodness of fit of a model
with belief-updating-predicted surprisal and all of the fixed
and random effects listed in its row and the preceding rows
(that is, the third model includes random intercepts for subjects and verbs, and a fixed effect for verb log-frequency). In
the final row, the baseline model has all fixed effects and their
interactions, except for the predicted surprisal, which does
not interact with any other effects. The deviance (negative
two times model log likelihood) is reported for each model,
along with the improvement in deviance over the corresponding baseline model, the additional degrees of freedom, and
the result of a χ2 test.

Low reli.

Figure 2: Behavioral results from Fine and Jaeger (2011)
(light bars) and corresponding model predictions (dark bars),
showing differential effect of high- and low-reliability training on ambiguity effect. Bars show decrease in ambiguity
effect (difference in reading times for that-present vs. thatabsent sentences) from pre-test to post-test.
its shape. This is the only free parameter of the model simulations reported here.1

Analysis

We found the overall best-fitting parameter values by fitting
the whole series of belief-updating regression models using a
range of parameter values (A = 10−3 to 104 ). The parameter
value with the best mean normalized goodness-of-fit (across
the various regression models) was used for the results below. We compared both r2 and deviance as measures of regression goodness-of-fit; both measures produce similar relative goodness-of-fit values but we chose to use deviance since
it suffers less from ceiling effects in the most complex (and
best-fitting) models. The best fitting prior pseudocount, used
to generate the predictions evaluated below, was A = 2.7.

To evaluate the predictions of the model against the behavioral data of Fine and Jaeger (2011), we regressed the negative log conditional probability against length-corrected reading times. This measure is known as surprisal, and has been
shown to be a good predictor of reading times in syntactic
comprehension (Levy, 2008; Hale, 2001; Fine, Qian, Jaeger,
& Jacobs, 2010).
However, there are many factors which influence reading
times, of which syntactic expectation may be just one. This
measure explicitly removes the influence of verb frequency
and that-bias, which independently predict reading times for
SCs. Also, reading times decrease in self-paced reading tasks
just because subjects become better at “pushing the button”,
an effect which will confound any difference in reading times
between pre- and post-test due to adaptation.
In order to control for these confounding effects and evaluate their relationship with our model’s predictions about
adaptation of syntactic expectations, we fit an increasingly
complex series of linear mixed-effects regression models. For
each regression model, we compared the baseline, with only
the “standard” suite of predictors, with the belief-updating
model which additionally includes the surprisal of each item
as a predictor. Table 1 shows the factors that were included
in each model.

Results
Qualitatively, the belief-updating model predicts the threeway interaction between group, time, and ambiguity (presence or absence of that), Figure 2.
The degree to
which subjects rely on the complementizer as a cue to SC
continuations—i.e., the strength of the effect of the complementizer on RTs—can be measured by the difference in reading times between complementizer-present and -absent sentences. The model predicts (dark bars), as is observed in the
data (light bars), that ambiguity effects should decrease more
after high-reliability training (All-SC group) and decrease
less (if at all) after low-reliability training (50-50 group).
The results from the regression analysis of the belief udpating model predictions show that the model predictions generally provide a good fit for reading times in the disambiguating
region. First, the model predictions alone (with random intercepts for subject and verb) account for 17% of the variance
in reading times. This effect cannot be reduced to any of the
other controls we evaluated (verb frequency, time, presence of

1 The probability of that occurring as a non-complementizer,
p(T = that|V, S = DO) cannot be determined from the same norming study, and in corpora it varies dramatically between spoken and
written English. For the simulations reported here it was fixed at
0.00005, based on the very low but non-zero value observed in the
Wall Street Journal corpus. This does not dramatically change the
predictions or the best-fitting pseudocount A.

602

that, verb SC-bias, and training condition group): the beliefupdating predictions still significantly improve the fit of the
model even after controlling for all of these fixed effects and
all of their interactions (χ2 (2) = 7, p < 0.03).
Of all of these control predictors, time (pre- vs. posttraining) has a notably large effect, and Wells et al. (2009)
observed a similar global speed-up between pre- and posttest, independent of effects on the form of the test sentences
and the type of training the subject received. This speed-up
reflects both increased familiarity with the self-paced reading
task (demonstrated by the fact that when the Time predictor
is added, the deviance accounted for by the belief-updating
predictions is reduced) and the effects of simply having seen
more SC structures than in typical written English (captured
by the belief-updating predictions after some SC exposure;
Fine et al., 2010).
Finally, the value of the prior confidence pseudocount parameter A which best fits the data corresponds to an effective
sample size of 2.7 observations for the prior beliefs. This
value is very low, but is consistent with results from other
belief-updating models of rapid syntactic adaptation and phonetic adaptation (Fine et al., 2010; Kleinschmidt & Jaeger,
2011) and with the larger idea that comprehenders weight
prior evidence less in novel situations where rapid adaptation
is likely required. Higher values correspond to less adaptation, and produce a worse fit, but interestingly lower values
produce a worse fit as well. If the good fit of this model
were simply due to the qualitative pattern of cue reliability
in the exposure statistics, then lower values of A, which result
in post-test reading times which better approximate the exposure statistics, should produce better fits, which is not the
case. This supports the idea that post-test reading times reflect
a combination of prior knowledge and recent experience.

sons. First, by modeling syntactic adaptation as incremental
Bayesian belief update, we provide a natural, formal connection between previous work on probabilistic models of
expectation-based processing (e.g., Hale, 2001; Levy, 2008)
and behavioral work on syntactic adaptation (or syntactic
priming; e.g., (e.g., Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008). Second,
using this modeling approach has allowed us to take a step towards providing a single computational framework for adaptation phenomena in language processing, since the same approach has been successfully applied in phonetic adaptation
(e.g., Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, 2011). Providing such a “common language” is an important step since this provides a way
of bridging insights from multiple strands of psycholinguistic
research that have previously been pursued in isolation from
each other, notably syntactic priming in comprehension (e.g.,
Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008) and perceptual adaptation in
speech (e.g., Norris et al., 2003).
As we briefly mentioned in the introduction, the model
reported here provides a way of formally describing both
adaptation and cue combination. Bayesian models of perception have consistently suggested that, when multiple cues
are available in a given task, the perceptual system weights
those cues according to how reliable they are, or, more formally, how narrow or wide the variance is over inferences
made based on those cues (Jacobs, 2002). In the exposure
phase of the study modeled here, the reliability of the verb
as a cue to syntactic structure is very high in the All-SC
group, but very low in the 50-50 group; on the other hand,
the complementizer that is a consistently good cue across
both groups. Our model qualitatively captures the behavioral
result that comprehenders in the 50-50 group come to rely
more on the complementizer that in the post- relative to the
pre-exposure phase, compared to the All-SC group (see Figure 2). Significantly, this result comes out of the model as
a natural consequence of tracking the joint distribution over
syntactic structures (DOs vs. SCs) and syntactic cues (complementizers, verbs). The model here therefore suggests a
very close relationship between adaptation and cue combination, and provides a formal account for the classic observation
that cues are weighted differentially according to their reliability in language acquisition and language processing (Bates
& MacWhinney, 1987).

Discussion and conclusion
In this paper, we formally characterize syntactic adaptation
as the incremental updating of a probability distribution over
syntactic structures. We showed that such a model provides a
good fit of behavioral data from a previously published study
of syntactic adaptation (Fine & Jaeger, 2011). This model is
a first step and leaves much open for future work. Because
of how it tracks the co-occurrence statistics of cues and syntactic structures, it does not make meaningful predictions on
a trial-by-trial basis for how the overall greater prevalence of
SC structures in the experiment changes syntactic expectations for verbs not encountered during training (which influences reading times as well, Fine et al., 2010). Such on-line
generalization is not in principle beyond the scope of the type
of model presented here, but is omitted in favor of presenting
a simple model which demonstrates the connections between
adaptation, cue-combination, and statistical learning in syntactic comprehension.
Independent of the details of the particular model presented
in this paper, characterizing syntactic adaptation in terms
of Bayesian belief update is appealing for at least two rea-

In general, the approach here is conceptually compatible with a sentence processing research emphasizing the
role of experience and learning in language comprehension
(e.g., MacDonald, 1999). Bayesian models provide a formal
framework for capturing the assumption—shared by many
experience-based accounts of processing—that comprehenders monitor and constantly integrate new evidence from the
input in order to maintain accurate linguistic expectations,
and to process language more efficiently (cf., Smith & Levy,
2008).
The results reported here raise a number of interesting
questions that we intend to pursue going forward. First, we
employ the same modeling framework and find results that

603

are generally consistent with the modeling results reported in
Fine et al. (2010). However, important differences in the experimental design between the two studies leave many questions open. Most significantly, the experiment in Fine et al.
(2010) observed changes in reading behavior over a much
shorter period of time (one half-hour experimental session)
than the current study, which lasted several days. The modeling framework employed here could be extended to examine
possible qualitative differences in adaptation over very different time courses, paralleling Bayesian accounts of the time
course of adaptation in speech perception (Kleinschmidt &
Jaeger, 2011).
Finally, the experiment and model reported here leave open
the question of how much the changes in expectations which
constitute adaptation generalize to novel situations (i.e., did
the adaptation effects observed here persist, and influence the
way subjects processed language outside the lab?). Rational models of linguistic adaptation generally predict that the
extent to which comprehenders generalize adapted expectations should depend on their prior beliefs about the degree
of similarity between different situations. This question has
been addressed behaviorally in phonetic adaptation (Kraljic
& Samuel, 2006, 2007) but remains virtually unexplored in
other domains of language processing, and has not been quantitatively modeled. Answering the question of generalization
is therefore a high priority for future work on adaptation.

Garnsey, S., Pearlmutter, N., Myers, E., & Lotocky, M.
(1997). The Contributions of Verb Bias and Plausibility to
the Comprehension of Temporarily Ambiguous Sentences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37(37), 58–93.
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. Second meeting of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
on Language technologies 2001 NAACL 01, 2, 1–8.
Jacobs, R. A. (2002). What determines visual cue reliability?
Trends in cognitive sciences, 6(8), 345–350.
Kaschak, M. P., & Glenberg, A. M. (2004). This construction needs learned. Journal of experimental psychology.
General, 133(3), 450–67.
Kleinschmidt, D., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011). A Bayesian belief updating model of phonetic recalibration and selective
adaptation. In 2nd acl workshop on cognitive modeling and
computational linguistics.
Koerding, K. P., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Shadmehr, R. (2007).
The dynamics of memory as a consequence of optimal
adaptation to a changing body. Nature Neuroscience, 10(6),
779–86.
Kraljic, T., & Samuel, A. G. (2006). Generalization in perceptual learning for speech. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 13(2), 262–8.
Kraljic, T., & Samuel, A. G. (2007). Perceptual adjustments
to multiple speakers. Journal of Memory and Language,
56(1), 1–15.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106(3), 1126–77.
Luka, B., & Barsalou, L. (2005). Structural facilitation: Mere
exposure effects for grammatical acceptability as evidence
for syntactic priming in comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 52(3), 436–459.
MacDonald, M. C. (1999). Distributional information in language comprehension, production, and acquisition: Three
puzzles and a moral. In The emergence of language (pp.
177–196). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., & Cutler, A. (2003). Perceptual
learning in speech. Cognitive Psychology, 47(2), 204–238.
Smith, N., & Levy, R. (2008). Optimal processing times in
reading: A formal model and empirical investigation. In
Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 595–600). Austin, TX.
Sonderegger, M., & Yu, A. (2010). A rational account of perceptual compensation for coarticulation. In Proceedings of
the 32nd annual conference of the cognitive science society
(pp. 375–380).
Thothathiri, M., & Snedeker, J. (2008). Give and take:
syntactic priming during spoken language comprehension.
Cognition, 108(1), 51–68.
Wells, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Race, D. S., Acheson, D. J.,
& MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Experience and sentence
processing: statistical learning and relative clause comprehension. Cognitive psychology, 58(2), 250–71.

Acknowledgements
This research was partially funded by NSF Graduate Research Fellowships to DK and ABF and NSF Grant BCS0844472 as well as an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship
to TFJ.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1987). Competition, Variation, and Language Learning. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.),
Mechanisms of language acquisition (pp. 157–194). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blakemore, C., & Campbell, F. (1969). On the existence of
neurones in the human visual system selectively sensitive
to the orientation and size of retinal images. The Journal of
Physiology, 203(1), 237–260.
Farmer, T. A., Fine, A. B., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011). Implicit
Context-Specific Learning Leads to Rapid Shifts in Syntactic Expectations. In The 33rd annual meeting of the cognitive science society (cogsci11). Boston, MA.
Fine, A. B., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011). Language comprehension
is sensitive to changes in the reliability of lexical cues. In
The 33rd annual meeting of the cognitive science society
(cogsci11). Boston, MA.
Fine, A. B., Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Jacobs, R. A. (2010).
Syntactic adaptation in language comprehension. In Acl
workshop on cognitive modeling and computational linguistics (pp. 18–26).

604

