UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Conceptual Network-Based Approach to Inferring the Cultural Evolutionary History of the
Baltic Psaltery

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4440n4br

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Veloz, Tomas
Temkin, Ilya
Gabora, Liane

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Conceptual Network-Based Approach to Inferring the Cultural Evolutionary
History of the Baltic Psaltery
Tomas Veloz (tomas.veloz@ubc.ca)
Department of Mathematics, University of British Columbia
3333 University Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, Canada

Ilya Tëmkin (itemkin@nvcc.edu)
Biology Department, Northern Virginia Community College, Annandale, VA, 22003
and Department of Invertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural History, Washington, DC 20013, USA

Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
3333 University Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, Canada

Abstract
The application of conventional phylogenetic techniques for
inferring cultural history is problematic due to differences in
the nature of information transmission in biological and
cultural realms. In culture, units of transmission are not just
measurable attributes, but communicable concepts. Therefore,
relatedness amongst cultural elements often resides at the
conceptual level not captured by traditional phylogenetic
methods. This paper takes a cognitively inspired approach to
analyzing material cultural history. We show that combining
data for physical attributes of cultural artifacts with conceptual
information can uncover cultural influences among different
ethnolinguistic groups, and reveal new patterns of cultural
ancestry. Using the Baltic psaltery, a musical instrument with a
well-documented ethnographic and archaeological record, we
recovered a previously unacknowledged pattern of historical
relationship that is more congruent with geographical
distribution and temporal data than is obtained with other
approaches.
Keywords: archaeology; artifacts; cladistics; cultural
evolution; material culture; network model; phylogeny

Introduction
The artifacts we put into the world reveal much about the
minds that conceived them. The evolutionary history of
human artifacts tells the story of how our thoughts, beliefs,
and understanding of the world we live in, has unfolded
over the ages. Using tools and techniques that include
insights from cognitive science, we are starting to piece this
exciting story together.
Phylogenetic approaches to reconstructing evolutionary
patterns and processes, applied routinely in systematics, are
increasingly applied not just to linguistics, but also
elements of material culture, such as textiles, weapons, and
musical instruments (e.g., Collard, Shennan & Tehrani,
2006; Forster & Toth, 2003; Mace & Holden, 2005;
Shennan, 2008; Whiten et al., 2011). Originally developed
in biology for inferring historical relationships among
groups of organisms, phylogenetics makes use of
assumptions about how information is organized and
transmitted that reflects peculiarities of the biology world.

The direct transfer of methodology from biology to
culture has raised the question about the extent to which
meaningful parallels can be drawn between the processes of
change in the two domains (e.g., Eldredge, 2000; Gabora,
2006). Application of phylogenetics to material culture
assume that the same (or analogous) causal processes
operate in culture and nature. However, what is transmitted
through culture is not just the objects themselves, but rather
communicable perspectives and concepts, such as notions
of complementarity (e.g., between a mortar and pestle,
which share no attributes but clearly are related), or
competition for the same cultural niche (e.g., spear, gun,
rope, and so forth) that may or may not be reflected in the
artifact design. Indeed, some claim that the differences
between biological and cultural evolution are so
insurmountable that insights obtained from biology are
completely irrelevant in a cultural context (Moore, 1994;
Dewar, 1995; Terrell, 2001). Others such as ourselves take
a more moderate stance, arguing that well there are
significant parallels as well as differences between
biological and cultural systems, phylogenetic techniques
have limited application to culture, and it is necessary to
either significant modify existing approaches, or develop
altogether new ones (Eerkens, Bettinger, & McElreath,
2005; Borgerhoff-Mulder et al., 2006; Gabora, 1998, 2006,
2008; Nunn et al., 2006; Tëmkin & Eldredge, 2007).
In a previous paper (Gabora et al., 2011) we put forward
a graph theory-based approach to modelling the evolution
of cultural artifacts, and applied it to a well-studied set of
artifacts: early projectile points from the Southeastern
United States. This data set had previously been modelled
using a phylogenetic approach (O’Brien, Darwent, &
Lyman, 2001), and using an earlier version of the networkbased approach, upon which our model is based (Lipo,
2005). The model included reticulate relationships as well
as hierarchical groupings, and incorporated conceptual
information to complement physical attribute data. We
showed that incorporating conceptual information that is
not typically captured by the phylogenetic analysis can
significantly alter the inferred pattern of historical
relationships amongst artifacts.

2487

The current paper reports on new developments of the
model, most notably, a means of evaluating the relative
contributions of different types of data to historical
inference. In addition, we apply the approach to a very
different domain, thus demonstrating its generalizability.

The Data Set
The experimental data set is a representative selection of
Baltic psalteries, a traditional plucked stringed musical
instrument distributed among Baltic, Finnic, and Slavic
peoples of Northeastern Europe. Until recently, the Baltic
psaltery remained an integral part of secular and ritual life,
and has become a national symbol for every ethnic group
that has it. The origin and historical development of the
Baltic psaltery has been a controversial subject for over a
century (reviewed by Raynolds, 1984) and remains so to
this day (Povetkin, 1989; Haas, 2001; Tëmkin, 2004).
The data on psalteries consist of extensive descriptions of
structural and ornamental features, and documented (or
inferred) playing styles for 13 ethnographic (dated by 17-20
centuries) and two archaeological (dated by late 10-13
centuries) artifacts, representing major pertinent
ethnolinguistic groups. The data set includes two Estonian
(EST), two Finnish (FIN), three Latvian (LAT), three
Lithuanian (LIT), three Russian (RUS), and two
presumably Slavic archaeological instruments from
Novgorod, northwestern Russia (NVG).

The Conceptual Network Approach
In this section we outline our approach. We begin by
summarizing how it models attributes and concepts. We
then move on to the conceptually new contribution of this
paper, the use of ‘perspectives’ to bias the network structure
in culturally meaningful ways.

The Structure of Attributes and Concepts
Following convention, concepts are indicated by all capital
letters (PSALTERY), whereas an actual artifact, or instance
of a psaltery is indicated with all small letters (psaltery).

The more superficial level of conceptual structure consists
of what Rosch (1978) refers to as basic level concept, such
as PSALTERY, which mirror classes of objects that share a
broad range of perceivable attributes. These basic level
concepts can be recursively differentiated. For example, a
psaltery's attribute “strings” can be differentiated into
“metal” or “nylon” depending on the type of the material
the strings are made of. Each of these subordinate attributes
can be further resolved by introducing their respective
attributes, such as, for instance, “metal type,” “nylon type,”
or “color.” Some attributes of the second degree may be
shared by those of the first: both metal and nylon strings
have color, but only metal strings are made from a specific
metal type. Hence, a basic level concept can be represented
as a root of a graph and its attributes arranged by levels of
descriptive resolution. Because attributes at a given level
can be connected to multiple attributes of levels above and
below, the resultant structure contains both hierarchical and
reticulate aspects.
Basic level concepts are generalized at a more abstract
level as instances of superordinate concepts, such as
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT. Superordinate concepts
typically refer to multiple basic level categories (e.g.,
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT consists of both PSALTERY
and CORNET).

Conceptual Structure and its Representation
Each artifact is represented by a network of attributes
consisting of reticulated hierarchies. The attributes can be
physical or non-physical (conceptual). The total network of
all available attributes constitutes the conceptual structure
(Figure 1). Each artifact is represented by a subnetwork of
the conceptual structure. (In a sense this is conceptually
similar to phylogenetic approaches where all taxa and their
attributes are described as arrays of specific character states
in a character state data matrix.)
The conceptual structure introduced here is based on the
state context property (SCOP) theory of concepts (Aerts &
Gabora, 2005a, 2005b; Gabora & Aerts, 2002) and is
equivalent to a simplified ontology (Sowa, 2000). We

Figure 1: A segment of the conceptual structure used in the Baltic psaltery analysis. Elements in square boxes represent
physical attributes of artifacts. Elements in oval boxes correspond to conceptual attributes. Shaded boxes designate
attributes associated with symbolic significance, i.e., those relevant to the “Symbolism” perspective (see text for details).
Note that this perspective includes both conceptual and physical attributes. Inset shows an example of a Baltic psaltery.
2488

incorporate the notion of context by introducing the notion
of perspective (see next section), and use graph theory
instead of operator theory to develop similarity metrics.

Incorporation of Perspectives
Given the heterogeneity of attributes, (structural vs.
ornamental, physical vs. conceptual, and so forth), it may
be useful to be able to explore the effect of different sets of
attributes on the evolutionary pattern. Depending on the
perspective from which a given artifact is considered, the
emphasis is placed on a particular set of attributes. For
example, a musical instrument can be viewed as an art
object, a product of craftsmanship, a sound-producing
device, or a sacred symbol. Given a particular perspective,
a set of attributes may include physical features (e.g.,
presence of a soundhole), conceptual non-physical
descriptors (e.g., ritualistic function), or a mixture of both.
Because physical and non-physical attributes represent
different culturally relevant aspects of the artifact, including
both types of data in the analysis can potentially produce a
more comprehensive, and presumably, more realistic
pattern of evolutionary history for a collection of artifacts
as a whole.
This is accomplished by defining a perspective, a part of
the conceptual structure that includes a predefined subset of
attributes that may or may not be directly linked to each
other. Multiple perspectives can be defined for a given
conceptual structure, and they may or may not have
attributes in common. In the analysis of the Baltic psaltery,
we defined three perspectives: (1) Physical Attributes,
containing structural or decorative features of actual
artifacts; (2) Performance, containing concepts related to
music performance styles; and (3) Symbolism, containing
concepts or physical attributes associated with sacred
symbolism and ritualistic significance. Perspectives in the
conceptual network approach are, in a sense, analogous to
character partitions in biological phylogenetics.

Reliablity and Similarity
In the proposed approach, similarity among artifacts is
assessed by pairwise comparison of their network
representations. The comparisons can be made between
entire
sub-networks
corresponding
to
complete
representations of the two artifacts, or with respect to a
particular perspective, or set of perspectives. To formalize
this notion of similarity, we assume graph representations
of two artifacts, a and a', and a perspective p. We introduce
two functions:
O(a,a',p) = |a ∩a' ∩ p|

(1)

D(a,a',p) = |a∩p| + |a'∩p| – 2O(a,a',p)

(2)

account for the number of attributes included in p that are
shared or non-shared, respectively, by a and a’.
Accounting for both the overlap and divergence is critical
to determine the similarity of two artifacts. Overlap alone
can lead to an overestimation of overall similarity in some
situations, such as in a trivial case where one of two
artifacts possesses just one attribute included in a particular
perspective and this attribute is shared by another artifact
that has a greater number of attributes included in the same
perspective. In this case, the failure to account for
divergence will erroneously interpret the complete overlap
as absolute similarity between the artifacts with respect to
the chosen perspective.
Some perspectives capture more of the overlap and
divergence between artifacts than others. Indeed, a (non
empty) perspective may include none of the attributes of
the artifacts being compared, or it may include them all. In
general, some portion of the total overlap and divergence
between two artifacts is captured by a perspective. We
define the reliability R(p,a,a') as the proportion of the
overlap and divergence between artifacts a and a' given
perspective p as follows:

R(p,a,a') = (O(a,a,p) + O(a',a',p)) / (|a|+|a'|)

(3)

Note that the entire conceptual structure can also be
considered as a perspective. In this case, its reliability is
equal to 1 for any given pair of artifacts. This is because it
contains all possible concepts used to represent each
artifact. Hence, the whole conceptual structure, and more
inclusive perspectives in general, have greater reliability.
However, the notion of reliability in itself may not be
sufficient as an estimation of the perspective’s effect on the
similarity between artifacts. There may exist a small
portion of the conceptual structure such that if considered
as a perspective it would have small reliability, but which
may nevertheless be vital for establishing the similarity of
some artifacts. Therefore, given a set of perspectives P =
{p1,…, pn}, we introduce a perspective weight vector,
V={v1,…, vn}, which gives the relative degree of
importance of p in P, and defines the similarity between
two artifacts a and a’ with respect to P by the following
formula:
n

S ( P,V,a,a' ) = ∑ v i R ( p i ,a,a' ) O ( a,a',pi )− D ( a,a',p i )
i=1

where |x| is the number of vertices of x, and x∩y is the set
of common vertices between x and y. O(a,a',p) is the
overlap and D(a,a',p) is the divergence between artifacts a
and a' with respect to p. The overlap and divergence

(

)

(4)

The similarity S(P,V,a,a') takes into account the overlap and
divergence between their graph representations summed
over all perspectives, each weighted by their respective
reliability values and perspective weight vectors. Note that
the greater the reliabilities of the perspectives in P, the
greater the similarity between a and a’.
The approach provides a means of exploring the effect of
individual perspectives on evolutionary inference. There
are several ways of going about this, ranging in objectivity
from fully automated, unbiased naive models to
sophisticated expert-specified models that allow for
incorporation of background information: (1) a uniform

2489

weights model, which weighs all perspectives equally; (2)
an implied weighting model, which weighs each
perspective proportional to its reliability; (3) a sensitivity
model, which explores a range of weights allowing for
identification of most and least stable relationships; and (4)
an expert choice model, which enables the user to specify
unique weights (including removing a selected perspective
from the analysis) to each perspective.

Similarity Graph and Cultural History
A pairwise similarity matrix based on comparing all pairs
of artifacts with respect to a chosen perspective (or set of
perspectives), is used to compute a similarity graph where
each vertex (node) corresponds to an artifact, and an edge
implies that the extreme vertices of the edge are similar.
The edge is labelled by the similarity weight between the
two artifacts. The graphical representation of the similarity
graph can subsequently be interpreted as a historical pattern
of relationships amongst included artifacts. It is important
to emphasize that the similarity graph is not a cultural
phylogeny, but a mere representation of similarity among
artifacts: it does not incorporate explicit actual cultural
transmission models but provides an independent
framework for establishing historical hypotheses that can
corroborate or disagree with existing models of cultural
change. We restrict ourselves to the maximal similarity
graph, which connects each artifact to only those that have
the highest similarity to it (in most cases, for each artifact
there is only one most similar artifact). The maximal
similarity graph provides an approximation to the artifact’s
true cultural history.

ethnolinguistic affinities with the exception of the Baltic
instruments that appear to be more dispersed (forming three
lineages; Figure 2A). This is consistent with previous
results based on maximum parsimony analysis (Tëmkin,
2004; Tëmkin and Eldredge, 2007). On the other hand,
when only symbolic aspects are taken into account, such
sharp delineation based on the linguistic affinity becomes
less evident and novel relationships emerge (Figure 2B).
For example, in the former scenario, the Baltic instruments
were linked to the Estonian (Finnic) ethnographic
instruments, whereas in the latter they have no connection
with the Estonian instruments, and display a novel
connection with the Slavic instruments.

Computational Implementation
The program we use to infer cultural lineages was
developed using the object-oriented Java platform with
extension packages for working with networks (JUNG). It
allows for the creation of a conceptual structure by adding
nodes (concepts) and edges (conceptual relationships).
Perspectives and artifacts can be generated as well. One can
specify the entries of the perspective weight vector using an
array of sliders (one slider is automatically created for each
perspective the user creates). Other software functions
allow the user to export and import these structures for later
use. The currently implemented default weighting scheme
is the implied weighting model, which weighs each
perspective proportional to its reliability. By modifying the
perspective weights, the user can recompute the similaries,
and visualize the resulting changes to the similarity graph.
This enables exploration of the resulting similarity graphs
found in different regions of perspective weight space.

Results
We present the patterns of relationship obtained for the
Baltic psalteries with respect to two perspectives: Physical
Attributes and Symbolism. When only physical attributes of
the psalteries are considered, the resulting similarity graph
recovers clusters of instruments corresponding to

Figure 2. Similarity graphs based on the conceptual
network analysis of Baltic psalteries under different
perspective weighting schemes. (A) Physical attributes;
(B) Symbolism; (C) Physical attributes and Symbolism
(equal weights); (D) Physical attributes (25% weight) and
Symbolism (75% weight). Each node corresponds to a
single artifact. The node shapes indicate ethnolinguistic
groups: Slavic (circle), Finnic (hexagon), and Baltic
(square). Shaded nodes designate archaeological
instruments (10-13 cc.); the remaining nodes correspond to
ethnographical instruments (17-20 cc).
Such incongruence in similarity inference between the
two perspectives suggests that the constructive principles of
the psalteries were regionally constrained and possibly
insured by master and apprentice relationship which has a
strong linguistic component. Similarity in symbolic
elements across cultures, however, appears to correspond
more closely to the geographic proximity and, possibly,
some symbolic features spread as decorative designs
without affecting structural aspects of local musical
instrument making traditions.
When both perspectives are analyzed simultaneously
under equal weights, the resulting similarity graph is
similar to those based on the analysis of physical attributes
alone, but results in greater similarity amongst the Baltic

2490

instruments (Figure 2C). This congruence between the two
graphs can be accounted for by a much greater number of
physical (80) than symbolic (20) attributes.
To reveal the impact of symbolic attributes given the
situation that they were outnumbered by physical attributes,
the data set was re-analyzed with 25% and 75% weights for
the Physical Attributes and Symbolism perspectives
respectively. The resulting similarity graph was identical to
the results of the analysis under equal-weight with respect
to the relationships among the Baltic, Finnic, and Slavic
ethnographical instruments with two significant differences
(Figure 2D). First, the relationships among the Baltic
instruments were stronger (as five out of 6 instruments
formed a single cluster). Second, the connection of most
ancient, archaeological instruments shifted from the Baltic
to the Finnic instruments.
The most comprehensive cladistic analysis of the Baltic
psaltery failed to unequivocally resolve which of the three
groups of instruments (Baltic, Finnic, or Slavic) were more
closely related to the root of the tree, the medieval artifacts
from Novgorod in northwestern Russia (Tëmkin &
Eldredge, 2007). The recovery of the Lithuanian (Baltic)
psaltery as most basal agrees with a presumed northward
diffusion of the instrument (the second wave of dispersal)
in (Tëmkin, 2004). The alternative scenario, in which the
Novgorodian instruments bear greater similarity to the
Finnic instruments (largely attested by shared symbolic
significance) suggests an intriguing hypothesis for
interpreting the instrument's history as it is more consistent
with archaeological data which indicates that medieval
Novgorod, where most ancient Baltic psalteries were
discovered, had a substantial proportion of Finnic
population (Tõnurist, 1977).

Discussion
By fusing physical information about artifacts with the
conceptual information our ancestors were using to create
these artifacts, we arrive at a more accurate picture of the
evolutionary trajectories by which the artifacts evolved, and
by which our human understanding of the world took
shape. This paper develops the conceptual and
mathematical foundation for a novel approach to
reconstructing patterns of cultural evolutionary history
based on graph theory. It uses algorithms for constructing
and displaying similarity graphs that can be biased by
conceptual knowledge from different domains. This
approach circumvents the limitations of traditional
phylogenetic approaches by (1) allowing for simultaneous
analysis of cognitive information and physical character
data, (2) providing the means for evaluating relative
contributions of different types of data to historical
inference, and (3) expanding hierarchical approach to
include reticulate relationships.
We tested the utility of the conceptual network approach
for inferring historical patterns of relatedness amongst
artifacts by applying it the analysis of the Baltic psaltery, a
stringed musical instrument unique to northwestern Europe.
Not only did the approach capture the essential features of

the instrument’s history inferred previously using other
methods, it also provided new insights that invite a novel
interpretation of the instrument’s evolution. To achieve this,
it was necessary to distinguish between hierarchically
organized conceptual attributes (largely pertaining to sacred
symbolic imagery), and physical characteristics (such as
elements of the instrument’s construction). Although this
was readily accomplished with the current approach, it
cannot be done with other approaches. The approach is not
limited to a specific data types; it can be extended to
include linguistic information, or any other discrete
character information.

Future Directions
Although limited in its present formulation, the conceptual
network approach provides large number of avenues for
future theoretical and mathematical developments. We are
currently developing methods for computing the expected
reliability of perspectives and determining the range of
weights (parameter space) in which a given perspective
becomes significant in the similarity computation. Other
immediate plans include developing sophisticated software
for analysis of the conceptual network.
In this investigation, we only explored the maximal
similarity graph, which connects each artifact to the artifact
that has the highest similarity to it according to the chosen
perspective weight vector (first neighbours graph). In future
investigations, we will consider the second or further most
similar artifacts (nth neighbour similarity graph), and
establish a mechanism to automatically split the perspective
space according to different criteria of similarity graph
equivalence. This will enable us to explore the
conglomeration of similarity graphs obtained from the
different sets of perspective weight vectors. To further
refine the approach, we will construct similarity graphs not
only considering the most similar connections of each
artifact, but connections above a certain threshold. This
could reveal different similarity ranges where the parameter
space is split in qualitatively different ways.
Finally, we plan to investigate the applicability of Kemp
and Tenenbaum (2008) structure discovery models.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge grants to Liane Gabora from
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada, and the Concerted Research Program
of the Fund for Scientific Research of Belgium.

References
Aerts, D., & Gabora, L. (2005a). A state-context-property
model of concepts and their combinations I: The
structure of the sets of contexts and properties.
Kybernetes, 34(1&2), 167–191.

2491

Aerts, D., & Gabora, L. (2005b). A state-context-property
model of concepts and their combinations II: A Hilbert
space representation. Kybernetes, 34(1&2), 192–221.
Borgerhoff Mulden, M., Nunn, C. L., & Towner, M. C.
(2006). Macroevolutionary studies of cultural trait
transmission. Evolutionary Anthropology 15, 52–64.
Coley, J. Hayes, B., Lawson, C., & Moloney, M. (2004).
Knowledge, expectations, and inductive inferences
within conceptual hierarchies. Cognition 90, 217–253.
Collard, M., Shennan, S. L., & Tehrani, J. J. (2006).
Branching, blending, and the evolution of cultural
similarities and differences among human populations.
Evolution and Human Behavior 27, 169–184.
Dewar, R. E. (1995). Of nets and trees: Untangling the
reticulate and dendritic in Madagascar prehistory. World
Archaeology 26, 301–18.
Eerkens, J. W., Bettinger, R. L., & McElreath, R. (2005).
Cultural
transmission,
phylogenetics,
and
the
archaeological record. In Lipo, C. P, O’Brien, M. J.,
Collard, M., & Shennan, S. (Eds.) Mapping Our
Ancestors: Phylogenetic Approaches in Anthropology
and Prehistory. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Eldredge, N. (2000). Biological and material cultural
evolution: Are there any true parallels? Perspectives in
Ethology 13, 113–53.
Forster, P. & Toth, A. (2003). Toward a phylogenetic
chronology of ancient Gaulish, Celtic, and IndoEuropean. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 100(15), 9079–9084.
Gabora, L. (1998). Autocatalytic closure in a cognitive
system: A tentative scenario for the origin of culture.
Psycoloquy, 9(67). [adap-org/9901002]
Gabora, L. (2006). The fate of evolutionary archaeology:
Survival or extinction? World Archaeology 38(4), 690–
696.
Gabora, L. (2008). The cultural evolution of socially
situated cognition. Cognitive Systems Research, 9(1-2),
104–113.
Gabora, L., Leijnen, S., Veloz, T., & Lipo, C. (2011). A
non-phylogenetic conceptual network architecture for
organizing classes of material artifacts into cultural
lineages. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2923–2928). July 20-23,
2011, Boston MA.
Gabora, L., & Aerts, D. (2002). Contextualizing concepts
using a mathematical generalization of the quantum
formalism. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 14(4), 327-358.
Haas, A. (2001). Intercultural conflict and the evolution of
the Baltic psaltery. Journal of Baltic Studies 32, 209–
250.
Holden, C. J., & Mace, R. (2003). Spread of cattle led to
the loss of matriliny in Africa: a co-evolutionary
analysis. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 270(1532), 2425–2433. ISSN: 0962-8452
Kemp, C., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). The discovery of
structural form. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 105(31), 10687–10692.

Lipo, C. P. (2005). The resolution of cultural phylogenies
using graphs. In Lipo, C. P., O’Brien, M. J., Collard, M.,
& Shena, S. J. (Eds.) Mapping our Ancestors. New
Brunswick: Transanunnction Publishers.
Mace, C. J., & Holden, R. (2005). A phylogenetic approach
to cultural evolution. TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution,
20(3), 116–121.
Moore, J. H. (1994). Putting anthropology back together
again: The ethnogenetic critique of cladistic theory.
American Anthropologist, 96, 925–48.
Nunn, C. L., Borgerhoff Mulden, M., & Langley, S. (2006).
Comparative methods for studying cultural trait
evolution: A simulation study. Cross-Cultural Research
40(2), 177–209.
O’Brien, M. J., Darwent, J., & Lyman, R. (2001). Cladistics
is useful for reconstructing archaeological phylogenies:
Paleoindian points from the Southeastern United States.
Journal of Archaeological Science 28, 1115–1136.
Povetkin, V. I. (1989). O proiskhozhdenii guslei s igrovym
oknom: iz opyta vosstanovitelnykh rabot. In Istoriya i
Kultura Drevnerusskogo Goroda. Moscow: Moscow
University Press.
Raynolds, S. (1984). Whence the Baltic psaltery? Paper
presented at the Ninth Conference on Baltic Studies, (pp.
1–22). June 14-16, 1984, Montréal, Canada.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In Rosch, E.
& Lloyd, B. (Eds.) Cognition and categorization.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shennan, S. 2008. Evolution in archaeology. Annual
Review of Anthropology, 37, 75–91.
Sowa, J. (2000). Ontology, Metadata, and Semiotics,
ICCS'2000, Darmstadt, Germany, August 14, 2000.
Published in B. Ganter & G. W. Mineau, eds.,
Conceptual Structures: Logical, Linguistic, and
Computational Issues, Lecture Notes in AI #1867,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2000, 55–81.
Tëmkin, I. (2004). The evolution of the Baltic psaltery: A
case for phyloorganology. The Galpin Society Journal
57, 219–30.
Tëmkin, I., & Eldredge, N. (2007). Phylogenetics and
material cultural evolution. Current Anthropology 48,
146–153.
Terrell, J. E., Hunt, T. L., & Gosden, C. (1997). The
dimensions of social life in the Paciﬁc: Human diversity
and the myth of the primitive isolate. Current
Anthropology 38, 155–95.
Terrell, J. E. (2001). Introduction. In J. E. Terrell (Ed.)
Archaeology, language, and history: Essays on culture
and ethnicity. Westport, Conn.: Bergin and Garvey.
Tõnurist, I. (1977). Kannel vepsamaast setumaani. In I.
Rüütel (Ed). Soome-Ugri Rahvaste Muusikapärandist.
Tallinn: Eesti Raamat.
Whiten, A, R. A. Hinde, K. N. Laland, & C. B. Stringer.
2011. Culture evolves. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 366, 938–948.

2492

