UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Narratological Approach for Narrative Discourse: Implementation and Evaluation of the
System based on Genette and Jauss

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9xx344rq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Akimoto, Taisuke
Ogata, Takashi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Narratological Approach for Narrative Discourse: Implementation and
Evaluation of the System based on Genette and Jauss
Taisuke Akimoto (g236i001@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University, 152-52 Sugo
Takizawa, Iwate 020-0193 Japan

Takashi Ogata (t-ogata@iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Faculty of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University
Abstract
This paper proposes a computational system of narrative discourse generation and its implementation. In the system, Genette’s discourse theory is reconstructed as discourse techniques
which transform the tree structure for a story into discourse structures. Also, we introduce Jauss’s reception theory to construct the
control mechanism, which continues discourse generation
through generation cycles based on the interaction between both
narrator and narratee mechanisms. Moreover, we attempt two
kinds of performance checks and two types of evaluation experiments and confirmed that the system generates diverse discourse
structures on the rough correspondence with generative parameters. And furthermore, this study show that two different types of
literary knowledge are organically integrated into a system’s
framework.
Keywords: Narrative generation system; narrative discourse; story; narratology; Genette; Jauss.

Introduction
The research of narrative generation system is a challenging
theme in artificial intelligence and cognitive science. It has a
close relationship to various topics such as problem solving,
planning, schema, story grammar, natural language generation,
creativity, etc. Moreover, in recent years, interdisciplinary approaches with narratology and literary theories are also emerging. We have proceeded on a narrative generation system based
on this kind of mixed approach since early 1990s. A common
framework for the narrative generation system (Ogata, 1994;
Ogata & Kanai, 2010; Akimoto & Ogata, 2011) consists of
three stages: story, discourse, and surface representations (by
language, animated movie, and music). Story is the content or a
temporal sequence of events to be narrated, and discourse
means how to organize a story or a narrated structure of events.
They are generated as the conceptual representation forms or
deep structures of narrative. Therefore, discourse phase does
not equal natural language generation phase. The discourse in
this paper especially means the internal structure of narrative
representation. For example, many of the objectives treated by
Callaway and Lester (2002) belong in natural language generation phase in the architecture of our narrative generation system.
This paper deals with the part of discourse and proposes a
computational model of structural narrative discourse processing and its implementation. As a fundamental standpoint,
we use the discourse theory of Genette (1972). In addition,
reception theory of Jauss (1970) is introduced into the system
to control the generation and transformation of narrative discourse structure. First, this paper introduces the system architecture. And second, we present results of the system’s evaluations, which focuses on the correctness of structure transformation and the control mechanism based on the interaction

between narrator and narrate inside the system. Last, the problems and future directions are discussed.
In the area of researches on narrative generation system,
there is no attempt that utilizes Jauss’s reception theory. Moreover, most of previous systems (e.g., TALE-SPIN by Meehan
(1980), BRUTUS by Bringsjord and Ferrucci (2000), and so
on) focused on the aspect of “story” generation mainly. However, recently, Montfort (2007) applied Genette’s discourse
theory to develop an interactive fiction system, and LönnekerRodman (2005) introduced the category of “voice” in Genette
theory into the conceptual design of natural language generation system. As stated above, the computational application of
Jauss provides an original design which can be not comparable
in other narrative generation systems. And, the introduction of
Genette has the character based on systematic and comprehensive design more than the other attempts. Such introduction of
the knowledge in literary area contributes to narrative generation system and artificial intelligence regarding the providing of
more precise and pragmatic domain specific knowledge and
can guide the exploration for the developing computational
techniques in creative areas. Especially, we show that two different and separate narratologies are organically integrated into
one computational mechanism. This is a worthy contribution that
the introduction of narratology into computational simulation has.

Genette’s Narrative Discourse Theory
Gérard Genette (1930-, France) is a representative literary theorist and narratologist mainly associated with structuralism. The
discourse theory by Genette (1972) comparatively clearly categorizes various types of discourse techniques through the analysis of a novel. The theory consists of following three broad
categories: “tense” relevant to the relationship between story’s
time and discourse’s time, “mood” relevant to the modality for
regulating narrative information, and “voice” relevant to the
relationship among narrating, story and discourse. Each category is further divided into many subcategories. In the proposed
system, discourse techniques are mainly relating to both categories for tense and mood.

Jauss’s Reception Theory
Reception theory is one standpoint in modern literary theories
and narratology, which focuses on the reception or reading
process of literary works. In this theory, readers contribute
strongly to the production process of literary works as a whole.
Hans Robert Jauss (1921-1997, German) is a representative
theorist of this area by proposing an idea to characterize literary
history based on the concept of “horizon of expectation”, which
means a kind of previous knowledge for positioning a new
work on the context of readers’ experiences of reading. Artistic
character of a new work is grasped by the disparity between the

1272

given horizon and the work, and the appearance of a new work
may result in the change of an old horizon. We grasp this theory as a model which literary works are continuously changing
through the interaction between authors and readers.

Proposing a Narrative Discourse Mechanism
We propose a narrative discourse system using both ideas of
Genette and Jauss. This system is intended to be positioned in
the part of narrative discourse in the common framework for
the narrative generation system (Ogata, 1994; Ogata & Kanai,
2010; Akimoto & Ogata, 2011). In the proposed discourse system, each category in Genette theory is elaborately formalized
as a discourse technique for transforming a story structure or
the part into a discourse structure, and Jauss theory is simply
interpreted as a mechanism in which above discourse construction process is controlled through the interaction between narrator mechanism with generative parameters and narratee mechanism with expectation parameters.
These narrator and narratee do not mean real existences but
virtual agents inside the system. In the current implementation,
both narrator and narratee is individual model. However, reception theory covers both individual model and collective one,
and we should consider other possibilities about the concepts in
the future. For example, there are multiple models such as the
narrator as an individual & the narratees as multiple individuals,
and the narrators as multiple individuals & the narratee(s) as a
collection. Our narrative generation research is an exploratory
approach through the incremental revision of a variety of elements or modules and the integration and a flexible framework
for the step-by-step expansion and conversion is prepared.
Following cycle continues according to the interaction of
narrator and narratee. The narrator mechanism performs the
processing of discourse generation and transformation using
discourse techniques and a set of rules for controlling the application based on generative parameters. On the other hand, the
narratee mechanism evaluates the result based on the comparison of expectation parameters and generative ones. In the next
cycle, referencing the narratee’s evaluation, the narrator tries to
do the generation in an effort to come close to the narratee’s
expectation or higher degree of the satisfaction. However, the
processing eventually comes at a point where the narratee’s
satisfaction turns to fall from rise or the narratee gets tired. In
such timing, the narrator abandons a part of old generative parameters (“deviation”) and moves to a new cycle of discourse
generation according to a new strategy, and narratee’s expectation is also altered.
As this process is a principled and elaborate computational
application based on the idea and concept of reception theory, it
is characterized as a comprehensive and general control mechanism for narrative generation system to be able to be expanded
to other narrative generation stages such as story generation
and natural language generation.

Structural Representations for Story and Discourse
Both structures for a story and a discourse have a same tree
form. In the story tree, each leaf node is corresponding to an
event described with conceptual representation, which is really
described by a case frame consisting of one verb concept and
eight kinds of cases such as agent and object. Each internal
node in the story tree is corresponding to a “relation” combining with the child nodes like “cause-effect” and “serial”. On the

other hand, a discourse is described as a tree structure transformed from a story tree. And next seven kinds of relations are
used for only the discourse tree: “recall”, “present-backward”,
“prophecy”, “present-feature”, “episode”, “description”, and
“repetition_discourse”.

Discourse Techniques
In computational perspective, since each technique for discourse by Genette is respectively corresponding to a type of
discourse structure outputted from an input story, the process is
be able to define with a kind of transformation procedure. For
the procedural definition of techniques, we prepare next five
kinds of procedural primitives for operating any intermediate or
terminal node in the input structure: deletion, copy, conjunction,
substitution, and creation. Current version of the system has 13
kinds of discourse techniques using the primitives as shown in
Table 1. Although techniques for tense cover the main part, a
few techniques for mood are also contained. Figure 1 shows the
operation of “complementary analepsis_ellipsis” as an example
of transformation.

Control Mechanism
By reference to the comparatively vague description about effects of discourse techniques by Genette (1972), we originally
defined discourse parameters including p1:supplement,
p2:complexity,
p3:suspense,
p4:length,
p5:hiding,
p6:descripttiveness, p7:repetition, p8:diffuseness, p9:implication,
and p10:temporal-independency. These parameters are associated with the feature and the effect of constructed discourse
structures, and are used for generative goals for narrator and
expectations for narratee. Each parameter takes the value of 1
(small), 2 (medium), or 3 (large). Moreover, we defined quantitative criteria for measuring the degree of attainment of each
parameter in a generated discourse. These criteria are not based
on the cognitive effects for recipient, but structural features
which can be calculated from the number and order of specific
leaf/internal nodes in the tree structure of discourse. For example, “length” is measured by the total number of leaf nodes in a
discourse structure. The quantitative criteria are used for the
system’s evaluation experiments in the following section. And
also, as mentioned later, the narrator decides discourse techniques to be applied based on the rules for selecting techniques
by values of the generative parameters. These rules are defined
according to the correlation coefficient between each generative parameter and each measured value using the above criteria.
Figure 2 shows the overview of control mechanism. The list
of Table 2 is the explanation of important terms used in the
process. For the process, an input story is given by user or previous story phase. Other necessary data are the saturation point
in the degree of satisfaction (np, 1 or more), the number of generation cycles (1 or more), and some kinds of initial values
including generative parameters, expectation parameters, the
degree of desire in narratee (0 or more), and the number of
sufficiency in narratee (0 or more). According to the input data,
system repeats following five steps.
(1) Selection of Techniques Narrator decides techniques to be
applied according to generative parameters and rules for selecting techniques to be used. These rules define 0 or more techniques corresponding to each parameter’s value, such as [If
“supplement” is 1 then nothing, 2 then “external analepsis”,

1273

and 3 then “external analepsis” & “external prolepsis”]. When
a same kind of technique is selected by more than one rule, the
narrator takes the number of times of this technique to be used,
from one rule which has the greatest number of the technique.
Table 1: 13 kinds of discourse techniques
External analepsis: Narrating past events which are positioned outside of story’s time range (i.e., not contained in the story).
Complementary analepsis_ellipsis: Narrating past events which are lacked of
the original position.
Complementary analepsis_paralipsis: Narrating past events which are partially lacked of the original position.
Repetitive analepsis: Narrating past events once more.
External prolepsis: Narrating prospective events which are positioned outside
of story’s time range (i.e., not contained in the story).
Complementary prolepsis_ellipsis: Narrating prospective events and these
events are lacked of the original position.
Complementary prolepsis_paralipsis: Narrating prospective events and these
events are partially lacked of the original position.
Repetitive prolepsis: Narrating prospective events and these events are narrated
at the original position once more.
Achronie: Narrating events which have unidentified temporal relation with time
of story.
Pause: Pausing temporal progress of the story by inserting descriptions.
Implicit ellipsis: Skipping one part of story.
Repeating: Narrating same events twice.
Paralipsis: Narrating less information than original sequence of the events.
INPUT

Copy
(X)

*
*

*

*

*

E1 E2 E3 E4

E1 E2 E3 E4

X

Conjunction
(Y, X2)

*

Y

*

Y

*

*
E1 E2

X

X2 E1 E2

*
present-backward

present-backward

E3

RESULT

Deletion
(X)

*

E4

*

E3

*

E4

E1 E2

E1 E2

Figure 1: The transformation process of “complementary analepsis_ellipsis”
Narrator mechanism
Generative
goal
(1) Selection
of techniques
Selective
rules

Narratee mechanism

Story

Expectation
(2) Application
of Techniques

(5) Adjusting
generative
parameters

Discourse
Evaluation
result

User input: story and initial value of generative goal and expectation

(3) Evaluation
of reception

(2) Application of Techniques Narrator mechanism applies all
selected techniques to the structure. The interference among
techniques sometimes arises. For example, an inserted node by
“repeating” is removed by “implicit ellipsis”. For avoiding such
phenomena, we determined the order of priority that techniques
are applied. Removal techniques like “implicit ellipsis” have
higher priority than additional techniques like “pause”. The
position for a technique to be applied is decided using some
heuristic constraint rules relevant to the node’s size mainly. For
instance, the large internal nodes containing more than 7 leafs
can not be the position “implicit ellipsis” is applied.
(3) Evaluation of Reception First, the narratee calculates the
degree of satisfaction in every expectation’s parameter. Here,
higher satisfaction can be obtained when a more strongly desired parameter is satisfied. Next, narratee calculates and indicates one parameter with the lowest satisfaction. If two or more
parameters have the lowest satisfaction, the parameter which
has smaller subscript number will be selected. For example,
when length (p4) and hiding (p5) were the lowest, the former is
selected. The result is described as a pair of the name of parameter and the evaluation value.
(4) Rewriting Expectation The narratee rewrites the expectation parameters through following two processes. First process
rewrites the number of sufficiency and the degree of desire.
The former is increased when the narratee received the sufficed
discourse in each time. And this change causes the rise and fall
in the degree of satisfaction as shown in Figure 3. And, np in
the figure sets a turning point of the degree of satisfaction.
Smaller np means the narratee is get tired easily. Through the
generation cycle, such change occurs in each of ten parameters
independently and repeatedly. In another process, a parameter’s
value caused by the reception of a deviated discourse is renewed.
(5) Adjusting Generative Parameters The narrator rewrites
one of generative parameter’s values according to the indication from the narratee. If there are no parameters to be changed,
this process is skipped. “Deviation” is done in this step when
narratee got tired in the expectation parameter. It randomly
alters the value of parameter got tired with a value from 1 to 3
except for the current value. In the next cycle (step 4), narratee
will rewrite the deviated parameter’s value.

(4) Rewriting
expectation
Data flow

Implementation and Execution Example
Procedure

Figure 2: The overview of control mechanism
Table 2: Important terms in the control mechanism
Generative Discourse parameters which represent the narrator’s direction of
goal
discourse generation.
Expectation Discourse parameters which represent the expected discourse features by the narratee. Each parameter has two kinds of attribu-tions
which are “degree of desire” and “number of sufficiency”.
Degree of This is numerical value and it represents the strength of expectation
desire
which is represented by the value of the parameter.
Number of This is number of time the parameter was sufficed. Suffice means the
sufficiency accordance of a value of generative parameter and a value of expectation parameter.
Degree of Degree of satisfaction in narratee’s each expectation parameter to
satisfaction narrator’s generative goal.
Indication An annunciation to the narrator about the parameter which was the
least “degree of satisfaction”.
Getting
The narratee is boring with the expected discourse, namely “degree
tired
of satisfaction” is decreased.
Deviation The narrator intentionally sets a generative goal which counters the
expectation of the narratee.

We implemented the system with Common Lisp. It mainly
consists of three main elements: discourse techniques, narrator
mechanism, and narrate mechanism. The program contains
about 60 kinds of defined functions. Story and discourse are
described with the same form of list. Moreover, we preliminarily provide supplemental data for events and descriptive information to use in “external analepsis”, “external prolepsis”,
“achronie”, and “pause”. The system finally outputs a list of
generated discourse and a Japanese natural language text. The
latter is generated by a simple natural language sentences generation program we have originally developed. Table 3 shows
an execution example which contains an input story, generative
parameters, and a generated discourse. Both input/output are
also described in natural language. In the generated discourse,
13 kinds of discourse techniques are applying. In addition, the
input story directly uses a generated result of a story generation
system by (Ogata & Terano, 1991) which uses a story grammar
based on Propp theory (Propp, 1969). This shows an actual
case this proposed system can be combined with other components in the narrative generation system architecture.

1274

Degree of
satisfaction
( )
2

turally different from the story, both have a same semantic content. This coincides with the definition of the relationship between story and discourse. Next, we analyzed the transformation
process of above result to check the logical correctness in the
processing of used techniques and confirmed that each technique
was correctly functioning as the individual level. However, we
found out some matters at the level of combinatorial application
of techniques. For example, a node inserted by “complementary
analepsis_paralipse” was additionally moved by “complementary analepsis_ellipsis”, that is, the result of the former was negated by the latter. This topic is generalized that a part of tree
constructed by previously applied discourse techniques is additionally transformed by the later techniques. Such phenomenon,
i.e., the interference among techniques may bring logical errors
in a discourse structure. For instance, under the “presentbackward” relation, right side’s child nodes may contain posterior events to left side’s child nodes. To solve such problem, we
prepared some heuristic constraints and priority order rules to
apply techniques in step 2 in the control mechanism.

Getting tired

0 1

Number of sufficiency( )

Figure 3: Changing pattern of the degree of satisfaction
Table 3: An execution example
Input story
A snake abducted a princess. An older woman sang a grief-stricken song. Ivan
resolved at searching the princess. Ivan departed from the town. Ivan battled
with the snake. Ivan got arm wounded by the snake. Ivan won against the
snake. Ivan abducted the princess. Ivan departed from the snake’s country. The
snake flew in the air to the snake’s country. The snake followed Ivan. Ivan hid
himself to a rock. The princess found Ivan’s wound. Dwarfs built a palace. Ivan
lived in the palace. Ivan married with the princess.
Generative goal
supplement:3, complexity:2, suspense:3, length:1, hiding:1, descriptive-ness:2,
repetition:2, diffuseness:2, implication:3, temporal-independency:2
Generated discourse
An older woman sang a grief-stricken song. The woman was born. (And) the
woman grew in a town. (Now,) Ivan battled with a snake in the snake’s country.
Ivan got arm wounded by the snake. (But) Ivan won against the snake. (And)
Ivan departed from the snake’s country. The snake followed Ivan. (A few years
later,) the older woman will get weak and die. (By the way,) the snake prophesied that dwarfs will build a palace. Ivan hid himself to a rock. A princess found
Ivan’s wound. The snake’s country is slightly dark. Ivan’s wound is bleeding.
The princess is beautiful. (Soon after,) Ivan lived in a palace. (A short time ago,)
dwarfs built this palace. Dwarfs built this palace. Ivan married with the princess.
(Go back to the time of beginning,) the snake abducted the princess. The older
woman sang a grief-stricken song. Ivan abducted the princess. Ivan departed the
snake’s country. (At that time,) Ivan prophesied that dwarfs will build a palace,
(and) dwarfs will build a palace. (By the way,) somewhere a bear went to farming village .The bear attacked a farmer.

Diverse Generation by Changing Parameters

Operation Checks and Evaluations
We think that the evaluation of narrative generation system
should be extremely done with a goal of narrative qualitative
progress such as the improvement of creativity and interestingness. For example, Callaway and Lester (2002) proposed some
evaluation items although the aspect of narrative comparatively
surface language generation and Akimoto and Ogata (2009)
organized evaluation criteria comprehensively. However, as the
previous step, we attempt fundamental checks of the performance and simple evaluations. First two attempts are for the
performance confirmation. In the first check, we analyze the
aspect of logical structure in generated discourse representations. Next, an important purpose of the current system is the
realization of no arbitrary diversity in the generation. First is a
simple attempt for confirming whether changing generative
goals results in the diversity of generated texts. And, second is
an experiment for investigating narrative diversity through a
generation cycle based on the interaction between narrator and
narratee. In the last experiment, we quantitatively verify the
correspondence relationship between used parameters and generated discourses. All experiments use the input story in preceding section.

A Structural Analysis of Generated Discourse
First, as a confirmation of the system’s performance, we explain the overall structure of the result shown in Table 3. The
outline of input story is that “A snake abducts a princess, and
then Ivan rescues the princess from the snake, and then Ivan
married the princess”. Whereas, the output discourse has some
features: (a) some events relating to the princess are hidden at
the early part of the discourse, and are revealed after the marriage, and, (b) the discourse is longer than the input obviously.
Moreover, we confirmed although generated discourse is struc-

Although it is no wonder in a sense, one of the merits in the
proposed mechanism is that the diversity of generation brought
by changing generative parameters. This characteristic is relating to a basic concept in the narrative generation system project
of the flexible generation from fragmentary narrative elements
and techniques. We confirmed generation diversity using
“measured values” which means numerical numbers calculated
based on the measurement criteria for each parameter. These
values are automatically calculated from generated discourse
using an embedded program routine. The various kinds of discourses are generated by different generative parameters such
as very short one, longer and relatively complex ordered one,
and so on. The obvious changes of measured values were
caused by the change of values of the parameters. On the other
hand, we confirmed that the system generates discourse structures in a certain range from same generative parameters. For
example, 100 results generated from a same story (Table 3) and
a set of generative parameters which generates very short discourse, the range of measured value “length” was 6 to 11. In
summary, we could confirm that a certain degree of generative
diversity is actualized from a generative goal and the change of
parameters causes the change of the range of generation.

Diverse Generation through Continuous Cycle
The objective of this experiment is to investigate the different
changing patterns of a circulative discourse generation process
based on the different values of np. We executed the program
respectively 10000 cycles for two kinds of np, 20 and 200. Figure 4 shows the change of four measured values in generated
discourses. However, although the only first 500 cycles are
shown, a similar pattern of change was continued after that.
Two types of changing patterns exist. First is a micro level
changing pattern based on same generative parameters occurring in each cycle. However, in this figure, “supplement” has
not such kind of change. Another type is a macro level changing pattern caused by different generative parameters. The frequency in this kind of change is influenced by the value of np,
and more frequent changes occur with smaller value of np. This
fact indicates that intentional or strategic control of the system’s behavior may become possible by adjusting the value of

1275

np. For example, if we want to generate in a wide range of discourses, we can set smaller values of np. In contrast, if we want
to generate in a narrow range of discourses, we can set larger
values of np. Next, we focus on the range of generated discourses. In each measured value, there was a certain range as
shown in Figure 4. On the other hand, as the combinations of
measured values, 18765 patterns of discourse texts were generated from above 20000 discourses as the pattern which has
completely similar measured values. In summary, the grasp of
generative characteristics by parameters is connected to the
development of a variety of control strategies. In addition, expansions of the existing control mechanism are also conceivable. The circulative generation process in the mechanism is
thought of as a kind of closed-loop because same a changing
pattern is repeating through a cycle. Regarding this, we programmed a simple mechanism which manipulates a specific
parameter intentionally or randomly to create a part exceeding
circulative loop. For example, by increasing a parameter’s value incrementally, the corresponding aspect in discourse generation deviates from the closed-loop. Such a kind of breakdown
or mutation may connect to narrative creativity or interestingness. These are implications for system implementation the
experiments have. On the other hand, this kind of trial exploits
a possibility of theoretical approach to creative genres like literature in terms of providing an experimental method to narratology, reception theory in this case.

Correspondence between Generative Parameters
and Generated Discourse
We programmed a function which generates discourse texts by
all (59049) combinations of generative parameters to quantitatively confirm the correspondence between used parameters
and generated texts. Table 4 shows all of the correlation coefficient between each generative parameter and each measured
value. In this table, vertical line and horizontal line respectively
shows generative parameters and measured values. Each intersection means their correlation coefficient. In each parameter,

Figure 4: Changing parameters through a generation cycle
Table 4: Correlation coefficients between generative parameters and measured values
Measured value

Generative goal

Supple- CompleSuspense Length
ment
xity

Supplement
Complexity
Suspense
Length
Hiding
Descriptiveness
Repetition
Diffuseness
Implication
Temporalindependency

0.76
-0.00
-0.00
0.19
0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.38

0.19
0.41
0.29
0.05
0.06
-0.00
-0.06
0.00
0.40

0.00

0.21

Hiding

-0.01 0.22 -0.00
0.26 0.22 -0.00
0.35 0.14 0.00
0.01 0.39 -0.28
-0.07 -0.26 0.69
-0.00 0.23 -0.00
-0.09 0.23 -0.00
-0.02 0.25 -0.28
-0.04 0.28 -0.00
-0.02

0.19

0.00

Descrip- Repeti- Diffuse- Implica- Temporaltiveness tion
ness
tion
independency

-0.01 0.00
0.00 0.21
-0.00 0.16
0.45 0.04
0.01 0.02
0.61 -0.00
0.00 0.40
-0.00 0.22
-0.01 0.19
0.00

0.23

0.00 0.22
0.17 0.11
0.13 0.01
0.19 0.00
-0.37 -0.01
-0.00 0.00
0.33 0.00
0.34 0.00
0.16 0.81

0.00
0.14
0.00
0.14
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.19 -0.00

0.88

higher value in the corresponding measured value’s column
(shaded one) and smaller values in other columns mean that the
parameter is clearly reflected into the generated text. As a result,
these are not complete correlations because the measured value
by a parameter is sometimes influenced by the effect of other
parameters. For example, the measured value by “length” is
influenced by “descriptiveness” parameter. And, as correlations
in “complexity”, “suspense”, “length”, “repetition”, and “diffuseness” were relatively weak, a reorganization of the correspondences between parameters and discourse techniques is
required. As an idea, we are considering a method for hierarchically organizing parameters according to the abstraction
level. For instance, parameters like “length” influenced by parameters such as “supplement” and “descriptiveness” may be
positioned at the lower or more concrete layer in the hierarchy.
In this hierarchical model, each technique is linked to one or
more lower parameters which are influenced by the technique.

Overall Discussion and Future Issues
This section shows more general discussions and future directions from several standpoints.

Toward the Expansion of Control Mechanism
Proposed system has the capacity to generate diverse discourses within a certain definite range based on the automatic
change of both sets of parameters for generation (narrator) and
evaluation (narrate). The changing pattern in discourse structures in a circulative process is based on variable np. In this
mechanism, discourse generation is principally executed automatically. In contrast, as stated in previous section, we are considering a method with more intentional and conscious mechanism to control generation. We prepared an experimental program repeating discourse generation based on a direction which
a real user directly gave. By increasing or decreasing the values
of “length” and “complexity” intentionally, this program repeats the rises & falls or continues to extend the length. For
instance, we confirmed that the program performed just as a
given direction and very long outputs were generated. The
measured value of “length” was 149 as maximum. Another
idea is about “deviation” process in the narrator (Table 2). Although current system changes only one parameter’s value randomly in deviation process, we experimentally modified the
system to be able to adjust the number of changing parameters
in deviation process. As a result, we confirmed more number of
changing parameters causes more rapid change of outputs.
These experiments show that proposed control mechanism is
an expandable framework based on the strategic and flexible
adjustment of parameters.

An Application for Narrative Creation Support
Although this research is directly aiming at automatic narrative
generation, at the same time, we are involved in the planning of
system for supporting user’s narrative creation with the automatic generation function. For example, the system automatically generates diverse narrative texts and then the user selects
one or more outputs to complete or expand by processing them
as a kind of narrative material. In the case, narrative generation
mechanism is corresponding to a function for stimulating user’s
thought and inspiration. To investigate the idea, next simple
experiments is attempted. First, we selected two preferred texts
from many outputs by the system (by the input information in
Table 3). At this time, we can see graphs of measured values as

1276

shown in Figure 4 to grasp parameters’ characteristics in generated discourses. And then, we created a new story by the processing, expansion, and elaboration, moreover by combining
two materials into one story. Human strong point is the creating
of complex or complicated psychological narrative simulations
and the processing of rhetorical techniques on surface text representation. On the other hand, machine’s special skill is the
generation of complex or complicated sequences in temporal
progression and the logical processing of other discourse elements, and machine has the capacity to be able to generate superhuman texts, though, they may sometimes unnatural. Collaborative narrative creation or creation support by computer is
one of the future directions in this research.

Issues for Introducing Narratology
In this proposal of the application of Genette theory, we do not
reach the comprehensive introduction. However, as we provided a common method for implementing discourse techniques,
we can directly use it to extend the range of covering Genette
based techniques and other categories. Previously, we have
been developing several elemental systems for discourse techniques including order, distance, focalization, and other categories (Ogata et al. (2004) shows their overviews). However,
these programs were not integrated as a whole system because
of different data forms and processing methods. The first step
for the integration at the level of discourse becomes the integration of existing functions into the proposed framework. On the
other hand, the proposition of computational formation and
implementation inspired by Jauss reception theory is also an
original result in this paper. Although we stated the topic of
individual narrator/narratee and collective ones, other various
issues. For example, the narratee mechanism does not refer to
generated discourse itself, and the narratee’s reception pattern,
which is the process of rise and fall in the degree of satisfaction,
is preliminarily fixed. These issues will be solved through an
exploratory approach in the future.

The Integration with Narrative Generation System
Proposed system is positioned as a module of the narrative
generation system. To integrate it into the system, first, it is
necessary that the output data by the story generation phase
becomes the input data of the discourse phase by unifying the
form of knowledge representations. Regarding this, a tentative
experimental version of integrated narrative generation system
is already implemented by Akimoto and Ogata (2011). Next
issue is the revision and expansion of discourse mechanism
itself. Our immediate goal is to develop a systematic set of discourse techniques including all categories of Genette theory. At
the same time, other types of techniques the theory does not
describe are also required to be added into the comprehensive
discourse mechanism. For example, Genette did not refer to the
concrete way of “description” and “explanation” for character,
object, and so on, at least systematically or formally. This sort
of micro discourse techniques is a topic that has been discussing in the field of AI and natural language processing, and by
the medium of this part, literary or narratological knowledge
and AI-based knowledge will be blended in a narrative generation system. Moreover, we plan to expand the proposed narrative control method based on the interaction between narrator
and narratee inside the system to an entire system including
story phase and surface representation phases.

Conclusions
This paper proposed a computational system of narrative discourse generation and its implementation. In the system, Genette’s discourse theory is reconstructed as discourse techniques which transform the tree structure for a story into discourse structures. Also, we introduced Jauss’s reception theory
to construct the control mechanism, which continues discourse
generation through generation cycles based on the interaction
between both narrator and narratee mechanisms. Moreover, we
did two kinds of performance checks and two types of evaluation experiments and confirmed that the system generates diverse discourse structures on the rough correspondence with
generative parameters. And furthermore, this study showed that
two different types of literary knowledge are organically integrated into a system’s framework. At last, although this research does not directly treat the aspect of human cognition, as
mentioned above, this indicates that advanced literary
knowledge which is an important part at human cognition can
be studied as a system, especially a computational system, more
essentially beyond the traditional boundaries of fields of study.
This is also a significance of cognitive science in a wide sense.

References
Akimoto, T. & Ogata, T. (2009). On the evaluation of a narrative
discourse system: surveys of evaluation methods and an exploratory evaluation. Proc. of the 19th Conference of LCCII,
Japanese Cognitive Science Society. 19G-01. (in Japanese)
Akimoto, T. & Ogata, T. (2011). A consideration of the elements
for narrative generation and a trial of integrated narrative generation system. Proc. of the 7th NLPKE (pp. 369-377).
Bringsjord, S. & Ferrucci, D. A. (2000). Artificial Intelligence
and Literary Creativity: Inside the Mind of BRUTUS, a Storytelling Machine. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Callaway, C. B. & Lester, J. C. (2002). Narrative prose generation. Artificial Intelligence, 139(2), 213-252.
Genette, G. (1972). Narrative discourse: an essay in method.
Transl. Lewin, J. E. (1980). New York: Cornell University Press.
Jauss, H. R. (1970). Toward an aesthetic of reception. Transl.
Bahti, T. (1982). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Lönneker-Rodman, B. (2005). Narratological knowledge for
natural language generation. Proc. of the 10th European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation (pp. 91-100).
Meehan, J. R. (1980). The Metanovel: Writing Stories by Computer. New York: Garland Publishing.
Montfort, N. (2007). Generating narrative variation in interactive fiction. A dissertation in computer and information science, University of Pennsylvania.
Ogata, T., Hori, K., & Ohsuga, S. (1994). Towards narrative
text generation based on narrative techniques and strategies.
Proc. of International Federation for Information and Documentation (pp. 296-300).
Ogata, T. & Kanai, A. (2010). An introduction of informatics of
narratology: on thought and technology of narrative generation. Tokyo: Gakubunsha. (in Japanese)
Ogata, T. & Terano, T. (1991). Explanation-based narrative
generation using semiotic theory. Proc. of Natural Language
Processing Pacific Rim Symposium 91 (pp. 321-328).
Ogata, T., Umehara, S., Yamakage, S., Ueda, K., & Hosaka, Y.
(2004). Aspects of narrative discourse process and their integration by computer simulation. Cognition, text and society
of narrative: notes of intensive course at university of Yamanashi 2002 (Edited by Ogata, T., Tech. Rep. JCSS-TR-52, pp.
136-143). Japanese Cognitive Science Society.
Propp, V. (Пропп, В. Я.) (1969). Морфология скаэки, Иэ, 2е.
Москва: Наука. (Transl. Scott, L. (1968). Morphology of the
Folktale. Austin: University of Texas Press.)

1277

