UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Window of Perception When Diverting Attention? Enhancing Recognition For Explicitly
Presented, Unattended, and Irrelevant Visual Stimuli by Target Alignment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86m2332m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Dewald, Andrew
Sinnett, Scott

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Window of Perception When Diverting Attention? Enhancing Recognition For
Explicitly Presented, Unattended, and Irrelevant Visual Stimuli by Target
Alignment
Andrew D. Dewald (adewald@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822
Abstract
Irrelevant, but overtly presented, stimuli that are temporally
aligned with an attended target in a separate task are later
inhibited in a recognition task (Dewald, Doumas, & Sinnett,
2011). This is contrary to findings in the perceptual learning
literature where facilitation has been observed for later
recognition of irrelevant motion stimuli, albeit after extensive
exposure rates. Here, we adapted previous work to include
higher exposure rates, and subsequently observed a reversal in
inhibition in favor of enhanced recognition performance.
Participants responded to immediate picture repetitions in a
stream of line drawings while ignoring simultaneously
presented superimposed words. A surprise test measured
recognition for the unattended words. Words that had
previously appeared simultaneously with a repeated picture
were recognized significantly more often than words that had
appeared with non-repeating pictures. The findings suggest
that the exposure rate and the quantity of irrelevant stimuli
can have a significant impact on whether perception is
inhibited or facilitated.

Introduction
Throughout the past decade, researchers have explored how
information is processed when it is explicitly or implicitly
presented, and the fate of this information when it receives
or does not receive direct and focused attention (Dewald,
Sinnett, & Doumas, 2011; Mack & Rock, 1998; Rees,
Russell, Frith, & Driver, 1999, Seitz & Watanabe, 2003,
2005; Sinnett, Costa, & Soto-Faraco, 2006, Tsushima,
Sasaki, & Watanabe, 2006; Tsushima, Seitz, & Watanabe,
2008, Swallow & Jiang, 2010). For instance, several
investigations have shown significant perceptual learning
enhancements in the absence of focused attention for stimuli
that are, in fact, presented below the threshold for visual
awareness (i.e., implicitly presented) (Seitz & Watanabe,
2003; 2005; Watanabe, Náñez, & Sasaki, 2001). More
recently and contrary to these findings, Tsushima and
colleagues (Tsushima et al., 2006; Tsushima et al., 2008)
presented evidence suggesting that when the implicit
stimulus is made explicit (i.e., observable), a later inhibition
is observed. Thus, it would appear that facilitation or
inhibition is dependent on whether or not stimulus
presentation is sub- or suprathreshold. Furthermore, all of
these investigations purport that a synchronous temporal

relationship between the irrelevant stimulus (motion in these
investigations) and a separate but attended target in the
exposure stage is critical to observing these facilitatory or
inhibitory effects in a later recognition task (i.e., the
nonsynchronous condition is baseline).
Demonstrating learning enhancements for irrelevant
stimuli, Seitz and Watanabe (2003) had participants take
part in a series of experiments in which improved motion
perception for an irrelevant, subthreshold motion, was
postulated to be due to the establishment of a temporal
relationship between task-relevant and task-irrelevant
stimuli (Seitz & Watanabe, 2003; 2005, see also Watanabe
et al., 2001 for a further example using a similar paradigm).
Briefly, participants were required to identify a differently
colored letter in a rapid serial visual presentation of letters.
This primary task was superimposed over an irrelevant
background motion stimulus that involved an array of
moving dots, of which a small subset moved in coherence.
Note that the coherently moving dots (5%) were implicit in
nature, demonstrated by chance motion discrimination
during pre-testing. While every letter was accompanied with
an array of moving dots, the direction of the subthreshold
coherent motion was always the same for the target letters
of the primary task, while remaining random for non-target
letters. The implicit motion synchronized with the presence
of the task- target (the different colored letter) was later
identified significantly more often than the other motions
(i.e. those accompanying non-target letters) in a motion
detection task (see, Seitz and Watanabe, 2003). It was
hypothesized that when the irrelevant motion and task-target
were presented simultaneously during exposure, the learning
associated with attention being directed to the detection of
the task-relevant features of the task-target would also be
applied to the task-irrelevant stimulus of background
motion, despite the motion being subthreshold and attention
being explicitly directed towards the primary attentiondemanding task. Further bolstering this account is the fact
that significant improvements in the motion discrimination
task were observed only for the motion direction that was
paired with the presence of the task-target (i.e.,
simultaneously presented). However, it is important to recall
that the irrelevant stimuli temporally aligned with the
presence of the task-target were subthreshold in nature.

1494

Given the differences in perception for subthreshold and
supratheshold information, a logical ensuing question would
be to explore what happens when above threshold irrelevant
motion stimuli are presented during the exposure stage.
Addressing this very question, Tsushima et al (2008)
conducted a similar experiment using explicit rather than
implicit motion. Specifically, their experiment included a
condition with suprahreshold motions (i.e., 50% coherence)
during the primary task (i.e., exposure stage), in addition to
a subthreshold motion condition (i.e., 5% coherence).
Although one might perhaps expect that higher motion
coherence would lead to stronger learning effects (when
compared to lower motion coherence signals) due to an
arguably strengthened perceptual signal (Britten, Shadlen,
Newsome, & Movshon, 1992), the opposite occurred.
Facilitation was found only for the subthreshold stimulus
levels, while an inhibition was observed for suprathreshold
exposure (i.e., explicit presentation). Combined, these
findings suggest that strong (overt) target-aligned irrelevant
features are subject to attentional inhibition, as the initial
task requires attention to be directed to the letter stream.
This possibly prevents the strong, but irrelevant, feature
from being learned. However, subthreshold motion is not
subject to this same inhibitory control, and might therefore
be learned and facilitate later perceptual performance.
Other experimental paradigms have utilized different
approaches and stimuli to further investigate the way
information is processed during dual-task performance.
Interestingly, despite the explicit presentation of their
stimuli, opposite findings from Tsushima et al (2006) have
been observed, with a facilitation for overt stimuli that was
presented simultaneously with an attended target from a
separate task. For instance, Swallow and Jiang (2010; see
also Lin et al., 2010 for a similar example of a paradigm
utilizing temporally aligned targets) completed a series of
experiments suggesting an “attentional boost” (i.e.,
facilitation) for simultaneously presented information in a
dual-task paradigm, rather than an inhibition as witnessed
by Tsushima et al (2006; 2008). In their experiment,
participants monitored a stream of pictures of various
scenes. A series of distractor items (small black
superimposed squares) were simultaneously paired with the
presentation of each picture. Participants were required to
remember as many of the presented scenes as possible, in
addition to monitor the distractor stream for the presence of
an “odd-ball” color change (i.e., the presence of a white
square rather than a black square). In a subsequent forced
choice recognition test for the picture scenes, an enhanced
recognition for pictures that had been presented
simultaneously with the presence of the target (i.e., the
‘odd-ball’ color change) in the distractor stream was
observed (i.e., an attentional boost).
Of particular note to Swallow and Jiang’s (2010)
findings is that participants were required to attend to both
streams of information simultaneously (encode the pictures
as well as detect an “odd ball” target). Recall that in the
paradigm utilized by Seitz and Watanabe (2003) as well as

Tsushima et al (2008), participants were instructed to detect
a target in one stream (i.e., identify a differently colored
letter) while being exposed to the background coherent
motion, but not actively attend to the background motion
(i.e., the motion was in fact irrelevant at this stage in the
experiment). Regardless of these procedural differences, it is
important to note that Swallow and Jiang’s (2010) findings
are based on the presentation of above threshold stimuli,
much like the 50% coherent motion in the Tsushima et al
(2008) paradigm. A second important difference is the
nature of the stimuli. Swallow and Jiang used pictures (see
also Lin et al., 2010) while irrelevant motion was used in the
other examples. It is likely that explicitly presented pictures
are processed much differently than irrelevant and implicitly
presented motion. Combined, the procedural differences
between these two paradigms may be a contributing reason
as to why a contradictory pattern of results has been
observed (i.e., facilitation for Swallow & Jiang, 2010 and
inhibition for Tsushima et al., 2008).
Recent work from our laboratory (Dewald et al., 2011)
examined the temporal pairing of highly salient and overtly
presented task-relevant and task-irrelevant stimuli with an
adapted inattentional blindness (IB) task (see Rees et al.,
1999; Sinnett et al., 2006 for similar examples), requiring
participants to monitor a stream of pictures with
synchronized superimposed words, and respond to
immediate repetitions in the picture steam while ignoring
the word stream. Following the picture repetition detection
task, participants were administered a surprise recognition
test for the (ignored) words that had been superimposed
over the pictures during the repetition detection task. Words
that had been temporally aligned with the presence of a
task-target (i.e., an immediately repeating picture) were
subsequently recognized significantly below chance levels
(i.e., inhibited), while words that had been temporally
aligned with non-targets (i.e., a non repeating picture) were
recognized at chance levels. These findings dovetail with
the conclusions of Tsushima et al (2006, 2008) and suggest
that suprathreshold presented stimuli will be inhibited rather
than facilitated if presented simultaneously with an attended
target from a separate task.
Critical the experiment presented here, a key component
of the paradigm used by Tsushima et al (2006, 2008) and
Seitz and Watanabe (2003, 2005) is that the exposure rates
of implicit and explicit motion were extremely high, often
including multiple days of exposure including thousands of
trials. On the other hand, our previous research included a
mere 200 total trials lasting approximately 10 minutes.
Furthermore, while our research (see also Swallow & Jiang,
2010) paired many different irrelevant stimuli (i.e., words)
with the relevant task target (picture repetition), the sub- and
superthreshold motion paradigms paired only a single
motion direction with all targets in the primary task. This
important point is explained further below. The present
investigation therefore aims to further extend this research
by exploring whether recognition for a highly salient
stimulus will in fact be facilitated if presented more

1495

frequently, and without other competing stimuli. That is, it
will address the question of whether using a higher
frequency of presentation for a salient irrelevant stimulus
could in fact modulate the previously observed inhibition
and lead to facilitation effects (i.e., akin to the attentional
boost effect; see Swallow & Jiang, 2010).
There are a number of possible outcomes in the present
investigation. First, based on the conclusions of Seitz and
Watanabe (2003), in regards to the temporal pairing of taskrelevant stimuli (e.g., immediate picture repetitions) and
task-irrelevant stimuli (e.g., superimposed words), it could
be predicted that this synchronization will at the least
establish a relationship that will affect perception for taskirrelevant stimuli aligned with task-relevant targets. It
should be noted however, that studies by Tsushima et al
(2006; 2008) as well as Dewald et al. (2011) suggest that if
an irrelevant stimuli is explicitly presented (rather than
implicitly, as used by Seitz & Watanabe, 2003), the
temporal relationship between task-relevant and taskirrelevant stimuli may lead to an inhibited performance in a
later recognition task for the irrelevant items. Critical to the
question at hand, our previous demonstration used 50
different words rather than a single word (i.e., akin to a
single motion; see Dewald et al., 2011). This increased
quantity of words could have augmented the salient nature
of the stimuli, thereby necessitating that they be ignored in
order to complete the primary task of detecting picture
repetitions, and consequently lead to inhibitory effects. To
better approximate the conditions used by Seitz and
Watanabe (2003), in the present experiment we utilize only
one high-level irrelevant stimulus (a specific written word)
that may lead to an enhanced performance rather than
inhibited. This would therefore be analogous to the same
unchanging suprathreshold motion always paired with the
presence of the task-target in Tsushima et al (2008). We
argue that although explicit and suprathreshold in nature,
coherent motion detection fails to be processed to the same
level as semantic words (see Borst & Egelhaaf, 1989 for a
review of visual motion detection). Therefore, it can be
predicted that the repeated exposure of a single word that is
temporally aligned with an attended target will lead to a
later facilitation in recognition for that word when compared
to words that were not temporally aligned with an attended
target (i.e., similar to the attentional boost, see Swallow &
Jiang, 2010). We predict that these results will surface due
to a synergy of higher salience for words along with
increased exposure levels to the word that is temporally
aligned with the presence of a task-target (note, all words
were presented in equal frequency).

Method
Participants. Sixteen participants (n=16) were recruited
from the University of Hawai’i at Manoa in exchange for
course credit. Participants were naïve to the experiment and
had normal or corrected to normal vision.

Materials. A total of 50 pictures were selected from the
Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) picture database. The
pictures (on average 5 to 10 cm’s) were randomly rotated
+/-30 degrees from upright so as to ensure the difficulty of
the task in each version of the experiment (see also Rees et
al., 1999). Each of these pictures was combined with eight
one to two syllable, high frequency English words (average
length of 5 letters; range 4-6) selected from the MRC
psycholinguistic database (Wilson, 1988). The overall
average frequency of the eight selected words was 361 per
million, ranging between 135 and 782. The words were
displayed in bold, capitalized letters in Arial font at a size of
24 points. Each word was superimposed over a picture and
the picture-word stimuli did not exceed 10 cm horizontally
or vertically. Care was taken to ensure that picture-word
combinations did not have any semantic relationship.
A stream of 960 picture-word concatenated items was
created. Repeated pictures acted as the task relevant-targets.
The presentation stream was broken into eight blocks of 120
trials in which an immediate picture repetition occurred on
average of one out of every eight trials, equating to an
average of 15 task-relevant target repetitions per block, for a
total of 120 trials of exposure to a task-relevant target (and
specific word, see below).
Eight words were selected to be superimposed over the
960 trial picture stream. This was done to parallel the
quantity of items and exposure to irrelevant stimuli as well
as mimic the dependent measure employed by Watanabe et
al. (2001; see also Seitz & Watanabe 2003, 2005). The eight
selected words can be thought of as the eight coherent
motions. That is, the same single word was always
temporally aligned with the presentation of an immediately
repeated picture target. All eight words were presented
equally. The presentation was pseudorandomized so that on
average one out of every eight trials was an immediate
picture repetition (and therefore the presentation of the same
superimposed task-irrelevant target word). Only one
superimposed word was aligned with all of the immediately
repeated pictures for each participant. This single word was
randomized between the eight words between participants (2
participants per word) so as to control for any possible
differences that may have existed regarding particular word
saliency.
A surprise recognition test was administered after the
completion of the repetition detection task. The test
consisted of a total of sixteen words from which half came
from the previously viewed visual stream, while the other
half consisted of foil words that had never been seen before.
The foils were words that had never been used in the
exposure stage of the experiment, but were taken from the
same database and had an average frequency of 236 per
million with a range of 165-399. The eight non-foil
(previously seen in the picture repetition task) words were
words that were either temporally aligned with the taskrelevant target, (i.e., superimposed over the immediate
repetition of a picture), or were not temporally aligned with
the task-relevant target (i.e., superimposed over non-

1496

immediately repeating pictures). For ease of explaining and
reference, words synchronized with task-relevant targets
will be referred to as target-aligned words and those not
aligned with task-relevant targets will be referred to as nonaligned words (see also Dewald et al., 2011).
Both the repetition detection and word recognition tasks
were randomized and presented by DMDX software
(http://www.u.arixona.edu/jforster/dmdx.htm) one at a time,
written in bold, capitalized letters in Arial font at a size of
24 points, in an identical fashion as they were displayed in
the previous stream. The words in the recognition test
remained on the screen until a response was made.

Procedure
Participants were required to attend to the picture stream
(i.e., ignore the simultaneously presented superimposed
words) and respond to immediate picture repetitions by
pressing the ‘G’ key on the keyboard of the computer. Each
item in the picture-word presentation was presented for 350
ms with a 150-ms inter-stimulus interval (ISI; blank screen)
between each item for a stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA)
of 500 ms (see Figure 1). Before the first experimental
block, a training block of eight trials was given and repeated
until participants were familiar and comfortable with the
task.

Figure 1. Each picture–word stimulus was presented for 350
ms and then replaced by a blank screen for 150 ms before
the next stimulus. The task is to respond to picture
repetitions and ignore the words, for which a surprise
recognition test is later given. Note that the target-aligned
word (in the present case ‘MUSIC’) remains the same
across all repetition trials.
Immediately after the repetition detection task, the
surprise word recognition test was administered to all
participants. Words were displayed individually on the
center of the screen in the same size and font as previously
presented in the repetition detection task, and remained on
the screen until the participant made a response. Participants
were instructed to press the “B” key if they had seen the
word during the repetition detection task or, instead, the “V”
key if they had not seen the word before.

appeared with a picture repetition, the average correct
recognition score for target-aligned words (words
superimposed over immediately repeated pictures) and nonaligned words was compared against chance, and also
against each other. In this case, recognition for targetaligned (87.5%, SE=.85) and non-aligned words (68.4%,
SE=.37) was significantly better than chance (t (15)= 10.91,
p < .001 and t (15)= 4.89, p < .001 respectively). Most
importantly, recognition for target-aligned words was
significantly better than performance for non-aligned words
(t (15)= 2.31, p = .03; see Figure 2).
Additionally, the correct rejection of foil words was
compared with overall performance for target-aligned and
non-aligned words. No significant differences between
recognition for target-aligned words and correct rejections
surfaced (target-aligned: 87.5%, SE=.85 vs. CR: 88.6%,
SE=.03, t(15)=-.07, p=.994). There was a significant
difference between correctly recognizing non-aligned words
and correctly rejecting foil words (non-aligned: 68.4%,
SE=.37 vs. CR: 88.6%, SE=.03, t(15)=3.69, p<.002).
Further demonstrating the overall accuracy of word
recognition, there were significantly fewer false alarms (FA)
(i.e., incorrectly identifying a foil word as having been
present during the picture repetition task), when compared
with correct foil rejections (FA=10.4% vs. CR=88.6%,
t(15)=17.08, p<.001), target-aligned words (87.5%,
t(15)=17.65, p<.001), and non-aligned (68.4%, t(15)=13.79,
p<.001) words as well as significantly fewer false alarms
than to be expected by chance (t(15)=19.11, p<.0001).
Lastly, confirming that participants were able to
successfully perform the initial repetition task, an analysis
was also conducted on the accuracy of the primary task of
detecting immediate target repetitions. Overall, participants
accurately detected target repetitions (Hits: 75%, SE=0.20
vs. Misses: 25%, SE=0.79, t(15)=11.83, p<.001).

Results

Figure 2. Recognition percentages and standard error bars
for Target-Aligned (grey bar) and Non-Aligned (black bar)
words in the surprise word recognition test after attending to
the picture stream.

Overall task performance for word recognition was 78%,
which was significantly above chance levels (t (15) = 6.58,
p < .01). In order to address the question at hand, that is, if
recognition performance is enhanced for words that had

The present findings extend investigations exploring how
above threshold, but unattended information is processed

Discussion

1497

when it appears simultaneously with an attended target
(Dewald et al, 2011; Lin et al, 2010; Seitz & Watanabe,
2003, 2005; Swallow & Jiang, 2010; Tsushima et al., 2006,
2008). Critically, despite all task-irrelevant words being
recognized better than chance, words that were temporally
aligned with a picture target (i.e., repetition) were
recognized at significantly higher rates when compared with
words that did not appear with a picture target. Specifically,
performance for both the target-aligned (88%) and nonaligned (68%) words was significantly better than chance,
but target-aligned words were recognized significantly
better than non-aligned words. Accordingly, this suggests
that, at least in the present case, temporally pairing
explicitly presented irrelevant stimuli with relevant target
stimuli facilitates subsequent recognition of the irrelevant
stimuli.
Performance on the ability to correctly reject foil words
further bolsters the notion that target-alignment is critical
for enhanced perception. Participants were significantly
more accurate at correctly rejecting foil words in the
recognition test than they were at correctly identifying nonaligned words (88% vs. 68%, respectively), while no
significant differences were observed when comparing
performance for rejecting foils with accuracy for targetaligned words (88% vs. 87%). These data suggest an
“attentional boost” (see Swallow & Jiang, 2010) for
irrelevant stimuli as long as the stimuli were presented
simultaneously with a target in the picture repetition task,
despite not receiving direct attention.
The superior recognition of target-aligned words is
analogous to the enhanced motion detection for coherent
motion displays aligned with relevant task-targets observed
by Seitz and Watanabe (2003). Interestingly, this
enhancement was found only after exposure to implicitly
presented motion directions. When explicitly presented (i.e.,
suprathreshold) an inhibition was observed for motion
recognition, rather than a facilitation (see Tsushima et al.,
2006; 2008). These findings would seemingly indicate that
the enhancement or inhibition of performance is contingent
on whether the initial irrelevant but target-aligned stimulus
was implicitly or explicitly presented. The present findings
fail to support either notion. That is, facilitation for targetaligned stimuli was observed, despite all irrelevant stimuli
being overtly presented.
Aligning with our result, other recent investigations have
observed an “attentional boost” (i.e., facilitation) for
simultaneously and overtly presented information in a dualtask paradigm (Lin et al., 2010; Swallow & Jiang, 2010).
However, significant procedural differences warrant
discussion. Specifically, Swallow and Jiang’s (2010) task
(see also, Lin et al, 2010) required participants to attend to
both the irrelevant and relevant streams of information,
rather than only one stream as done here (see also Seitz &
Watanabe, 2003; but see Swallow & Jiang, 2011, discussed
below). Thus, the key distinguishing feature between the
respective paradigms is whether or not attention was
simultaneously directed to both streams of information or if

only a single stream receives attention while the other is
ignored.
Addressing the differing approaches, Swallow and Jiang
(2011) required to only attend to one stream of information
while ignoring the other. In this case, participants were
required to direct their attention to the detection of the “odd
ball” target only and not required to pay attention to the
concurrently presented picture scenes (i.e., the images were
now irrelevant to the task). A surprise recognition test
administered for the pictures (task-irrelevant) revealed that
the attentional boost effect did not occur when the
background scenes were made task-irrelevant, thereby
suggesting that temporal alignment was not sufficient to
foster the attentional boost of target-aligned irrelevant
stimuli.
This elimination of the attentional boost seemingly
contradicts the present findings demonstrating an enhanced
performance for the recognition of target-aligned stimuli. A
potential explanation for this could be found in the differing
amounts of irrelevant stimuli utilized in each respective
paradigm. For instance, in Swallow and Jiang’s (2011)
experiment over 100 different stimuli (pictures) served as
the irrelevant items, while presently there was only one
target-aligned stimulus and seven non-aligned items (i.e.,
analogous to Tsushima et al., 2008). This considerable
difference in stimulus set size could be why we observed an
attentional boost (despite attention not being directed to
both streams). Note, the elimination of the attentional boost
effect is actually a null effect when comparing aligned with
non-aligned items, therefore it is difficult to make a strong
claim regarding these findings.
Further support for the speculation that the quantity of
irrelevant items modulates whether the boost is observed or
not, comes from previous research conducted by our
laboratory (Dewald et al., 2011). In this work, the paradigm
was identical to the present (i.e., detect picture repetitions
followed by a word recognition test), but an inhibition for
target-aligned stimuli was observed. Importantly, the
number of irrelevant items (50) was more in line with
Swallow and Jiang’s (2011) recent work. Furthermore, as
stated before, using semantic words rather than pictures
could also be a contributing reason why we continue to see
an attentional boost here, despite attending to only one
stream of information (pictures).
Setting aside the null effect found by Swallow and Jiang
(Experiment 4, 2011), studies involving a specific analysis
of recognition performance for target-aligned vs. nonaligned stimuli show recognition for target-aligned stimuli
to be either inhibited (i.e., recognized significantly below
chance levels) or facilitated, with a key difference being
whether the target stimulus was implicitly or explicitly
presented. It is evident that in the present experiment, words
were recognized at high levels (78% of the time), and when
accounting for target alignment, those synchronized with
repetitions were indeed better recognized (a 20%
improvement). In fact, when attention was most utilized in
the repetition detection task, subsequent performance for the

1498

target-aligned word was best. Recall however, that
Tsushima et al. (2008) observed an inhibition for targetaligned, suprathreshold irrelevant stimuli. Although both
Tsushima et al. (2008) and the present investigation utilized
an above threshold, irrelevant stimuli (written words/ high
motion coherence, respectively), it may be that the increased
saliency and frequency of presentation of the written words
lead to a facilitation rather than an inhibition.
Combined, the present findings and previous research
offer insight into how irrelevant information is processed
when it is presented simultaneously with an attended target.
Under certain circumstances, unattended stimuli can be
perceived and affect behavior (see also Dewald et al., 2011;
Seitz & Watanabe, 2003; Tsushima et al., 2008). When
using a low salience, irrelevant stimulus, there appears to be
a relationship between explicit or implicit presentations,
fostering either an inhibition (Tsushima et al., 2008), or
facilitation (Seitz & Watanabe, 2003) respectively.
Regardless of the explicit or implicit nature of the stimuli
presentation, synchronization of task-relevant and taskirrelevant signals is crucial to establishing a relationship that
will affect perception for task-irrelevant stimuli aligned with
task-relevant targets, however, this relationship can be
modulated when dividing attention across streams of
information (Swallow Jiang, 2010, i.e., a facilitation is
observed for explicitly presented stimuli). Most importantly
to the present investigation however, when using a high
exposure rate to salient, explicitly presented irrelevant
stimuli in a limited stimulus set a perceptual window is
created in which an “attentional boost” (Swallows & Jiang,
2010) surfaces for stimuli that do not receive direct and
focused attention as long as they are presented
simultaneously with the relevant target of a separate task.

References
Ahissar, M., & Hochstein, S. (1993). Attentional control of
early perceptual learning. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science U.S.A, 90, 5718–
5722.
Borst, A., & Egelhaaf, M. (1989). Principles of visual
motion detection. Trends in Neurosciences, 12(8),
297-306.
Dewald, A.D., Sinnett, S., & Doumas, L.A.A. (2011).
Conditions of directed attention inhibit recognition
performance for explicitly presented target-aligned
irrelevant stimuli. Acta Psychologica.138, 60-67.
Driver, J., & Spence, C. (2004). Crossmodal spatial
attention: Evidence from human performance.
In C. Spence & J. Driver (Eds.), Crossmodal space
and crossmodal attention. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Lin, J.Y., Pype, A.D., Murray, & Boynton, G.M. (2010).
Enhanced memory for scenes
presented
at
relevant points in time. PLoS Biol, 8(3), E1000337.

Rees, G., Russell, C., Frith, C. D., & Driver, J. (1999).
Inattentional blindness versus
inattentional
amnesia for fixated but ignored words. Science,
286, 2504-2507.
Roelfsema, P. R., van Ooyen, A., & Watanabe, T. (2009).
Perceptual learning rules based
on reinforces
and attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(2),
64-71.
Seitz, A. R., Kim, R., & Shams, L. (2006). Sound facilitates
visual learning. Current Biology, 16, 1422-1427.
Seitz, A. R. & Watanabe, T. (2003). Psychophysics: Is
subliminal learning really passive? Nature,
422,
36.
Seitz, A. R. & Watanabe, T. (2005). A unified model for
perceptual learning. Trends in
Cognitive
Science, 9 (7), 329-334.
Sinnett, S., Costa, A., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2006).
Manipulating inattentional blindness
within
and across sensory modalities. Quarterly Journal
of experimental Psychology, 59(8), 1425-1442
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 260 pictures: Norms
for
name
agreement, image agreement, familiarity, and
visual complexity.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 1
74–215.
Swallow K. M., & Jiang, Y. V. (2010). The attentional
boost effect: Transient increases in attention to
one task enhance performance in a second task.
Cognition,
115,
118-132.
Swallow K.M., & Jiang, Y. V. (2011). The role of timing in
the attentional boost effect. Attention, Perception,
and Psychophysics, 73, 389-404.
Tootell, B., Silverman, M. S., & De Valois, R. L. (1995).
Spatial frequency columns in primary visual
cortex. Science, 214(4522), 813-815.
Tshushima, Y., Sasaki, Y., & Watanabe, T. (2006). Greater
disruption due to failure of
inhibitory
control on an ambiguous distractor. Science, 314,
1786-1788.
Tsushima, Y., Seitz, A. R., & Watanabe, T. (2008). Taskirrelevant learning occurs only
when
the
irrelevant feature is weak. Current Biology,18(12),
516-517.
Watanabe, T., Náñez,Y., & Sasak, S. (2001). Perceptual
learning without perception.
Nature,
413,
844–848.
Wilson, M. D. (1988). The MRC psycholinguistic database:
Machine readable dictionary,
version
2.
Behavioural Research Methods, Instruments and
Computers, 20, 6-11.

1499

