UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Actively Learning Nouns Across Ambiguous Situations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8m19v389

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kachergis, George
Yu, Chen
Shiffrin, Richard

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Actively Learning Nouns Across Ambiguous Situations
George Kachergis, Chen Yu, and Richard M. Shiffrin
{gkacherg, chenyu, shiffrin}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological & Brain Science / Cognitive Science Program
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

When tested on each word and given four trained objects to
choose from, participants chose the correct object for half of
the 18 words, on average (Yu & Smith, 2007).
However, in the real world even infant learners are not
passive observers, merely watching the world go by. As
learners shift their attention, their eyes, head and hands
move, changing the objects in their view. If caregivers
notice these attention shifts, they may be more likely to
name objects that are currently being attended to. Thus,
learners may in essence be able to increase the likelihood an
object is named by shifting their attention to include this
object. This is a form of active learning, a concept studied
extensively in machine learning (cf. Settles, 2009), in which
a learner can query an information source for the labels of
particular data points.
In this study, we introduce active cross-situational word
learning, in which learners choose which four objects they
would like to see named on each successive trial. Thus,
learners control when to repeat pairs, when to stop
experiencing pairs they feel they know, and when to attempt
to learn more pairs. This gives us a glimpse of their
preferred strategies. For example, participants may choose
to repeat a single pair from the previous trial, and leverage
working memory to quickly learn that the repeated word
refers to the repeated object, while ignoring the other three
word-object pairs on the trial. Equivalently, a learner may
prefer to repeat three pairs from the previous trial, and
quickly learn the novel pairing that was not present.
Kachergis, Yu, & Shiffrin (2009a) manipulated this sort of
temporal contiguity in a passive cross-situational study and
found not only that repeated pairs are learned more easily,
but so are unrepeated pairs in conditions with some repeats.
This suggests that simple inference supported by working
memory is not the only learning mechanism at work.
In fact, investigating active learning can reveal what
information and mechanisms a learner has at their disposal,
and characterizing the observed strategies—and their
performance—will motivate learning models. For example,
our recent associative model of cross-situational learning
assumes that learners have access to both their familiarity
and their uncertainty about the word-object pairings present
on a given trial, and that attention competes for uncertain
stimuli and for already-strong pairings (Kachergis, Yu, &
Shiffrin, 2012). This model matches adult behavior in
passive cross-situational experiments investigating mutual
exclusivity, a bias to find 1-to-1 word-object mappings that
is present even in 2.5-year-olds (Markman & Wachtel,
1988). If active learners have access to their knowledge of
pairing strength and stimulus uncertainty, these cues can be
combined to produce a few active learning strategies. One

Previous research shows that people can use the cooccurrence of words and objects in ambiguous situations (i.e.,
containing multiple words and objects) to learn word
meanings during a brief passive training period (Yu & Smith,
2007). However, learners in the world are not completely
passive, but can affect how their environment is structured by
moving their heads, eyes, and even objects. These actions can
indicate attention to a language teacher, who may then be
more likely to name the attended objects. Using a novel active
learning paradigm in which learners choose which four
objects they would like to see named on each successive trial,
this study asks whether active learning is superior to passive
learning in a cross-situational word learning context. Finding
that learners perform better in active learning, we investigate
the strategies that were most successful, discuss the
implications, and model the results.
Keywords: active learning; statistical learning; crosssituational learning; temporal contiguity; language acquisition

Introduction
Human infants learn words quite quickly despite many
challenges facing them, including uncertainty and ambiguity
in the language environment. Recent research has studied
how learners may acquire word meanings from regularities
in the co-occurrence of words and referents (e.g., objects).
Such cross-situational statistical word learning relies on two
assumptions: 1) that spoken words are often relevant to the
visible environment, and 2) that learners can to some extent
remember the co-occurrence of multiple words and objects
in a scene. Thus, as words and their intended referents are
observed in different situations over time, learners can
apprehend the correct word-object mappings. Relying only
on the regularity of the linguistic environment and basic
memory and attention processes, this may be an important
method of learning nouns for infants, and even adult
travelers.
In adult cross-situational learning studies (e.g., Yu &
Smith 2007), participants are asked to learn the meaning of
alien words by watching a series of training trials. On each
trial learners see an array of unfamiliar objects (e.g., four
sculptures) and hear pseudowords (e.g., stigson, bosa). The
meaning of each pseudoword is ambiguous on a given trial,
because although each word refers to a single onscreen
object, the intended referent is not indicated. In a typical
learning scenario, participants attempt to learn 18 wordobject pairings from 27 trials, with four words and four
objects given per trial. In this design, each word-referent
pair is presented six times over the five-minute training
period. Learning a correct word-object pairing requires
some form of accumulation of word-object co-occurrences.

527

strategy is to choose one object you have never seen before
(i.e., one with maximal uncertainty), and fill the remaining
three slots on the trial with familiar objects. Alternatively,
learners may choose novel combinations of familiar objects
in order to disambiguate mappings; we have previously
found such contextual diversity to aid learning (Kachergis,
Yu, & Shiffrin, 2009b). Detailed analysis of active learning
strategies can reveal what knowledge is available to learners
and how they attempt to employ it to learn the correct
mappings. It may even be that people are worse at actively
structuring the learning environment than the randomlyconstructed passive trial sequences they normally
experience in word-learning experiments.
In the Experiment, participants do two blocks of passive
cross-situational learning, as well as of two blocks of active
cross-situational learning in which they choose the objects
that they see named on each successive trial. Although there
are many other possible formulations of active crosssituational learning, we choose this instantiation because it
most closely matches the passive task, and it somewhat
matches the real world, where learners can attend to objects
and likely increase the chance of a teacher labeling those
objects.

probable in English (e.g., “bosa”), and were spoken by a
monotone, synthetic female voice. These 72 objects and 72
words were randomly assigned to four sets of 18 wordobject pairings, one set for each training condition.
Training for each condition consisted of 27 trials. Each
training trial began with the appearance of four objects,
which remained visible for the entire trial. After 2s of initial
silence, the four words were heard in a random order (1s per
word, with 2s of silence after each) for a total duration of
14s per trial.

Procedure
Participants were told they would see a series of trials with
four objects and four alien words, but that the order of
presentation of the words was random. They were also told
that their knowledge of which words belong with which
objects would be tested at the end. In the active learning
conditions, participants were instructed that they would be
able to choose four objects they wanted to see named next.
In active learning training blocks, after each trial a display
of all 18 objects in the to-be-learned set was shown, and
participants chose four to be named on the next trial.
Objects that had already been chosen six times were not
After each training block, participants’ knowledge of
word-object mappings was assessed using 18-alternative
forced choice (18AFC) testing: on each test trial a single
word was played, and the participant was instructed to
choose the appropriate object from a display of all 18
trained objects. Each of the 18 words was tested once in a
random order.
Every participant did four blocks of training and testing:
half did two active learning blocks followed by two passive
learning blocks, and the other half did the reverse.

Experiment
Participants were asked to learn 18 word-referent pairs
from a series of individually ambiguous training trials using
the cross-situational word learning paradigm (Yu & Smith,
2007). Each training trial was comprised of a display of four
novel objects and four spoken pseudowords. With no
indication of which word refers to which object, learners
have little chance of guessing the four correct word-referent
mappings from the 16 possible pairings. However, since
words always appear on trials with their proper referents,
the correct pairings may be learned over the series of trials.
The key manipulation of this study is to allow learners in
active conditions to choose which four objects they want to
see named on the next trial. In both conditions, 18 wordreferent pairs were experienced over a series of 27 training
trials. Importantly, the same pair was never allowed to
appear in neighboring trials in passive conditions. In both
conditions, each pair could only appear six times during the
training session. Thus, both the number of exposures per
pair and the ambiguity on each trial (i.e., number of pairs)
were matched in active and passive learning conditions. In
order to compare passive and active learning performance,
each participant underwent two training and test blocks of
each.

Results & Discussion
A repeated measures ANOVA on accuracy1 by training type
(active or passive) and training type repetition (1st or 2nd),
nested by condition order (active-first or passive-first)
revealed a significant main effect of training type (F(1,39) =
15.17; p < .001). Test performance after active learning is
far better than after passive learning (active M = .59; passive
M = .35), confirming that adults can use knowledge of their
internal state to structure their environment for better
learning. Moreover, participants did not improve much on
their second block of either training type: there was no
significant effect of repetition (F(1,39) = 2.08; p = .15).
There was no significant interaction of condition order and
repetition (F(2,38) = 1.62; p = .20), nor of training type and
repetition (F<1), but there was a significant interaction of
training type and condition order (F(2,38) = 4.53; p < .05).
As shown in Figure 3, doing active learning first improves
performance in the passive conditions (passive M = .30 if
passive-first, M = .39 if active-first). This is somewhat
surprising, as it is easy to imagine that doing passive first

Subjects
Participants were 41 undergraduates at Indiana University
who received course credit for participating. None had
participated in other cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli
Each training trial consisted of an array of four uncommon
objects (e.g., sculptures) and four spoken pseudowords. The
72 pseudowords generated by computer are phonotactically-

1

Data from one subject were excluded after it was found that
their average performance in all four blocks was below chance
(chance in an 18AFC test is .056).

528

might give learners an idea for better active learning
strategies, whereas it is difficult to see how practice at active
learning can improve one’s performance in conditions with
no command. However, it may be that active learning also
allows learners to practice different rehearsal strategies, and
helps them choose better ones even when they cannot
control the structure of the trials. In any case, individual
performance after the different types of training was
significantly correlated (Pearson’s r=.62, t(38)=4.81,
p<.001). Figure 2 shows that almost every participant
performed at least as well after active training as passive
training.

two types of training is correlated (r=.62), but learners are
almost universally better after active training.
Given that adults can actively structure their environment
in order to effectively learn the word meanings, we next
investigate the strategies effective learners use to
disambiguate mappings. However, we must first consider
that there are many strategies, and that not all of them result
in swift learning. Performance in cross-situational wordlearning is typically highly variable, both within- and
between-subjects. This is likely because what is learned on a
given trial depends on what has been learned on all previous
trials, and both the ambiguity on each trial and the fallibility
of human memory means that people often learn different
things. Giving learners an opportunity to structure training
may yield a more diverse set of learning states, and thus
may increase variability in performance. Figure 3 shows a
histogram of learning performance after each block of active
and passive learning. While accuracy after passive training
is unimodal and positively skewed, accuracy after passive
learning looks roughly bimodal, with peaks at .25 and at .95,
which may reflect strategies of differing utility. In the
following analysis, we will examine strategy differences
both by doing a median split on the performance of active
learners and analyzing the strategies used by each group,
and by clustering the active training trials and looking at the
mean performance of each cluster.

Figure 1: Accuracy by type of first condition and training
type in the Experiment. Active learning resulted in far
higher test performance than passive learning. Moreover,
learners who did active learning first performed better in the
passive learning conditions. Error bars show +/-SE.

Figure 3: Histograms of performance after active learning
(left) and passive learning (right) training blocks
(2/subject/condition). Accuracy after active learning is
bimodal, indicating that some strategies are quite successful
while others are mediocre.
As mentioned earlier, one obvious active learning strategy
is to choose to repeat some pairs from this trial on the next
trial. If constructed randomly, a given trial would contain
only .22 pairs repeated from the previous trial. In our
passive training conditions, no pairs were allowed to repeat.
The overall mean number of repeated pairs selected by
active learners was 1.5—learners are using repetition to
disambiguate pairs. To distinguish individual strategies
(e.g., repeating one vs. repeating three), we clustered the

Figure 2: Comparison of performance after passive vs.
active learning for each participant. Performance after the

529

trial-by-trial number of repetitions chosen in each active
learning training block. Using partitioning around medoids
we found two clusters, estimated by the optimum average
silhouette width (Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 1990). Cluster 1
contained 33 of the active training structures, and Cluster 2
contained the other 47. Figure 4 shows the trial-by-trial
average number of repeated pairs for each cluster. Although
people in both clusters initially repeat around one pair per
trial, learners in Cluster 1 soon began to repeat two or more
pairs on average, while those in Cluster 2 stayed closer to
one repeat, until the last few trials2. Overall, Cluster 1
repeated 1.9 pairs per trial, significantly more than Cluster
2’s mean of 1.1 repetitions (Welch t(60.7) = 9.09, p<.001).
From Figure 5, which shows how many pairs were repeated
trial-by-trial in each cluster, it is clear that learners in
Cluster 2 often chose to repeat single pairs until the very
end. Cluster 1 shows a much more varied approach,
repeating anywhere from one to three pairs. It turns out that
these strategy clusters—constructed solely from the active
training data—result in different overall levels of
performance: Cluster 1’s mean of .71 is significantly higher
than Cluster 2’s mean of .50 (Welch t(69.8) = 3.00, p<.01).
Repeating more than one pair seems to be a good strategy—
indeed, the mean number of pairs repeated per trial in active
training is correlated with learning (Pearson’s r=.30,
t(78)=2.82, p<.01). Corroborating this clustering result, a
median (Mdn=.61) split on active learning performance
identifies a similar grouping: Cluster 1 contained 22 of the
33 better blocks, whereas Cluster 2 contained 30 of the 47
worse blocks (χ2=6.05, p=.01). A graph of the active
learning blocks identified by median split looks much like
Figure 5, showing that better learners repeat more pairs.

Figure 5: The number of pairs active learners chose to
repeat on each consecutive trial, accumulated for each of the
two clusters (red=0, white=27). Learners in Cluster 2 most
often repeated one—or even zero—pairs, while Cluster 2
chose anywhere from one to three repeats per trial.
How is it that repeating more than one pair on each trial
can further improve learning? Working memory can likely
be used to segregate repeated and unrepeated pairs on a
given trial. Thus, choosing one or three objects for repetition
allows the learner to infer that the single repeated or new
word goes with the repeated or new object. Repeating two
pairs also yields information—only 8 associations are
reasonable using repetition information, instead of 16 on a
normal trial—but is most useful if a learner already knows
one of the repeated pairs: then they may learn the unknown
pair, and practice the known pair. To elucidate what learners
are doing in active training when repeating multiple pairs,
we extend a recent associative model of cross-situational
word learning with a working memory mechanism.

Model
The Experiment showed that adults learn many more words
from active cross-situational training than passive training.
Our analysis of active learning strategies found that most
people repeated one or more pairs in consecutive trials, and
that repeating more pairs helped: many excellent learners
repeated close to two pairs per trial. To understand how this
is helpful, we will introduce and then extend an associative
model of cross-situational word learning proposed by
Kachergis, Yu, and Shiffrin (2012).
The model assumes that learners do not equally attend to
all word-object pairings on a trial (i.e., store all cooccurrences). Rather, selective attention on a trial is drawn
to strengthen associations between words and objects that
have co-occurred previously. This bias for familiar pairings
competes with a bias to attend to stimuli that have no strong
associates (e.g., as a novel stimulus). The competing
familiarity and uncertainty biases allow the model to exhibit
fast mapping, since a novel word-novel object combination
will demand more attention, and mutual exclusivity: a novel

Figure 4: The mean number of word-object pairs repeated
on consecutive trials by the two clusters of active learners.
Learners in Cluster 1 repeated more pairs per trial than
Cluster 2, except at the beginning, when both repeated ~1.
Error bars show +/-SE.

2
Due to the constraint of each pair appearing only six times—as
in passive training—there are only a few objects remain to choose
from, with the final trial being completely determined.

530

word will only become weakly associated with an alreadyknown referent (Kachergis, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2012). For
example, suppose word w1 and object o1 have appeared
together and are thus somewhat associated, while w7 and o7
are novel. Given a trial with both pairs: {w1,o1,w7,o7}, w1-o1
demands more attention than w7-o1, w1-o7, or w7-o7, since
w1-o1 is stronger than baseline. However, attention is also
pulled individually to w7 and to o7, since both of these novel
stimuli have no strong associates. Uncertainty is measured
by the entropy of each stimulus’ association strengths.
Because of the high joint uncertainty of w7 and o7, more
attention is given to the association w7-o7. Thus, attention is
mostly divided between w1-o1 and w7-o7, although the other
pairings will be strengthened a bit.
Formally, let M be an n word × n object association
matrix that is incrementally built during training. Cell Mw,o
will be the strength of association between word w and
object o. Strengths are subject to forgetting (i.e., general
decay) but are augmented by viewing the particular stimuli.
Before the first trial, M is empty. On each training trial t, a
subset S of m word-object pairings appears. If new words
and objects are seen, new rows and columns are first added.
The initial values for these new rows and columns are k, a
small constant (here, 0.01).
Association strengths are allowed to decay, and on each
new trial a fixed amount of associative weight, χ, is
distributed among the associations between words and
objects, and added to the strengths. The rule used to
distribute χ (i.e., attention) balances a bias for attending to
unknown stimuli with a bias for strengthening alreadystrong associations. When a word and referent are repeated,
extra attention (i.e., χ) is given to this pair—a bias for prior
knowledge. Pairs of stimuli with no strong associates also
attract attention, whereas pairings between uncertain objects
and known words, or vice-versa, draw little attention. To
capture stimulus uncertainty, we allocate strength using
entropy (H), a measure of uncertainty that is 0 when the
outcome of a variable is certain (e.g., a word appears with
one object, and has never appeared with any other object),
and maximal (log2n) when all of the n possible object (or
word) associations are equally likely (e.g., when a stimulus
has not been observed before, or if a stimulus were to
appear with every other stimulus equally). In the model, on
each trial the entropy of each word (and object) is calculated
from the normalized row (column) vector of associations for
that word (object), p(Mw,·), as follows:

governing differential weighting of uncertainty and prior
knowledge (familiarity). As λ increases, the weight of
uncertainty (i.e., the exponentiated entropy term, which
includes both the word’s and object’s association entropies)
increases relative to familiarity. The denominator
normalizes the numerator so that exactly χ associative
weight is distributed among the potential associations on the
trial. For stimuli not on a trial, only forgetting operates.
After training, a learner is tested with each word and
chooses an object from n alternatives in proportion to the
association strengths of each alternative to that word.
Using competing biases for familiar pairings and
uncertain stimuli, this associative model learns on a trial-bytrial basis by distributing attention in a way that corresponds
with both our intuitions about word-learning and a number
of empirical findings. However, although this model does
exhibit training order effects, it has no working memory
component that would confer additional benefit for
successively repeated pairs. Thus, we augment the baseline
model with a mechanism that segregates words and objects
repeated from the last trial from unrepeated stimuli, and
only strengthens associations within these subsets. This
working memory (WM) model will learn better than the
baseline model whenever there are repetitions, because of
the 16 possible associations on the trial, it will not attend to
the spurious ones between repeated stimuli and unrepeated
stimuli: 6 in the case of one or three repeated pairs, and 8 in
the case of two repeated pairs. To estimate whether people
are attending more to the repeated or unrepeated stimuli, we
added an attention parameter β to the WM model that
apportions more weight to associations between repeated
stimuli as β approaches 1, and more weight to unrepeated
pairs as β approaches 0. When β=.5, the attention given to
repeated vs. unrepeated associations is proportional to the
size of each subset.
Three parameters (χ, α, and λ) were fit to each active
training order for the baseline model, and four (χ, α, λ, and
β) were fit to the WM model. Fitting only to the overall
mean accuracy of each active training order—two
conditions per learner—does not capture detail of
repetition’s effect on accuracy, which may vary in different
active training sessions. Instead, we fit to the accuracy for
each subgroup of pairs that were repeated different numbers
of times (0-5, as each pair was seen 6 times). An ANCOVA
shows number of repetitions significantly affected accuracy
(F(1,209) = 8.50, p<.01), discussed in more detail later.

Results & Discussion
Overall, both models achieved quite good fits to the data,
with R2=.901 for the baseline model, and R2=.925 for the
WM model. The WM model’s BIC was 577.7 and the
baseline model’s BIC was 565.9, so the WM model is
preferred, despite the additional parameter. Figure 5 shows
mean accuracy for humans and both models on the subsets
of pairs that were repeated on pairs of consecutive trials.
Accuracy increases from 0 to 3 repetitions, while the few
people who repeated pairs 4 or 5 times improved less,
though with great variability.

The update rule for allocating attention and adjusting
strengths for the stimuli presented on a trial is:

In this equation, α is a parameter governing forgetting, χ
is the weight being distributed, and λ is a scaling parameter

531

information available to them. In the context of crosssituational word learning, we have shown that many adults
can generate strategies that improve their overall learning.
Indeed, people who did active learning first were better at
passive learning, suggesting that some strategies carried
over, which is somewhat puzzling because many of the
active learning strategies involved trial-to-trial repetitions of
at least one word-object pair—many more, in the most
successful active learning blocks. Given that active learners
were using many repetitions, but with apparently diverse
strategies and outcomes, we extended a word-learning
model with a working memory mechanism to attempt to see
how people were leveraging repetitions. Overall, the model
accounted for active learning accuracy very well, but
parameters told of a plurality of strategies: many people
ignore unrepeated pairs while several only attend to these
pairs, but the majority fall roughly in the middle, attending
to both repeated and unrepeated pairs. It may be that this
focus often shifts during a block, as knowledge develops.
Future work should also focus on predicting which pairs
people will choose next, perhaps based on their current
knowledge state.
In summary, active noun learners use many repetitions,
and successfully learn far more than in passive training.
Infants may also benefit from such repeated labeling, and
fortunately there is much autocorrelation in scenes (as you
turn your head or shift your eyes, many objects remain in
view) and in language (conversations drift over minutes).
Moreover, we suggest that infants likely influence their
learning environment in a way that is analogous to the
active learning paradigm we present here. By choosing to
look longer at some objects, they may increase the
likelihood that a caregiver will label one of those objects.
Active learning is clearly a powerful learning aid, and with
better understanding it can likely be harnessed in education
to speed learning in many domains.

Figure 5. Human and model accuracy on actively-learned
subsets of items that were repeated 0-5 pairs of trials (not
necessarily consecutive for all repetitions—except in the
rare case of 5 repetitions). Error bars are +/-SE.
Given the large number of repetitions used by active
learners, it is surprising that the baseline model can
approach the fit of the WM model without explicit
awareness of repetitions. This may indicate that individual
differences (e.g., in learning rate) contribute much of the
variability. However, the WM better accounts for the data,
and contains a parameter, β, that should be valuable in our
pursuit to understand the range of strategies. Do learners
focus more on repeated (β≈1) pairs, unrepeated pairs (β≈0),
or do they split attention (β≈.5)? Figure 6 shows the
trimodal distribution of the estimated β values: many people
focused almost exclusively on learning the repeated pairs,
but several attended only to unrepeated pairs, and the
majority split attention roughly equally. Once again, we see
individual differences spanning the range of possibilities,
although the peaks are of interest. However, β values were
uncorrelated with accuracy (r=.06), and people with modal
β values showed no different accuracy, on average. Thus,
the WM model found three attention strategies for repeated
pairs, but the strategies alone do not predict performance.

References
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009a). Temporal
contiguity in cross-situational statistical learning. In N. Taatgen,
H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L. Schomaker (Eds.) Proceedings
of CogSci 31. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009). Frequency and
contextual diversity effects in cross-situational word learning.
In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L. Schomaker
(Eds.) Proceedings of CogSci 31 (pp. 755-760).
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R.M. (2012). An
associative model of adaptive inference for learning
word-referent mappings. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Kaufman, L. and Rousseeuw, P.J. (1990). Finding groups in
data: An introduction to cluster analysis. Wiley, New York.
Markman, E.M. & Wachtel, G.F. (1988). Children’s use of
mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121–157.
Settles, B. (2009). Active learning literature survey. Computer
Sciences Technical Report 1648, Uni. of Wisconsin-Madison.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.

Figure 6: Histogram of best-fitting β values, showing a
trimodal distribution peaked (highest to lowest) at 1—attend
repeated pair, .5—split attention, and 0—attend unrepeated.

General Discussion
Active learning can speed language acquisition if the
learner can implement an appropriate strategy based on the

532

