UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An fMRI Investigation of Feature-Emergence-related Activation within Metaphor
Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9wr4f3kk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Terai, Asuka
Kuriyama, Naoko
Nakagawa, Masanori
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An fMRI Investigation of Feature-Emergence-related Activation
within Metaphor Comprehension
Asuka Terai (asuka@nm.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Global Edge Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 152-8550 JAPAN

Naoko Kuriyama (kuriyama@hum.titech.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Decision and Science Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 152-8550 JAPAN

Masanori Nakagawa (nakagawa@hum.titech.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Decision and Science Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 152-8550 JAPAN

Kimihiko Yamagishi (yamagishi@hum.titech.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Decision and Science Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 152-8550 JAPAN

Takashi Kusumi (kusumi@educ.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University,
Yoshidahonmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501 JAPAN

Koji Jimura (jimura@cns.pi.titech.ac.jp)
Precision and Intelligence Laboratory, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
4259 Nagatsuta-cho Midori-ku Yokohama, 226-8503, JAPAN
Abstract
Metaphor comprehension involves the generation of novel semantic attributes, especially when a metaphor emphasizes a
shared but atypical characteristic of the relevant concepts. The
present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study
explores neural activation during the process of attribute generation known as feature emergence. The participants judged
whether a presented semantic feature was an appropriate interpretation of a primed metaphor sentence. Two types of features
were evaluated: emergent features that are not applicable to the
respective concepts and only become salient in a metaphorical context and non-emergent features which are typical characteristics. In contrast to non-emergent features, processing
of emergent features mainly involved prefrontal regions of the
right hemisphere, including the precentral gyrus. The present
results suggest that feature emergence necessitates a shift of
semantic attention that drives a novel metaphor interpretation
beyond the semantic elaboration implicated within the left prefrontal cortex.
Keywords: Metaphor comprehension; Feature Emergence;
functional MRI.

Introduction
It is widely accepted that the comprehension of metaphorical
expressions entails greater semantic elaboration than for literal sentences, because the relevant concepts are not directly
connected in terms of literal similarity, even though an expression is understandable (Ortony, 1979). Reflecting this
salient nature of metaphors, it is also known that metaphor usage enhances recognition memory performance within reading tasks (Reynolds & Schwartz, 1983) and that it is more

persuasive when logical reasoning is less effective (Sopory &
Dillard, 2002).
The primary form for metaphors consists of two concepts
combined by the “be” verb, such as “A is B”, where (A) and
(B) are known as the topic and the vehicle, respectively. This
type of metaphor is believed to be interpreted through four
types of features depending on whether the feature represents
a typical characteristic of the concepts. In the first type of
“common feature”, the topic and vehicle share a typical feature. For example, in the metaphor of “ideas are fireworks”,
“brilliant” is a common feature, because both ideas and fireworks can be regarded as being brilliant. In the second type
of “vehicle feature”, the feature is only typical of the vehicle
concept. Taking the same metaphor example again, “momentary” would be a vehicle feature because it is only relevant to
“fireworks”. In contrast to a vehicle feature, a topic feature
is only a typical characteristic of the topic concept. “Flash”
would be a topic feature in this example. Although these
three feature types minimally involve a typical characteristic of either the topic or the vehicle concepts, the last type of
“emergent feature” does not involve a typical characteristic of
neither the topic nor the vehicle. However, non-emergent features only appear for interpretations of metaphorical context.
The feature “sudden” is interpretable within the metaphor
example, but it is not a typical characteristic of either the
“ideas” topic or the “fireworks” vehicle. Gineste and colleagues (2000) claim that more than 60% of metaphoric interpretations involve emergent features, which suggests that

2405

Materials and Method

emergent features play a major role within metaphor comprehension.
Although previous cognitive neuroscience studies have explored the neural regions involved in metaphor comprehension, they have failed to distinguish between the interpretations of emergent and non-emergent features (e.g., Rapp et
al. 2004; Shibata et al. 2007a, 2007b; Stringaris et al. 2007).
Some studies indicate that literal and metaphorical sentence
comprehension activates multiple cortical regions, including
the ventro lateral prefrontal cortex near Brodmann areas (BA)
47 and 44/45, mainly in the left hemisphere (LH), and probably reflects normal semantic processing. In contrast, some
other studies have reported fronto-temporal activation within
the right hemisphere (RH) during the processing of verbally
presented figurative expressions compared to literal expressions (e.g., Marshal et al. 2007; Stringaris et al. 2006). In
particular, Marshal and colleagues (2007) found that the processing of word pairs forming novel metaphors, compared to
conventional ones, elicited stronger activation within the posterior superior temporal sulcus and the right inferior frontal
gyrus mainly in the RH, and Stringaris and colleagues (2006)
found right-lateralized prefrontal activation when participants
search for a wider range of semantic relationships between a
metaphoric sentence and a word. However, others have reported the opposite pattern of lateralization (e.g., Rapp et al.
2004, Stringaris et al. 2007, Shibata et al. 2007b). Rapp
and colleagues (2004) report that recognition of metaphors
only elicits prominent brain activity in the LH–inferior frontal
(BA45/47), inferior temporal (BA20) areas, and the posterior
medial/inferior temporal (BA37) gyrus–with no RH activation.
The present study investigates the pattern of cortical involvement during metaphor comprehension. One possibility
is, as Marshal and colleagues (2007) suggest, that the processing of novel metaphors involves the right hemisphere.
Another possibility is that RH activation reflects some decision criteria processing of presented expressions. Shibata and
colleagues (2007a, 2007b) suggest that right frontal regions
are more activated when the metaphorical aspect is emphasized for judgments. Thus, they argue that metaphor comprehension requires association search over a wide range which
involves RH activation.
The present study hypothesizes that feature emergence
activates RH frontal regions during metaphor comprehension. In our previous studies, we have argued that feature
emergence is enhanced with longer comprehension times,
which suggests that feature emergence may involve interaction spreading out over the semantic network (Terai & Goldstone 2011). We apply the same paradigm within this fMRI
study to explore the neural regions activated in feature emergence. We first develop a set of metaphors with features for
which feature emergence occurs. In addition to non-emergent
features, this set of metaphors was judged by participants
while fMRI imaging was conducted.

Participants
All participants (N = 10; mean age = 23.3 years; range 2129 years; 5 male, 5 female) were healthy, right-handed, native Japanese speakers. The current study was approved
by the ethical committee of Tokyo Institute of Technology.
All participants gave their informed consent before the experiment, and they were compensated for their participation
(2000 JPY/hour).

Materials
Ten metaphorical Japanese sentences of the style “topic is vehicle” (e.g., “Ideas are fireworks”) were created based on a
behavioral experiment. The behavioral experiment used three
feature types (emergent, non-emergent, and filler features).
For each metaphor, an emergent (e.g., “sudden”), a nonemergent (e.g., “sparkle”) and a filler feature (e.g., “pray”)
were created based on results of a behavioral study. One hundred and fifty five participants evaluated 16 metaphors and six
features for each metaphor. The metaphors and participants
were divided into four groups. Each participant evaluated the
relationship between four metaphors and their features on a
7-point scale. They also evaluated the relationships between
eight concepts (the topics and vehicles of the four metaphors)
and the features of the metaphors, and rated the characteristics of metaphors (e.g., comprehensibility and novelty). Ten
metaphors with higher mean ratings for comprehensibility
(above 4) were selected as metaphors that can be easily interpreted. Each metaphor was then assigned with the three types
of features, based on comprehensibility ratings of more than
5 (slightly comprehensible) from participants who could interpret a metaphor1 . Features that fulfilled the following two
criteria were classified as emergent features; 1) the mean adequacy rating was greater than three (neutral) and 2) the mean
typicality rating was lower than that for the metaphor2 [mean
ratings (SD) for metaphor, 5.01 (1.80), topic, 4.60 (2.10), and
vehicle, 4.38 (1.99)]. In contrast, features with mean ratings
for the metaphor of more than 3 and with higher mean ratings for the vehicle that for the metaphor were classified as
non-emergent features [mean ratings (SD) with the metaphor,
5.18 (1.81), topic, 4.85 (1.89), and vehicle, 5.88 (1.67)]. If
the mean rating for a feature’s relationship with the metaphor
was less than 3, the feature was classified as a filler feature
[mean ratings (SD) with metaphor, 1.80 (1.29), topic, 1.95
(1.43), vehicle, 2.05 (1.66)].
1 The average proportion of participants who could interpret a
metaphor was 33.0%.
2 We expect that the relationships of an emergent feature with
both the vehicle and with the topic are less than that with the
metaphor. However, generally, metaphor interpretations can be regarded as a topic characteristic if it is not a typical characteristic.
Participants tend to rate vehicles’ relationships with the metaphor
highly. Thus, we consider the difference between the relationships
with the vehicle and with the metaphor as being important.

2406

Procedures
fMRI scanning consisted of two sessions. For the first session (concept term condition), at the beginning of each trial,
a fixation point “+” was presented for 900 msec on the computer screen. Then, participants were presented with a concept term, which was either a vehicle or a topic, for 3900
msec. They were asked to read the term covertly. Next, the
fixation point “+” was presented for 900 msec again. Then,
a feature (either an emergent, a non-emergent or a filler feature) was displayed on the screen for 4000 msec. The participants were instructed to respond concerning whether the
feature is a typical characteristic of the concept (the vehicle or the topic) term during the presentation period. They
held a response box in each hand and responded by pressing
the right button (“Yes”) or the left button (“No”). The trials were pseudo-randomly ordered. Fixation trials were also
intermixed pseudo-randomly.
In the second, metaphor session, the procedure was as follows: At the beginning of each trial, the participants were presented with a metaphorical sentence on the computer screen
for 3900 msec. They were asked to silently read and interpret the metaphor. Then, the metaphor disappeared and
a fixation point “+” was presented for 900 msec, followed
by the presentation of a feature for 4000 msec. The participants were asked to respond “Yes” or “No” depending
on whether the feature represented an adequate interpretation of the metaphor by pressing the right button (“Yes”) or
the left button (“No”) during the presentation period. The
trials were presented pseudo-randomly, such that the same
metaphor never appeared in succession. Fixation trials were
intermixed pseudo-randomly.
Participants were given instructions prior to performing the
tasks. They were asked to think of nothing during presentation of the fixation point. We conducted a follow-up survey
with a questionnaire. The participants were asked to evaluate
the characteristics of the metaphors (comprehensibility, novelty, etc.) on 7-point scales.

Imaging procedures

into 2-mm isotropic voxels, and then spatially smoothed with
an 8-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel.
The present imaging analysis focused on the metaphor
condition. For each participant, a voxel-wise GLM analysis was first performed to estimate parameter values for the
MR signal magnitudes. The trial period for the metaphor
condition was modeled by two independent regressors, one
coding metaphor-sentence presentation, and the other coding
feature-word presentation that involved a feature judgment,
convolved with a canonical HRF (together with time and dispersion derivatives). The metaphor regressor lasted from presentation onset to offset of the sentence, while the judgment
regressor lasted for 1000 msec, which was determined based
on the mean RTs for each condition for each participant. The
estimated parameters during feature judgment were then contrasted between the emergent and non-emergent conditions.
Parameter estimates for each participant were submitted
to a group analysis using a voxel-wise random-effect model.
Whole-brain exploratory analysis was performed to identify
the brain regions showing activity during feature judgment in
the emergent condition relative to the non-emergent condition. Due to the small size of the sample in the present study,
significance was assessed by a relatively liberal threshold of
ten or more continuous voxels above p < .001 (Z = 3.3) uncorrected.

Results
Behavioral results
The mean reaction times in the concept term condition are
shown in Figure 1. A two-way ANOVA with reaction times
for the feature conditions and concept types as factors showed
a significant main effect for feature types [F(2, 18) = 46.35,
p < .01]. A post-hoc t-test showed that reaction times for the
emergent features were longer than reaction times for nonemergent features [t(9) = 4.99, p < .01]. These results suggest that emergent features are more involved in evaluationrelated processes, which is consistent with previous studies
(Gineste et al. 2000).

fMRI scans were conducted with the 3T GE SignaHDxt scanner (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI) at Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Japan. High-resolution anatomical images were
obtained using an FSPGR T1-weighted sequence [repetition
time (TR) = 7.712 msec; echo time (TE) = 2.88 msec, flip
angle (FA) = 11 deg, slice thickness = 1 mm; in-plane resolution = 1 x 1 mm2 ]. Functional images were obtained using a
GE-EPI sequence [TR = 2.0 sec, TE = 30 msec, FA = 90 deg,
slice thickness = 3.0 mm, in-plane resolution = 3.75 x 3.75
mm2 , slice gap = 1.0 mm].

Imaging analysis procedures
Imaging analysis was performed using SPM8
(http://fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/).
All the functional images were temporally aligned across the brain
volumes, spatially registered to a MNI template, resampled

Figure 1: Mean reaction times (±SEs) for emergent, nonemergent and filler features (in concept term condition)

2407

Table 1: Mean proportions for emergent and non-emergent
(%). For almost all of the filler features, the proportions were
almost 0%.

Emergent
Non-emergent

Concept Term
Condition
Vehicle Topic
34.0
45.0
85.0
30.0

Metaphor
Condition
Metaphor
51.0
67.1

gard the metaphors as being very conventional.

Imaging results
Figure 2: Mean reaction times (±SEs) for emergent, nonemergent and filler features (in the metaphor condition)
Figure 2 shows the mean reaction times for the metaphor
condition. A one-way ANOVA for reaction times in the feature condition revealed that significant main effect of feature type [F(2, 18) = 29.20, p < .01]. The reaction times
for the emergent and the non-emergent features were significantly longer than those for the filler features at the 1% level.
However, there was no significant difference between reaction times for emergent features and for non-emergent features (p=.19). These results indicate that emergent features
are activated within metaphor processing as much as nonemergent features.
The average proportions of “Yes” responses are shown in
Table1. All participants responded “No” for almost all the
filler features. The proportions of “Yes” responses for emergent features in the metaphor condition (51.0%) were significantly lower than for the non-emergent features (67.0%)
[F(1, 9) = 12.5, p < .01]. In the concept term condition,
when the target was the vehicle, the average proportion for
non-emergent features (85.0%) was higher than that for emergent features (34.0%) [F(1, 9) = 157.1, p < .01]. When the
target was the topic, the average proportion for emergent features was 45.0%, while for non-emergent features, it was
30.0% [F(1, 9) = 5.55, p < .05]. Collectively, these findings suggest that emergent features were not easily understood compared to non-emergent features, which is consistent
with previous studies (Terai, Goldstone 2011).
These behavioral results suggest that there are distinct
differences between the processing of emergent and nonemergent features. In particular, the results indicate that nonemergent features are recognized as a typical characteristic of
the vehicle but emergent features are not.
Post-scan evaluations of the metaphor characteristics revealed that the mean rating of the metaphors’ comprehensibility was 4.00 on the 7-point scale (1: incomprehensible - 7:
comprehensible), suggesting that the participants understood
the presented metaphors. The mean rating for the metaphors’
novelty was 4.29, suggesting that the participants did not re-

In order to investigate the difference between the processing of emergent and non-emergent features within metaphor
comprehension, we analyzed the differential contrast between
the activation of emergent features and for non-emergent features in the metaphor condition (Figure 3 and Table 2). The
emergent feature condition showed significant activation in
the precentral gyrus (BA6) in the RH and the cingulate gyrus.
In contrast, in the concept term condition, no activation was
observed in the emergent condition compared to the nonemergent condition.

Discussion
The present study has explored the pattern of neural activation during feature emergence within metaphor comprehension. Emergent features elicited higher levels of activations
in the right precentral gyrus (BA6) and the cingulate gyrus in
contrast to non-emergent features in the metaphor condition.
Higher levels of activation have been observed in the right
precentral gyrus and the cingulated gyrus during the reading of anomalous metaphors compared to literal sentences
and in the right precentral gyrus compared to conventional
metaphors (Ahrens et al. 2007). The metaphors were presented as a sentence (e.g. “The theory framework of this theory is very loose”) and the participants were asked to read
the sentence and press a button when they finished. In such
a situation, participants may search for the relationships between the topic (e.g. “the theory framework”) and the feature (e.g. “loose”) presented in the sentence. In particular,
in the anomalous metaphor sentence condition (e.g. “Their
capital has rhythm”), they may search for a wider range of
associations between the topic (e.g. “their capital”) and the
feature (e.g. “have rhythm”). One may speculate that the
precentral gyrus is more activated when participants search
for a relationship between a metaphor and a novel feature.
Accordingly, emergent features may require additional cognitive processing in searching for a wider range of semantic
relationships for the metaphor.
Furthermore, these right frontal regions have been associated with stimulus-driven attentional reorientation (Corbetta
& Shulman 2002). It is thus feasible to assume that the presentation of emergent features shifts the participants’ seman-

2408

Table 2: Activation contrasts obtained for emergent features versus non-emergent features in the metaphor condition. (Activations listed here were obtained at a voxel level of two-tailed p < .001, uncorrected, clusters of 10 or more)
Z value
4.40
4.10

Cluster size
10
54

MNI(x)
52
-2

MNI(y)
-2
-24

MNI(z)
52
24

BA
6
24

Side
R
L/R

Cerebral Region
precentral gyrus
cingulate gyrus

Figure 3: Activation patterns for the differential contrasts between emergent features versus non-emergent features in the
metaphor condition (two-tailed p < .001, uncorrected, clusters of 10 or more)
tic attention to words that are triggered by the presentation of
an emergent feature. In other words, these results suggest that
the presentation of an emergent feature prompts participants
to modify their comprehension processes to incorporate interaction between the topic and the vehicle. That would be consistent with experimental results (Gineste et al. 2000) which
indicate that the processing of emergent features is facilitated
by interaction between the target and the vehicle concepts.
Previous studies have suggested that searching for a wider
range of semantic relationships within metaphor comprehension elicits activation of the right inferior frontal gyrus
(Stringaris et al. 2006, Shibata et al. 2007a). However, the results from the present study failed to demonstrate that searching for a wider range of semantic relationships led to activation of this area. In Stringaris et al. (2006), the word was
presented with the metaphor and the participants judged the
relationship. In contrast, in the present study, the feature was
presented after the metaphor had disappeared and we have
analyzed data obtained during the interval between feature
presentation onset and the participants’ responses. Thus, the
results from the present experiment only reflect the recognition processing of the feature. The present study’s result
observed no significant activation differences for the right inferior frontal gyrus.
Moreover, in the present study, emergent features were not
spontaneously generated within the interpretative processing
of the metaphors. Accordingly, the results only represent a
part of the mechanisms of feature emergence within metaphor
comprehension. It should also be noted that only ten individ-

uals participated in the present study which only consisted of
ten stimulus item for each condition. In order to obtain more
robust results, further experiments are needed with more participants and more items.
Nonetheless, the present results indicate that that the right
frontal area is involved in the processing of emergent features.
Accordingly, it is not possible to account for the involvement
of the RH merely in terms of metaphor novelty (Marshal et
al. 2007, Ahrens et al. 2007), for it may rather reflect feature emergence. If RH involvement can explain differences
between the cognitive processing of figurative and literal sentences, feature emergence may be related to metaphor recognition when reading sentences.

Acknowledgments
We are deeply grateful to Dr. Noburu Hidano, Dr. Hiroyuki
Akama and Dr. Atsushi Terao for helping our research. This
research is supported by MEXT’s program “Promotion of
Environmental Improvement for Independence of Young Researchers”, KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B)
23700160.

References
Ahrens, K., Liu, H., Lee, C., Gong, S., Fang, S., & Hsu,
Y. (2007). Functional mri of conventional and anomalous
metaphors in madarin chinese. Brain and Language, 100,
163-171.
Becker, A. H. (1997). Emergent and common features influ-

2409

ence metaphor interpretation. Metaphor and Symbol, 12,
243–259.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goaldirected and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Neurosicence, 3, 201-215.
Gineste, M., Indurkhya, B., & Scart, V. (2000). Emergence of
features in metaphor comprehension. Metaphor and Symbol, 15, 117–135.
Marshal, N., Faust, M., Hendler, T., & Jung-Beeman, M.
(2007). An fmri investigation of the neural correlates underlying the processing of novel metaphoric expressions.
Brain and Language, 100, 115-126.
Ortony, A. (1979). Beyond literal similarity. Psychological
Review, 86, 161–180.
Rapp, A. M., Leube, D. T., Erb, M., Grodd, W., & Kircher,
T. T. J. (2004). Neural correlates of metaphor processing.
Cognitive Brain Research, 20, 395–402.
Reynolds, R. E., & Schwartz, R. M. (1983). Relation
of metaphoric processing to comprehension and memory.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 450–459.
Shibata, M., Abe, J., Terao, A., & Miyamoto, T. (2007a).
Neural bases of metaphor comprehension an fmri study (in
japanese). Cognitive Studies, 14, 339-354.
Shibata, M., Abe, J., Terao, A., & Miyamoto, T. (2007b).
Neural mechanisms involved in the comprehension of
metaphoric and literal sentences: An fmri study. Brain Research, 1166, 92-102.
Sopory, P., & Dillard, J. P. (2002). The persuasive effects
of metaphor: a meta-analysis. Human Communication Research, 28, 382–419.
Stringaris, A. K., Medford, N. C., Giampietro, V., Brammer,
M. J., & David, A. S. (2007). Deriving meaning: distinct neural mechanisms for metaphoric, literal, and nonmeaningful sentences. Brain and Language, 100, 150–
162.
Stringaris, A. K., Medford, N. C., Giora, R., Giampietro, V.,
Brammer, M. J., & David, A. S. (2006). How metaphors
influence semantic relatedness judgments: The role of the
right frontal cortex. Neuro Image, 33, 784–793.
Terai, A., & Goldstone, R. (2011). Processing emergent features in metaphor comprehension. In Proceedings of the
33rd annual meeting of the cognitive science society (pp.
2043–2048).

2410

