UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Problem Solving: Insights from Verbal Reports

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/55j4q6k3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Gralla, Linn
Tenbrink, Thora
Siebers, Michael
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Problem Solving: Insights from Verbal Reports
Linn Gralla (gralla@uni-bremen.de)
Department of Linguistics and Literary Sciences, Universität Bremen, Germany

Thora Tenbrink (tenbrink@uni-bremen.de)
Department of Linguistics and Literary Sciences, Universität Bremen, Germany

Michael Siebers (michael.siebers@uni-bamberg.de)
Cognitive Systems Group, Universität Bamberg, Germany

Ute Schmid (ute.schmid@uni-bamberg.de)
Cognitive Systems Group, Universität Bamberg, Germany

Abstract

ubiquitous and efficient problem solving strategy,
participants seldom apply it in experimental settings, unless
the analogous nature is directly salient (Gick & Holyoak,
1980; Schmid, Wirth & Polkehn, 1999). If analogies are
used in problem solving the transfer can be on different
levels of specificity, leading to different cognitive solution
steps and strategies. In this paper, we pursue these issues by
an analysis of verbal data collected while solving an analogy
problem. In the following, we will first discuss previous
work on analogical problem solving, with a brief look at the
role of language. Next, we introduce a previous study by
Schelhorn, Griego, and Schmid (2007) that served as our
starting point. Our current study is then presented and
discussed in the remainder of this paper.

Problem solving is a complex cognitive activity that involves
the construction of sequences of actions to reach a given goal.
One powerful strategy is to identify analogies between the
problem at hand and previously encountered ones. Relevant
similarities between problems can be detected more easily if
there is a high resemblance on the surface or with respect to
structure. Earlier theoretical observations and performance
data have pointed to two distinct kinds of analogical
reasoning, direct solution transfer (transformational analogy)
and the creation of a new solution based on adapted past
reasoning processes (derivational analogy). In order to gain
insights about the cognitive processes involved, we extend
this work by an analysis of different kinds of verbal data.
Planning protocols were collected prior to problem solving,
and retrospective reports, evaluations, and instructions were
elicited after the task was completed. Results show that the
different kinds of analogical reasoning involved different
degrees of analogy awareness, as reflected by the
verbalizations. Derivational analogy involved problem
solving on a more detailed and structured step-by-step basis
than the more superficial transformational strategy, in which a
simple matching procedure was employed.

Analogical Problem Solving
Analogies are based on shared relations between base and
target problem (Gentner, 1983; Clement & Gentner, 1991).
By highlighting shared relational structures, analogies
connect domains and problems that may appear only
marginally similar on the surface. This process involves
structural alignment as a crucial component of analogical
reasoning. While similarity centers on shared attributes,
analogy concerns the alignment of relational structures at a
deeper level. According to the systematicity principle, the
structural relations are connected by one-to-one
correspondences (Gentner & Markman, 1997).
As proposed by Carbonell (1986), analogical problem
solving can be performed on different levels of abstraction.
Transformational analogy is based on direct solution
transfer, i.e. the solution to a previous problem is slightly
altered in a transformation process to solve the new
problem. The solution transfer process contains three basic
processes. First, the initial partial matching process
determines if two problems share similar aspects based on
state information and operator sequences. Second, the
sequence of actions from the retrieved solution is transferred
to the new situation in an analogical mapping process.
Third, the retrieved solution is copied and altered in a

Keywords: analogical problem solving, verbal reports,
cognitive discourse analysis

Introduction
People frequently encounter problem situations in their daily
lives. Most of these are instantly solved, as humans are well
equipped with numerous problem solving strategies. One
powerful strategy is the adaptation of previous experiences
to solve the newly encountered problem. Analogical
reasoning is not only involved in problem solving but also
in a number of other human activities, such as use of
metaphor, scientific reasoning, humor, and empathy.
Gentner, Holyoak & Kokinov (2001) therefore argue that
analogical reasoning is at the core of cognition. Hofstadter
(2001) supports this view by arguing that all concepts that
are used to understand recurrent and new situations are
packages of analogies.
Even though analogical reasoning is assumed to be a

396

heuristically guided manner to finally satisfy the given
constraints (Carbonell, 1986).
Derivational analogy follows the same processes of
analogical thinking. However, the accessed information is
different, since it is based on the preservation and
reconstruction of past reasoning processes. In the initial
partial matching process, significant aspects are considered
analogous if they share the same reasoning steps, i.e. the
same issues are considered and equivalent decisions are
made. Second, in transfer of earlier derivation, significant
aspects of the reasoning process are recreated. Finally, the
retrieved derivation is applied to the current situation “by
‘replaying’ the problem solving episode, checking for each
step if the derivation is still applicable in the new problem
solving context” (Schmid & Carbonell, 1999: 116). To
summarize, in transformational analogy the solution is
slightly altered to fit the new problem. In derivational
analogy, in contrast, previous reasoning processes are
applied and adapted to find a solution. As a result, new
solutions are likely to be different from previous ones.
While Carbonell introduced derivational analogy as an
artificial intelligence model, humans have also been shown
to use this strategy (Schmid & Carbonell, 1999).
Experiments showed that a high saliency of analogous
elements fosters the use of transformational analogy
(Schelhorn et al., 2007). Furthermore, participants were
more successful in solving novel problems when they
studied examples by using instructions fostering
derivational analogy (Kleinbeck et al., 2001).

the different processes are described (Caron & CaronPargue, 1987; Wedman, Wedman & Folger, 1996), or which
linguistic differences can be found between reports of
successful and unsuccessful problem solvers (Roth, 1985).
In this study, the analysis of performance data is
supplemented by a content and linguistic analysis of
different kinds of verbal reports. By combining those
measures we aim to
• identify the processes described in the verbal reports
and match those to the different processes proposed for
transformational and derivational analogy,
• explore how transformational and derivational analogy
can be linguistically distinguished in verbal reports, and
• confirm that a high saliency of analogous elements
fosters transformational analogy.

The Effect of High vs. Low Guidance on the
Selected Analogical Transfer
Our experiment is based on a study by Schelhorn et al.
(2007) in which the saliency of the correspondences
between entities in base and target problem was varied.
These authors used the following design to address the
influence of saliency on the selected analogical strategy.
First, in order to prime participants for analogical
reasoning, they were given two example problems (‘The
Fortress’ and ‘Radiation’, cf. Gick & Holyoak, 1980) and
their solutions, where the second was solved analogously to
the first. While those two problems were purely conceptual,
the base and target tasks in the study by Schelhorn et al.
concerned a type of path-finding problem called “Eulerian
Trail” where a path needs to be found that visits every edge
of the graph exactly once. After participants were presented
with the base problem (Boat; see Schelhorn et al., 2007:
Appendix), the solution was explained step-by-step
(visually supplemented by a graph). Then participants were
given the target problem (Birthday) and asked to find a
solution. In the high guidance condition, the initial letters of
the five objects that represented the edges of the graph were
identical (cities in the base problem and peoples’ names in
the target problem). This was not the case in the low
guidance condition. After giving the solution, participants
were asked to map objects from the base to those of the
target. Mapping times were recorded. Participants then
completed a Strategy Assessment Questionnaire (SAQ),
which contained 16 statements that participants should agree
or disagree with (see Schelhorn et al., 2007: Appendix).
Five statements corresponded to the derivational strategy
(e.g. The “boat” and the “birthday” problem seemed
similar but I could not figure out how the solutions were
related), and five corresponded to the transformational
strategy (e.g. It was simple to use the “boat” solution to
solve the “birthday” problem by replacing the names of the
towns with the names of the people). The remaining
statements were fillers. Finally, biographical information
was collected.
Schelhorn et al. (2007) found that participants transferred
knowledge from the base to the target problem even in the

Verbal Reports in Studying Problem Solving
Measuring solution times is common in problem solving
research (e.g. Funke & Spering, 2006); the analysis is based
on assumptions about the time which different processes
take. However, solution times do not contribute information
about cognitive processes at work during problem solving.
A combination with other measures such as verbal or
behavioral data can lead to more detailed insights.
The elicitation and analysis of verbal reports is an
establish method to study the processes involved in human
problem solving (e.g. Newell & Simon, 1972; Gick &
Holyoak, 1980; Ericsson & Simon, 1984). Ericsson &
Simon (1984) outline the different processes that can be
accessed by different kinds of verbal reports. They argue
that think-aloud protocols and retrospective reports do not
modify cognitive processes; the task-oriented processes
determine what information is heeded and verbalized. Most
information in these reports is still held in short term
memory. If information is retrieved from long-term memory
in retrospective reports, some information might already be
missing or erroneous, for instance with regard to difficulties
encountered while solving the problem.
Most studies investigating verbal data along with problem
solving focus on the content level, identifying the explicit
statements elicited from participants during (or following) a
problem solving process. Few studies analyze verbal reports
on a deeper linguistic level, identifying more precisely how

397

absence of surface and structural correspondences, namely
by using derivational analogy. Since the derivation process
takes longer than direct solution transfer, participants in the
high guidance version should be faster. However, as
participants may solve the problem while reading the task
instructions, or take time to re-read parts of the instruction
when facing difficulties, solution times as such did not seem
to be an accurate measure. Mapping times seemed more
informative since participants in the low guidance condition
needed to map the entities from the base problem to those of
the target problem in a separate step to solve the mapping
task. Results showed that, as expected, mapping times were
significantly longer in the low guidance condition.
Furthermore, participants in the low guidance condition
agreed with more SAQ questions that corresponded to the
derivational strategy than participants in the high guidance
condition, indicating that low correspondence hampers
direct solution transfer.
In a comparable study, Schmid & Carbonell (1999) report
similar performance results. Additionally, they briefly report
how the two analogical strategies were expressed in think
aloud protocols. In preparation for the analysis of verbal
reports in our current study, we revisited the set of 14 think
aloud protocols to identify linguistic markers of cognitive
processes. This analysis revealed the following general
structure in 10 of the protocols:
1. construct the graphs representing cities and locks,
2. connect cities satisfying the given constraints, and
3. check the solution during a final evaluation.
The final stage of evaluation was missing in the
remaining four protocols. An analysis of the verbs occurring
in the protocols revealed that participants were engaged in a
number of mental activities: satisfying constraints (have to,
need to), forming hypotheses (should, could), gaining
insight (I see), planning (want to, going to), and recalling
(seen before). In those data, the distribution of verbs
(categorized following Halliday & Matthiessen, 1999) could
to some extent be associated with use of derivational and
transformational strategies. For instance, participants using
derivational analogy used more verbs of ‘doing’ (go, start)
than participants using transformational analogy.

•

correspondence, such as “the same as”, “similar”, and
“analogous”.
Reports by participants using derivational analogy
should include descriptions of different stages of the
problem solving process, such as visualizing the
different connections (relationships) between the
different points (people). Furthermore, unspecific terms
(in general) and structuring devices, i.e. ordinal
numbers and temporal connectors were expected to be
more frequent.

Design
In addition to replicating the study by Schelhorn et al.
(2007) (original condition), we collected different kinds of
verbal reports in two further conditions, yielding a 2x3
design (high vs. low guidance, original vs. planning vs.
retrospective). In the planning condition, participants were
asked to write down how they would solve the problem
(planning protocol) after going through the example
problem and viewing the target problem for the first time.
Furthermore, they were asked to evaluate their plans after
completing the mapping task. Participants in the
retrospective condition were asked to write a report on how
they solved the target problem, and subsequently to write an
instruction for a friend to solve this problem. Since these
verbal reports were collected at different times relative to
the problem solving process, different kinds of information
were gathered. We expected that planning protocols and
retrospective reports would be most likely to include
descriptions of the actual problem solving process. Planning
protocols were expected to contain information on
spontaneous transfer from base to target problem.
Retrospective reports may further include memories of
detours and fresh starts, and possibly information on the
mapping task and meta-information on the study or the
problem solving process. This kind of meta-information
may also be reported in evaluation protocols. Instructions,
on the other hand, would be highly structured and include
generalized steps to solve the given problem.

Procedure
Participants were recruited by various means, e.g. by a call
for participation on LinguistList.org and among students at
the University of Bremen. As a consequence, the age range
was very wide (22 to 73 years, mean 38,1 years).
Participants were randomly assigned to conditions.
Performance was analyzed with regard to solution and
mapping correctness, mapping times, and the answers given
in the SAQ. The elicited verbal reports were analyzed
qualitatively with regard to their content, the overall
structure, and linguistic markers such as verbs, nouns,
structuring devices, and other keywords.

The Eulerian Trail: Empirical Study
Hypotheses
The current study supplements the quantitative analysis of
performance data by a qualitative analysis of verbal data.
We expected protocols to show transformational and
derivational strategies, reflecting the processes proposed by
Carbonell (1986). In particular:
• Participants in the high guidance version were expected
to state explicitly that they noticed the analogy.
• We assumed that participants using the transformational
strategy would explicitly state that they used the base
solution for solving the target problem. On a linguistic
level, they might use explicit markers of

Results
69 participants (35 female and 34 male) took part in the
web-based study. 33 of these were given the high guidance
condition by the system, and 36 saw the low guidance

398

condition. We collected 20 planning protocols, 21
evaluations, 22 retrospective reports, and 21 instructions
(evenly distributed between the two guidance conditions).
Performance and Strategy Assessment. Solutions to the
target problem did not differ significantly between the high
(57,6%) and low guidance version (66,7%). However, the
mapping task was solved significantly better in the high
(90,9%) than the low guidance version (63.9%), χ2 = 7.01;
p<.01. Also, mapping times in the high guidance condition
(n = 33; M = 76.9 s; SD = 64.5) were significantly shorter
(W = 947, p <.001) than in the low guidance condition (n =
36; M = 217.0 s; SD = 206.7).
The answers to the SAQ were analyzed using MannWhitney U tests to compare the amount of positively ranked
questions belonging to the derivational strategy to those that
belong to the transformational analogy. Participants with
high guidance (n = 33) agreed with significantly more
statements corresponding to transformational analogy than
participants with low guidance (W = 854.4, p<.001).
Statements that corresponded to derivational analogy were
significantly more often confirmed by participants in the
low guidance (n = 35) than by those in the high guidance
condition (W = 771.5, p <.01) (Figure 1). One participant in
the low guidance condition did not complete the SAQ.

solved the mapping task. They reported different strategies,
viz. redrawing the graph (4 cases), aligning the entities
(once), or matching functions of entities (twice).
88% of all planning protocols in the high guidance
condition contained statements of noticing the analogy, as
compared to 40% in the low guidance condition. A similar
trend emerged in the retrospective reports; 73% of the high
guidance reports explicitly mentioned noticing the
analogies, as compared to 27% in the low guidance version.
With regard to success, it could be observed that those
participants who reported noticing the analogy in their
planning protocols succeeded in finding the solution three
times more often than those who did not mention the
analogy. In retrospective reports no such effect of noticing
the analogy could be found. A closer analysis showed that
some participants reported solving the example problem
themselves; if they came up with a wrong solution there,
noticing the analogy and transferring the solution to the
target would result in a wrong solution.
A closer look at the nature of the descriptions of the
analogies revealed a systematic difference. In the high
guidance version they reflected abstract, general
observations of the following kind: “When I read the
birthday problem, I recognized that it was the exact same
problem as the boat problem”. Here, no alignment of
structures or entities is provided. Only protocols collected in
the low guidance version contained more detailed
representations such as: “I recognized right away that the
messages were analogous to the locks.” Here, the entities of
the target problem are matched to those of the base problem.
The descriptions of the problem solving processes could
be divided into four subcategories. Descriptions of abstract,
generalized steps were classified as general strategy. If the
solution of the base problem was directly transferred to the
target problem, this was called direct solution transfer. If
the strategy (rather than the solution) was described as being
transferred, this was categorized as direct strategy transfer.
If instances of the solution process were specified, the
description was classified as step-by-step. These categories
showed different linguistic markers as illustrated by the
following examples:
1. I worked counterclockwise and connected as many of
the people along the edges as possible before working
on the connections that cut across the middle of my
shape. (general strategy)
2. I simply copied and pasted the solution from the third
problem onto the forth. (direct solution transfer)
3. I solved it the same way. (direct strategy transfer)
4. Starting from S, I first connected the group of 3 persons
that know each other (S, B, E), coming back to S. Then
from S to R, and from R to the other group of 3 persons
that know each other (R, M, B), coming back to R.
Finally from R to E. (step-by-step)
In detail, the category general strategy included
• general statements of the kind ‘find pattern/ mapping’,
• the generalized strategy ‘go through the graph’, and

Figure 1: Mean number of agreed SAQ questions.
Running a Kruskal-Wallis test no interaction was found
between the verbal elicitation task and mapping times (H =
2.8207, p = .244). For this reason, and because the results of
the performance measures confirmed the findings by
Schelhorn et al. (2007), we assume that the elicited verbal
data did not affect performance in any substantial way and
can therefore contribute to the study of differences in
derivational and transformational analogy.
Verbal Data Analysis. First we investigated the general
structure of the collected 21 planning protocols. In 12 of
these, participants stated noticing the analogy between base
and target problem in the beginning. In 7 protocols this
insight was followed by a description of the graph and a
subsequent description of the problem solving process. 17
participants stated the solution at the end of the protocol.
Similar structures were also found in the retrospective
reports, which additionally contained meta-information such
as remarks on the study design, the problem solving
process, and background knowledge. 7 participants (2 high
guidance, 5 low guidance) furthermore reported how they

399

the verbs ‘connect’ and ‘draw’ (6 occurrences as
compared to 3 in step-by-step descriptions).
The two categories that described direct transfer both
contained the markers ‘same’ and ‘again’ (6 times) and the
verb ‘solve’ (5 occurrences). But the verb ‘copy’ was solely
used in two protocols to describe direct solution transfer.
And the nouns ‘strategy’ and ‘template’ only occurred in
protocols displaying direct strategy transfer. Protocols in
the category step-by-step contained
• first letters or names of entities,
• references to connections drawn by the participants (5
out of 7 cases), and
• a detailed description of the process of drawing the
graph, listing the connections and finding a way to
satisfy the task constraints (2 cases).
Structuring devices were most frequent in general strategy
or step-by-step descriptions, viz. temporal connectors (13
compared to 3 occurrences in the two transfer categories)
and the conjunction ‘and’ (27 compared to 2 occurrences).
26 out of 33 planning protocols and retrospective reports
contained strategy descriptions. Of these, 15 were
categorized as general strategy descriptions and 7
occurrences were found for each of the other three
categories respectively. Step-by-step descriptions were most
frequently used in the low guidance version (5 as compared
to 2 times). Direct solution transfer was more often
described in the high guidance version (6 as compared to 1
occurrence).
Instructions were found to be more structured (structuring
devices were used in 50% of the instructions) and more
general in describing the steps to be taken (12 out of 20
protocols). Those steps can be summarized as ‘draw the
graph & find a pattern by satisfying the given constraints’.
Eight instructions included references to task-specific
entities (e.g. lock, messenger puzzle). One participant
refused to write an instruction. 16 instructions contained an
advice for a specific strategy. The same strategy categories
as outlined before could be used for the analysis. A
comparison between the strategy described in the instruction
and (by the same participant) in the retrospective report
revealed that people advised a more general strategy (6
cases) or the same strategy (9). No differences with regard
to high or low guidance was found. 15 out of 21 evaluations
stated if the planned strategy was used; this was mostly the
case (10 of 15).

in order to solve the mapping task was confirmed by the
descriptions found in 8 protocols.
The analysis of verbal data furthermore provides a range
of insights about the cognitive processes involved in
analogical problem solving. As a tendency, participants
reported recognizing the analogy more often when it was
highly salient. Equally unsurprisingly, those recognizing the
analogy appeared more likely to succeed in giving the right
solution. However, as the retrospective reports revealed,
participants working their way through the example problem
by themselves may give the wrong solution although they
noticed the analogy. This observation might explain the low
performance in solution correctness of the target problem.
The distinctively better performance of participants in the
high guidance version on the mapping task supports this
view. This interesting possibility could not be detected by
performance data alone.
Our qualitative analysis of strategy categories suggested
that participants in the high guidance version described
direct solution transfer more often than participants in the
low guidance version, as opposed to more detailed step-bystep descriptions that were associated with low guidance.
Together these tendencies support the idea that high
guidance fosters a transformational strategy involving more
superficial and less intricate cognitive processes.
A comparison of the processes identified in our verbal
data with the processes hypothesized for transformational
and derivational analogy by Carbonell (1986) reveals the
following. For transformational analogy, which is associated
with high guidance, the initial partial matching process is
expressed in descriptions of noticing the analogy. Since the
descriptions exhibit a very abstract level of representation,
no conclusions can be drawn about the nature of the aspects
that are considered analogous. Quite possibly, participants
did not need to consider the matter in any more depth
(leading to the lack of more detailed alignment
descriptions), since a superficial transformation was
sufficient. The analogical matching process in which
knowledge from the base problem is transferred to the target
problem is evident in the descriptions of graph
representation. The following example is representative for
the transfer of the sequence of actions: “making nodes for
each person and drawing lines between acquaintances”. The
process of alteration of the retrieved solution is
straightforwardly expressed in descriptions of direct
solution transfer.
In low guidance protocols that are associated with the use
of derivational analogy, the initial step of matching
reasoning processes of base and target problem is also
verbally expressed by noticing the analogy. These
descriptions show a more detailed representation (matching
base and target entities), but do not contain information on
individual reasoning steps. The transfer of significant
aspects of the reasoning process and traces of replaying the
problem solving episode can be observed in step-by-step
descriptions.

•

Discussion
We set out in our study to extend findings previously
published by Schelhorn et al. (2007) concerning the use of
transformational and derivational strategies in analogical
problem solving. Our performance results successfully
replicate the earlier findings in that participants given high
guidance were more likely to use transformational analogy,
while participants given low guidance could be associated
with derivational analogy. The assumption that participants
would have to map base and target entities in a separate step

400

Our analysis of verbal reports thus enabled the
identification of different cognitive processes involved in
analogical problem solving, along with linguistic markers,
depending on the degree of guidance which led to the
different problem solving strategies previously described as
transformational and derivational (Carbonell, 1986). These
findings illustrate that the analysis of verbal data contributes
to a more detailed understanding of the processes at work
during analogical problem solving.
Our elicitation of written data can be regarded as a first
broad exploration of the kinds of verbalizations that might
be expected along with complex analogical problem solving
tasks. Quite typically for free production tasks and low
participant numbers that allow for a more or less complete
comprehension of the descriptions (rather than performing
quantative computations), the resulting numbers of
occurrences of specific phenomena (as reported in this
paper) were too small for statistical validation. Nevertheless,
the distribution of contents and linguistic markings were
both inspiring and suggestive in light of the theoretical
background of this study, and thus open up some avenues
for further research. In particular, we suggest the following:
• Of the four types of elicited verbalization the planning
protocols seemed to be the most informative. Quite
unexpectedly, participants seemed to already solve the
task while writing up how they would do this, rendering
the descriptions rather similar to think aloud data
(elicited during, rather than before, problem solving). If
this observation can be supported by further studies, it
would open up interesting ways of collecting verbal
data much more efficiently than possible with think
aloud recording.
• The tendency for low-guidance participants to produce
more detailed procedural descriptions of a derivational
problem solving process calls for further exploration.
Focusing on this particular aspect, a more controlled
elicitation of a larger amount of verbal data should
highlight how these matching processes develop over
time, as well as the extent to which the two proposed
analogical reasoning strategies (transformational and
derivational) are systematically distinct. The linguistic
markers identified in the present study can serve as a
first indication of the ways in which language
represents these distinctions.

Caron, J., & Caron-Pargue, J. (1987). Towards a
psycholinguistic approach of argumentative operators:
The ‘Thinking Aloud’ procedure. In F. van Eemeren, R.
Grootendorst, J. A. Blair, C. A. Willard (Eds.),
Argumentation: Perspectives and approaches. Providence
USA: Foris Publications.
Clement, C., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984). Protocol analysis.
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Funke, J. & Spering, M. (2006). Methoden der Denk- und
Problemlöseforschung. In Funke, J. (Ed.), Enzyklopädie
der Psychologie, Band 8. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52 (1),
45-56.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J. & Kokinov, B. N. (2001).
Introduction. In Gentner, D., Holyoak, K.J. & Kokinov,
B.N. (Eds.), The Analogical Mind – Perspectives from
Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA; MIT.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Halliday, M. A. K & Matthiessen, C. M. (1999). Construing
Experience Through Meaning – A Language Based
Apprroach to Cognition. London: Continuum.
Hofstadter, D.R. (2001). Epilogue: Analogy as the Core of
Cognition. In Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J. & Kokinov, B.
N. (Eds.), The Analogical Mind – Perspectives from
Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA; MIT.
Kleinbeck, S., Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., & Schmid, U.
(2001). Einfluss derivationaler und transformationaler
Beispielformate auf Beispielnutzung und Problemlöseleistung. Proceedings der 43. Fachtagung experimentell
arbeitender Psychologen.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Roth, T. (1985). Sprachstatistisch objektivierbare
Denkstilunterschiede zwischen „guten“ und „schlechten“
Bearbeitern komplexer Probleme. Sprache und Kognition,
4, 178-191.
Schelhorn, S. E., Griego, J., & Schmid, U. (2007).
Transformational and derivational strategies in analogical
problem solving. Cognitive Processing, 8, 45-55.
Schmid, U., & Carbonell, J. (1999). Empirical evidence for
derivational analogy. Proceedings der 4. Fachtagung der
Gesellschaft für Kognitionswissenschaft (pp. 116-121).
Bielefeld: Bielefeld Universität.
Schmid, U., Wirth, J., & Polkehn, K. (1999). Analogical
Transfer of Non-isomorphic Source Problems. 21st
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Wedman, J., Wedman, J., & Folger, T. (1996). Analysis of
analogical problem-solving processes via think aloud
protocols. Journal of Research and Development in
Education, 30 (1), 51-62.

Acknowledgments
Funding by the Zentrale Forschungsförderung Universität
Bremen is gratefully acknowledged. We thank André
Scholz for the technical support.

References
Carbonell, J. G. (1986). Derivational analogy: A theory of
reconstructive problem solving and expertise acquisition.
In R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell
(Eds.), Machine learning: An artificial intelligence
approach – Volume II. Los Altos: Kaufmann.

401

