UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Arbitrary Category Labels Can Change Similarity Judgments of Human Faces

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0pg729wb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Lara, Frankie
Hahn, Amanda
Yu, Na-Yung
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Arbitrary Category Labels Can Change Similarity Judgments of Human Faces
Frankie Lara (frankie.lara@jaguar.tamu.edu)
Amanda Hahn (achahn30@gmail.com)
Na-Yung Yu (nayungyu@gmail.com)
Takashi Yamauchi (takashi-yamauchi@tamu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Mail Stop 4235
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA

Abstract
In two experiments, participants were presented with a triad
of morphed White and Hispanic faces paired with
pseudoword labels. The meanings of these labels were
manipulated to represent categorical information about the
face. Labels were said to represent either the person’s belief,
the food s/he ate, the disease s/he had, or the person’s last
name. The results indicated that categorical information
affects our judgments of faces. Information categories such as
belief, food, and diseases were particularly strong in
modifying the participants’ similarity judgment of faces,
whereas information characterized with last names of faces
were least powerful. Previous research focuses on race face
perception being affected primarily by racial indicators or
racial information. Our results provide that how we
perceptually analyze faces is not confined to obvious racial
cues, but by non-racial semantic information as well,
suggesting that category-relevant information by itself
provides a strong basis for inductive generalization.
Keywords: Labeling; Similarity; Categorization

Introduction
In the perception of faces, there is a tendency to pay
excessive attention to salient features such as race-specific
(Eberhardt, Dasgupta, & Banaszynski, 2003; Levin, 2000;
MacLin & Malpass, 2003). When we see racially
ambiguous faces, we shift our attention to features that
signal ethnicity such as hair-style or skin color and ignore
other important information. This attention shift often
results in undesired psychological effects such as cross-race
face recognition deficit, i.e., faces that are categorized into
“other race” are recognized less than the faces that are
categorized into one’s own race. (MacLin and Malpass,
2003) and erroneous impression formation (Kashima, 2000;
Hamilton & Sherman, 1994; Macrae, Milne, &
Bodenhausen, 1994).
Additional studies show that race-based categorization
modifies perception of skin color and the width of faces and
mouth (MacLin & Malpass, 2003). Research further
suggests that holistic face-processing is more prevalent in
same-race faces than in other-race faces (Michel, Rossion,
Han, Chung, & Caldara, 2006b).
Social categorization based on in-group and out-group of
an observer also yield a cross-race recognition deficit,
implying that categorization itself can be a mediating factor
changing face perception (Bernstein, Young, Hugenberg,
2007). As long as stimuli are grouped in a meaningful way,
some modification in face perception is likely to occur. For

example, incremental training or labeling of faces into
arbitrary categories generates a categorical perception
effect, in which faces taken across a category boundary are
recognized better than faces taken within the category
boundary (Kikutani, Roberson, & Hanley, 2008). Taken
together, these studies demonstrate that not just racial
information per se, but category information plays a
substantial role in modifying perception of faces.
This explains why social categorization often
accompanies faulty generalization and stereotyping.
Categories are generative in nature. Categorical labeling not
only accentuates features that are central to the category
(e.g., prototypical features), but also help generate new
features by means of explanations and justifications (Kunda,
Miller, & Claire, 1990). When confronted with
contradictory attributes (e.g., a rich African-American
businessperson), people often make up a subtype of the
category (e.g., black entrepreneur) and use it to preserve
their initial stereotypical belief (Macrae, Stangor, &
Hewstone, 1996). Combinations of contradictory concepts
such as “Harvard-educated carpenter” create new features
such as “being rebellious” or “anti-social,” which were not
part of each separate concept – “Harvard-educated” and
“carpenter” (Kunda, Miller, & Claire, 1990). When a person
is characterized categorically (“Linda is a feminist” as
opposed to “Linda believes in and support feminism”),
people not only think that the person possesses prototypical
attributes of the category (“Linda majored in philosophy in
college”) but also some unrelated features are deemed likely
(“Linda likes Chinese food”) (Yamauchi, 2005, 2008,
2009). Categorization also helps reframe people’s attention.
When geometric stimuli are grouped by categories,
perceptual sensitivity within the category is reduced while
the differences between categories are enhanced (Tajfel &
Wilkes, 1963; Yamauchi & Yu, 2008; Yamauchi et al.,
2002). On this basis, we think that when labels help form
categories, labeling can modify people’s perceived facial
similarities. The two experiments tested this idea.

Overview of the experiments
We employed a widely used triad task (Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Yamauchi
Markman, 2000; Yamauchi, Kohn, & Yu, 2007; Yamauchi
& Yu, 2008; Yu et al., 2008, 2010; Waxman & Booth,
2001) in which we attached pseudoword labels (e.g.,
“Scrakies”) to face pictures and examined how these labels

1852

Figure 1: Otherwise identical, triads of faces shown (a) without labels, (b) with labels (different-label condition; Experiment
1), and (c) with labels (same-label condition; Experiment 2). Here, the dissimilar base picture appears on the right.
influenced participants’ judgments of facial similarity when
the same arbitrary labels represented different kinds of
semantic information.
In our experiments, participants were shown a triad of
human faces (Figure 1) and judged which face, bottom left
or right, was more similar to the target face on the top. The
target face (top face) was an original face that was either
Hispanic or Caucasian. The bottom left and right faces were
morphed faces. These faces were displayed either without a
label (the control condition, Figure 1a) or with a label (the
label condition, Figure 1b & 1c). Each label was an arbitrary
pseudoword (such as “Scrakies”), but the meaning of the
label was manipulated in the instructions that the
participants read at the beginning of the experiment.
In the three experimental conditions, participants were
told the arbitrary labels either represented the name of the
food the person regularly eats (the food-label condition), the
name of the disease that he has (the disease-label condition),
or the name of belief that he follows (the belief-label
condition). Note that these manipulations were introduced
only in the instructions participants received and all
participants received the same stimuli. These three
conditions were contrasted to two control conditions, in
which the labels were removed entirely from the stimulus
frame (no-label condition, Figure 1a) or the arbitrary labels
were characterized as the last name of the person (the lastname-label condition).
We measured the proportion of trials that participants
chose the face that was physically dissimilar to the target
image. For example, in Figure 1a, the left base image looks
more similar to the target image when compared to the right
base image. We measured the proportion of participants
selecting the dissimilar face pictures (the right base image in
Figure 1) when face pictures had no labels (Figure 1a), and
when the target and dissimilar face pictures had different
labels (Figure 1b – Experiment 1) or the same labels (Figure
1c – Experiment 2).
We predicted category information would affect similarity
judgments while indexical labels would not to the same
degree. We commonly classify people by their habit of
eating (food-labels, e.g., vegetarians, ethnic-food lovers),
the disease they have (disease-labels, e.g., people with high
blood pressure, people with cancer, people with allergies) or
the belief that people follow (belief-labels, e.g., Christians,
positive thinkers). By categorizing people in this manner,

we obtain a sense of similarity and unity among category
members. In contrast, a last name is indexical; it refers to a
specific person. Groups, such as families, can be formed by
last names, but they do not give us a sense of coherence. A
name points to a specific entity within a category and
therefore should no influence judgments of similarity as
strongly as categorical labels. Thus, our hypothesis that
categorical labeling helps modify perception of facial
similarity leads to the prediction that arbitrary labels change
the perception of face similarity in the food-label, diseaselabel, and belief-label conditions, but not in the last-name
label condition.
When items do not share category membership,
differences are emphasized. On the contrary, when items are
in the same category, differences are diluted (Sloutsky,
2003; Waxman & Markow, 1995). Therefore, in Experiment
1, when the dissimilar picture does not share a label with the
target, the proportion of participants selecting the dissimilar
base picture should be considerably smaller in the foodlabel, disease-label, and belief-label conditions than the nolabel condition. In Experiment 2, the dissimilar base picture
shares a label with the target, so the proportion of
participants selecting the dissimilar base picture should be
larger than the no-label condition. The proportion of
participants selecting dissimilar face pictures as “similar”
should be indistinguishable between the no-label and lastname-label conditions in both Experiments

Experiment 1
Method
Participants A total of 191 undergraduate students
participated in this experiment for course credit. They were
randomly assigned to one of five conditions: no-label
(n=39), belief-label (n=39), food-label (n=35), disease-label
(n=34), and last-name-label (n=34) conditions.
Materials Stimuli were triads of faces that either had no
label or label attached to them (Figures 1a and 1b). The
target was an original picture of either a Hispanic or
Caucasian face, and the two base pictures were a morph of
the original Hispanic and Caucasian face (Figure 2).
In total, we photographed five pairs of original Hispanic
and Caucasian faces. All expressions are neutral and no
faces contained any distinguishing features, e.g., none had
moles or mustaches. These photographs were morphed into

1853

five pairs of 20 images using Morph Man 4.0 (2003)
software starting from the original Hispanic face and
morphing towards the Caucasian face (Figure 2). Altogether
there were 100 images (10 original faces and 90 morphed
images) that had varying degrees of Hispanic and Caucasian
facial features.

Design The experiment had a 3 (Physical Difference; low,
medium, and high; within-subjects factor) × 5 (Label
Condition; belief-label, food-label, disease -label, lastname-label and no-label; between–subjects factor) mixed
design. All participants in the five conditions (no-label,
food-label, disease-label, belief-label, and last-name-label
conditions) received the identical stimuli. The labels in each
condition were physically the same, but the meaning
attached to the labels was altered in the instructions.

Results
Figure 2. One real Hispanic face (far left) is morphed
gradually with one real Caucasian face (far right). In the
actual experiment, there were 18 morphed images between
the two original faces.
From the 90 morphed images, base pictures were selected
controlling for physical differences between stimuli.
Specifically we developed three levels of physical
difference- low, medium and high physical difference
within conditions – based on the degree of merging two of
the original face pairs. In the low physical difference
condition there was a
a)
small
amount
of
physical
difference
between the two base
picture (Figure 3a); in
the medium physical
difference condition, the
b)
base pictures
were
moderately
different
(Figure 3b); and in the
high physical difference
condition, the base
c)
pictures were highly
different (Figure 3c).
Two sets of base
pictures were randomly
selected at each level of
physical difference and
were combined with
Figure 3: The three levels of
two original pictures in
physical difference— low (a),
each pair, yielding 12
medium (b), and high (c) used
triads for each pair (a
in the similarity judgment task.
total of 60 triads = 5
In this example, the dissimilar
face pairs × 12 triads).
picture is seen on the right.
Procedure Participants were shown 60 triads of pictures,
one at a time, and judged which base picture within the triad
was more similar to the target image by pressing either the
right or left arrow key on the keyboard. The order of
presenting the stimuli and the left-right location of placing
the dissimilar base pictures were determined randomly. The
experiment took approximately 15 minutes to complete.

Figure 4 summarizes the results in Experiment 1. There was
a significant main effect of label condition: F (4, 176) =
4.49, MSE = .03, p = .002, 2 = .09. Individually, the belieflabel (M = .10), food label (M = .09), and disease label (M =
.11) demonstrated a significant effect when compared to the
no label condition (M = .18): belief label vs. no label, t (76)
= 3.76, SE = .02, p < .001, d = .85; food label vs. no label, t
(72) = 5.66, SE = .02, p < .001, d = 1.32; and disease label
vs. no label: t (71) = 4.13, SE = .02, p < .001, d = .97. The
last name label condition (M = .13), however, showed no

Figure 4. The proportion of participants selecting the
dissimilar image of the base pair pictures according to label
type in Experiment 1. The error bars represent two SE units
calculated from each condition
significant difference when compared to the no label
condition (M = .18), t (71) = 1.59., SE = .03, p > .10, d =
.37.
Physical similarity played a role in judgments. Labels
influenced similarity judgments of faces more in the low
physical difference condition than the medium and high
physical difference conditions. In the low physical
difference condition, all labels produced a significant effect
compared to the no-label condition, ts > 2.33, ps < .01, ds >
.60. In the medium physical difference condition, the food
label and disease labels produced significant effects when
compared to the no label condition: ts > 2.33, ps < .01,
while the belief and last name conditions did not, ts < 2.33,
ps > .01. In the high physical difference condition, the
disease condition was significantly different compared to
the no label condition, t (65) = 3.16, SE = .06, p = .002, d =
.77, while other conditions were not, ts < 2.33, ps >.01.

1854

Discussion
Consistent with our hypothesis, labels attached to face
pictures modified participants’ judgments of similarity
considerably. When the target and dissimilar face pictures
had the different labels, the proportion of participants
selecting the dissimilar face pictures decreased dramatically.
The impact of the labels was particularly pronounced when
these labels conveyed some categorical information, such as
the types of food, disease, or belief that the people eat, have,
or follow. When the labels represented the last names of the
people, the effect of labels diminished considerably,
supporting the view that the distortion of race perception
occurs especially when labels are associated with
categorical information.
Because such an effect was present primarily when labels
conveyed categorical information, we suggest that the
distortion of face perception is linked to the general
mechanism of categorical perception. Experiment 2 tested
this idea further.

Design The design of Experiment 2 was the same as
Experiment 1 except that the target face in each slide shared
the same label as its least similar base face (Figure 1c).

Results
Consistent with our hypothesis, our results show that
category information, even though they were only indirectly
related to race, can affect judgment of Hispanic and White
faces.
Figure 5 summarizes the results of Experiment 2. There
was a significant main effect of label condition: F (4, 177) =
4.50, MSE = .16, p = .002, 2 = .09. Specifically, the belieflabel condition (M = .36), the food-label condition (M = .33)
and the disease-label condition (M = .32) demonstrated
significant effects when compared to the no-label condition

Experiment 2
The results from Experiment 1 suggest that labels attached
to face pictures can modify people’s perception of
similarity. In Experiment 1, all dissimilar face pictures
carried the different labels as the target picture (Figure 1b);
as a result, the difference between the two face pictures
(target and dissimilar base pictures) was exaggerated
considerably. If, as hypothesized, the categorical labels
attached to the face pictures are indeed responsible for the
modified perception faces, then the labels can also create the
perception of “sameness.” In other words, if the dissimilar
face pictures carry the same label as the target picture then
the dissimilar face pictures should be perceived as more
similar to the target picture. This was tested in Experiment
2. The only difference between Experiment 1 and 2 was the
assignment of the labels. In Experiment 2, the labels of the
base pictures were simply swapped so that the dissimilar
face pictures and the target picture had the same label
(Figure 1c). In Experiment 2, when compared to the nolabel condition, the proportion of participants selecting the
dissimilar face pictures should increase considerably when
the dissimilar face pictures and the target picture have the
same label. This phenomenon should occur primarily in the
belief-label, food-label and disease-label conditions, but not
when in the last-name condition.

Method
Participants A total of 182 undergraduate students
participated in this experiment for course credit. They were
randomly assigned to one of five conditions: no-label
(n=34), belief-label (n=40), food-label (n=38), disease-label
(n=33), and last-name-label (n=37) conditions.
Materials and Procedure The materials and procedure
used in Experiment 2 were identical to those described in
Experiment 1.

Figure 5. The proportion of participants selecting the
dissimilar image of the base pair pictures according to label
type in Experiment 2. The error bars represent two SE units
calculated from each condition
(M = .17): belief-label vs. no-label, t (72) = 4.05, SE = .05, p
< .001, d = .95; food-label vs. no-label, t (70) = 3.18, SE =
.05, p < .005, d = .75; disease-label vs. no-label, t (65) =
3.11, SE = .05, p < .005, d = .76. The last name label (M =
.22), however, showed no significance when compared to
the no label condition (M = .17); t (69) = 1.84, SE = .03, p =
.07, d = .44. There was no interaction effect between the
label condition and the physical difference: F (8, 354) = .74,
MSE = .01, p = .66, 2 = .02.
The belief, food, and disease conditions all showed
significance at each level of physical difference when
compared to the no label condition: ts > 2.33, ps < .01, ds >
.60. Just as in the between subject analysis, the last-name
label produced null effects across all levels of physical
difference: ts < 2.00, ps > .05.

Discussion
As in Experiment 1, labels attached to the face pictures in
Experiment 2 modified participants’ judgments of similarity
considerably. Again, the impact of labels was particularly

1855

pronounced when the labels conveyed certain categorical
information such as the types of food, belief and disease that
people eat, follow, and have. The effect of labels was
reduced dramatically when the labels were associated with
the names of people. In Experiment 2, the target and
dissimilar face pictures had the same labels (Figure 1c). As
a result, the proportion of participants selecting the
dissimilar face pictures as similar to target pictures
increased dramatically. These results indicate that the effect
of the categorical labels is bi-directional. Categorical labels
can create a sense of difference and a sense of proximity.
These changes occurred primarily when labels were
associated with the types of food, disease, and belief that
people have (or eat) but not when labels were associated
with the last names of the people.
Together, these experiments further support the view that
the meaning attached to these labels, not labels themselves,
modifies our perception of similarity both positively and
negatively by enhancing the sense of similarity and
difference depending on whether stimuli carry the same or
different labels.

General Discussion
Our results indicate that categorical information influences
the participants’ judgments of similarity. In Experiment 1,
participants chose the dissimilar face significantly less often
when the target and dissimilar face pictures had different
labels. In Experiment 2, participants chose the dissimilar
faces more often when the target and dissimilar face pictures
had the same labels. The impact of the labels was negligible
when the labels were associated with the last names of
people. These results suggest that categorical information
given to these labels were indeed responsible for the
modified perception of similarity. This modified perception
likely arose from some general mechanism underlying the
categorical perception effect (Goldstone, 1994, 1995;
Livingston, Andrews, & Harnad, 1998; Newell & Bulthoff,
2002; Roberson, Davies, & Davidoff, 2000).
Previous research has focused on race-specific cues to
distort racial perception (Eberhardt, Dasgupta, &
Banaszynski, 2003). Other research deliberately uses
racially related facial features to distort race perception
(MacLin & Malpass, 2003). Our study, which uses both
White and Hispanic faces, extends previous results by
demonstrating that perceptions of race-oriented faces can be
distorted by attributing information that is not directly
related to racial cues. Meaningful categorical labels can
create a sense of similarity and difference depending on
whether two stimuli have the same or different labels. Some
category information seems to have greater impact than
others. For example, the belief labels and the food labels
were relatively stronger than the disease and last-name
labels. Although the reason behind these differences cannot
be determined based on these experiments, we speculate that
some categories of information held stronger weight
because of their behavior and preference implications

Gil Diesendruck and Heidi haLevi (2006) point out that
personality traits are the primary means by which
categorical distinctions and inferences are made because
these traits explain behavior and preferences (Yuill, 1992).
Food-labels, disease-labels, and belief-labels explicitly refer
to such behaviors and preferences, while last-name-labels
do not suggest that two people will behave in the same
manner.
This reaction to labels and assumptions based on these
traits may be related to naïve theories that people form in
everyday situations (Chao, Chen, Roisman, & Hong, 2007;
Gelman, 2003). It is suggested that people tend to assume
there is an essence underlying observed physical
characteristics of people, animals, and things (Ahn, 2001;
Chao et al., 2007; Gelman, 2003; Medin & Ortony, 1989;
Murphy & Medin, 1985). Such essence can be biological
characteristics (diseases or DNA, Medin & Atran, 2004),
core beliefs (e.g., religion, Cairns, Jenworthy, Campbell &
Hewstone, 2007), or behavioral habits (Gelman & Heyman,
1999). The results of our experiments demonstrated how
easily people construct naïve theory and how powerful the
influence of the naïve theory is. The simple label-meaning
manipulation used on our experiments was powerful enough
to alter their perception of people. Our results, combined
with previous research, suggest categorical information is
important when makes judgments about people.

References
Ahn, W. (2001). Dissociation between categorization and
similarity judgment; differential effect of causal status on
feature weights. In U. Hahn & M. Ramscar (Eds.),
Similarity and categorization (pp. 87-107). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Bernstein, M. J., Young, S. G., & Hugenberg, K. (2007).
The Cross-Category Effect: Mere social categorization is
sufficient to elicit an own-group bias in face recognition.
Psychological Science, 18, 709-712.
Cairns, E., Jenworthy, J., Campbell, A., & Hewstone, M.
(2007). The role of in-group identification, religious
group membership and intergroup conflict in moderating
in-group and out-group affect. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 45(4), 701-716.
Chao, M. M., Chen, J., Roisman, G., & Hong, Y.-y. (2007).
Essentializing race: Implications for bicultural
individuals' cognition and physiological reactivity.
Psychological Science, 18, 341-348.
Diesendruck, G., HaLevi, H., (2006). The Role of
Language, Appearance, and Culture in Children’s Social
Category-Based Induction. Child Development, 77(3),
539-553.
Eberhardt, J., Dasgupta, N., & Banaszynski, T. L. (2003).
Believing is seeing: The effects of racial labels and
implicit beliefs on face perception. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 29, 360–370.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.

1856

Gelman, S. A., & Heyman, G. D. (1999). Carrot-eaters and
creature-believers: The effects of Lexicalization on
children's
inferences
about
social
categories.
Psychological Science, 10(6), 489-493.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Influences of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123(2), 178-200.
Goldstone, R. L. (1995). Effects of categorization on color
perception. Psychological Science, 6(5), 298-304.
Hamilton, D. L., & Sherman, J. W. (1994). Stereotypes. In
R. S. Wyer, Jr., & T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of social
cognition (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 1-68). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kashima, Y. (2000). Maintaining cultural stereotypes in the
serial reproduction of narratives. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 26, 594-604.
Kikutani, M., Roberson, D. & Hanley, J.R. (2008) What's in
the name? Categorical Perception of unfamiliar faces can
occur through labeling. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
15, 787-794
Kunda, Z., Miller, D. T., & Claire, T. (1990). Combining
social concepts: The role of causal reasoning, Cognitive
Science, 14, 551-557.
Levin, D.T. (2000). Race as a visual feature: Using visual
search and perceptual discrimination tasks to understand
face categories and the cross-race recognition deficit.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 129 , 559574.
Livingston, K. R., Andrews, J. K., & Harnad, S. (1998).
Categorical perception effects induced by category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24(3), 732-753.
MacLin, O. H., & Malpass, R. (2003). The ambiguous-race
face illusion. Perception, 32, 249–252.
Macrae, C.N., Milne, A.B., 7 Bodenhausen, G.V. (1994).
Stereotypes and enery-saving devices: A peek inside the
cognitive toolbox. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 66, 37-47.
Macrae, C.N., Stangor, C. & Hewstone, M. (Eds.) (1996).
Stereotypes and stereotyping. New York: Guilford.
Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (2004). The native mind:
Biological categorization and reasoning in development
and across cultures. Psychological Review, 111(4), 960983.
Medin, D., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and Analogical Reasoning (pp. 179 - 195).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Michel C., Rossion, H. J., Chung, C. H., & Caldara, R.
(2006b). Holistic processing is finely tuned for faces of
one’s own race. Psychological Science, 17(7), 608-615.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92(3),
289-316.

Newell, F. N., & Bulthoff, H. H. (2002). Categorical
Perception of familiar objects. Cognition, 85, 113-143.
Roberson, D., Davies, I., & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color
categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a stone-age culture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129(3), 369-398.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133(2), 166-188.
Tajfel, H., & Wilkes, A. L. (1963). Classification and
quantitative judgment. British Journal of Psychology, 54,
101-114.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. E. (2001). Seeing pink
elephants: Fourteen-month-olds’ interpretations of novel
nouns and adjectives. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 217-242.
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12- to 13month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29(3), 257-302.
Yamauchi, T. (2005). Labeling bias and categorical
induction: Generative aspects of category information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 31, 538-553.
Yamauchi, T. (2008) Linking syntax and inductive
reasoning: Categorical labeling and generic noun phrases.
Psychologia.51, 1-13.
Yamauchi, T. (2009). Finding abstract commonalties of
category members. Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence. 21 (3), 155-180.
Yamauchi, T., Kohn, N., & Yu, N. Y. (2007). Tracking
mouse movement in feature inference: Category labels are
different from feature labels. Memory & Cognition,
5(852-863).
Yamauchi, T., Love, B. C., & Markman, A. B. (2002).
Learning nonlinearly separable categories by inference
and classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 28(3), 585-593.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (2000). Learning
categories composed of varying instances: The effect of
classification, inference, and structural alignment.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 64-78.
Yamauchi, T., & Yu, N. Y. (2008). Category labels versus
feature labels: Category labels polarize inferential
predictions. Memory & Cognition, 36(3), 544-553.
Yu, N., Yamauchi, T., & Schumatcher, J. (2008).
Rediscovering symbols: The role of category labels in
similarity judgment. Journal of Cognitive Science, 9, 89109.
Yu, N.. Yamauchi, T., Yang, H, Chen, Y. & GutierrezOsuna, R., (2010). Feature selection for inductive
generalization. Cognitive Science, 34, 1574-1593.
Yuill, N. (1992). Children’s conception of personality traits.
Human Development, 35, 265 – 279.

1857

