UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Argument Homogeneousness and Structure Simplicity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94n065rm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Zhang, Niina Ning

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Argument Homogeneousness and Structure Simplicity
Niina Ning Zhang (Lngnz@ccu.edu.tw)
Graduate Institute of Linguistics, National Chung Cheng University
168 University Rd., Min-Hsiung, Chia-Yi 62102 Taiwan

Abstract
Subjects and objects are arguments of verbs. They show
either homogeneous or heterogeneous properties, with respect
to time. The subject of sleep and the subject of fall are
homogeneous and heterogeneous, respectively. In this
research, we develop a novel analysis of the organization of
arguments of various types of verbs. We argue that
heterogeneous arguments are hosted in two levels of Verb
Phrase, whereas homogeneous ones are hosted in one level of
Verb Phrase. Therefore, homogeneous events and states are
encoded in simpler syntactic structures than heterogeneous
ones in natural language.
Keywords: argument; verb, syntax; language, simplicity;
homogeneous; heterogeneous; transitive; intransitive.

1. Introduction
The goal of this study is to try to explore the cognitive view
that different conceptualizations will lead to different
syntactic structures and that the complexity of the former
should correlate with the complexity of the latter. This study
develops Klein’s (2010) new theory of the arguments of
verbs and proposes a novel analysis of the structures of the
arguments of various kinds of verbs. Instead of the
traditional triple division of transitive verbs (e.g., kiss),
unaccusative intransitive verbs (e.g., arrive), and unergative
intransitive verbs (e.g., sleep), we argue that verbs are first
divided into homogeneous and heterogeneous ones, and
then each type is further divided into transitive and
intransitive subtypes. The two major types are different in
the number of Verb Phrases (VPs) are involved in the
syntactic structures: homogenous ones have only one-layer
of VP, while heterogeneous ones have two-layers of VP.
Therefore, in our understanding, homogeneous events and
states are encoded in simpler syntactic structures than
heterogeneous ones.
We will introduce a new classification of verbs based on
Klein (2010), then present our proposal, in Section 2 and 3,
respectively. In Section 4, we list our supporting facts.
Finally, in Section 5, we make some general remarks about
this new syntactic analysis.

have a source state and a target state, and thus they are not
homogeneous in the event or state, e.g., the subject of fall.
Homogeneous Intransitive (HOI) verbs have one
argument with respect to one state, e.g., sleep, dance,
vibrate, be.
Homogeneous Transitive (HOT) verbs have two
arguments with respect to the same state over time, e.g.,
weigh with a measure phrase, resemble, admire.
Heterogeneous Intransitive (HEI) verbs have one
argument with source time state and target time state, e.g.,
die, (intransitive) drown, rise, remain.
Heterogeneous Transitive (HET) verbs have two
arguments — one at one time state, one with source time
state and target time state. The state of the one-time state
argument can overlap the source or target time states of the
other argument, e.g., leave, close, slay, (transitive) drown,
observe.
We summarize the classification in the following table (AS
= Argument-State; Ss = source time state; St = target time
state):
(1) Common AT-structures (cf. Klein 2010: 1231)
type

description

typical examples

HOI

1 argument at
one state

sleep, dance,
vibrate, be

HOT

2 arguments at
the same state

weigh with a
measure phrase

HEI

1 argument with
source state and
target state

HET

2 arguments—1
at one state, 1
with a source
state and a target
state.

die,
(intransitive)
drown, rise,
remain
leave, close,
slay, (transitive)
drown, observe

AS
skeleton
A
|
S
A1 A2
S
A
1
Ss St
A1 A2
|2
Ss
St

2. Classification of Verbs
Based on the homogeneousness of the properties of an
argument with respect to time, Klein (2010) discusses
certain types of verb stems in their default readings. As
pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, Klein’s term time
should be understood as state. I thus use the term state rather
than Klein’s term time. There are one-state arguments,
which are homogeneous in the event or state, such as the
subject of laugh. There are also two-state arguments, which

3. The Structure-Positions of Arguments
A well-adopted assumption is that all verbs are represented
by a two-layer verbal projection: a vP to host the external
argument of a transitive verb, or the unique external
argument of an unergative verb, and a VP to host the
internal argument of either a transitive verb or an

2599

unaccusative verb. The assumption does not consider the
contrast between HO and HE verbs at all. All external
arguments are assumed to have the same syntactic position,
i.e., Spec of vP.
We propose that arguments of the four types of verbs are
base-generated as in (2).
(2)

a. HOI: [VP V Argument]
VP
3
V
Argument
b. HOT: [VP Argument 1 [V Argument 2]]
VP
3
Argument 1
V’
3
V
Argument 2

constructions (4.1); the structural richness of HE
constructions (4.2); and the special contrasts between HO
and HE verb constructions (4.3).

4.1 Structure Integrity
All of the arguments that support severing the subject from
VP or projecting of a vP shell (Marantz, 1984; Larson, 1988;
Kratzer, 1996) come from HE, rather than HO,
constructions. Typical tests are pseudo-cleft and the do-so
replacement.
4.1.1 Pseudo-cleft Unlike HE verbs, HO verbs fail in
pseudo-cleft (Zucchi, 1998: 349) (* means the sentence is
not acceptable).
(3) a. What John did was eat an apple.
[HE]
b. *What John did was resemble his father. [HO]
4.1.2 vP-proform do so Unlike HE verbs, HO verbs fail in
replacement by the vP-proform do so (Ross, 1970; cf. Stroik
2001: 367).

c. HEI: [vP v [VP V Argument]]
vP
3
v
VP
3
V
Argument
d. HET: [vP Argument 1 v [VP V Argument 2]]
vP
3
Argument 1
v’
3
v
VP
3
V’
3
V
Argument 2
One can see that HE verbs have vP, whereas HO ones do
not, regardless of how many arguments occur. In (2b), the
two arguments are hosted in the same VP; but in (2d), the
two arguments are hosted in vP and VP, respectively.
In the structures for HO verbs, only one-layer of VP is
projected, and there are maximally two positions for
arguments: one is at Spec and the other is at Complement of
V. In contrast, in the structure for HE verbs, there are two
layers of VP, and thus one more position is available for an
additional argument.

4. Supporting Facts
Three kinds of evidence supports our proposal in (2): the
integrity of the verbs and the arguments of HO

(4) a. Chris is leaving now, and Sam is doing so too. [HE]
b. *Mary likes Sam, and Chris does so too. [HO]
c. *The shoes cost 5 dollars, and the gloves do so too.
[HO]
The two restrictions on HOT verbs are covered by (2b),
where the whole VP is composed of two arguments and the
verb. In the structure, the combination of V and Argument 2
is just part of a VP, which lacks syntactic visibility
(Chomsky 1995). The combination is not a vP, either, since
vP does not exist for this type of verbs. Therefore, it may
not be replaced by do so.

4.2 Structure Richness
HE constructions have more argument positions than those
of HO constructions. This can be seen in the following four
facts.
4.2.1 Double object constructions Why is there no double
object or applicative HO verb (5)? If only HE verbs may
host their arguments in two layers of VP, the contrast is
explained. (2b) does not have enough positions for three
arguments.
(5) a.
b.
(6) a.
b.

I gave him the clothes. (HET)
*I like him the clothes. (HOT)
Intended: ‘I like him with respect to his clothes.’
John rented Bill a room. (HET)
*John resembles Bill the eyes.
Intended: ‘John looks like Bill with respect to their
eyes.’

4.2.2 Object control constructions There is no HO objectcontrol construction, which has two internal arguments: a
nominal and a clause.

2600

(7) a.
b.

Mary forced John to feed the baby.
*Mary admired John to feed the baby.
Intended; ‘Mary admired John for his feeding of
the baby.’

4.2.3 Expansion from HO to HE constructions Many
verbs may occur in either HO or HE constructions (e.g.
Dowty 1979: 60; Rosen 1999). It is easy to change an
otherwise HO construction into a HE one by adding a
delimitable element. But we do not add material to a HE
structure to change it into a HO one (Thompson 2006: 218).
HE structures are thus richer than HO ones.
(8) ADDITION OF DIRECT OBJECT
a. Bill ran (*in 5 minutes).
[HO]
b. Bill ran the mile in 5 minutes. [HE]
(9) ADDITION OF INDIRECT OBJECT
a. That book costs three dollars.
[HO]
b. That book has cost me three dollars. [HE]
(10) ADDITION OF COGNATE OBJECT
a. Terry sang (*in an hour).
[HO]
b. Terry sang the ballad in an hour. [HE]
(11) ADDITION OF X’S WAY EXPRESSION
a. Terry sang (*in an hour).
[HO]
b. Terry sang her way to the Met in 10 years. [HE]
(12) ADDITION OF FAKE REFLEXIVE
a. Terry sang (*in an hour).
[HO]
b. Terry sang herself to sleep in an hour. [HE]
(13) ADDITION OF RESULTATIVE
a. Terry ran (*in an hour).
[HO]
b. Terry ran us ragged in an hour. [HE]
Note that heterogeneous events can be repeated (Mary
dried the dishes in an hour. vs. Mary dried the dishes for
hours before being released from duty) (Thompson 2006:
218; Ramchand 2008: 31). It is just like all nominals can be
counted if an appropriate unit is identified (two drops of
water as well as two books).

From the above citation, we can see that the event
reported in (48a) is bounded and thus the sentence is a HE
construction, whereas the event reported in (48b) is
unbounded and thus the sentence is a HO construction.
Presumably, formatives such as meg- are licensed by vP,
and thus the HE reading correlates with a richer structure.

4.3 Special Contrasts Between HO and HE Verbs
Three further contrasts between HO and HE verbs are
reported as below.
4.3.1 Intransitive verbs exhibit HO-HE contrasts Only
HEI verbs allow the expletive there, but HOI verbs may not,
as seen in (14).
(14) a. There arrived a train in the station.
[HE]
b. *There laughed a man in the hallway. [HO]
This contrast can be captured by the assumption that the
expletive is base-generated in vP only (Deal, 2009). (2c),
but not (2a), has vP, although both are for intransitive verbs.
4.3.2 Transitive verbs exhibit HO-HE contrasts We have
seen the contrasts between HOT and HET in English in (4).
Moreover, in some languages (e.g. Finnish, Hungarian) only
HE structures have accusative case marker. The following
Finnish examples are cited from (Hopper & Thompson 1980:
262):
(15)

4.2.4 Verb affix marking Certain formatives mark the HE
status of the verb, and their absence marks the HO status,
e.g., meg- in Hungarian (Hopper & Thompson 1980: 267)
(O means object):

In (15a), the presence of the ACC (accusative) marker
with the direct object kirjeen ‘letter’ indicates a bound event:
a letter was created at the target time, and thus the event was
not homogeneous. In (15b), however, there is no ACC
marker with the direct object, and the event could be
homogeneous. See Rosen (1999) for more such examples.
The contrast can be captured in the contrast between (2b)
and (2d): the overt accusative case marking is licensed by
vP (cf. Chomsky 1995). Only in (2d), which is for HET, vP
is projected and thus the ACC marker can be licensed. Since

2601

there is no vP in (2b), which is for HOT, no ACC marker
can be licensed in the structure.
4.3.3 The prefix re- Certain rules apply to HE constructions
only, but not HO ones, regardless of whether the verb is
transitive or intransitive. The English prefix re- occurs with
HE verbs only, as seen in (16) (Horn, 1980). Since again
behaves differently, the issue is not semantic.
(16) a.
b.
c.
d.

The door reopened.
I reopened the door.
John {*resmiled/smiled again}.
*John re-admired his father.

[HE]
[HE]
[HO]
[HO]

Note that re- scopes over either the HE root or the
affected nominal (Marantz, 2005). But the ambiguity is
independent of the HE restriction.
4.3.4 The time frame preposition phrases Preposition
phrases like in an hour are licensed by HE verbs, regardless
of whether the verb is transitive or intransitive, as seen in
(17). Thompson (2006) shows that such PPs are licensed by
a projection higher than VP. Their absence in HO
constructions indicates that the structure of HO
constructions are lower and thus simpler than that of HE
ones.
(17) a. John walked to the store in two hours.
b. John destroyed the toy in two hours.
c. *John slept in two hours.
d. *John admired his father in two hours.

[HE]
[HE]
[HO]
[HO]

5. General Remarks
In this proposed new analysis of the time-argument
structures of various types of verbs, the structures of
homogeneous eventuality constructions are simpler than
those of heterogeneous ones.
A parallel analysis of noun constructions is found in Borer
(2005) and Zhang (2012). In Borer’s analysis, CLP or DivP
is projected for count nominals, but not for mass nominals.
In Zhang (2012), DelimitP is projected for non-mass
nominals, but it is absent in the structures of mass nominals.
In both analyses, the structures of mass nominals are
simpler than those of count nouns. The former shows
homogeneousness, whereas the latter does not.
The significance of this study is that, like Borer’s (2005)
and Zhang’s (2012) studies of nominal structures, our
research of verbal structures here also show that the
perceived homogeneousness in our understanding of the
world, including events and individuals, correlates with the
simplicity of linguistic structures.

Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Deal, A. (2009). The origin and content of expletives:
evidence from “selection”. Syntax 12: 285-323.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague Grammar,
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Hopper, P. & S. Thompson. (1980). Transitivity in grammar
and discourse. Language 56: 251-299.
Horn, L. (1980). Affixation and the Unaccusative
Hypothesis. CLS 16: 134-146.
Klein, W. (2010). On times and arguments. Linguistics 48:
1221-1253.
Kratzer, A. (1996). Servering the external argument from its
verb. In Rooyck, J. and L. Zaring (eds.) Phrase
Structure and the Lexicon. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Larson, R. (1988). On the double object construction,
Linguistic Inquiry 19: 335-91.
Marantz, A. (1984). On the nature of grammatical relations.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marantz, A. (2005). Rederived Generalizations. Ms. MIT.
Ramchand, G. (2008). Verb meaning and the lexicon.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rosen, S. (1999). The syntactic representation of linguistics
events. GLOT International 4.2: 3-11.
Ross, J. (1970). Act. In D. Davidson & G. Harmon (eds.)
Semantics of natural language, 70-126, Dordrecht:
Reidel.
Stroik, T. (2001). On the light verb hypothesis. Linguistic
Inquiry 32: 362-369.
Thompson, E. (2006). The structure of bounded events.
Linguistic Inquiry 37: 211-228.
Zhang, N. (2012). Numeral Classifier Structures.
lingBuzz/001197. http://ling.auf.net/lingBuzz/001197.
Zucchi, S. (1998). Aspect shift. In S. Rothstein (ed.) Events
and Grammar, 349-370, Dordrecht: Kluwer.

References
Borer, H. (2005). In name only. New York: Oxford
University Press.

2602

