UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beyond one’s own understanding: How text comprehensibility affects laypeople’s
decision about scientific claims

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3323j404

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Scharrer, Lisa
Britt, M. Anne
Stadtler, Marc
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beyond one’s own understanding: How text comprehensibility affects laypeople’s
decision about scientific claims
Lisa Scharrer (lisa.scharrer@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21,
48149 Münster, Germany

M. Anne Britt (britt@niu.edu)
Psychology Department, Northern Illinois University, 363 Psychology-Math Building,
Dekalb, IL60115, USA

Marc Stadtler (marc.stadtler@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21,
48149 Münster, Germany

Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21,
48149 Münster, Germany

Abstract
The study investigated whether the facilitating effect of high
text comprehensibility on lay recipients’ inclination to rely on
their own decision about scientific claims is mitigated if the
presented information is controversial. Moreover, it was
assessed whether the impact of both information features is
mediated by perceptions of topic complexity. Lay readers
read medical text information varying in comprehensibility
and controversiality and indicated their agreement strength
and confidence with contained claims. Results revealed that
participants’ reliance on their own agreement decision was
stronger after reading comprehensible than incomprehensible
texts, but this difference was larger in case of uncontroversial
than controversial information. However, these effects were
not mediated by perceptions of topic complexity.
Keywords:
knowledge
evaluation;
comprehensibility; controversiality

expertise;

text

Introduction
Laypeople often find themselves in situations where they
have to come to a judgment about the veracity of sciencebased knowledge claims, e.g. when they need to decide
whether to undergo a certain medical treatment. The ease of
accessing information on the Web has eliminated problems
regarding the availability of science knowledge that might
act as a basis for such decisions. The great challenge lies
instead in the evaluation of accessed information and the
knowledge claims they contain regarding their acceptability
(Mason, Ariasi & Boldrin, 2011). The reason why this
evaluation presents such a challenge is that we all are
laypeople with regards to most science domains and lack the
background knowledge and specialized training usually
required for making well-founded decisions about
knowledge claims. Consequently, laypeople are generally
not in a position to evaluate claims by themselves but rather
depend on experts for decision support (Bromme, Kienhues
& Porsch, 2010; Keil, 2008). Hence, when confronted with

the necessity to decide about a science-based claim,
laypeople can choose between two major courses of action:
They can either rely on their own judgment despite their lay
status or they can outsource the decision to an expert.
However, given their own epistemic limitations, relying on
experts is most often the appropriate and sensible strategy.
If laypeople nevertheless rely on their own claim
decision, this should be reflected in their inclination to be
easily persuaded by provided claim-related information that
contains apparently sound arguments. Only if they see
themselves in a position to decide about information quality
should recipients make strong judgments in favor of a claim.
Conversely, they should be more hesitant to strongly agree
if they do not feel ready to decide. In addition, laypeople’s
willingness to rely on their own judgments should be
reflected in high confidence in their claim decision, i.e.
strong trust in their own judgment and a weak desire to hand
over the decision to an expert (Scharrer, Bromme, Britt &
Stadtler, 2012).

Text Features influence Laypeople’s Reliance on
their own Decisions
Previous research indicates that laypeople’s readiness to rely
on their own decision about the veracity of science-based
claims can be influenced by features of the text information
they read about the topic.
Information Comprehensibility One such text feature is
the comprehensibility of contained information. In popular
scientific reports addressed to the lay public, information is
frequently simplified in order to make it understandable for
the audience (Wagner, Elejabarrieta & Lahnsteiner, 1995).
Such simplification can be achieved through enhancement
of comprehensibility, e.g. by translating technical terms. But
while an increase in comprehensibility facilitates
laypeople’s ability to follow what is being said, it may also

965

raise their inclination to rely on their own decisions. A
layperson’s experience of easily understanding information
about a scientific topic may induce the impression that they
are not in need of expert support to reach a decision about
related information. Previous findings support this
assumption by showing that science-based information
simplified by means of increased comprehensibility leads
laypeople to more strongly and confidently agree with
claims than incomprehensible information (Eagly, 1974;
Scharrer et al., 2012).
Hence, while it may be worthwhile to simplify
information for the sake of allowing the lay public to gain
insight into topics important for their daily lives, such
simplification also comprises the risk of making readers
underestimate their own dependence on experts for decision
advice. The question arises whether and how it is possible to
inform laypeople about scientific topics without tempting
them to overconfidently rely on their own derived decisions,
i.e. whether there are further information characteristics that
can prevent the observed comprehensibility effect.
Information Controversiality A textual feature that might
counteract the influence of comprehensibility on laypeople’s
reliance on their own decisions is information
controversiality. Due to the evolving and discursive nature
of scientific knowledge production, views on a particular
phenomenon held by different scientists are frequently
conflicting. Confronting lay recipients with the
controversiality of a particular topic might alert them that
judging related claims is generally a highly demanding task,
independently from whether related text information is easy
or difficult to comprehend. The notion that encountering
controversies might decrease recipients’ persuasion is in
accordance with previous findings showing readers to be
more hesitant to agree with consistently supported than with
controversial claims (Kienhues, Stadtler & Bromme, 2011;
Yaniv, Choshen-Hillel & Milyavsky, 2009).
However, as of yet it has not been investigated whether
the impact of information controversiality on recipients’
persuasion interacts with the influence of information
comprehensibility and thus can prevent the persuasive effect
of high comprehensibility. Furthermore, it is still unclear
which cognitive processes underlie the impact of
comprehensibility and controversiality on recipients’
reliance on their own decisions.

Possible Mechanism underlying the Influence of
Comprehensibility and Controversiality
On a theoretical level it is conceivable that the effects of
both comprehensibility and controversiality on laypeople’s
decision readiness are mediated by recipient’s assessment of
the epistemic complexity of the topic. If laypeople
encounter simplified texts tailored for them to comprehend,
their understanding of the text may mislead them to consider
the subject matter itself as less complicated than it really is
(cf. Goldman & Bisanz, 2002; Scharrer et al., 2012).
Consequently, they may overestimate their actual insight

into the topic and their ability to appropriately evaluate the
provided information (cf. Keehner & Fischer, 2011).
Likewise,
laypeople
may
explain
information
controversiality with high epistemic complexity of the topic.
As a result of encountering a conflict, laypeople might
become attentive to the possibility that scientists can have
opposing views on the same phenomena, and hence that a
given claim might be valid only under specific
circumstances. Laypeople may then become aware that
reading the provided information does not equip them with
sufficient knowledge to confidently decide about related
claims.
However, the described mediating role of perceived topic
complexity would require that laypeople elaborate on the
epistemic demands of the problem at hand relative to their
own epistemic capabilities to determine whether or not they
can decide. Conversely, it is also possible that lay recipients
do not engage in such elaborate reflections but rather base
their judgment on intuitive or affective reactions. In light of
such alternative possibilities it remains an open empirical
question whether the influence of comprehensibility and
controversiality on laypeople’s decision behavior are indeed
mediated by perceived epistemic topic complexity.

The Present Study
The present study set out to pursue two goals. Firstly, we
aimed to assess whether laypeople’s increased reliance on
their own decision after reading comprehensible compared
to incomprehensible information is reduced if this
information contains conflicting rather than consistent
positions. Secondly, given the above considerations about
the possible mediating role of perceived topic complexity,
we aimed to gain insight into the processes by which
comprehensibility and controversiality exert their influence
on laypeople’s decision behavior. For this purpose, we
presented lay readers with argumentative text information
that varied in comprehensibility and controversiality.
With regards to the first goal, we expected that
comprehensible information would lead laypeople to rely
more on their own decision than incomprehensible
information if information is uncontroversial. However, we
assumed that this comprehensibility effect is mitigated or
even prevented if the received information is controversial.
Specifically, we hypothesized that laypeople agree more
strongly with a claim when reading comprehensible than
incomprehensible information but that this difference is
greater in case of uncontroversial than controversial
information (H1). Furthermore, we expected laypeople’s
decision confidence to be analogously influenced by
comprehensibility and controversiality. Decision confidence
should be reflected in laypeople’s respective preferences of
three decision strategies: Strategy A to decide by oneself
based on one’s knowledge after reading the information
should indicate high decision confidence, Strategy B to
decide by oneself but only after obtaining further content
information should indicate intermediate confidence, and
Strategy C to leave the decision to an expert should indicate

966

low decision confidence. Hence, we hypothesized that
laypeople find Strategy A more preferable after reading
comprehensible than incomprehensible texts, but that this
effect should be more pronounced in case of uncontroversial
than controversial information (H2a). Similarly, Strategy B
should be more popular after reading comprehensible than
incomprehensible texts, but this difference should be greater
in case of uncontroversial than controversial information
(H2b). Finally, incomprehensible texts should lead to a
greater preference of Strategy C than comprehensible texts
but this effect should be stronger if the information is
uncontroversial than controversial (H2c).
As to the second goal, we considered it possible that
laypeople’s impression of epistemic topic complexity
mediates the influence of comprehensibility and
controversiality on laypeople’s persuasion strength and
confidence.
Comprehensible
and
uncontroversial
information might facilitate the impression of the subject
matter being simple and straightforward, i.e. decrease
perceptions of epistemic complexity. As a result, laypeople
may regard themselves able to appropriately understand the
topic and may thus be inclined to rely on their own claim
decisions. However, we would assume no mediation effect
of topic complexity if laypeople’s determination of their
own decision readiness does not depend on elaborations of
epistemic demands. Since both possibilities are conceivable,
we formulated the following exploratory research question:
Is the influence of comprehensibility and controversiality on
claim agreement and agreement confidence mediated by
perceived epistemic topic complexity?

Method
The experiment was conducted using a 2x2 mixed design
with
the
within-participant
factor
information
comprehensibility (comprehensible vs. incomprehensible)
and the between-participant factor controversiality
(controversial vs. uncontroversial). In each condition,
participants were presented with texts about a medical issue
that were either comprehensible or incomprehensible and
controversial or uncontroversial, respectively. Eighty-eight
undergraduates of various majors at a German university
participated in the experiment (54 female; mean age = 22.81
years, SD = 4.39). To ensure participants’ lay status,
students of medicine, biology or related subjects were
excluded from participation. Moreover, the medical issues
addressed in the texts were fictitious in nature to ensure that
participants were unable to make informed decisions about
the contents based on their everyday knowledge and had no
strong prior attitudes about the topics.

Materials
Participants read a document (Document 1) containing a
particular medical knowledge claim (e.g. “Bouchard
arthrosis is caused by a deficiency of purinerase”) followed
by an explanation that described the mechanisms underlying
the proposed claim and supporting empirical evidence. In
addition, a second document (Document 2) was presented

consisting of a claim supported by empirical evidence.
Depending on the controversiality condition, Document 2
either contained a claim that was in conflict with Document
1 (e.g. “A lack of purinerase is not among the causes of
Bouchard arthrosis”) or a claim that did not render the
Document 1 information controversial (e.g. “A persistent
lack of folic acid is not among the causes of Bouchard
arthrosis”). The information contained in the documents was
furthermore comprehensible or incomprehensible. In the
incomprehensible conditions, both texts contained a large
number of unexplained technical terms, whereas in the
comprehensible conditions, technical jargon was translated
into words that should be understandable for laypeople (e.g.
“articulations” was translated to “joints”). All documents
were comparable in length (M = 142.67 words, SD = 44.66).
Before reading a document pair, participants were
confronted with a framing scenario in which a fictitious
friend was described as having a medical problem and, due
to their insecurity about the correctness of a particular
problem-related claim, asked the participant for advice. The
claim in question was the same that was later on stated and
supported in Document 1. Participants were then presented
with both text documents which they had allegedly found
during an Internet search and which were described as being
authored by different sources.

Dependent Measures1
Manipulation Check In order to verify that
comprehensibility had been manipulated as intended,
participants rated each document for perceived
comprehensibility on a Likert-scale from 1 (“very
incomprehensible”) to 7 (“very comprehensible”). Before
providing their ratings, participants were given a definition
of what we meant by comprehensibility. This definition
described information as comprehensible when readers
perceive the contents as clear and feel able to discriminate
essential from less important parts and to evaluate
information consistency.
Claim Agreement We assessed the extent to which
participants were persuaded by measuring their agreement
with the Document 1 claim after reading both documents.
For this purpose, participants indicated their agreement on a
1 (“I don’t agree at all”) to 7 (“I totally agree”) Likert-scale.
Confidence in the Agreement Decision Participants’
confidence in their ability to decide about the claim was
indicated by their agreement with three statements. Each
statement reflects a strategy which individuals might use to
come to a claim decision. Participants provided their
agreement with these strategies on three separate 1 to 7
Likert-scales (1: “don’t agree”, 7: “strongly agree”):
1

In addition to the above variables, further measures were
collected. However, due to space constraints we only report the
analysis of the presently listed measures.

967

(A) Trust in own agreement decision based on present
knowledge: Following this strategy means participants felt
ready to decide based on their knowledge after reading the
documents. Preference for this strategy was measured by
strength of agreement with the statement: “Based on my
present knowledge about the topic, I am confident to decide
whether it is correct that [Document 1 claim inserted]”.
(B) Trust in own decision based on further information:
This strategy indicates that participants felt principally able
to decide, but only after obtaining further topic information.
Preference for this strategy was measured through
agreement with the statement: “I want to obtain further
information about [topic] which I then use to decide myself
whether it is correct that [Document 1 claim inserted]”.
(C) Desire to consult an expert: Following this strategy
means that participants wished to leave the decision to an
expert. Preference for this strategy was measured by
agreement with the statement: “I want to obtain information
about experts in the field in order to identify a particular
competent and credible expert. I would then consult this
expert and rely on their judgment as to whether it is correct
that [Document 1 claim inserted]”.
Perceived Epistemic Complexity Participants’ perception
of epistemic topic complexity was assessed with six
adjective pairs in a 7-point scale semantic differential
format (very uncomplex─very complex, very multifaceted─very single-faceted, very unscientific─very
difficult,
very
scientific,
very
easy─very
uncomplicated─very complicated, very difficult to
comprehend─very easy to comprehend). Two additional
distracter pairs were presented to decrease transparency of
the measurement intent (very unimportant─very important,
very boring─very entertaining). Exploratory factor analyses
(ML-extraction, oblimin rotation) showed the target items to
load on one common factor in both comprehensibility
conditions (comprehensible: KMO = .88; χ2(15) = 350.71, p
< .001; 70.43% explained variance; incomprehensible:
KMO = .86; χ2(15) = 230.52, p < .001; 58.88% explained
variance). To determine a score of perceived topic
complexity, the arithmetic mean of the target items was
calculated. Internal consistency of the items was satisfactory
in both comprehensibility conditions (comprehensible:
Cronbach’s α = .91, incomprehensible: Cronbach’s α = .86).

Procedure
Participants received a paper booklet containing the text
materials and scales for collecting the dependent measures.
The booklet first presented a scenario describing the
fictitious friend’s problem. Participants then read the
document pair and provided their measures of claim
agreement and confidence in their agreement decision. This
was repeated four times, so that each participant read four
document pairs in total, two in each condition. Afterwards,
readers were asked to provide their ratings of
comprehensibility for each document they had read and to
evaluate the complexity of each addressed topic. Finally,

participants completed a demographic questionnaire before
being debriefed about the fictitious nature of the text
contents.

Results
The means and standard deviations of the collected
measures per experimental condition are shown in Table 1.

Manipulation Check
A mixed ANOVA on comprehensibility ratings with
document (Document 1 vs. Document 2) and
comprehensibility (comprehensible vs. incomprehensible)
as within-participant factors and controversiality
(controversial vs. uncontroversial) as between-participant
factor verified that texts designed as comprehensible were
perceived as more comprehensible than texts designed as
incomprehensible, F(1,85) = 648.11, p < .001, part. η2 = .88.
Moreover, Document 2 was overall rated more
comprehensible than Document 1 F(1,85) = 22.54, p < .001,
part. η2 = .21. The other main and interaction effects did not
reach significance, all F(1,85) < 2.91, ns.

Claim Agreement
Claim agreement scores were analyzed using a mixed
ANOVA
with
the
within-participant
factor
comprehensibility and the between-participant factor
controversiality. Results showed that laypeople agreed more
strongly with the Document 1 claim when the supporting
information was comprehensible than when it was
incomprehensible, F(1,86) = 9.34, p < .05, part. η2 = .10.
Moreover, agreement was higher in the uncontroversial than
the controversial condition, although this difference was
only marginally significant, F(1,86) = 3.41, p = .07, part. η2
= .04. In line with H1 a significant interaction of
comprehensibility and controversiality (F(1,86) = 4.89, p <
.05, part. η2 = .05) indicated that only in the uncontroversial
condition did participants agree more strongly with claims
from comprehensible than incomprehensible texts, t(43) =
3.52, p < .01. In contrast, there was no difference in
agreement between comprehensible and incomprehensible
texts in the controversial condition, t(43) = .64, ns.
Confidence in the Agreement Decision
To test H2a-c, we conducted separate mixed ANOVAs for
each decision strategy using comprehensibility as withinand controversiality as between-participant factor.
(1) Trust in own agreement decision based on present
knowledge This strategy was more popular in the
comprehensible than in the incomprehensible conditions,
F(1,86) = 51.08, p < .001, part. η2 = .37, as well as in the
uncontroversial compared to the controversial conditions,
F(1,86) = 23.74, p < .001, part. η2 = .22. Furthermore, and
in line with H2a, there was a significant
comprehensibility*controversiality interaction, F(1,86) =
6.43, p < .05, part. η2 = .07. This was due to the difference

968

Table 1: Means and standard deviations (in brackets) of the collected measures as a function of comprehensibility and
controversiality.

Condition
Compr./
uncontr.
Incompr./
uncontr.
Compr./
contr.
Incompr./
contr.

Comprehensibility
Doc.1
Doc.2

Claimagreement

5.80
(1.13)
2.05
(1.17)

5.93
(1.08)
2.38
(1.34)

4.53
(1.05)
3.90
(1.04)

5.57
(1.00)
1.78
(.80)

5.97
(1.05)
2.37
(1.30)

3.98
(.94)
3.88
(.621)

Decision based
on present
knowledge
3.30
(1.66)
2.10
(1.31)
1.90
(.94)
1.33
(.61)

between both comprehensibility conditions being larger
when the documents were uncontroversial than when they
were controversial.
(2) Trust in own decision based on further information
With regards to the popularity of this strategy results
revealed no significant main or interaction effects (all
F(1,86) < 1.26, ns), hence providing no support for H2b.
(3) Desire to consult an expert This strategy was shown to
be more popular in the incomprehensible than in the
comprehensible conditions, F(1,86) = 5.24, p < .05, part. η2
= .06. However, contrary to H2c, controversiality had no
influence on participants’ willingness to ask an expert, all
further F(1,86) < .97, ns.
Perceived Epistemic Complexity
To answer the research question whether the influence of
comprehensibility and controversiality on claim agreement
and agreement confidence was mediated by perceived
epistemic topic complexity, we conducted separate mediator
analyses for each combination of independent variable,
mediator variable and dependent variable following the
approach suggested by Baron and Kenny (1986) and Judd,
Kenny, and McClelland (2001). Results showed that of the
three preconditions necessary for a variable to act as a
mediator (1. the independent variable affects the assumed
mediator 2. the independent variable affects the dependent
variable, 3. the mediator affects the dependent variable) the
first two were fulfilled for most combinations, but the third
precondition was fulfilled in no case (all F(2,41) < 3.23, ns).
Hence, complexity perceptions do not appear to mediate the
observed comprehensibility and controversiality effects.

Discussion
By presenting medical laypeople with texts varying in
comprehensibility and controversiality, the present
experiment assessed whether the facilitating influence of
high comprehensibility on recipients’ reliance on their own
decision about scientific claims is mitigated by information

Decision
based on
further info.
5.16
(1.57)
5.25
(1.64)
4.99
(1.70)
4.82
(1.91)

Decision
through expert
advice
5.16
(1.87)
5.41
(1.65)
5.47
(1.80)
5.73
(1.73)

Epistemic
complexity
4.38
(1.03)
5.46
(.86)
4.22
(.92)
5.47
(.78)

controversiality. Moreover, the study was aimed to gain
insight into the possible process through which both text
features affect laypeople’s decision behavior by examining
the role of perceived epistemic topic complexity as a
potential mediator.
The results revealed that in line with our expectations and
previous research (Eagly, 1974; Scharrer et al., 2012), lay
recipients agreed more strongly with claims from
comprehensible than incomprehensible texts; however, this
difference occurred only when the information was
uncontroversial. In case of controversial information,
laypeople’s claim agreement was not affected by text
comprehensibility. It seems that encountering controversial
information makes laypeople more cautious to agree with a
claim even if the information is easy to comprehend.
Moreover, both comprehensibility and controversiality
affected laypeople’s decision confidence; however this
impact was manifested differently on the three decision
strategies. Similar to the state of affairs regarding claim
agreement, the strategy to decide based only on one’s
present knowledge was more popular after reading
comprehensible than incomprehensible texts, but this
influence of comprehensibility was diminished when
information was controversial. In contrast, none of the text
features had an effect on the strategy to decide based on
further information and only comprehensibility had an
impact on the strategy to ask an expert, with high
comprehensibility decreasing the desire for expert advice.
We assume that if information is incomprehensible,
laypeople are generally willing to consult an expert
regardless of controversiality. In case of comprehensible
controversial texts, laypeople feel possibly more encouraged
to determine which of both conflicting position is correct
due to their comprehension success, for instance by seeking
out further information. This might explain why their
willingness to ask an expert in this condition is not higher
than in case of comprehensible uncontroversial texts.
It is noteworthy that even when participants received
comprehensible and uncontroversial texts, ratings of their
willingness to ask an expert did not average below 5 on a
scale from 1 to 7 (7 indicating a strong willingness).

969

However, the observed influence of comprehensibility on
desire for expert advice suggests that a too strong
simplification of scientific contents may mislead lay
recipients to underestimate their dependence on experts.
As to our second goal, to get an insight into the possible
process
through
which
comprehensibility
and
controversiality affect laypeople’s reliance on their own
decisions, we found that the influence of neither information
feature is mediated by perceived topic complexity. It seems
that laypeople do not base their judgment of whether or not
to rely on their own decisions on reflections about epistemic
complexity. Perhaps the experience of fluently
comprehending information simply triggers positive
affective reactions, which then translate to more favorable
evaluations in general (Schwarz, 2004). However, this can
so far only be assumed, and the exact mechanisms that
underlie the influences of comprehensibility and
controversiality remain subject to further empirical
clarification.
In sum, the present findings largely confirm our
assumption of a combined influence of comprehensibility
and controversiality on laypeople’s reliance on their own
decisions. The results indicate that the facilitating influence
of comprehensibility on claim agreement found in previous
research is more pronounced if the information is
uncontroversial but seems to be reduced or even prevented
in case of controversial information. As to laypeople’s
confidence in their claim decision, the results are less
conclusive. While it appears that controversiality has a
moderating effect on the influence of comprehensibility
regarding laypeople’s trust in their own decision based on
current knowledge, this influence does not translate to their
preference of the decision strategy to consult an expert.
Finally, we found that perceived epistemic topic complexity
does not appear to act as a mediating factor of either the
observed comprehensibility or controversiality influence.
The results have practical implications by informing
about how scientific information can be optimally
communicated to the lay public. Although simplified
science reports have the advantage to provide lay recipients
insight into scientific issues, it is possible that based on such
easy-to-comprehend information laypeople become overly
ready to make own decisions, in spite of their lack of
background knowledge and training. The present results
suggest that when scientific findings are communicated to
laypeople, the inclusion of information about related
controversies can serve to weaken the comprehensibility
effect. As a result, laypeople are more likely to be prevented
from readily relying on their own claim evaluations and
might rather turn to a pertinent expert for support.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Jasmin Hettinger, Stephanie Sievers and
Nikolai Wystrychowski for their help with data collection.
This research was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), grant BR 1126/6-1.

References
Baron, R. & Kenny, D. (1986). The moderator-mediator
variable distinction in social psychological research:
Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 11731182.
Bromme, R., Kienhues, D. & Porsch, T. (2010). Who knows
what and who can we believe? Epistemological beliefs are
beliefs about knowledge (mostly) attained from others. In
L. Bendixen & F. Feucht (Eds.), Personal epistemology in
the classroom: Theory, research, and implications for
practice, Cambridge: University Press.
Eagly, A.H. (1974). Comprehensibility of persuasive
arguments as a determinant of opinion change. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 758-773.
Goldman, S.R., & Bisanz, G.L. (2002). Toward functional
analysis of scientific genres: Implications for
understanding and learning processes. In J. Otero, J.A.
Leon, & A.C. Graesser (Eds.), The psychology of science
text comprehension, Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Judd, C., Kenny, D. & McClelland, G. (2001). Estimating
and testing mediation and moderation in withinparticipant designs. Psychological Methods, 6, 115-134.
Keehner, M. & Fischer, M.H. (2011). Naive realism in
public perceptions of neuroimages. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 12, 118.
Keil, F. (2008). Getting to the truth: Grounding incomplete
knowledge. Brooklyn Law Review, 73, 1035-1052.
Kienhues, D., Stadtler, M. & Bromme, R. (2011). Dealing
with conflicting or consistent medical information on the
Web: When expert information breeds laypersons’ doubts
about experts. Learning and Instruction, 21, 193-204.
Mason, L., Ariasi, N. & Boldrin, A. (2011). Epistemic
beliefs in action: Spontaneous reflections about
knowledge and knowing during online information
searching and their influence on learning. Learning and
Instruction, 21, 137-151.
Scharrer, L., Bromme, R., Britt, M.A. & Stadtler, M.
(2012). The seduction of easiness: How science
depictions influence laypeople’s reliance on their own
evaluation of scientific information. Learning and
Instruction. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2011.11.004
Schwarz, N. (2004). Meta-cognitive experiences in
consumer judgment and decision making. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 14, 332-348.
Wagner, W., Elejabarrieta, F. & Lahnsteiner, I. (1995). How
the sperm dominates the ovum – Objectification by
metaphor in the social representation of conception.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 25, 671-688.
Yaniv, I., Choshen-Hillel, S. & Milyavsky, M. (2009).
Spurious consensus and opinion revision: Why might
people be more confident in their less accurate
judgments? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 558-563.

970

