UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Building Conceptual Dictionary for Providing Common Knowledge in the Integrated Narrative
Generation System

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/93j50363

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Oishi, Kensuke
Kurisawa, Yasunari
Kamada, Mami
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Building Conceptual Dictionary for Providing Common Knowledge in the
Integrated Narrative Generation System
Kensuke Oishi (g231g010@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University, 152-52 Sugo
Takizawa, Iwate 020-0193 Japan

Yasunari Kurisawa (g031g054@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Faculty of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University

Mami Kamada (g031i301@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Faculty of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University

Itaru Fukuda (g031h134@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Faculty of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University

Taisuke Akimoto (g236i001@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University

Takashi Ogata (t-ogata@iwate-pu.ac.jp)
Faculty of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University
Abstract
We explain the current version of a conceptual dictionary
containing two hierarchies of verb concepts and noun concepts to be functioned in our narrative generation system. It is
used for operating naturalness or validity of generated events
and realizing or adjusting the intentional defamiliarization.
Namely, this dictionary is a mechanism to be able to flexibly
adjust a variety of generation from realistic narratives to fantastical narratives as well as the foundation for a narrative
event and the elements. In the current version, verb concept
dictionary has originally defined 5338 case frames and modified 1158 constraints and noun concept dictionary contains
121573 concepts including 5808 intermediate concepts.
Keywords: Narrative generation system; conceptual dictionary;
verb/noun concept hierarchy; case frame; constraint.

Introduction
This paper explains the development of a conceptual dictionary
or hierarchical systems of concepts in the narrative generation
system framework which is our main research theme. A basic
unit for a narrative in the system is an event concept containing
a verb concept and noun concepts and the information of these
concepts is held in the conceptual dictionary. It is one of the
central components in the system.
Narrative is the strongest method for organizing fragmentary
knowledge human being has. We have been developing a narrative generation system as an intelligence tool for the creation
of future literature & narrative (Ogata & Kanai, 2010). For
digital art and entertainment such as computer game, perhaps
narrative and story can become an important element in the same
manner as traditional genres. Our research of narrative generation is done for the application to novel contents such as computer game and narrative generation based narrative or literature.
As a related work, Okada and Endo (1992) proposed a system to generate stories like Aesop fables. A story generated is a
kind of simulation of the process that a main character or actor
plots a sequence of planning actions. In contrast, our narrative
generation system architecture is constructed as an organic

fusion of diverse narrative knowledge and techniques including
planning, discourse structure, story grammar, script, discourse
relation, and so on. Although the Aesop system has a feature as
an application of conceptual dictionary research, our goal of the
narrative generation system is pursuing the mechanism of narrative generation itself. Our extreme purpose is not developing
conceptual dictionary itself, but creating narrative generation
system. Therefore, a basic policy here is to use existing dictionaries as possible to customize and expand them according to
the architecture and mechanism.
As a narrative generation study, Oz project (Bates, 1992) attempted the development of an interactive drama with dialogue
and actions in autonomous agents. This system mainly focuses
on the interactive techniques for the user’s narrative experiments. In contrast, our system contains a variety of narrative
and linguistic knowledge for generating deep and conceptual
narrative structures. On the other hand, BRUTUS (Bringsjord
& Ferrucci, 2000) is an interactive narrative generation architecture which has an integrative feature including story grammar, planning, and so on. However, it deals with only a specialized narrative theme, “betrayal”. Whereas, we are intend to develop a more general mechanism for various types of narratives.
The goal of this paper is the proposition of a conceptual dictionary in the narrative generation system architecture we have
been developing. The conceptual dictionary has two components of verb concept dictionary and noun concept dictionary
and each system has a hierarchical structure based on single
inheritance. A main issue in the development of conceptual
dictionary is currently defining constraints, which means the
knowledge for deciding the range of value for each case in an
event as a basic unit in a narrative. A constraint is described in
a verb concept and prescribes the possible range of noun concepts. In this paper, we describe the whole structure and some
detailed parts of the conceptual dictionary by especially putting
a focus on the description and role of constraints. Although this
paper uses existing studies of conceptual dictionaries as a reference, in the combination with the domain of narrative generation system, a variety of novel and difficult issues emerges. For

2126

example, realistic narratives and fantastical narratives respectively need different widths of conceptual constraint. This issue
is directly treated in other papers (Zhang, Ono & Ogata, 2011,
2012). A characteristic of this study is an exploratory approach
through the incremental system development, and it is hoped
that models and theories progress through the repetition of design-implementation-experiment. The proposed conceptual
dictionary in this paper provides a foundation for such incremental process toward more principled modeling.

Narrative Generation and Conceptual Dictionary
In the macro design, the architecture of narrative generation
system consists of conceptual generation phase and surface
representation phase by natural language, visual media, and
music. The former is divided into story as the narrative content
to be narrated and discourse as the structure that a story is narrated. According to this framework, we have been developing
various mechanisms and modules independently of each other.
Currently, we are advancing the developing of an integrated
narrative generation system in which a variety of modules are
organically blended into a whole. The goal of this system is to
execute the generation of narrative structures in some levels
such as story, discourse, and surface representations in a unified method. Story and discourse are represented in formally
same a tree structure description form. Each leaf node in the
structure is corresponding to an event or state and each intermediate node is corresponding to a relation combining the child
nodes including events, states, and the sub-structure. An event
as a unit of conceptual representation is the most fundamental
element of story and discourse. It is described in the form of
case frame which is linked to a verb concept and some noun
concepts in the conceptual dictionary. When story or discourse
generation mechanism generates an event concept, the conceptual dictionary provides or constraints the semantic elements. A
case frame for a verb concept is created and a constraint in the
verb concept combining with noun concepts decides the semantic range of each noun concept in the case frame.
The proposed conceptual dictionary is actually positioned in
a pilot version of integrated narrative generation system
(Akimoto & Ogata, 2011b). It is implemented by Common
Lisp with about 800 functions. The main macro modules are
control mechanism, conceptual generation module, and surface
representation module. The control mechanism calls each
module according to a set of parameters as the goal of generation to automatically execute a generation process from story to
expression. The conceptual generation module contains next
modules to generate or transform narrative conceptual structure: a story generation mechanism including a single event
generation mechanism using rhetorical techniques (Zhang, Ono
& Ogata, 2011, 2012), a state-event transformation mechanism
(Onodera & Ogata, 2012), an events sequence generation
mechanism by story grammar based on Propp’s narratology
(Propp, 1969; Imabuchi & Ogata, 2011), and a discourse
mechanism containing 13 kinds of narrative discourse techniques redefined Genette’s narrative discourse theory (Genette,
1972; Akimoto & Ogata, 2011a). The surface representation
mechanism consists of a sentence generation mechanism, an
animated movie generation mechanism (Ogata, 2008), and a
cyclical mutual transformation mechanism between conceptual
narrative and music (Ogata, Akimoto & Seito, 2011).

Our narrative generation project is a longitudinal and exploratory study, and we have been employing both top-down approach relevant to the system’s macro design and bottom-up
one programming various modules in parallel. Although the
above system is a kind of “bricolage” in the current state, the
conceptual dictionary plays an important role in an organized
integration of some modules developed independently. The
standardizing of an event form and the reference of a common
conceptual dictionary by various modules enables the combination as a whole narrative generation system. This is the most
fundamental role of the conceptual dictionary and advanced
topics of research for upgrading narrative generation emerge on
the ground.

The Structure of Conceptual Dictionary
As described above, the basic unit of a narrative is an event or
an event concept described as a conceptual representation. A
story and a discourse are represented as each tree structure
(Figure 1). Each terminal node is corresponding to an event and
each intermediate node is a relation for binding some the lower
nodes. Each event is represented as a case frame with a verb
concept and some noun concepts. We prepare next eight cases:
agent (an subject in an action), counter-agent (an object in an
action and a living thing), object (an object in an action and a
no living thing), instrument (an tool used in an action), location
(a place of an action), time (a pair of starting time and ending
time of an action), from (a starting place of an action), and to
(an ending place of an action). In addition, we prepare seven
kinds of optional cases for treating such concepts which are not
able to describe using above cases (Table 2).
The conceptual dictionary performs as a background for each
event in narrative generation. It is divided into verb concept
hierarchy and noun concept hierarchy. Both have a hierarchical
structure based on is-a relations by the mechanism of single
inheritance. A verb concept defines one or more case frames
which become the templates of the event concept(s). In addition, it has the description of constraint condition (simply constraint) for limiting the range of each case’s value. A constraint
is defined by one or more noun concepts in noun concept hierarchy and means the range that an element in each case contained in a verb concept can refer inside the noun conceptual
hierarchy. The current version of verb concept hierarchy has
5338 case frames and 4881 constraints. On the other hand,
current noun concept hierarchy contains 121573 noun concepts
including 5808 intermediate concepts.
In a verb concept, if noun concepts inside the range of constraint are used, a natural and possible event like “A knight
fight an enemy” is formed. But, if noun concepts outside the
range are used, an unnatural and impossible event like “A
knight fight a windmill” is created. We show another example.
In an event concept (eat (agent old-person) (object rice-ball))
(“an old-person eats a rice-ball”), when (eat (agent N1) (object
N2)) is defined as the case frame corresponding to “eat” and
the noun concept “food” is defined as the constraint of N2, the
Cause-effect
Serial
Event1

Event2

Repetition

Event3

Event4

(Go (type action) (ID 1) (time (1 2)) (agent Old-person) (counter-agent nil)
(object nil) (instrument nil) (location nil) (from House) (to Mountain))
Meaning of the event concept: “An old-person goes to mountain from home.”

Figure 1: An example of narrative conceptual structure

2127

noun concept to inserted into N2 is the subordinate concept of
“food” in the noun concept hierarchy. Therefore, we can confirm that this event concept is constructed inside the constraint.
By the way, fantastical events or physically impossible ones
appear in narratives normally. One of concerns for us in our
narrative generation project is to be able to flexibly generate
from more realistic narratives or events sequences to more fantastical ones. Although the objective of this paper does not discuss the topic, it has been treated in the study of advertising
scenario generation system as an application of the narrative
generation system in our group (for details, Zhang, Ono &
Ogata, 2011, 2012). One of main objectives of this research is
to adjust the semantic range in a single event using the concept
and techniques of “defamiliarization”. Its idea was acquired
from a rhetorical analysis of actual television commercial films.
The analysis defined three types of standard rhetoric, which are
for generating events corresponding to ordinary events, and
nine types of irregular rhetoric, which are for generating events
corresponding to extraordinary events. We call twelve types of
rhetoric “product introduction rhetoric (or technique)”. In advertising narratives, events with a product are represented
through the rhetoric. The former types of rhetoric draw the
processes of “manufacturing”, “purchasing”, and “usage” of a
product. In contrast, the latter types of rhetoric perform a kind
of deviance by techniques of defamiliarization for “the actor’s
action”, “the state of product”, “the background or place”, “the
actor himself (herself)”, and so on. Defamiliarization means a
literary technique for changing a familiar object into unfamiliar
one to reinforce the impression. For example, the impression of
a familiar product is reinforced by the application of defamiliarization techniques to the objects and agents. This idea will be able
to generalize to narratives other than the advertising narrative.
We show the overview of the processing flow. First, user selects a product name from a products list prepared by the developer and the number (1-3) of a type of standard rhetoric.
Based on the information, the system generates an ordinary
event by acquiring a verb concept and some noun concepts
within the standard rhetoric for the product. These concepts are
prepared according to each product. Next, when the user designates an irregular rhetoric, the system rewrites the ordinary
event to an irregular or extraordinary event by applying the
corresponding rhetorical technique. Conceptual dictionary is
used in the application of irregular rhetoric. Specifically, the
system replaces an original concept in the target event with
another concept in the different category by changing the reference region in the noun concept hierarchy. For example, to
generate an event with a product “car” according to “the defamiliarization of location” rhetoric, first, the system generates
an event like ”(drive (agent woman) (instrument car) (location
plateau))” using a noun concept “car” inside the constraint.
Next, the system replaces a noun concept corresponding to the
location with another concept outside the constraint using the
defamiliarization processing to generate an event at the strange
place like “(drive (agent woman) (instrument car) (location
seabed))”. The condition of this processing is that the constraint
in regular rhetoric is limited in the actual range. In this research,
the conceptual dictionary basically defines the standard semantic range for each noun concept in an event from the viewpoint
of actual possibility or physical possibility principally. On the
other hand, extraordinary or irregular events are constructed by
several types of defamiliarization rhetoric based on a kind of

constraint relaxation. Although a weak point of the current
version is that the defamiliarization techniques are randomly
applied, we succeeded at the experimental implementation of a
simple framework of defamiliarization processing using the
conceptual dictionary.
In addition, a story generation system by McIntyre and
Lapata (2009) generates stories by using a knowledge base
about compositions of an event sentence and chains of events
extracted from a narrative corpus based on co-occurrence of
words. Stories are generated by a kind of tree search of possible
stories. Here, the system has several scoring criteria for pruning
low scored branches that are strength of connection of words in
an event and words between adjacent events, interestingness,
and coherence.

Existing Conceptual Dictionaries
Table 1 compares existing Japanese conceptual dictionaries.
“Goi-Taikei, A Japanese Lexicon” (Ikehara et al., 1999) is the
largest scale Japanese lexical and conceptual dictionary for
Japanese-to-English machine translation, which hierarchically
organizes semantic attributes based on single inheritance. We
mainly referred to it as a starting point to construct the overall
structures of two hierarchies. The lexicon is basically a lexical
dictionary, and because the definition of constraints and the
granularity of noun concepts’ categories are too rough to directly use in the narrative generation system, we considerably refined their organizations and uniquely added case frames for
verb concepts. Especially, for the purpose of complementing
the shortage of intermediate concepts in the noun conceptual
hierarchy to a large degree, we referred to “Japanese WordNet”
(Bond et al., 2009). Although we used only Japanese lexicon
and Japanese conceptual dictionaries as a reference, narrative
has an aspect which transcends linguistic difference and we
also need to them.

A Verb Concept Hierarchy
Figure 2 shows the overall structure of verb concept hierarchy.
Although the Japanese lexicon contains about 12000 verb concepts under 36 categories, the current version of our verb concept hierarchy contains 4260 verb concepts in 6 categories to
represent physical state changes (“physical transfer”, “possessive transfer”, “change of attribute”, “change of body”, “body
motion”, and “generation”). A verb concept defines a sentence
pattern (“A Japanese Lexicon” contains about 12000 sentence
patterns), which is the template for a sentence that takes a verb
as the predicate, one or more sets of case frames, the constraints, and the superordinate concept (by an “is-a” relation).
The number of case frames is 5338 for 4260 verb concepts.
In Figure 3, we show the form by an example of a verb concept’s description by Common Lisp. The information relating
to a verb concept is stored into a variable. In this example, next
information is stored into the variable: (1) A corresponding
sentence pattern; (“N1 eat N2”), (2) Two case frames; “(eat(2)
(agent N1) (counter-agent N2))” and “(eat(2) (agent N1) (object N2))” (“(2)” means the second meaning of “eat” covering
some meanings), (3) Constraints for each case, and (4) the information that the superordinate concept is a verb concept category (“body motion”).

Defining Case Frames
In the description of a case frame, we decided adequate cases
corresponding to respectively a noun concept based on the

2128

Table 1: Existing conceptual dictionaries
EDR Electronic
Dictionary
(National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, 2001)

Japanese
WordNet
(Bond et al.,
2009)
57,238

Goi-Taikei,
A Japanese
Lexicon
(Ikehara et al., 1999)
About 3,000

About 410,000
Number of
concepts
About 270,000
93,834
Number of
words
Multiple
Multiple
Structure of
inheritance
inheritance
concept
hierarchy
Bilingual dictionary, collo- The words are
Feature
cation dictionary, corpus,
etc. are recorded.

About 300,000
Single
inheritance
About 12000 sentence
patterns corresponding to
the meaning of verb
concept are recorded.

divided into
group by synonym (synset).

sentence pattern and the constraints. We show an example of
the definition based on a sentence pattern, “N1 eat N2”. The
constraints of N1 and N2 are respectively “(human, animal)”
and “(food, life)”. This means that N1 takes the subordinate
concepts of “human” or “animal” and N2 takes the subordinate
concepts of “food” or “life”. In the N2, we distinguish “a living
thing” from “a nonliving thing” and define two types of case
frames, “(eat(2) (agent N1) (object N2))” and “(eat(2) (agent
N1) (counter-agent N2))”. Here, the constraints of N1 in two
frames are “human” and “animal”. However, in the N2, the
constraints of two frames are respectively “food” and “life”. As
mentioned above, a verb concept sometimes holds some different case frames.
Currently, case frames for 174 verb concepts are not defined
because it is difficult to find an adequate case for a noun
Event

Action

State

Abstract
relationship

Mental
Natural
relationship phenomenon

Mental
action

Thinking action

Sensory action

Emotional action

Mental transfer

Combining action

Demise/destruction

Result

Utilization

Change of body

Generation
Physical transfer

Change of attribute

Body motion

Possessive transfer

Mental state

Sentence pattern
N1がN2を食べる
[N1 eat N2]

Physical state

Thinking state

Sensory state

Emotional state

Causal relationship

Ownership

Relative relationship

Being

Attribute

食べる(2)
[Eat]

Causative Possible Begin Close

Physical
action

Case frames and constraints
(Eat
(Eat
(agent N1)
(agent N1)
(counter-agent N2))
(object N2))
N1: Human, …
N2: Whale, Horse, …

N1: Human, ...
N2: Food, …

Figure 2: The overall structure of verb concept hierarchy
Description format
(set (intern <verb concept>) „((name (<verb concept‟s name>))
(sentence-pattern <sentence-pattern>)
(case-cons-set
((case-frame ((agent [<noun term> nil]) (counter-agent [<noun term> nil])(location
[<noun term> nil]) (object [<noun term> nil])(instrument [<noun term>
nil]) (from [<noun term> nil]) (to [<noun term> nil])))
(constraint ((<noun concepts>)))))
(is-a (<superordinate concept>))))

An example
(set (intern “食べる[eat](2)”) „((name (食べる[eat] (2)))
(sentence-pattern “N1が N2を 食べる”[N1 eat N2])
(case-cons-set
((case-frame ((agent N1) (counter-agentN2) (location nil) (object nil) (instrument nil)
(from nil) (to nil)))
(constraint ((“人<human>” “-死人<dead person>” “-人間〈人称<personal pronoun>〉”
“-準人間<demi-human>”) (”*獣[鯨<whale>]*” “*獣[馬<horse>]*” “*獣[牛<cattle>]*”
“*獣[豚<pig>]*” “*獣[山羊<goat>]*” “*獣[羊<sheep>]*” “*獣[鹿<deer>]*”
“*獣[猪<wild boar>]*” “*獣[兎<rabbit>]*” “*鳥<bird>[家禽<poultry)]*”
“*鳥[猟鳥<game bird>]*” “魚<fish>” “-*魚[伝説<legendary>]*”
“たこ・いか・えび・かに<octopus・squid・prawn・crab>”))))
((case-frame ((agent N1) (counter-agent nil) (location nil) (object N2)(instrument nil)
(from nil) (to nil)))
(constraint ((“人<human>” “-死人<dead person>” “-人間〈人称<personal pronoun>〉”
“-準人間<demi-human>”) (”食料<food>" "-調味料<seasoning>"
"-飲物・たばこ<drink・cigarette>")))))
(is-a (身体動作<Body motion>))))

Figure 3: The description of a verb concept

concept within the current cases. Such noun concepts are categorized into following seven types: “adverbial concept”, “possessive case”, “event”, “purpose of action”, “experiencer”,
“target of comparison”, and “idiom”. We show an example of
“purpose”. In a verb concept, “go(3)”, the sentence pattern is
“N1 go to N3 from N2 for N4” and the constraint of N4 is
“(abstraction)” which shows the purpose of “go”. For instance,
“a man goes to a mountain from a house for mowing”. If we
interpret it as “to”, we can not distinguish N4 from N3 (“(place,
field)”). Table 2 set straight above seven cases to be expanded
and the relevant studies. Okada (1991) and Takeuchi (2011)
show other case frames. The former uses ten types of cases.
And, the latter uses 71 types of cases to represent the argument
structure of verbs which defines the relationship between a verb
and nouns in a sentence. Because the description of case frames
by the reference may become too long and complex, we tentatively describe seven types of case frames with “optional” sign.
In addition, for example, FrameNet (Fillmore & Baker, 2010)
and Japanese FrameNet (Ohara, 2008) define the semantics of a
word by a semantic frame, which means the structured
knowledge about a typical scene, constructed with the frame
elements. And, VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler, Dang, & Palmer,
2000; Kipper-Schuler, 2005) is a hierarchical verb lexicon in
which each class is described by semantic predicates, thematic
roles, and basic syntactic frames. Their resources and above
Takeuchi (2011) are advanced semantic knowledge to deal with
the complex narrative knowledge unit. In the modular approach
of our narrative generation system architecture, a common and a
large amount of conceptual dictionary treats the semantic
knowledge which has a comparatively simple structure and other
mechanisms handle more complex semantic processing. For
example, Onodera and Ogata (2012) resolve an action into two
states and the relations to generate sequences of states which
form a basis of a story. The above resources are more directly
related to the part of such complex semantic processing.

Editing Constraints
The result of a previous evaluation and consideration shows
that if we adopt “actual naturalness” as the criterion, the definition of constraints become too difficult or ambiguous (Oishi &
Ogata, 2011). So, as a basic policy, we define constraints in the
range of physical possibility (in our daily life in common
sense). We think this criterion is comparatively clear though it
may actually contain difficult problems. In addition, constraints
contained in “A Japanese Lexicon” have originally the purpose
and role of conflict resolution for Japanese-English translation.
For the context of narrative generation, they are too wide to
adequately limit the semantic range for each noun concept to be
generated. For example, in the case of “eat(2)”, the subordinate
concepts of a constraint “food” corresponding to the N2 contain inadequate concepts such as “drink”. And, the subordinate
hierarchy of “life” also contains “the animal on a legend”. One
of primary purposes of the extension of hierarchy is to avoid
such ambiguity and inaccuracy.
The method is divided into two parts. First is by hyponymy
concepts and “furniture” is substituted with “chair” and “bed”.
Second is by the partial exclusion of hyponymy concepts and
“dead person” is excluded from “human” using a minus sign
such as “-dead person”. Oishi and Ogata (2011) have modified
300 constraints by the methods. For noun concepts defined as
constraints of all terms in these case frames, we investigated

2129

Table 2: Towards the expansion of deep case definition
problem

example of sentence pattern

1) adverbial
concept

N1が N2を N3に N4 縮める

2) possessive
case
3) event

4) purpose of
action
5) experiencer
6) target of
comparison
7) idiom

(N1 shorten N2 by N4 to N3)

Okada
(1991)

Takeuchi
(2011)

numeral /
OC:
complement correspond
of attribute to adverb

N1が N2の N3に/へ 潜る

situation

(N1 beat N2 at/in N3)
N1が N2から/より N3へ/に/まで N4に 出かける

(N1 go to N3 from N2 for N4)
N1が N2に 疲れる
(N1 get tired of N2)
N1が N2を N3の 倍にする
N1は N2(足)が N3から 遠のく

(N1 go to N3 less frequently)

Adverb
Possessive

(N1 go under N2)
N1が N2を N3で 破る

(N1 make N2 twice as much as N3)

New case

Situation

purpose

Purpose

experiencer

Experiencer
Souse

OS: souse
usage

Ideom

Object

Abstract
object

Time

Place

Form

Walrus

Quantity

ドルフィン
(dolphin)

Orca

State

whale

Property

Bug

Anthropoid
Beast
Carnivore
Rodent
Marsupial
BatBeast
Ungulate
ape
(others)
(legend)

dolphin

イルカ
(dolphin)

Ocean Life

Group/system

Sea
animal

Bird Amphibian/reptile

Relation

Beast

Abstract relation

Existence

Event

Animal(part) Animal(Individual)

Nature phenomenon

Action

Animal

Thing
Human activity

Mental

Life

Plant

Abstraction

Matter

Area

Nature

Institution

2130

Subject Location

Human

A Noun Concept Hierarchy
Figure 4 is the overall structure of noun conceptual hierarchy.
The current version contains 5808 intermediate concepts and
115765 terminal concepts. Many of the higher level concepts
are based on the information registered in “general semantic
attributes system (hierarchy) for nouns” in “A Japanese Lexicon”. On the other hand, the hierarchy of lower intermediate
concepts is basically organized referring to “Japanese WordNet”. The terminal concepts are based on the words in the Japanese lexicon.
Next Figure 5 is the format for describing the noun concept
hierarchy and the actual example by Common Lisp. The upper
list means the serial number showing registered intermediate
concepts, and variables into which the information for each
intermediate concept is stored. An intermediate concept has a
list of hyponymy concepts, a number of the depth in hierarchy,
the serial number of the superordinate concepts, and the range
of serial numbers of the hyponymy concepts. In the example,

Noun
Physical

Organization

the subordinate concepts and edit them according to the methods. For instance, for the constraints of N3 in “N1 return to N3
from N2”, we extended the original constraints “(location place
building)” to “(lodging housing area -area(scope)
-area(human_activity) -land -world foot_of_mountain mountain_pass valley ground island/cape shore -bank farm site
point_of_compass edge distance house(body)[housing])”.
However, this work spent a lot of time.
To improve the work efficiently and organically, we prepared a lot of “sets” that describe a group of constraints to be
used commonly in similar plural case frames. For instance，a
common set can be applied to the case frames consisting of a
place a person can sit down and the set can be used to the opposite concepts such as “stand up” too. Specifically, to a set of
noun concepts used as constraints, we give a name that the set
means as a whole to apply it to the constraints for other case
frames. For example, we give a name, “inhabitable location” to
a set of constraints, “(lodging housing area -area(scope) area(human_activity) -land -world foot_of_mountain mountain_pass valley ground island/cape shore -bank farm site
point_of_compass edge distance house(body)[housing])”. The
set of noun concepts is commonly used for the constraint of N2
in other events like “N1 move to/into N2”, and so on.
In this time, we extracted 26 kinds of sets from the modified
constraints in 300 case frames and applied the sets to other
5037 case frames. As a result, we could apply the sets to one or
more elements in 4581 case frames. The number of cases that
are adequate sets to all elements was 1158. For example, in
“N1 take out N2 from N3”, we could apply a set, “a person of
such age who can take care by herself or himself” to N1 and
“transportable object” to N2.

“(seal sea-lion fur-seal sea-animal dugong bakushia)” is defined as the subordinate concepts of “sea-animal”.
The method of constructing the noun conceptual hierarchy is
as follows. The referred Japanese lexicon contains 141870 words
in 2710 attributes in “general semantic attributes system (hierarchy) for nouns”. Here, each attribute is corresponding to a concept in our conceptual dictionary. These words have homonyms
like “狸” (“tanuki” in Kanji) and “タヌキ” (“tanuki” in Katakana), which means commonly “raccoon dog” in Japanese. In the
narrative generation system, we divide the generation process
into a conceptual level to make a narrative content and a surface
representation level to make the variations by language and other
representation media. The former uses a conceptual dictionary
and the latter uses a language dictionary. To realize the mechanism, after we integrated two or more homonymous words into a
single concept, we viewed all words as concepts to store 115765
concepts into the noun concept hierarchy.
In addition, to be able to set more detailed and elaborated
constraints, we added intermediate concepts and refined the
classification referring to “Japanese WordNet”. In the step that
we integrated homonymous words into a single concept to register them as concepts, many terminal concepts were directly
combined with the intermediate concepts. For example, “seal”
and “raccoon-dog” are respectively the subordinate concepts of
“beast”, and more detailed categories do not exist. If we want
to define “aquatic mammal” as a constraint, we have to list all
the terminal concepts. On the other hand, in “Japanese WordNet”, the concept of “aquatic mammal” exists as a subordinate
category of “aquatic mammal”. Therefore, we added an

Animal(Individual(others))
Lives-Apetock man

Seal SeaFur sealSea
Bakushia
lion
animal

Black
whale White fin
whale
right whale

Figure 4: The overall structure of the noun concept hierarchy
Description Format
(set (intern [noun concept]) „(([subordinate concept(terminal)])
([depth] [number of superordinate concept] ([range of subordinate concept]))))

Examples
Intermediate Concepts List
…(1025 “*獣[海獣]*<sea animal>”) (1026 “*獣[イルカ]*<dolphin>”) (1027 "*獣
[鯨]*<whale>") (1028 "*獣[シャチ]*<orca>") …
Hierarchy Structure
…
(set (intern “*獣[海獣]*<sea animal>”)
„((海豹<seal> 海驢<sea lion> 膃肭臍<fur seal>
海獣<sea animal> 儒艮<dugong> バークシア<bakushia>)
(8 1022 (1026 1029))))
(set (intern “*獣[イルカ]*<dolphin>”)
Number:1025
„((イルカ<dolphin> ドルフィン<dolphin>)
Depth:8
Sea animal
(9 1025 (nil))))
(set (intern “*獣[鯨]*<whale>”)
1026
1027
1028
・・・
'((鯨 白長須鯨<white fin whale>
Sea 9
dolphin
whale
Orca
せみ鯨<black right whale>)
Seal
lion
(9 1025 (nil))))
(set (intern “*獣[シャチ]*<orca>”)
White fin
Black
10
'((逆叉<orca> 鯱<orca>)
dolphin dolphin whale
whale
right whale
(9 1025 (nil))))

Figure 5: The format and an example of noun concept hierarchy

intermediate concept, “sea-animal”, under “beast”, and moved
“seal” and “sea-lion” to the subordinate category.

A Tentative Evaluation
For the concepts that constraint sets are applied, we attempted a
confirmation of the validity of the constraints and the classification of noun concepts regarding to the constraints. The criterion
is whether physically possible events can be generated by each
constraint. For example, we determine that such event as “A
salesgirl divorces her husband” is possible. In contrast, such
event as “A spokesman is sailing on the paper” is impossible.
We prepared an experimental event generation program
which selects a noun concept in the noun concept hierarchy for
each case in the case frame at random according to the constraint. And, we generated 20 events by 100 case frames selected at random from 1158 case frames that all constraints were
set. Three evaluators checked the generated 2000 events according to the criterion of possible/impossible. As a result, if
14/20 or more events were “physically possible”, we decided
that the constraints in the case frame were comparatively adequate. When the results in the evaluators were different, we
employed the result of majority. The success was 70 and the
failure was 30. For 12 in the 30 failures, we could modify them
by applying another set of constraint. For example, in the case
of “N1 collect N2 from N3”, we may replace the set of
“N2:object” from “goods, status, and notion to be able to send”
to “goods to be able to send”. For the 15, we modified the constraints themselves. For example, in the case of “N1 sail N2”,
we changed the constraint of “N2:location” to ”(river waterway
lake sea)” from ”(river waterway lake sea sky)” which is corresponding to a set, “the place to be able to pass with ship and
aircraft”. Other two ones are the description errors in case
frames. Remaining 1 problem is the case that the verb concept
itself is impossible like “N1 cast a spell on N2”. By applying
the above criterion of evaluation, the difference of feelings by
evaluators and the ambiguity of evaluation diminished more
than previous criterion, natural/unnatural. This brings the simplicity of system development. However, there is also the difficulty that possible but ordinarily unnatural events can not be
eliminated. Because it is difficult that the conceptual dictionary
absorbs this sort of contextual knowledge, the solving needs to
be given in the relation with the above-mentioned defamiliarization rhetoric. We are considering a basic framework that the
conceptual dictionary gives comparatively simple and standard
conceptual knowledge and a variety of narrative knowledge
such as the defamiliarization operates and adjust more complex
and advanced literary or artistic rhetorical techniques.

Conclusions
We explained the current version of a conceptual dictionary
containing two hierarchies of verb concepts and noun concepts
to be functioned in our narrative generation system. It is used
for operating naturalness or validity of generated events and
realizing or adjusting the intentional defamiliarization. Namely,
this dictionary is a mechanism to be able to flexibly adjust a
variety of generation from realistic narratives to fantastical
narratives as well as the foundation for a narrative event and
the elements. In the current version, verb concept dictionary
has originally defined 5338 case frames and modified 1158
constraints and noun concept dictionary contains 121573 concepts including 5808 intermediate concepts.

References
Akimoto, T., & Ogata, T. (2011a). Computational model of
narrative discourse theory and reception theory in narratology and its implementation. Proc. of the 13th Japanese Society
for Language Sciences (pp. 155-156).
Akimoto, T., & Ogata, T. (2011b). A consideration of the elements
for narrative generation and a trial of integrated narrative generation system. Proc. of the 7th NLPKE (pp. 369-377).
Bates, J. (1991). Virtual reality, art, and entertainment. The Journal of Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 1(1), 133-138.
Bond, F., Isahara, H., Fujita, S., Uchimoto, K., Kuribayashi, T.,
& Kanzaki, K. (2009). Proc. of the 7th Workshop on Asian
Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP (pp. 1-8).
Bringsjord, S. & Ferrucci, D. A. (2000). Artificial Intelligence
and Literary Creativity: Inside the Mind of BRUTUS, a Storytelling Machine. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Genette, G. (1972). Discours du récit. essai de méthode, Figures
III, Seuil: Paris. (Transl. Lewin, J. E. (1980). Narrative discourse: an essay in method. NY: Cornell University Press.)
Ikehara, S., Miyazaki, M., Shirai, S., Yokoo, A., Nakaiwa, H., Ogura,
K., Ooyama, Y., & Hayashi, Y. (1999). Goi-Taikei–a Japanese
Lexicon CDROM. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten. (in Japanese)
Imabuchi, S., & Ogata, T. (2011). A story generation system
based on Propp combined with a conceptual dictionary. Proc.
of the 7th NLPKE (pp. 359-362).
McIntyre, N. & Lapata, M. (2009). Learning to tell tales: A
data-driven approach to story generation. Proc. of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the
AFNLP (pp. 217-225).
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (2001). EDR Electronic dictionary technical guide.
http://www2.nict.go.jp/r/r312/EDR/J_index.html (Last access: 1.11.2012).
Ogata, T. (2008). Towards the movie construction in narrative
generation system. In A. Kanai & Y. Niwa (Eds.), Theory
and practice of film editing. Tokyo: Hosei University Press.
Ogata, T., Akimoto, T., & Seito, A. (2011). A new version of circular mutual transformation system between music and narrative. Proc. of the 25th JSAI (1H2-OS1-13in). (in Japanese)
Ogata, T., & Kanai, A. (2010). An introduction of informatics
of narratology: on thought and technology of narrative generation. Tokyo: Gakubunsha. (in Japanese)
Oishi, K., & Ogata, T. (2011). Towards the development of
conceptual dictionary for narrative generation system. Proc.
of the 7th NLPKE (pp. 351-358).
Okada, N. (1991). Representation and strage of word concepts.
Tokyo: The Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers. (in Japanese)
Okada, N., & Endo, T. (1992). Story generation based on dynamics
of the mind. Computational Intelligence, 8(1), 123-160.
Onodera, K. & Ogata, T. (2012). Sequence generation based on
mutual relationship between state and action: As a mechanism
in narrative generation system. Proc. of the 4th DIGITEL (pp.
159-161).
Propp, V. (Пропп, В. Я.) (1969). Морфологияскаэки, Иэ, 2е.
Москва: Наука. (Transl. Scott, L. (1968). Morphology of the
Folktale. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.)
Takeuchi, K. (2011). Construction of thesaurus of predicateargument structure for Japanese verbs. Proc. of the 25th JSA I
(3H2-OS3-5). (in Japanese)
Zhang, Y., Ono, J., & Ogata, T. (2011). An advertising rhetorical
mechanism for single event combined with conceptual dictionary in
narrative generation system. Proc. of the 7th NLPKE (pp. 340-343).
Zhang, Y., Ono J., & Ogata, T. (2012). Single event and scenario
generation based on advertising rhetorical techniques using the conceptual dictionary in narrative generation system. Proc. of the 4th
DIGITEL (pp. 162-164).

2131

