UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can native-language perceptual bias facilitate learning words in a new language?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85r6430p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Pajak, Bozena
Creel, Sarah
Levy, Roger

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can native-language perceptual bias facilitate learning words in a new language?
Bożena Pajak
˛ 1 (bpajak@ucsd.edu), Sarah C. Creel2 (creel@cogsci.ucsd.edu), Roger Levy1 (rlevy@ucsd.edu)
1 Department

of Linguistics, 2 Department of Cognitive Science, UC San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Abstract

Acquiring a language relies on distinguishing the sounds and
learning mappings between meaning and phonetic forms. Yet,
as shown in previous research on child language acquisition, the ability to discriminate between similar sounds does
not guarantee success at learning words contrasted by those
sounds. We investigated whether adults, in contrast to young
infants, are able to attend to phonetic detail when learning similar words in a new language. We tested speakers of Korean and
Mandarin to see whether they could use their native-languagespecific perceptual biases in a word-learning task. Results revealed that participants were not able to fully capitalize on
their perceptual abilities: only faster learners – as independently assessed by baseline trials – showed enhanced learning
involving contrasts in phonetic dimensions informative in their
native language. This suggests that attention to phonetic detail
when learning words might only be possible for adults with
better learning skills or higher motivation.
Keywords: word learning; non-native speech perception; second language acquisition

Introduction
Humans are able to take advantage of many different resources available to them in the course of learning. For example, when learning a new language – whether in infancy
or adulthood – humans actively search for regularities by analyzing the input in several alternative ways (e.g., examining
either adjacent or non-adjacent dependencies; Gómez, 2002),
and are able to simultaneously entertain multiple implicit theories about the input’s underlying structure (e.g., Gerken,
2010). One of the complex features of learning a language is
that listeners must perform concurrent analyses of the input
at different levels of processing and integrate these multiple
pieces of information at once. If, for example, we zoom in
to the level of processing single words, one needs to encode
phonetic cues and, at the same time, map the phonetic form
onto meaning. This task may be particularly hard for beginner second language (L2) learners who are not yet familiar
with the L2 sound system, especially when they are processing words with novel sounds that do not exist in their native
language (L1). However, there is evidence that learners capitalize on whatever pieces of information are available to them
to achieve this task: they might use lexical cues to make inferences about sound categorization (Feldman, Myers, White,
Griffiths, & Morgan, 2011), and – conversely – take advantage of perceptual learning on sound categorization to help
them make inferences about the lexicon (Perfors & Dunbar,
2010). The question we are addressing in this paper is another
piece of this puzzle.
Specifically, we know that prior language knowledge is one
of the starting points when learning a new language: L1-based
perceptual biases can facilitate perception of novel sound
contrasts that differ along phonetic dimensions informative
in L1 (Pajak, 2010a, 2010b; Pajak & Levy, in prep.), and can

affect interpretation of distributional information from novel
language input (Pajak & Levy, to appear). How efficiently,
then, do adults capitalize on their L1-based phonetic generalizations when learning the lexicon in a new language?
Intuitively, it might seem that whatever perceptual abilities adults have, they should be able to use them both when
distinguishing sounds and when learning novel words. That
is, if they hear a distinction between sounds b and p, they
should be able to easily distinguish between words like ban
and pan. However, the picture emerging from prior research
is far less clear. In fact, research with young infants suggests
that the ability to discriminate perceptually between similar
sounds does not in general guarantee immediately successful learning of words that are contrasted by those sounds.
At 14 months, infants can easily discriminate the sounds b
and d. However, when taught that a novel object is called a
bih, but later on is referred to as a dih, infants do not notice this mispronunciation (Stager & Werker, 1997). The initial explanation proposed for this result was the limited resource hypothesis (Stager & Werker, 1997; Werker, Fennell,
Corcoran, & Stager, 2002): since attending to fine phonetic
detail while learning new words is computationally very demanding, young infants – who have limited attentional and
cognitive resources – might have difficulty accessing all phonetic detail when focusing their attention on learning meaning. Subsequent research showed that 14-month-old infants
succeed only with additional contextual information or under less demanding learning conditions (Fennell & Werker,
2003; Fennell, Waxman, & Weisleder, 2007; Rost & McMurray, 2009; Swingley & Aslin, 2002; Thiessen, 2007; Yoshida,
Fennell, Swingley, & Werker, 2009).
Some evidence suggests that adults might have similar difficulties when learning words in a new language. In a study
by Perfors and Dunbar (2010), native speakers of English
were first trained on discriminating a non-native contrast between a prevoiced and a voiceless unaspirated stop ([gipur]
vs. [kipur]), and then taught word-picture mappings using
minimal-pair words distinguished by this non-native contrast.
The results showed that while participants performed better
than chance at learning similar words with the exact contrast they had been trained on ([gipur]-[kipur]), they were at
chance at learning words contrasted by sounds with an analogous contrast ([bipur]-[pipur]). This was despite the fact that,
after perceptual training on [g]-[k], participants were able to
distinguish [b] and [p] perceptually. Thus, just like 14-monthold infants, adults had difficulty differentiating between similar words in a word-learning task, even though they could tell
these words apart in a pure perceptual task.1
1 Better performance on [gipur] and [kipur]) might have been due

2174

Experiment
Participants learned novel word-picture mappings, where
each word was in a minimal pair with either a length disto the familiarity with these lexical items from perceptual training,
which is consistent with infants also performing better on familiar
words (Swingley & Aslin, 2002).
2 Korean mostly uses length distinctions on vowels (e.g., [pul]
‘fire’ vs. [pu:l] ‘blow’), but some long consonants ([ll], [nn], [mm])
arise from phonological assimilation processes (Sohn, 2001), and
Korean tense obstruents ([p], [t], [k], [s], [tC]) have sometimes been
"" "" ""
"" "" As
analyzed as long (Choi, 1995).
for Mandarin, alveolo-palatals
and retroflexes exist as allophones of the same phonemic category,
and voiced obstruents ([ý], [dý], [dü]) are entirely absent (except [ü])
since Mandarin has obstruent distinctions in aspiration, not voicing
(Lin, 2001).

1.0

1.5

2.0

Korean
Mandarin

0.5

d−prime

However, the difficulty in learning similar-sounding words
found by Perfors and Dunbar (2010) might have a purely perceptual basis. That is, learners’ ability to discriminate a prevoiced [b] vs. a voiceless unaspirated [p] might not have been
sufficiently robust to be of any use in a word-learning task.
This is similar to the intuition of Perfors and Dunbar, who
point out that learners’ representations of [b] and [p] categories might have been too fragile to see any advantage in
word learning. If this reasoning is correct, then the comparison between 14-month-olds and adults in Perfors and Dunbar’s (2010) study is less warranted because, at 14 months,
infants have difficulty learning the words bih and dih despite
easily discriminating between the sounds b and d.
In the study reported here we achieve a more direct comparison with the situation of 14-month-old infants by investigating how adults learn similar-sounding words that they
can distinguish perceptually due to their L1-based phonetic
generalizations. Specifically, we used two distinctions: length
(e.g., [taja]-[tajja]) and place of articulation between alveolopalatal and retroflex sounds (e.g., [gotCa]-[gotùa]). Our participants were native speakers of Korean and of Mandarin,
who were previously shown to have differential perceptual
sensitivity to these two distinctions, as illustrated in Figure 1
(Pajak, 2010a, 2010b; Pajak & Levy, in prep.). In particular, Korean speakers were shown to be better than Mandarin
speakers at discriminating consonant length contrasts ([m][mm], [n]-[nn], [l]-[ll], [s]-[ss], [f]-[ff], [j]-[jj], [w]-[ww]), but
the reverse was true for the alveolo-palatal vs. retroflex place
contrasts ([C]-[ù], [tC]-[tù], [ý]-[ü], [dý]-[dü]). This result was
likely due to the fact that Korean has length distinctions,
and Mandarin does not, but Mandarin has alveolo-palatal and
retroflex sounds, while Korean does not (Lin, 2001; Sohn,
2001). Crucially, however, these perceptual sensitivities cannot be attributed to direct L1-to-L2 phonetic category transfer
alone (as has been generally proposed for these types of perceptual patterns; Major, 2008) because not all of the tested
speech sounds exist in Korean or Mandarin.2 Consequently,
Pajak hypothesized that perceptual advantages in non-native
speech processing can arise from sensitivity to phonetic dimensions that are informative in L1, and not just sensitivity
to specific L1 categories. In this study we test whether these
perceptual advantages are exploited during word learning.

length

place

Figure 1: Perceptual discrimination results (Pajak, 2010a,
2010b; Pajak & Levy, in prep.).
tinction or an alveolo-palatal vs. retroflex place distinction.
We predicted that if adult L2 learners are able to attend to
phonetic detail by using their L1-based resources when learning a new lexicon, then we should observe the same pattern
in both the perceptual discrimination and the word-learning
tasks: that is, Korean speakers should be better at learning
length minimal pairs, and Mandarin speakers better at learning place minimal pairs.

Method
Participants 54 undergraduate students at UC San Diego
participated in the experiment for course credit or payment.
Half were speakers of Korean, and the other half were speakers of Mandarin. Participants varied in terms of their length
of residence in the US: some were born in the US, while
others immigrated at some point after birth or were international students who arrived very recently. Consequently, they
varied in English proficiency. Importantly, however, they all
learned Korean or Mandarin from birth, reported high proficiency in those languages, and still used them regularly, predominantly with family. In most cases they had some high
school and/or college exposure to Spanish or French. Some
Mandarin speakers were also familiar with Taiwanese, mostly
through family exposure. All participants reported no history
of speech or hearing problems.
Materials The materials consisted of 16 nonce words of the
form CVC(:)V, where each was in a minimal pair differing
only in the middle consonant (a subset of contrasts tested by
Pajak, 2010a, 2010b; Pajak & Levy, in prep.). There were 12
length words, with either a short or a long middle consonant,
and 4 place words, with either an alveolo-palatal or a retroflex
consonant (both pronounced as in Polish, which has a distinction similar to Mandarin), as illustrated in Table 1.
The materials were recorded in a soundproof booth by a
phonetically-trained native speaker of Polish. There were 10
tokens recorded for each word. For length words, two tokens
of each word with long consonants were chosen for the experiment. Subsequently, words with short consonants were
created by shortening the tokens with long consonants in a
way that, for each word and each recording, the naturallyrecorded long consonant was reduced to half its duration so as

2175

Table 1: Stimuli (in IPA).
L ENGTH WORDS
short
long
taja
tajja
tala
talla
diwa
diwwa
difa
diffa
kema
kemma
kena
kenna

P LACE WORDS
alveolo-palatal retroflex

gotCa
goýa

gotùa
goüa

to maintain a constant 2:1 duration ratio (cross-linguistically,
the long-to-short consonant ratio varies between 1.5 to 3;
Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996). For place words, two tokens
each were chosen for the experiment with the goal of maximizing the similarity between the words in minimal pairs with
regards to how vowels were pronounced, but at the same time
choosing tokens with clearly enunciated middle consonants.
Each word was paired with a picture of a different kind of
mushroom (see two examples in Fig. 2), which were chosen
in order to include objects that were unfamiliar to our participants, but not so unfamiliar that participants would find them
bizarre and hard to remember. We selected pictures that varied in shape and color so as to maximize visual differences
between them. We created four different one-to-one word-topicture mappings that were counterbalanced between participants in order to make sure that the results were not driven by
any peculiarities in the mappings we chose.
Procedure Participants sat in front of a computer, and responded by using a mouse. They were instructed that in this
experiment they would be learning a novel language, and,
specifically, the language’s words for mushrooms. The experiment was completed in a single session. There were 4 training blocks (each with 128 trials, about 10-15min long) and 4
testing blocks (each with 64 trials, about 5min long), interleaved. Blocks were separated by self-terminated breaks. In
each trial, two pictures were presented on a computer screen
(see Fig. 2), and a word was played through headphones with
a delay of 500ms. Participants were asked to click on the picture that they thought went with the word. In training, feedback was provided following the response in the form of the
correct picture staying on the screen. A mouse click triggered
the start of the next trial. Presenting feedback after participant’s response meant that the early responses were necessarily random. Participants were told to guess at first, and
that through feedback they would eventually learn the correct word-to-picture mappings. In testing, no feedback was
provided.
The training trial types consisted of picture pairs that were
always associated with dissimilar word pairs (e.g., taja-diwa,
gotCa-kemma) so that participants were not directly alerted to
the distinctions of interest. The testing trial types were always
different from the training trials. There were four types of tri-

Figure 2: Example of a screen shot that participants saw
throughout the experiment.
als in testing depending on the minimal-pair contrast that corresponded to the pictures, as illustrated in Table 2: (i) length
(24 trials per block), (ii) place (8 trials), (iii) filler-dissimilar
(16 trials), and (iv) filler-similar (16 trials). The critical trials
consisted of the critical minimal-pair picture pairings (i.e.,
pairs of pictures whose corresponding words were a minimal pair): length pairs and place pairs. The filler trials consisted of dissimilar pairs, always differing in the first CV sequence, and similar pairs that shared the initial CV sequence.
The picture position was counterbalanced. The trial order was
pseudo-randomized: we created four randomized lists, and
then altered them manually so that the same word was never
repeated in two consecutive trials. Furthermore, the minimalpair trials were always separated by at least two other trials.
Each participant heard each list once, with a different list for
each block. The block order was counterbalanced across participants.
Table 2: Trial types in testing.
C RITICAL PICTURE PAIRS
type
example
Length
taja-tajja
Place
gotCa-gotùa

F ILLER PICTURE PAIRS
type
example
Dissimilar tala-goýa
Similar
tala-taja

Results
We analyzed accuracy scores from testing with mixed-effects
logit models (Jaeger, 2008). We included random intercepts
for participants and items, and random slopes for participants
and items for all effects of interest that were manipulated
within participants or within items. We controlled for participants’ nonverbal IQ, self-reported L1 proficiency, and current L1 exposure and use by adding them as fixed effects to
the models. Although we present data for the four test blocks
separately for purposes of visualization, in statistical analyses
we collapse across test block.
As a sanity check, we expected that all participants, regardless of language background, should perform best on
filler-dissimilar trials, slightly worse on filler-similar trials,
and worst on critical trials. These overall results were borne
out, as illustrated in Figure 3. In a model with fixed effects of TRIAL TYPE (filler-dissimilar, filler-similar, critical)

2176

Length trials

0.9
Test2

Test3

0.5

Test4

Test1

Test3
Block

Mandarin speakers

Place trials
Korean
Mandarin

0.9
Test2

Test3

Test4

0.5

0.7

Accuracy

0.7
0.5

Filler−Dissimilar
Filler−Similar
Critical
Test1

Test2

Block

0.9

Test1

Accuracy

Korean
Mandarin

0.7

Accuracy

0.7

Filler−Dissimilar
Filler−Similar
Critical

0.5

Accuracy

0.9

Korean speakers

Test4

Test1

Block

Test2

Test3

Test4

Block

Figure 3: Proportion of correct responses on critical and filler
trials (in all figures, error bars are standard errors).

Figure 4: Proportion of correct responses on critical trials.

and LANGUAGE (Korean, Mandarin), we found that the responses in the filler-dissimilar condition were significantly
higher than in the filler-similar condition (p < .001), which
in turn were higher than in the critical condition (p < .001).
Neither LANGUAGE nor its interactions were significant in
the model. Furthermore, a log-likelihood ratio test comparing the full model to a reduced version which did not contain
LANGUAGE revealed no evidence that language background
significantly contributed to the model (χ(5) = 2.20; p = .82),
thus suggesting that there were no significant differences between the two language groups in overall response patterns.
Next, we compared Korean and Mandarin speakers on critical trials in a model with fixed effects of CRITICAL TRIAL
TYPE (length, place) and LANGUAGE (Korean, Mandarin).
If learners are able to capitalize on their L1-based perceptual generalization when beginning to learn new words, we
should observe a difference in performance between the two
language groups in line with their perceptual biases: Korean speakers should be more accurate on length pairs, and
Mandarin speakers more accurate on place pairs. However,
there was no significant interaction between CRITICAL TRIAL
TYPE and LANGUAGE (p=.21), indicating that Korean and
Mandarin speakers did not differ in their accuracy when
learning similar-sounding words that differed in either length
or place. These results are illustrated in Figure 4. This is in
striking contrast to perceptual discrimination results (Fig. 1;
Pajak, 2010b, 2010a; Pajak & Levy, in prep.), where – using
similarly constructed stimuli – Korean speakers clearly outperformed Mandarin speakers on perception of length con-

trasts, and the reverse was true for place contrasts.
However, we know that learners vary in their attention, motivation and learning skills. Thus, we asked whether only better learners are able to use their L1 resources and attend to fine
phonetic detail in word learning. To answer that question we
split the participants into two halves, top- and bottom-scoring
on filler trials. We chose this way of doing the median split
due to the fact that performance on fillers was a dimension independent from the variables of interest. The median score on
all fillers combined was 94.5% accuracy. There were 7 participants who scored right at 94.5%, who were then split based
on their performance on dissimilar fillers alone. The distribution of participants in terms of their language background was
fairly equal in both groups: Korean=13 and Mandarin=14 in
the top half, and Korean=14 and Mandarin=13 in the bottom
half. The filler scores for both top-scoring and bottom-scoring
participants are provided in Table 3 (next page). Both groups
were highly accurate on filler pairs (at least 80% accuracy),
but there was much more variability in the bottom-scoring
group.
The results split by top-scoring vs. bottom-scoring participants are illustrated in Figures 5 and 6. Even by visual inspection alone, the results on critical trials look strikingly different in the top vs. bottom-scoring group: in the top half, participants were clearly improving in the course of the experiment (with the biggest jump from Test1 to Test2), while in
the bottom half, participants’ responses were close to chance
throughout the experiment, with only minimal signs of learning (namely, Mandarin speakers seemed to improve on length
trials toward the end of the experiment). We analyzed these

2177

Top scoring participants − length trials

Test1

0.7

0.9
Test2

Test3

Test4

Test1

Test2

Test3

Test4

Block

Block

Top scoring participants − place trials

Bottom scoring participants − place trials

0.7

0.9

Korean
Mandarin

0.5

0.7

Accuracy

0.9

Korean
Mandarin

0.5

Accuracy

Korean
Mandarin

0.5

0.7

Accuracy

0.9

Korean
Mandarin

0.5

Accuracy

Bottom scoring participants − length trials

Test1

Test2

Test3

Test4

Test1

Block

Test2

Test3

Test4

Block

Figure 5: Faster learners: proportion of correct responses on
critical trials.

Figure 6: Slower learners: proportion of correct responses on
critical trials.

Table 3: Proportion of correct responses on filler trials (standard errors in parentheses).

LANGUAGE (p < .05). On place trials, Korean and Mandarin
speakers were not significantly different, but the numerical
tendency was the opposite of that seen in the length trials:
Mandarin speakers were slightly more accurate than Korean
speakers.
For bottom-scoring participants, on the other hand, we
found no significant interaction between CRITICAL TRIAL
TYPE and LANGUAGE . There were also no significant differences between Korean and Mandarin speakers when only
length (p = .21) or only place trials (p = .99) were examined.
However, Mandarin speakers did seem to improve on length
– but not place – trials toward the end of the experiment. It is
unclear why Mandarin, but not Korean speakers showed this
improvement, especially since – if anything – it was Korean
speakers who seemed to perform slightly better on filler trials
in the bottom-scoring group. As for the learning asymmetry
– improvement on length, but not on place – it could be that
length was simply easier to learn, perhaps due to it being a
more salient cue (note that in the perception study, Fig. 1,
length contrasts were obviously easier than place) and due
to the fact that the stimuli included significantly more length
words compared to place words, thus allowing more opportunity for perceptual learning of the length contrast.
Why did some learners succeed at using their perceptual
abilities while others did not? The individual measures we
collected indicate that the top-scoring and the bottom-scoring
groups did not differ in nonverbal IQ nor L1 proficiency.
However, the bottom-scoring participants did, on average, immigrate to the US later in life, and, consequently, had lower

F ILLER
TYPE

Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4

T OP HALF
Korean Mandarin
.95 (.01) .92 (.01)
.98 (.01) .98 (.01)
.98 (.01) .97 (.01)
.99 (.00) .99 (.01)

B OTTOM HALF
Korean Mandarin
.80 (.04) .84 (.02)
.90 (.02) .87 (.05)
.90 (.01) .86 (.05)
.89 (.02) .86 (.05)

results with a model with fixed effects of CRITICAL TRIAL
TYPE (length, place) and LANGUAGE (Korean, Mandarin),
and an additional fixed effect of FILLER PERFORMANCE (top,
bottom). We found a significant three-way interaction between CRITICAL TRIAL TYPE, LANGUAGE, and FILLER PER FORMANCE (p < .01), indicating distinct response patterns
for Korean vs. Mandarin speakers on length and place trials
depending on their overall success rate in learning, as measured by their accuracy on filler trials. (A regression analysis
treating filler performance as a continuous covariate yielded
similar results).
For the top-scoring group, we found the pattern indicating that participants were taking advantage of their perceptual biases: Korean speakers more accurate on length trials
than Mandarin speakers, but not on place trials, as indicated
by a significant interaction between CRITICAL TRIAL TYPE
and LANGUAGE (p < .01). Furthermore, a model examining length trials only revealed a significant main effect of

2178

English proficiency. This suggests that there might be an advantage for more balanced bilinguals (consistent with findings by Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009), or perhaps students
less accustomed to the US educational system have more
overall difficulty performing these kinds of tasks in a laboratory setting.

Discussion
Previous work (Pajak, 2010a, 2010b; Pajak & Levy, in prep.)
has shown beneficial effects of L1 properties on L2 discrimination, but what about learning? For the populations as a
whole there was no clear effect indicating that participants
made effective use of their native-language resources, but
there is evidence that the faster learners (as independently
assessed by filler performance) were able to do so. This is
in contrast to the discrimination results we cited, where L1based perceptual advantages were observed for all participants. This result suggests that there is something inherently
hard about the early stage of word learning that precludes attention to fine phonetic detail that is otherwise available during phonetic processing. This is even more surprising given
that adults have well-developed attentional and cognitive capacities, but nevertheless fail to use them in this task. It is still
an open question as to what exactly made the faster group
of learners succeed at using their L1 resources and attending to fine phonetic detail. Perhaps they were more attentive throughout the experiment, more motivated, or had better
learning skills.
Overall, the results reported here shed some more light on
the interaction between sound perception and word learning
in adults. In particular, they suggest that perceptual resources
are not easily used when learning minimal-pair words. An intriguing possibility – consistent with results from infant studies (Thiessen, 2007; see also Feldman, Griffiths, & Morgan,
2009) – is that learners’ initial strategy is to assume that similar sounding minimal pairs are homophones, and only phonetic evidence from non-minimal pairs (or explicit information about the number of categories) pushes them to revise
that assumption. This kind of parsimony might benefit learning when there is uncertainty about phonetic category boundaries – a possibility that we plan to pursue in future research.

Acknowledgments
For their helpful feedback the authors thank Eric Baković,
Klinton Bicknell, Computational Psycholinguistics Lab at
UC San Diego, and the audience of LSA 86. K. Michael
Brooks helped with data collection. We are grateful to Eugene
Carsey for permission to use his photographs of mushrooms
(www.eugenecarsey.com). This research was supported by
NIH Training Grant T32-DC000041 from the Center for Research in Language at UC San Diego to the first author, and
the UC San Diego Academic Senate Grant to the third author.

References
Choi, D.-I. (1995). Korean “tense" consonants as geminates. Kansas
Working Papers in Linguistics, 20, 25–38.

Feldman, N. H., Griffiths, T. L., & Morgan, J. L. (2009). Learning phonetic categories by learning a lexicon. In Proceedings of
the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2208–2213). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Feldman, N. H., Myers, E., White, K., Griffiths, T. L., & Morgan, J. L. (2011). Learners use word-level statistics in phonetic category acquisition. In Proceedings of the 35th Boston
University Conference on Language Development (pp. 197–209).
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Fennell, C. T., Waxman, S. R., & Weisleder, A. (2007). With referential cues, infants successfully use phonetic detail in word learning. In Proceedings of the 31st Boston University Conference on
Language Development. Cascadilla Press.
Fennell, C. T., & Werker, J. F. (2003). Early word learners’ ability
to access phonetic detail in well-known words. Language and
Speech, 46(2-3), 245–264.
Gerken, L. (2010). Infants use rational decision criteria for choosing
among models of their input. Cognition, 115, 362–366.
Gómez, R. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant structure.
Psychological Science, 13(5), 431–436.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: away from ANOVAs
(transformation or not) and towards logit mixed effects models.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434–446.
Kaushanskaya, M., & Marian, V. (2009). The bilingual advantage
in novel word learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(4),
705–710.
Ladefoged, P., & Maddieson, I. (1996). The sounds of the world’s
languages. Oxford, UK; Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Lin, H. (2001). A grammar of Mandarin Chinese. München: Lincom
Europa.
Major, R. C. (2008). Transfer in second language phonology:
A review. In J. G. Hansen Edwards & M. L. Zampini (Eds.),
Phonology and second language acquisition (pp. 64–94). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Pajak, B. (2010a). Bilinguals generalize from known phonological contrasts in perception of a novel language. St. Louis, MO.
(Poster at the 51st Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society)
Pajak, B. (2010b). Perceptual advantage from generalized linguistic
knowledge. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 369–374). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Pajak, B., & Levy, R. (in prep.). Inductive generalization over phonetic categories in perceptual reorganization: the case of segmental length. (Manuscript)
Pajak, B., & Levy, R. (to appear). Distributional learning of L2
phonological categories by listeners with different language backgrounds. In Proceedings of the 36th Boston University Conference on Language Development. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Perfors, A., & Dunbar, D. (2010). Phonetic training makes word
learning easier. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1613–1618). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Rost, G. C., & McMurray, B. (2009). Speaker variability augments
phonological processing in early word learning. Developmental
Science, 12(2), 339–349.
Sohn, H.-M. (2001). The Korean language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stager, C. L., & Werker, J. F. (1997). Infants listen for more phonetic
detail in speech perception than in word-learning tasks. Nature,
388, 381–382.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Lexical neighborhoods and
the word-form representations of 14-month-olds. Psychological
Science, 13(5), 480–484.
Thiessen, E. D. (2007). The effect of distributional information on
children’s use of phonemic contrasts. Journal of Memory and
Language, 56, 16–34.
Werker, J. F., Fennell, C. T., Christopher T., Corcoran, K. M., &
Stager, C. L. (2002). Infants’ ability to learn phonetically similar
words: effects of age and vocabulary size. Infancy, 3(1), 1–30.
Yoshida, K. A., Fennell, C. T., Swingley, D., & Werker, J. F. (2009).
Fourteen-month-old infants learn similar-sounding words. Developmental Science, 12(3), 412–418.

2179

