UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Category structure modulates interleaving and blocking advantage in inductive category
acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0nw0d367

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Carvalho, Paulo
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Category structure modulates interleaving and blocking advantage in inductive
category acquisition
Paulo F. Carvalho (pcarvalh@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E 10th St
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E 10th St
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

taught. For example, Elio and Anderson (1984; see also,
Sandhofer & Doumas, 2008) have proposed that learning
should start with low variability items and later introduce
items with greater variability. Another proposal is that items
that present the same generalization should be presented
close together in temporal sequence (e.g., Elio & Anderson,
1981; Mathy & Feldman, 2009).
More recently, researchers have proposed interleaving
items from the categories being taught (i.e., presented in
alternating fashion), rather than grouping items together
from the same category. The advantage of alternating
categories has been observed in different kinds of concepts
such as artists’ styles (Kornell & Bjork, 2008), bird species
(Kornell, Castel, Eich, & Bjork, 2010; Wahlheim,
Dunlosky, & Jacoby, 2011), novel category learning in
children (Vlach, Sandhofer, & Kornell, 2008) and also
mathematical operations in primary school students (Taylor
& Rohrer, 2010).
Initial accounts of this advantage for interleaving related
the interleaved presentation with spacing of exemplars.
However, Kang and Pashler, (2012) used a procedure
similar to the one used by Kornell and Bjork (2008), but
with added presentation conditions. In one experiment, the
authors compared categorization performance in a
generalization test preceded by one of four conditions: (1)
blocked, (2) interleaved, (3) blocking in which every
presentation of a painting was followed by an unrelated
filler task (Temporal Spaced Condition), and (4) when all
exemplars from the same painter were presented
simultaneously (Blocked Simultaneous Condition). The
results showed that only the interleaved condition resulted
in better performance than the blocked condition, thus
providing evidence that greater temporal spacing of
presentations is not the critical factor in the interleaved
advantage. The authors argue that the real advantage of
interleaving might be a result of the greater opportunity to
contrast and compare examples, making the differences
between the artists’ styles more salient (see also, Goldstone,
2003; Goldstone & Steyvers, 2001).
Further evidence for this proposal was provided in a
second experiment in which the interleaved and blocked
conditions were compared to a simultaneous presentation of
two paintings by different artists. This latter condition

Research in inductive category learning has demonstrated that
interleaving exemplars of categories results in better
performance than presenting each category in a separate
block. Two experiments indicate that the advantage of
interleaved over blocked presentation is modulated by the
structure of the categories being presented. More specifically,
interleaved presentation results in better performance for
categories with high within- and between-category similarity
while blocked presentation results in better performance for
categories with low within- and between-category similarity.
This interaction is predicted by accounts in which blocking
promotes discovery of features shared by the members of a
category whereas interleaving promotes discovery of features
that discriminate between categories.
Keywords: category learning; order effects; interleaving;

Introduction
How to present information so that learning and memory are
optimized is an important issue in teaching and training
contexts (Rohrer & Pashler, 2010). It has long been
demonstrated that spacing repeated presentations of the
same information results in better memory than repeating
the same information at a single occasion, even when time
and number of presentations are equated (Ebbinghaus,
1885). This memory phenomenon, known as the “Spacing
Effect,” is a highly robust finding (Delaney, Verkoeijen, &
Spirgel, 2010; Proctor, 1980) that has been shown both in
experimental situations with words and pictures and more
applied situations such as flashcard studying (Kornell,
2009). Although demonstrating the critical importance of
carefully considering how to present information, the
importance of maximizing memory for specific concepts or
problems might not be as relevant as learning general
concepts. Indeed, in educational contexts, often times
inferring what characterizes or defines a concept or problem
is more relevant than memorizing a single instance of that
concept or fact. In this sense, a more interesting question
might be to know whether the way instances are presented
influences inductive learning and subsequent generalization
of the acquired knowledge.
The question of how to present information in order to
optimize category learning and generalization has been
raised before and several proposals have been put forward.
Some of these proposals are related to the categories being

186

resulted in similar performance to interleaved presentation
and better performance than the blocked condition.
Interleaving examples from different categories, thus,
may improve inductive learning because it promotes
discrimination between the categories. Rapid alternation
between examples of different categories, as well as
simultaneous presentation of multiple categories, might lead
to enhanced attention to the features that discriminate
between the categories and differentiation of the dimensions
on which the categories vary (Goldstone & Steyvers, 2001;
Kang & Pashler, 2012; Nosofsky, 1986). However, there are
also situations in which these conditions are not ideal and
previous studies have also demonstrated an advantage of
blocked presentation (Goldstone, 1996; Kurtz & Hovland,
1956).
Goldstone (1996) proposed that category learning might
be difficult for two different reasons: high between-category
similarity or low within-category similarity. High betweencategory similarity refers to category structures in which
both categories share most of their features, making
discriminating the categories a matter of finding subtle
differences between exemplars (as is the case of
distinguishing between alligators versus crocodiles, for
example). Low within-category similarity, on the other
hand, refers to category structures in which the exemplars of
the same category share very few features (as is the case for
the category “animal,” for example).
Each one of these two kinds of categories requires
different mechanisms for efficient category learning. In the
case of high between-category similarity, one has to identify
subtle differences between categories, which might be
facilitated by frequent alternation. However, rapid
alternation between two categories with low within-category
similarity will not allow for the identification of the relevant
properties characteristic of a category. In this case it might
be more beneficial to block exemplars of each category
separately so that the learner can identify the shared features
among members of a category hidden within their diversity.
By this analysis, the best presentation schedule would
depend upon the learning situation at hand. In this paper we
approach this question directly by manipulating only the
characteristics of the stimuli presented during learning. We
aim to demonstrate that interleaving or blocking can both be
beneficial for inductive category learning. In Experiment 1
participants were taught three categories with high withinand between-category similarity, in both an interleaved and
blocked schedule. In Experiment 2 we employ the same
learning procedure but using three categories that possess
low within- and between- category similarity. Performance
during category learning and in a subsequent generalization
task are measured.

categories had high within- and between- category
similarity. In this sense, every stimulus from the same
category shared several features, some category relevant and
others not, while they also shared almost every feature with
every stimulus from the other categories. We believe this is
a situation close to previous work on sequencing effects in
category learning (e.g., Kornell & Bjork, 2008) and
literature on perceptual discrimination learning showing an
interleaving advantage (Mitchell, Kadib, Nash, Lavis, &
Hall, 2008; Mundy, Honey, & Dwyer, 2007). Under this
situation, rapid alternation between categories will lead to
the direction of attention to the diagnostic features because
identifying what is changing from category to category is
relatively easy given the high overall similarity.

Method
Participants Forty-four Indiana University undergraduate
students participated in this experiment in return for partial
course credit. All participants completed every condition.
Fifteen participants did not reach the criterion of 34%
correct responses during categorization learning and were
excluded from further analyses.

Fig. 1: Examples of stimuli used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Apparatus and stimuli In this and the subsequent
experiment, blob figures were used as stimuli (see Fig. 1).
All blobs were created by randomly generating curvilinear
segments. The blobs used were very similar, sharing almost
every feature. Variation within each category was exactly
the same for all categories, so that a difference that could
exist between two exemplars in Category 1 would also exist
between 2 exemplars of Categories 2 and 3. As a cover
story, participants were told that a recent expedition to Mars
recovered several cells of alien organisms. Each cell could
be categorized into one of 3 species based solely on its
perceptual features. Stimuli were presented on a computer
screen and participants responded using keys on the
keyboard with a consistent mapping to the category
assignment.

Experiment 1: High Similarity
In this experiment we aim to replicate previous results
showing an advantage for interleaved presentation of
categories for category learning. Participants were presented
with 3 categories (either blocked or interleaved). These 3

187

Design and procedure This experiment had two conditions
(blocked category learning and interleaved category
learning), manipulated within-subject. Each condition was
composed by 2 phases. The first phase was a category
learning task. During this task participants were presented
with a stimulus in the center of the screen for 500 ms. After
the blob was removed, the participant was asked to classify
the blob into one of 3 species (Q, Y or P) by pressing the
corresponding key on the keyboard. After a participant’s
response, the blob was presented again for 2000 ms together
with the presentation of feedback on the accuracy of their
response and the correct species of the blob (e.g,
“CORRECT! This cell belongs to species Q” or “Sorry, that
is INCORRECT! This cell belongs to species Y”).
A 1000 ms inter-trial interval followed and then a new
trial began. In the blocked condition, the categories
presented alternated 25% of the time while in the
interleaved condition they alternated 75% of the time. Thus,
in the interleaved condition, the probability of a blob being
followed by a blob of the same category was low, whereas
for the blocked condition this probability was high. We used
this probabilistic approach rather than creating purely
interleaved or blocked conditions in order to diminish the
possibility that participants noticed the pattern of alternation
in responses, which would affect categorization accuracy.
Furthermore, if a purely blocked condition had been used
there would be no way to guarantee participants’ attention to
the task, as there would be no uncertainty as to the correct
categorization. This approach has been used before in
similar tasks with successful results (Carvalho & Goldstone,
2011; Goldstone, 1996).
The learning phase was composed of 4 blocks. Each block
had 48 trials (8 exemplars of each category repeated 2 times
each). After the 4th block of categorization learning a new
set of instructions was presented on the screen and the
second phase began. This second phase was a generalization
task during which 48 stimuli were shown in random order –
the 24 blobs participants studied during the learning task
and 24 new stimuli. The new stimuli were generated in the
same manner as training stimuli, with new instantiations of
the unique features. Each stimulus was presented in the
center of the screen for 500 ms, after which participants
were asked to classify it into one of the species just learned.
After a 1000 ms inter-trial interval, a new trial would begin.
No feedback was provided during this phase.
The two learning conditions (blocked vs. interleaved)
differed only in the frequency of category change and the
species labels. In one of the conditions Q, Y and P
labels/keys were used, while in the other, A, G and L were
used, by random assignment. Which condition was
presented first was counterbalanced across participants and
the allocation of the stimuli to each category and condition
was randomized across participants.

with learning condition (blocked vs. interleaved) and
learning block (1 vs. 2 vs. 3 vs. 4) as factors revealed main
effects of learning block, F(3,81) = 59.42, p < .00001 and
condition, F(1,27) = 18.58, p = .0002, but no interaction
between the two variables, F(3,81) = 1.43, p = .24. Thus,
there is an improvement in categorization accuracy during
the task, regardless of presentation schedule, and blocked
presentation results in the overall best accuracy rates.

0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50

blocked
interleaved

0.40

0.45

Proportion Correct Reponses

0.70

0.75

Learning Phase

1

2

3

4

Block

1.0

Generalization Phase

0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

Proportion Correct Reponses

0.8

blocked
interleaved

novel

studied

Fig. 2: Results from Experiment 1. The top graph represents
accuracy during the learning phase for both conditions
across the four blocks of trials. The bottom graph represents
accuracy during the generalization phase for novel and
studied stimuli for each condition. Error bars represent
standard errors.
The results from the generalization task are depicted in
the bottom panel of Fig. 2. A 2 x 2 repeated measures
ANOVA with learning condition (blocked vs. interleaved)
and stimulus presented (novel vs. studied) as factors,
revealed a main effect of condition, F (1,27) = 4.50, p = .04,
with higher accuracy for the interleaved condition, but no
main effect of stimulus presented, F (1,27) < 1, or
interaction between the two variables, F (1,27) < 1.
Overall these results replicate previous demonstrations
that interleaving very similar categories during learning
results in better memory for the presented items (as seen by
the higher accuracy rates for the studied stimuli) but also
better generalization to novel items. The finding that
blocked presentation results in higher accuracy rates during
learning has also been demonstrated before and has been
explained by a relative ease in performing the training task
(Taylor & Rohrer, 2010), which would make the interleaved

Results and Discussion
The top panel of Fig. 2 depicts the main results of the
categorization task. A 2 x 4 repeated measures ANOVA

188

condition a desirable difficulty in this kind of task (Kornell
& Bjork, 2008).
The results are consistent with the hypothesis that
interleaved presentation promotes the discovery of features
that discriminate between alternative categories, which is
important when categories are highly similar.

showing an overall improvement for both presentation
conditions. Moreover, categorization is overall better for the
blocked condition when compared to the interleaved
condition, F(1, 31) = 29.03, p < .0001. Finally, a significant
interaction between presentation condition and learning
block was also found, F(3, 93) = 7.06, p = .0002, indicating
that the difference in accuracy between the two conditions
decreases as the categorization progresses.

Experiment 2: Low Similarity
In this Experiment we analyze the effect of the schedule of
presentation in a categorization situation different from that
of Experiment 1. We tried to create a category learning task
in which blocked presentation of the category exemplars
would allow for the discovery of hard-to-find common
features among dissimilar category members.
We employ the same procedure as in Experiment 1 but
the 3 categories now have low within- and betweencategory similarity. In this sense, exemplars from the same
category share only one feature (the category relevant
feature) while differing in all other features. Moreover,
exemplars from different categories are also highly
dissimilar, sharing none of their features. Thus, in this
condition, it is not expected that interleaving will have a
beneficial effect on learning. Rapid alternation of categories
would not allow for the identification of important features
because all the features change from trial to trial. On the
contrary, we expect blocked presentation to result in
superior category learning and performance on a later
generalization task, by promoting comparison of objects
from the same category and thereby promoting discovery of
their subtle commonality.

0.8
0.7
0.6

blocked
interleaved

0.5

Proportion Correct Reponses

0.9

Learning Phase

1

2

3

4

Block

blocked
interleaved

0.6
0.4
0.2

Proportion Correct Reponses

0.8

1.0

Generalization Phase

0.0

Method

novel

Participants Thirty-two Indiana University undergraduate
students participated in this experiment in return for partial
course credit. All participants completed every condition
and all reached the criterion of 34% correct responses or
more during categorization learning.
Apparatus and stimuli The same kind of blob figures as in
Experiment 1 were used. However, the blobs used in this
experiment differed from every other blob in all the
segments except the one that defined each one of the six
categories (each one of the discriminating features). In this
experiment, Blobs also differed in their overall shape, some
being more circular and others more elongated. All other
details were kept the same as in Experiment 1.
Design and procedure This experiment followed the same
procedure as Experiment 1 with the exception of the stimuli
used.

studied

Fig. 3: Results from Experiment 2. The top graph shows
accuracy during the learning phase for both conditions
across the four blocks of trials. The bottom graph shows
accuracy during the generalization phase for novel and
studied stimuli for each condition.
The bottom panel of Fig. 3 shows accuracy performance
in the generalization task as a function of stimulus presented
(novel vs. studied) and presentation condition during
learning (blocked vs. interleaved). A 2 x 2 repeated
measures ANOVA with both presentation condition
(blocked vs. interleaved) and stimulus presented (novel vs.
studied) as factors revealed a main effect of stimulus, F(1,
31) = 74.20, p < .00001, with higher accuracy for the
studied than novel stimuli. There was no significant main
effect of presentation condition during learning, F(1, 31) =
1.14, p = .30. However, the interaction between the two
variables was significant, F(1, 31) = 14.61, p = .0006. To
further investigate this interaction, pairwise t-test
comparisons were performed correcting for the error
associated with multiple comparisons using Bonferroni
correction (critical α = .025). This analysis revealed that
blocked presentation results in higher accuracy in
categorizing novel stimuli, t(31) = 2.47, p = .02, but there is

Results and Discussion
The graph in the top panel of Figure 3 depicts response
accuracy during category learning as a function of both
learning block and schedule of presentation.
A 2 x 4 repeated measures ANOVA with both learning
condition (blocked vs. interleaved) and learning block (1 vs.
2 vs. 3 vs. 4) as repeated measures factors, revealed a main
effect of learning block, F(3, 93) = 169.74, p < .0001,

189

no difference between the two conditions for studied
stimuli, t(31) = 1.21, p = .24.
Thus, the results of this experiment demonstrate an
advantage of blocked presentation of category exemplars in
accuracy during learning, although participants in the
interleaved condition approach that performance by the last
trial. Perhaps more interestingly, blocked presentation
resulted in better performance when categorizing new
stimuli when compared to interleaved presentation.
However, for studied stimuli no difference was found.
These results directly challenge the proposal that
interleaving categories during learning improves
performance due to the increased spacing of exemplars.
They are, however, consistent with our proposal that the
interleaving advantage was due to greater opportunity for
contrasting categories and discovery features that
distinguish between categories. When finding feature
differences between categories is easy, as in Experiment 2,
then the more important task is to find features shared by
members of the same category, a task promoted by
blocking. This clearly demonstrates that the category
structure has a modulating effect on the advantage of one
sequencing over another.

Although this can, in fact, account for the results found in
Experiment 1, that is not the case for Experiment 2. In that
experiment, the condition resulting in greater accuracy
during learning also resulted in better generalization.
In line with Goldstone (1996) we propose that
interleaving categories allows for the identification of the
features that are different between each category while
blocked presentation promotes the identification of the
features that are common among stimuli from the same
category. This dichotomy is the result of the same principle:
the opportunity to compare and contrast the properties of the
categories, what will emphasize different features in
different situations,
We further build on this proposal by suggesting a
mechanistic account of how it takes place in a trial by trial
basis. It has previously been demonstrated that during
category learning participants take into account information
from the previous few trials to decide whether a stimulus
belongs to one category or another (Stewart & Brown, 2004;
Stewart, Brown, & Chater, 2002). We further propose, that
when two successive stimuli are similar and in different
categories, participants’ attention will be directed to the
differences between exemplars by a comparison process. On
the other hand, if stimuli are very dissimilar but in the same
category, participants’ attention will be directed towards the
similarities between successive stimuli. This proposal can
account for both the advantage of interleaving over blocking
with high-similarity categories and the reversal with lowsimilarity categories.
Rapid alternation of categories allows participants to
identify differences between categories, which will be
particularly beneficial if those differences are hard to detect,
as in the case of the stimuli used in Experiment 1 and the
artists’ styles or bird species used in previous studies.
Infrequent alternation of categories, on the other hand, will
allow participants to identify the commonalities within each
category, which is particularly beneficial if categories are
composed by members with high variability, like the ones
used in Experiment 2.
In appreciating the benefits of blocking it is important to
keep in mind that not all concept learning takes place by
identifying discriminating features among categories. For
example, sometimes it is possible to create an absolute
characterization of a category in terms of its prevalent
features, regardless of their discriminative values (Markman
& Ross, 2003). Furthermore, in other situations,
memorizing instances might be a highly useful strategy.
In sum, the results presented here show that there may not
be a single answer to the question of how should an
instructor sequence information so that the learner acquires
the knowledge and is able to generalize it more efficiently.
Best sequencing practices will depend on the nature of the
categories being sequenced.

General Discussion
Learning the characteristics of concepts and categories
inductively takes place frequently. In learning contexts, it is
also important to be able to generalize that knowledge to
new exemplars. In this work we studied the interaction
between object presentation during learning and the
structure of the category being taught for inductive learning
and generalization optimization.
Experiment 1 replicated previous results demonstrating
that interleaving categories being taught results in better
memory and generalization for those categories.
Additionally, in Experiment 2 we presented results pointing
to an advantage of blocking by category. In Experiment 2
generalization was better for categories that had their
exemplars presented in adjacent temporal sequence during
learning.
Critically, the only difference between these two
experiments was the properties of the categories being
taught. while in Experiment 1, the three categories were
highly similar among each other and were constituted by
exemplars that were also very similar, in Experiment 2 the
similarity within and between the categories was low,
resulting in categories that did not share any features and
were composed of stimuli that shared only one feature with
other objects in their same category.
A possible explanation to at least some of the results
presented here could be that interleaving constitutes a
“desirable difficulty” (Bjork, 1994). In both experiments,
blocked presentation during the learning phase resulted in a
higher proportion of correct responses. This could indicate
that interleaved presentation involved a greater effort on the
participants’ part, maintaining their attention to the stimuli
and leading to better performance in the subsequent task.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by National Science
Foundation REESE grant 0910218 and Department of

190

Education IES grant R305A1100060. PFC was also
supported by a Fulbright Research Fellowship and Graduate
Fellowship SFRH/BD/68554/2010 from the Portuguese
Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT). The authors
would like to thank Rachel Selonick for her help with data
collection.

induction in young and older adults. Psychology and
aging, 25(2), 498-503.
Kurtz, K. H., & Hovland, C. I. (1956). Concept learning
with differing sequences of instances. Journal of
experimental psychology, 51(4), 239.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4), 592613.
Mathy, F. & Feldman, J. (2009). A rule-based presentation
order facilitates category learning. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 16, 1050-1057.
Mitchell, C. J., Kadib, R., Nash, S., Lavis, Y., & Hall, G.
(2008). Analysis of the role of associative inhibition in
perceptual learning by means of the same-different task.
Journal of experimental psychology. Animal behavior
processes, 34(4), 475-85.
Mundy, M. E., Honey, R. C., & Dwyer, D. M. (2007).
Simultaneous presentation of similar stimuli produces
perceptual learning in human picture processing. Journal
of experimental psychology. Animal behavior processes,
33(2), 124-38.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
experimental psychology. General, 115(1), 39-61.
Proctor, R. W. (1980). The Influence of Intervening Tasks
on the Spacing Effect for Frequency Judgments. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory, 6(3), 254-266.
Rohrer, D., & Pashler, H. (2010). Recent Research on
Human Learning Challenges Conventional Instructional
Strategies. Educational Researcher, 39(5), 406-412.
Stewart, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2004). Sequence effects in
the categorization of tones varying in frequency. Journal
of experimental psychology. Learning, memory, and
cognition, 30(2), 416-30.
Stewart, N., Brown, G. D. A., & Chater, N. (2002).
Sequence effects in categorization of simple perceptual
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28(1), 3-11.
Taylor, K., & Rohrer, D. (2010). The effects of interleaved
practice. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(6), 837-848.
Vlach, H. A., Sandhofer, C. M., & Kornell, N. (2008). The
spacing effect in children’s memory and category
induction. Cognition, 109(1), 163-7.
Wahlheim, C. N., Dunlosky, J., & Jacoby, L. L. (2011).
Spacing enhances the learning of natural concepts: an
investigation of mechanisms, metacognition, and aging.
Memory & cognition.

References
Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalfe & A. P. Shimamura (Eds.), Metacognition:
Knowing about knowing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carvalho, P. F., & Goldstone, R. L. (2011). Sequential
similarity and comparison effects in category learning.
In C. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Delaney, P. F., Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L., & Spirgel, A. (2010).
Spacing and Testing Effects  : A Deeply Critical,
Lengthy, and At Times Discursive Review of the
Literature. Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
53(10), 63–147.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1885). Memory: A contribution to
experimental psychology. City. New York, NY:
Teachers College, Columbia University.
Elio, R., & Anderson, J. R. (1981). The effects of category
generalizations and instance similarity on schema
abstraction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 7(6), 397-417.
Elio, R., & Anderson, J. R. (1984). The effects of
information order and learning mode on schema
abstraction. Memory & cognition, 12(1), 20-30.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and interrelated concepts.
Memory & cognition, 24(5), 608-28.
Goldstone, R. L. (2003). Learning to perceive while
perceiving to learn. In R. Kimchi, M. Behrmann, & C.
Olson (Eds.), Perceptual organization in vision:
Behavioral and neural perspectives. New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Goldstone, R. L., & Steyvers, M. (2001). The sensitization
and differentiation of dimensions during category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
130(1), 116-139.
Kang, S. H. K., & Pashler, H. (2012). Learning Painting
Styles: Spacing is Advantageous when it Promotes
Discriminative Contrast. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
26, 97-103.
Kornell, N. (2009). Optimising learning using flashcards:
Spacing is more effective than cramming. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 23(9), 1297-1317.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: is spacing the “enemy of induction”?
Psychological science, 19(6), 585-92.
Kornell, N., Castel, A. D., Eich, T. S., & Bjork, R. A.
(2010). Spacing as the friend of both memory and

191

