UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal Status meets Coherence: The Explanatory Role of Causal Models in Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5vs9329v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Mayrhofer, Ralf
Rothe, Anselm

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal Status meets Coherence:
The Explanatory Role of Causal Models in Categorization
Ralf Mayrhofer (rmayrho@uni-goettingen.de)
Anselm Rothe (anselm.rothe@stud.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen,
Goßlerstraße 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany

Fratianne, 1995). A causal Bayes net consists of nodes,
which represent causally relevant variables (i.e., in case of
categorization: the presence or absence of features or—more
general—properties of objects), and arrows, which stand for
counterfactual or statistical dependencies between these
variables. The arrows are placeholders for underlying causal
mechanisms (Pearl, 2000) and render the variables into
causes and effects. Figure 1 shows an example of a common-cause network that relates a cause feature FC to three
effect features FE1, FE2, and FE3. The features of a category
are usually coded such that the typical feature value is 1
(i.e., presence) and the atypical value is 0 (i.e., absence).

Abstract
Research on causal-based categorization has found two competing effects: According to the causal-status hypothesis,
people consider causally central features more than less central ones. In contrast, people often focus upon feature patterns
that are coherent with the category’s causal model (coherence
hypothesis). Following up on the proposal that categorization
can be seen as inference to the best explanation (e.g., Murphy
& Medin, 1985), we propose that causal models might serve
different explanatory roles. First, a causal model can serve as
an explanation why the prototype of a category is as it is. Second, a causal model can also serve as an explanation why an
exemplar might deviate from the prototype. In an experiment,
we manipulated whether typical or atypical features were
linked by causal mechanism. We found a causal-status effect
in the first case and a coherence effect in the latter one, suggesting both are faces of the same coin.

FE1

Keywords: categorization; causal reasoning; causal status effect; coherence effect; explanation.

FC

FE2

Introduction
The question how people organize objects into categories
and form abstract concepts about the world to make sense of
it has puzzled philosophers for centuries. It is therefore not
surprising that categorization has been an important topic in
cognitive science since its beginnings. Early but nevertheless prominent accounts concentrated on the role of similarity between exemplars, or exemplars and category prototypes, or rules with respect to defining features of a category
(e.g., Nosofsky, 1986; Rosch & Mervis, 1975; for an overview see Ashby & Maddox, 2005). In contrast, more recent
accounts emphasize the role of abstract conceptual, mostly
causal knowledge as an integral part of category representations (see Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rehder, 2010; Rehder &
Hastie, 2001; Sloman, Love, & Ahn, 1998): People do not
only know which features are typical for a category and
which not. They often represent knowledge about how
strongly and why features are correlated with each other
within a category (Ahn, Marsh, Luhmann, & Lee, 2002;
Murphy & Medin, 1985). For instance, people do not only
know that birds typically have wings, can fly, and build
nests on trees. People also know that birds build nests on
trees because they can fly and that they can fly because they
have wings.
This kind of causal knowledge underlying category concepts can be formalized in causal graphical models or Bayes
nets (see Rehder, 2003a, 2003b; Waldmann, Holyoak, &

FE3
Figure 1: An example of a simple common-cause structure
that connects a cause feature FC with three effect features
FE1, FE2, and FE3. Due to the causal relations, the state of
each effect feature depends counterfactually or statistically
upon the state of the cause feature.
Nowadays, it’s quite uncontroversial that causal knowledge is an important part of people’s concepts that underlie
category representation (see Rehder, 2010, for a review).
But it is still in controversial debate how causal knowledge
affects the classification of objects.
In a typical causal-based categorization task people are
introduced to a target category that possesses a set of mostly
three or four features. In addition, it is pointed out how these
features are causally related to each other due to some causal mechanisms that hold for the category (e.g., a commoncause model as shown in Figure 1). Then, participants are
presented with several potential exemplars with the category’s features being either present or absent. For each of the
presented exemplars, membership ratings are obtained. The
enduring controversy, then, spans around the question how
the instructed causal model interacts with the presence and

743

Figure 2. Predicted patterns for category membership ratings are shown according to (a) the causal status hypothesis and (b)
the coherence hypothesis. The predicted ratings are computed for a category possessing four features that are connected as a
common-cause model (as shown in Figure 1). The ratings depend upon the presence of the cause feature (FC = 0 vs. FC = 1;
dashed vs. solid lines) and upon the number of effect features being present, #(FE = 1)={0, 1, 2, 3}.
absence of features with respect to the membership ratings
of the presented exemplars.
Some researchers propose that causal knowledge is an
important determinant of individual feature weights in these
judgments (e.g., Ahn, Kim, Lassaline, & Dennis, 2000;
Marsh & Ahn, 2006). According to this account, the causal
status of a feature matters. Others, however, emphasize the
importance of feature configurations that are more or less
coherent with the category’s causal model (Rehder, 2003a,
2003b; Rehder & Hastie, 2001; Rehder & Kim, 2010). Although the effects are conceptually independent of each
other (Rehder, 2010), both sides claim (and have—
puzzlingly—shown empirically) that the other effect plays
only a marginal, if any, role in human categorization.
In the following sections, we will describe the causal status hypothesis and the coherence hypothesis in more detail.
Then, we will offer an account that—in our view—makes
sense of the diverging evidence, and present an experiment
that tests our claims.

For example, with respect to a common-cause model (see
Figure 1), the presence vs. absence of the cause feature FC
should have more influence on the membership rating of an
exemplar than the presence vs. absence of an effect feature.
In Figure 2a, such an idealized causal status effect is shown:
The membership ratings increase with the number of features being present; the increase, however, is higher for the
cause feature (ΔC), than for effect features (ΔE).
Conceptually, the causal status effect has been linked to
psychological essentialism (Ahn et al., 2000). Hence, people
believe in things having essences that make them the objects
they are. An essence, then, is the (unobservable) root cause
for the surface features that can be observed in category
members (Gelman & Wellman, 1991). Features that have a
high causal status might be seen as most diagnostic for an
object’s essence and, therefore, category membership (Ahn
et al., 2000; see also Rehder & Kim, 2010).

Coherence effect
Whereas the causal status effect is defined with respect to
the weight of individual features, the coherence effect arises
from the impact of feature interactions (Rehder, 2010).
According to the coherence hypothesis, exemplars whose
feature configurations are most coherent with the category’s
causal model are seen as the best members. Causal models,
therefore, provide us with information about which features
should go together in an exemplar. Features that are connected by a causal link should be either both present, or both
absent (Rehder, 2003a; Rehder, 2010). With respect to a

Causal status effect
According to the causal status hypothesis, features that are
causally more central (i.e., that have more dependents in the
causal model or that appear earlier in a causal chain) have
greater influence in categorization decisions when other
perceptual (e.g., salience) or statistical (e.g., cue validity)
properties of the material are held constant or controlled for
(e.g., Ahn et al., 2000). The causal status of a feature is,
therefore, an important determinant of its decision weight.

744

common-cause model (see Figure 1), for example, membership ratings should be an increasing function of the number
of effects being present when the cause feature is present,
but a decreasing function in its absence. Figure 2b shows
such an idealized coherence effect. Membership ratings are
expected to be highest when all features are either present or
absent. In this case, all causal links are preserved (i.e., such
an exemplar is most coherent). The worst (i.e., most incoherent) exemplars, in contrast, are those that preserve none
of the links: The cause feature is present but all effect features are absent, or the cause feature is absent but all effect
features are present (three violated links in both cases).
Coherence in the proposed manner, however, faces a
problem when assessed intuitively in real world cases that
pop into one’s mind: It does not make sense. An animal that
does not have wings, does not fly, and does not build nests
on trees is not a bird, although the absence of these features
is perfectly coherent with the causal model of the concept
“bird”. Marsh and Ahn (2006) therefore suggested that the
coherence effect may be not more than an experimental
artifact arising from the artificial material used by Rehder
and colleagues (e.g., Rehder 2003a, 2003b; Rehder & Hastie, 2001). Nevertheless, we propose otherwise.

From this point of view, we can at least differentiate two
explanatory roles of causal models. First, when causal
mechanisms are established in terms of typical features, the
causal model serves as an explanation why the category’s
prototype or prototypical exemplar (i.e., all features present)
is as it is. The bird example given above belongs to this type
of explanation. With respect to a common-cause model (see
Figure 1), we would expect a strong increase of membership
ratings with more effect features being present when the
cause feature is also present. In this case more and more
explanatory links are served (i.e., the exemplar becomes
more and more coherent with the provided explanation). But
when the cause is absent, the effect features are conceptually unrelated to each other. Therefore, we would expect a
much smaller increase when more and more effects are
present. Since the presence vs. absence of the cause feature
modulates the positive influence of the effect features, we
expect membership ratings that—in the aggregate—exhibit
a strong causal status effect.
Second, however, it is also possible to establish causal
mechanisms with respect to atypical feature values (usually
coded as absences). In this case, the causal model serves as
an explanation for why a category member might deviate
from the category prototype (e.g., fouling that makes an
apple not looking like an apple anymore). When now presented with an exemplar that lacks all typical features, you
would probably be much more willing to judge this exemplar a category member than in the bird example, because
the causal model provided you with an explanation why this
atypical exemplar deviates from the prototype. Thus, in case
the causal model links atypical feature values, we expect a
pattern that looks quite like the prediction of the coherence
hypothesis (see Figure 2b). First related evidence for this
proposal comes from Ahn, Novick, and Kim (2003): In their
studies, participants judged persons who showed a set of
abnormal characteristics (e.g., suffering from insomnia,
memory deficits, and episodes of extreme anxiety) as more
“normal” when provided with plausible causal relations
between these abnormal characteristics compared to a condition in which no such links were provided.
To summarize, we believe that the diverging evidence
found in the literature regarding the causal status and the
coherence effect stems from the fact that causal models play
different roles in categorization and that those studies might
differ with respect to the explanatory role of the instructed
causal model. In the next section we present an experiment
that tests our claim.

Explanatory roles of causal models
So far, the whole debate has neglected the fact that causal
models may play different roles in the representation of
concepts that underlie categories. Causation in those models
is implemented (or thought) in a way that causes, when
present, have the power to bring about their effects, but are
causally inactive when absent (Cheng, 1997; Rehder,
2003a). At first glance, this might not matter anyway: Usually, the presence of the cause goes together with the presence of its effects, as well as the absence of the cause goes
together with the absence of its effects (Note, that this superficial symmetry is the basis for the coherence hypothesis). However, whereas the first fact is a direct consequence
of causal mechanism, the latter is just an indirect “side effect” of it (Dowe, 2000, aptly mentioned that in this case the
absence of the cause prevents the presence of its effect by
omission, i.e., just by not causing it). Although this difference hasn’t received much attention yet, we think it is crucial for understanding causal-based categorization.
Categorization can be seen as a kind of inference to the
best explanation (Jameson & Gentner, 2008; Lombrozzo,
2009; Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rips, 1989), according to
which causal models provide a system of explanatory links
that tie the features of a category together. Therefore, exemplars whose configuration of features can be best explained
in the light of the category’s causal concept are rated as the
best members. With respect to the causal analysis given
above, we propose—in contrast to the coherence hypothesis—that only those feature combinations matter that are
relevant with respect to the underlying causal mechanisms
(e.g., when both are present, but not when both are absent),
because it is the mechanism but not the regularity that has
explanatory value (see Keil, 2006, for an overview).

Experiment
To test our hypothesis we adapted the material used in the
experiments of Rehder (2003a; in similar versions also used
in Marsh & Ahn, 2006; Rehder, 2003b; Rehder & Kim,
2008, 2010, and others). Rehder presented subjects with
instructions about several artificial categories (e.g., Kehoe
Ants, Mya Stars) possessing four features that were linked
in a common-cause model (see Figure 1). Features were
introduced without giving precise base rate information

745

(e.g., “Some Kehoe Ants have blood that is very high in iron
sulfate. Others have blood that has normal levels of iron
sulfate.”, “Some Kehoe Ants have an immune system that is
hyperactive. Others have a normal immune system.”)1.
Then, causal mechanisms were introduced by plausible
descriptions (e.g., “Blood high in iron sulfate causes a hyperactive immune system. The iron sulfate molecules are
detected as foreign by the immune system, and the immune
system is highly active as a result.”). After participants have
learned the category, they had to rate all possible exemplars
(all possible combinations of features being present or absent) regarding their category membership. In his studies,
Rehder found evidence for the coherence effect (but see
Marsh & Ahn, 2006, for a critical discussion).
In our experiment, we used the same procedure and same
material. To manipulate the explanatory role of the instructed causal model, we explicitly instructed which of the feature values were described as typical for the category (e.g.,
hyperactive immune system or normal immune system). So,
between conditions, the typicality of the feature values
changed but the description of causal mechanisms remained
constant for the same feature values. By that, however, we
manipulated the explanatory role of the causal mechanisms
(i.e., whether typical or atypical values were linked by
mechanisms). Furthermore, we added a replication condition that was identical to Rehder (2003a), to ensure that our
procedure (and translated material) yields the same findings.

(2003a) did (see above). The description of causal mechanism was identical for all conditions.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the two categories and to the typical, atypical, or replication
condition. They completed the experiment individually on
desktop computers. The experiment consisted of two phases,
an instruction phase and a test phase.
In the instruction phase, we presented subjects with information about the category (Kehoe Ants, Mya Stars).
Subjects were introduced to the four binary features and
their typical values (depending on typical or atypical condition, respectively). Then, subjects were provided with information about how the features are causally connected.
(As stated above, in all conditions the causal links where
instructed between the same feature values. However, the
typicality of these feature values and, therefore, the explanatory role of the causal model differed depending on condition.) In the replication condition the causal links were
presented in the same way, but no information about the
typicality of the values was given (as in Rehder, 2003a).
The instructions were followed by a multiple choice test in
which participants were required to demonstrate that they
had learned all given information about the assigned category. In case of incorrect answers they had to reread the instructions and had to take the test again until they committed 0 errors.
In the test phase, subjects were presented sequentially
with all 16 possible exemplars (all combinations of the four
binary features) in two consecutive blocks. Order of exemplars was randomized in each block. For each exemplar,
subjects were requested to give a category membership

Method
Participants 96 students (62 women, mean age 22.4 years)
from the University of Göttingen, Germany, participated in
this experiment as part of a series of various unrelated computer-based experiments in our computer lab. Participants
received either course credit or were paid €8 per hour.
Material Two categories used in Rehder (2003a) were
translated into German: Kehoe Ants (a biological kind) and
Mya Stars (a non-living natural kind).2 Each category possessed four binary features. Depending on condition, each
feature had a typical value (coded throughout this paper as
“1”) and an atypical value (coded as “0”). For example,
Kehoe Ants have an immune system that was either hyperactive or working normal. Which of the two values was
described as typical depended on the experimental condition
(e.g., in the typical condition, it was stated: “Typically,
Kehoe Ants have an immune system that is hyperactive. A
few have a normal immune system.”, in the atypical condition, it was stated: “Typically, Kehoe Ants have a normal
immune system. A few have an immune system that is hyperactive.”).
Additionally, the features were causally linked in a common-cause network. Each causal relationship was described
as one feature causing another in the same way Rehder

Figure 3. Results of the replication of the experiment of
Rehder (2003a). Membership ratings of exemplars are
shown with cause feature present (FC=1) vs. absent (FC=0).
X-axis displays the number of effect features being present
(i.e., having typical value). Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

1

Note that normal values were coded as “0” (= absence).
Rehder (2003a) used six categories, but no differences for
membership ratings were obtained. Therefore, we only used two
randomly chosen categories.
2

746

rating on a scale from 0 (not a member at all) to 10 (definitely a member).

Results
Category In line with previous studies, the category (Kehoe
ants, Mya stars) revealed no significant influence on membership ratings, neither as main effect nor in any interaction
(all ps>.1). Therefore, the factor is aggregated over in the
following analyses.

Design The membership ratings were aggregated for each
subject across blocks and with respect to the cause feature
being present (FC = 0 vs. FC = 1) and the number of effect
features being present (#[FE = 1] = {0, 1, 2, or 3}). This
yielded a 3 (typical, atypical, replication condition) × 2
(category: Kehoe Ants vs. Mya Stars) x 2 (FC = 0 vs. FC =
1) × 4 (#[FE = 1] = {0, 1, 2, or 3}) ANOVA design with
condition and category as between-subjects factors and the
presence of the cause or effect features, respectively, as
within-subjects factors and average membership rating as
dependent variable.

Replication In Figure 3, the results of the replication condition are shown. When the cause feature was present (FC = 1)
membership ratings increased with increasing number of
effects being present. In contrast, when the cause feature
was absent (FC = 0) membership ratings decreased, yielding
a significant interaction (F3,99=62.5, p<.001). This replicates
the findings of Rehder (2003a) and is in line with other
studies using the same material.
Explanatory Role Figure 4 displays the aggregated membership ratings for the typical and atypical condition. In
both typical and atypical conditions, subjects rated exemplars with a present cause feature (FC = 1) better members
the more typical effect features were present. So, the exemplar with all features being present was rated very high (9.8
and 8.9 in typical and atypical condition, respectively)
whereas the exemplar with all effects being absent was rated
very low (2.6 and 1.7, respectively).
Exemplars, however, with the cause feature being absent
(FC = 0) exhibit a significant interaction between conditions
(F3,198=28.2, p<.001) (The three-way interaction was also
significant, F3,198=17.79, p<.001). In typical condition, ratings’ increase was only marginal significant (F3,102=2.24,
p=.088). In atypical condition, subjects rated exemplars
lower, the more effect features expressed the typical value.
So, the exemplar with all effects being absent (and, therefore, all features being absent) was rated very high (9.6),
whereas the exemplar with all effects being present was
rated very low (1.7).
Thus, the atypical condition looks like the prototypical
case of a coherence effect. In fact, individual influence of
features (i.e., marginalized across the states of the other
features) are negligible and even negative (ΔC = –0.67, ΔE
= –0.14). In contrast, the typical condition revealed a strong
causal status effect (ΔC = 2.83 vs. ΔE = 1.37), as we have
predicted.

Discussion & Summary
It is widely accepted that causal knowledge is an important
part of people’s concepts that underlie category representations. Nevertheless, it is still quite controversial how causal
knowledge affects membership ratings: Some researchers
propose that causal knowledge determines the individual
feature weights in categorization judgments (causal status
hypothesis; see Ahn et al., 2000), whereas others, however,
emphasize the role of feature combinations and whether
those are coherent with the statistical regularities imposed
by the category’s causal model (coherence hypothesis; see
e.g., Rehder, 2003a, 2003b; Rehder & Kim, 2010). We
presented one possible solution to this puzzle: According to

Figure 4. Average category membership ratings are shown
for (a) typical condition and (b) atypical condition with
cause feature present (FC=1) vs. absent (FC=0). X-axis displays the number of effect features being present (i.e., having typical value). Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

747

our proposal, causal knowledge is important in categorization because it provides people with explanatory links such
that they can make sense of presented exemplars. Thus,
categorization is seen as inference to the best explanation
(Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rips, 1989). And because the
explanatory value of causal knowledge is engrained in people’s beliefs about underlying mechanisms (and not statistical regularities), we derived at least two possible explanatory roles of causal models: First, a causal model can serve as
explanation why a prototypical exemplar is as it is (e.g.,
why most birds can fly). Second, a causal model can also
serve as explanation why a category member might deviate
from the prototypical exemplar (e.g., why some birds cannot
fly). Depending on which kind of causal model people have
in mind for a given category we expect people to judge
different exemplars as best and worst category members.
We presented an experiment in which we manipulated the
explanatory role of the instructed causal knowledge directly,
and we found huge differences in membership ratings. Interestingly, in the typical condition (i.e., typical feature
values were linked by causal mechanisms) judgments exhibited a causal status effect. In contrast, in the atypical condition (i.e., atypical feature values were link by causal mechanisms) we found a strong coherence effect. Therefore, we
believe that causal-status as well as coherence effects are
both faces of the same coin.

Lombrozo, T. (2009). Explanation and categorization: How
“why?” informs “what?” Cognition, 110, 248-253.
Marsh, J. K., & Ahn, W.-K. (2006). The role of causal status versus inter-feature links in feature weighting. Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 561-566).
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the identification categorization relationship. JEP: General, 115,
39-57.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Rehder, B. (2003a). A causal-model theory of conceptual
representation and categorization. JEP:LMC, 29, 11411159.
Rehder, B. (2003b). Categorization as causal reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 27, 709-748.
Rehder, B. (2010). Causal-based classification: A review. In
B. Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation (52), 39-116.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (2001). Causal knowledge and
categories: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization,
induction, and similarity. JEP: General, 130, 323-360.
Rehder, B., & Kim, S. (2008). The role of coherence in
causal-based categorization. Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
285-290).
Rehder, B., & Kim, S. (2010). Causal status and coherence
in causal-based categorization. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36, 11711206.
Rips, L. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization. In
S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp. 21-59). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
centrality and conceptual coherence. Cognitive Science,
22, 189-228.
Waldmann, M. R., Holyoak, K. J., & Fratianne, A. (1995).
Causal knowledge and the acquisition of category structure. JEP: General, 124, 181-206.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a research grant of the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG Wa 621/20).

References
Ahn, W.-K., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J.
(2000). Causal status as a determinant of feature centrality. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 361-416.
Ahn, W.-K., Marsh, J. K., Luhmann, C. C., & Lee, K.
(2002). Effect of theory-based feature correlations on typicality judgments. Memory & Cognition, 30, 107-118.
Ahn, W.-K., Novick, L. R., & Kim, N. S. (2003). Understanding behavior makes it more normal. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 10, 746-752.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Human category
learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 149-178.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Dowe, P. (2000). Physical causation. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and essences: Early understandings of the nonobvious. Cognition, 38, 213-244.
Jameson, J., & Gentner, D. (2008). Causal status and explanatory goodness in categorization. Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 291-296).
Keil, F. C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual
Review of Psychology, 57, 227-254.

748

