UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Changes in Foreign Language Skills Over Time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d81p3qd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Bloomfield, Amber
Masters, Megan
Ross, Steven
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Change in Foreign Language Skills Over Time
Amber N. Bloomfield (abloomfi@umd.edu)
Megan C. Masters
Steven J. Ross
Stephen P. O’Connell
Kassandra Gynther
University of Maryland, College Park
7005 52nd Avenue, College Park, MD 20901

Abstract
Foreign language professionals invest considerable time and
effort in acquiring foreign language skills. Of key interest is
how these skills change over time, and which sustainment, or
language training activities, are efficacious in maintaining or
improving proficiency. This paper discusses the results of
mining more than 800 test/re-test records of foreign language
professionals. Analyses investigated the extent to which lag
time between test occasions and formal language training
impacted changes in listening and reading proficiency ratings.
Results indicate that certain factors, such as initial proficiency
level, affect both patterns of change and the rate at which
foreign language skills manifest evidence of loss.

Keywords: foreign language attrition, foreign language
assessment, language training

Introduction
The study of how foreign language proficiency changes
over time is a relatively new area of research, often noted as
receiving its first major impetus from a conference at the
University of Pennsylvania in May 1980 (e.g., Clark &
Jorden, 1984; De Bot & Weltens, 1995; Lambert & Freed,
1982; Weltens, 1987). In the few decades during which
research on this topic has been active, a variety of papers
have been published, though many of these studies have
focused on which aspects of the foreign language are lost,
and in what order (e.g., syntax vs. lexical knowledge first;
Jordens, De Bot, & Trapman, 1989). Although this approach
is valuable for describing the language aspects most
vulnerable to loss, it does not target the question of what
factors (e.g., conversing informally with friends in the L2)
increase or decrease the rate of loss or how quickly general
language abilities, such as reading comprehension, begin to
show loss. Studies which have investigated factors
influencing the loss of foreign language skills have
examined the duration of the period of reduced input (i.e.,
time elapsed since peak language ability was attained),
achieved proficiency level prior to the period of reduced
input, and target language use during the period of reduced
input, as well as other factors. The current study expands on
previous research by examining the language skills of adults
with foreign language proficiency in a variety of languages
at multiple points of time to determine the rate at which loss

occurs, and how change in proficiency over time is affected
both by formal language training and starting proficiency
level.

Period of reduced input and change in language
skills
Duration of the period of reduced input has been defined as
time since the end of formal training (e.g., Bahrick, 1984) or
time since the end of intensive language exposure, such as
an immersion experience (e.g., Snow, Padilla, & Campbell,
1988). More generally, this factor has been conceptualized
as the amount of time since learners achieved their peak
proficiency (Bardovi-Harlig & Stringer, 2010), though this
characterization can be problematic when learners’ abilities
actually improve during the period (Gardner, Lalonde,
Moorcroft, & Evers, 1987; Murtagh & van der Slik, 2004).
The amount of time the learner has had to lose language
skills is a particularly intuitive factor in explaining degree of
foreign language loss, with the common sense prediction
being that loss increases with elapsed time. Several studies
have found evidence for such a relationship (e.g., Murtagh
& van der Slik, 2004; Nagasawa, 1999; Reetz-Kurashige,
1999), though there are some findings suggesting the rate of
loss over time may not be linear (Bahrick, 1984). However,
it is important to take into consideration other factors, such
as the target language-specific activities the learner has
engaged in during the period of reduced input, rather than
just the time elapsed since some benchmark of language
learning was attained.
One issue with research on the duration of the period
of reduced input is that these studies explore duration as a
discrete factor, investigating language skills at a few
specific points in time (often at only one or two time points
after the period of reduced input has begun). In general,
there is a tradeoff in the literature between sample size and
the number of time points at which the language skills of the
participants are measured: those studies with sizable n (e.g.,
Clark & Jorden, 1984; Gardner et al., 1987; Murtagh & van
der Slik, 2004) tend to measure language skills only twice,
once at the beginning of the period of reduced input (i.e., the
baseline) and again a set amount of time later. Crosssectional studies, like Bahrick (1984) and Snow et al.
(1988), take only one measure of language skills for each
participant and compare across groups that have

1350

experienced different durations of reduced input (note that
this method does not take into account potential differences
in initial proficiency levels). By contrast, some studies
compare language skills for the same individual at a number
of time points, but tend to involve only very small groups of
participants, generally children (but see Russell, 1999, for
an exception), and to focus on the specific aspects of the
language that are lost rather than loss of general language
ability (e.g., Hansen-Strain, 1990; Reetz-Kurashige, 1999;
Yoshitomi, 1999). The reason for the small number of
studies exploring multiple time points with adult foreign
language learners is likely attributable to practical
constraints: it is difficult to longitudinally track and
maintain contact with the same group of language learners
over a long period of time. Yet, to explore how foreign
language skills change over time, it is desirable to examine
the skills of the same set of individuals repeatedly during
the period of reduced input.

Language use during the period of reduced input
The extent to which foreign language is used during the
period of reduced input is likely to be an important
determiner of the amount of knowledge lost at the end of
this period because it determines just how “reduced” the
input during this period is for the learner. Clark and Jorden
(1984) found that the learners of Japanese who did not show
loss months after formal language training ended reported
using the language more regularly than those who did show
loss. In a similar study, Murtagh and van der Slik (2004)
demonstrated that use of the target language after leaving
formal language training predicted strength of language
skills for learners of Irish eighteen months after leaving
school. In a study with employees of the Canadian
government, French-dominant bilinguals reported more
opportunities to use their less dominant language (English)
and also showed less loss of skills in their weaker language
than did English-dominant bilinguals (Edwards, 1977,
discussed in Oxford, 1982). Snow (1982) found that, at the
group level, the lowest amount of loss was exhibited by
Spanish immersion student groups that had the highest
proportion of learners who continued to study the target
language after the immersion ended (reported in Snow et al.,
1988).

Achieved proficiency and change in language skills
Achieved proficiency in the L2 is important for assessing
change in foreign language skills because it provides the
baseline against which to compare current ability. This
factor has also been considered in its own right as a
potential predictor for foreign language loss. Having higher
target language proficiency may lead to decreased loss over
time (for reviews, see Bardovi-Harlig & Stringer, 2010;
Weltens, 1987). One potential reason for this is that having
greater foreign language proficiency may provide a learner
with more available strategies to compensate for loss of
specific foreign language knowledge. For example, a learner
could use target language morphological knowledge to

uncover the meaning of a forgotten lexical item in the same
way children use this type of information to comprehend
unfamiliar words (Carr & Johnston, 2001). In addition,
some theories of foreign language acquisition suggest that
language knowledge, once it reaches a critical threshold,
simply becomes resistant to loss (Bardovi-Harlig &
Stringer, 2010). However, there are somewhat mixed results
for the relationship between achieved proficiency and
change in language skills over time, with several studies
suggesting that higher proficiency learners do indeed
experience less loss over time than do lower proficiency
learners (Clark & Jorden, 1984; Gardner et al., 1987;
Kaufman, 1995; Nagasawa, 1999) and others suggesting
there is no difference in rate of language loss between
higher and lower proficiency learners (Bahrick, 1984;
Weltens & Grendel, 1993).

The Current Study
The current study explored change in general foreign
language skills (reading and listening comprehension) for a
large number of foreign language professionals who were
tested multiple times (2-7 test occasions, with the majority
having 3 or more) over a period as long as 6 years. The
dataset included test histories for nearly 50 different
languages; because of the small number of people testing in
any one language, all analyses were completed in aggregate
across the tested languages. Most people in the dataset were
tested annually, but there was considerable variation in the
frequency of testing. In addition to test records, information
on participation in official language training was available
for individuals in the dataset.

Method
The dataset included 1084 test histories for listening and
1085 for reading. 1 Each test event was associated with a
rating of proficiency based on the raw score from the test;
the raw score was not included in the dataset. Ratings are
based on the Interagency Language Roundtable (ILR) scale
for that particular skill: possible scores can range from 0 to
5, with 0 = No Proficiency and 5 = Functionally Native
Proficiency; between each pair of adjacent levels is a “plus
level” (e.g., 0+, 2+), assigned when proficiency
substantially exceeds one skill level and does not fully meet
the criteria for the next level (Interagency Language
Roundtable, 2011). 2 For the purpose of analyses, all ILR
ratings were recoded into numeric values. 3 All scores were
associated with a test date, so it was possible to calculate the
amount of time, in days, from the first test administration to
each subsequent test. Whether or not a person received
language training, dummy coded as 0 = no training and 1 =
training, was included in all analyses. Only a small subset
1

A minority of individuals tested in more than one language;
analyses treat each test history as a separate case.
2
For more information on the ILR proficiency scales, see
http://www.govtilr.org/Skills/ILRscale1.htm.
3
For example, 1 = 10, 1+ = 16, 2 = 20, 2+ = 26, etc.

1351

of the individuals in the dataset had formal language
training on record (~14%).
Initial target language proficiency was defined as the
first ILR rating on record for any given language in the
relevant skill (i.e., reading or listening). Due to the
sparseness of individuals at some levels of proficiency, each
person’s first rating was coded as either high/2 = a rating of
2+ or greater or low/1 = a rating of 2 or lower. This recoded
variable was used in analyses of skill loss. In addition,
information about whether or not the test version changed
during the testing history was available for the dataset. This
factor is likely to be important when examining change in
ratings, as the introduction of a new, unfamiliar test may
decrease ratings even in the absence of loss of language
skills. This factor was coded as 1 = version change and 0 =
no version change.

Results
Overall patterns of change To explore the pattern of
change across test administrations, a latent growth analysis
(Bollen & Curran, 2006) was used to examine the direction
and trajectory of change over time. In these latent growth
analyses, the first score or intercept (ICEPT) and the growth
over time (SLOPE) were dependent variables, while
participation in formal language training (Training) and the
occurrence of a test version change (verdif) were included as
independent variables (see Figure 1). Because few test
histories contained more than four tests, only the first four
tests in the dataset were included in the latent growth
analyses.
For listening test histories, 398 cases in the dataset
contained at least 4 test records and 729 contained at least 3.
The model fit the data adequately (RMSEA = 0.053, CFI =
0.984). The average slope was M = 1.35 (SE = 0.15; t =
8.94, p < .001), indicating a significant positive pattern of
change (improvement) in listening scores over test
administrations. The correlation between the intercept and
0, Var

0, Var

0, Var

E1

E2

E3

1

1

0

1

0

score1

0,
E4

1

0

score2

score3

1

1

score4

1

0 .5

1

1

0

0,

0,
1

ICEPT
ea
IM
n

Training

SLOPE

ds

SM
ea
n

di

1

verdif

Figure 1. The latent growth model fit to listening and
reading ILR ratings

the slope was also significant for listening scores (r = -0.37,
p < .001), indicating that people who started with lower
initial ILR ratings had a faster rate of improvement over
time than did those who started with higher ILR ratings.
The training variable had a significant negative relation (0.15) to the intercept for listening scores (t = -4.27, p <
.001), indicating the people who participated in formal
training had lower initial ILR ratings, perhaps indicating
that these individuals self-selected for training. In addition,
training had a significant positive relationship (0.20) with
slope (t = 3.09, p < .01), indicating that the trajectories of
improvement for professionals who had some kind of
language training were higher than for those who had not
participated in a training activity. The version change
variable also had a significant relationship with slope, but
this relationship was negative (-0.19; t = -2.88, p < .01). The
direction of this relationship is intuitive: the introduction of
a new test version decreases the rate of improvement. What
is less intuitive, however, is the significant positive
relationship (0.09) between the version change variable and
the intercept (t = 2.76, p < .01). This relationship indicates
that people who experienced a version change at some time
in their testing history also tended to have higher initial ILR
ratings. A new test version was introduced for only a subset
of languages during the time covered by the test history
data, so whether a version change occurred was partially
dependent on the language tested. It may be that initial
proficiency in this dataset was higher in those languages that
experienced a version change, leading to the relationship
between version change and the intercept. In fact, chi-square
tests revealed that significantly more people with starting
proficiency of 2+ or above experienced a version change for
both listening and reading (χ2(1) = 8.08 and χ2(1) = 8.32,
respectively; both ps < .01).
For reading test histories, 400 cases in the dataset
contained at least 4 test records and 729 contained at least 3.
The model fit of these data was successful (RMSEA = 0.027,
CFI = 0.997). The average slope was M = 1.03 (SE = 0.15; t
= 7.08, p < .001), indicating a modest but significant pattern
of positive change over time. Unlike for listening ratings,
the significant correlation between the intercept and the
slope was positive (r = 0.24, p < .05); this indicates that
people with higher initial ILR ratings tended to show greater
improvement over time than people with lower initial ILR
ratings. The reason for this difference between listening and
reading ratings is not immediately clear.
As for listening, the training variable has a significant
negative relationship (-0.20) with the intercept for reading (t
= -5.71, p < .001), indicating that people who participated in
training tended to have lower initial reading ILR ratings,
and has a significant positive relationship (0.16) to the slope
(t = 2.67, p < .01), suggesting that improvement was faster
for those individuals who have received some type of
language training. The version difference variable has a
significant negative relationship (-0.19) to slope (t = -2.88, p
< 0.01); as for listening, the introduction of a new test
version leads to a slower rate of growth in reading ratings

1352

over time. The same non-intuitive positive relationship
between version change and the intercept was also present
for reading scores (0.12; t = 3.42, p <.001). Again, the most
likely explanation is that those languages for which a new
test version has been introduced also tend to be languages
where the individuals have a higher initial rating.
Ratings improved over time for both reading and
listening, as indicated by the significant positive slopes in
the latent growth analyses. Version change negatively
impacted this trend, leading to a slower rate of improvement
over time for listening scores but did not affect change over
time for reading scores. Training, on the other hand,
positively affected this trend, indicating that the formal
language training resulted in faster improvement in ILR
ratings for both listening and reading. While people with
lower initial ratings showed a faster rate of improvement in
listening, this pattern was reversed for reading. It may be
that attaining higher proficiency levels in reading becomes
easier as proficiency increases, while attaining higher levels
for listening becomes more difficult as proficiency
increases. This is a topic for future research.
Loss in ILR ratings To examine how the amount of time
between test occasions affected the incidence of loss in
ratings, event history analyses were conducted separately
for reading and listening. A test history was coded as
showing a loss if any subsequent test occasion produced a
lower ILR rating than the first test occasion. In an event
history analysis, the time between the first test and the test
that yielded a lower score (i.e., lag time) is modeled to
capture the amount of lag time for cases coded as losses
compared to the lag time for cases where scores are
sustained or increased from the first to the most recent test
(i.e., non-loss cases). 4 The goal of the event history analysis
is an estimation of the average time lag associated with
increasing incidences (events) of proficiency loss and the
effect of any covariates on the rate of loss.
The version change factor was revised somewhat for
the event history analyses. The factor captured whether a
person who experienced a loss experienced a version change
prior to that loss, rather than at another point in their test
history. For individuals who did not show loss, this factor
continued to indicate whether they had experienced a
version change at any time in their test history.
Across all sets of listening test records, 17.7% of the
cases were coded as showing a loss (i.e., at least one rating
was lower than the first ILR rating on record). The event
history analysis estimates the time lag associated with
survival (i.e., not showing a loss) as a function of time
beginning with 100% of the cohort surviving. The event
history model assesses whether loss is a possible function of
time between test occasions. For an event phenomenon

impervious to time, the rate of loss would be expected to
remain close to zero across all observed time lags. However,
the prediction based on previous studies (e.g., Nagasawa,
1999; Reetz-Kurashige, 1999) would be for the rate of loss
to increase as time lag increases, which was in fact found
for listening ratings. Event history analysis revealed that the
projected survival rate for listening was fairly long, with
over 80% of cases found to maintain or improve listening
ratings with three years’ lag between test occasions (see
Figure 2).

Figure 2. Loss in listening ratings over time
Version change was a marginally significant covariate
in the event history analysis (B = 0.32, p < 0.07), with the
predictable impact of increasing the rate of loss for
listening: the odds of showing loss were projected to be
roughly 1.37 times higher for people experiencing a version
change than those who did not experience a version change.
In addition, whether or not the person engaged in formal
language training was entered as a covariate into the
analysis. Participation in training did not significantly affect
rate of loss for listening ILR ratings (B = -0.15, p = 0.51).
However, the initial proficiency of the individual, coded as
low for those with an initial ILR rating of 2 or lower and as
high for those with first ILR rating of 2+ or higher, was a
significant covariate (B = 0.71, p < 0.01, see Figure 3).

4

Cases where the first rating on record was 0 (providing no
opportunity to see a pattern of loss over time) and those where two
test ratings were listed for the same date (suggesting the person
was tested twice in one day) were excluded from event history
analyses.

Figure 3. Initial proficiency and loss in listening ratings

1353

Surprisingly, however, those with higher scores exhibited a
faster rate of loss, with the odds of this group showing loss
projected as roughly 1.99 times higher than the odds for
those with lower initial ratings. This finding is contrary to
what has been found in previous studies (Clark & Jorden,
1984; Gardner et al., 1987; Kaufman, 1995; Nagasawa,
1999), and will be discussed in the Summary below.
Across all sets of reading test records, 17.6% of the
cases were coded as showing a loss compared with the first
score. As for listening, the incidence of loss increased with
the amount of time between test occasions for reading tests
scores (see Figure 4). Event history analysis projected the
survival rate for reading to be comparable to that seen for
listening: about 80% of cases were found to maintain or
improve listening scores with three years’ lag between test
occasions.
Consistent with the analyses completed for listening
scores, test version change was entered as a covariate into
the event history analysis for reading scores. This factor
failed to approach significance for reading scores, however
(B = 0.13, p =0.48). Whether or not the individual engaged
in formal language training also failed to approach
significance as a covariate for loss of reading ratings (B =
0.12, p = 0.56). However, as for listening ILR ratings, the
first rating on record, coded as high = 2+ or higher and low
= 2 or lower, was again a significant covariate (B = 0.55, p <
.05; see Figure 5). The difference between the high and low
proficiency groups was similar to that seen for listening
scores, with the higher proficiency group showing a faster
rate of loss than the lower proficiency group.
The results of the event history analyses reveal that the
proportion of test cases in the dataset showing loss increased
as the amount of time since the first test increased.
However, training did not have a significant effect on the
rate of loss for listening or reading. Because only a small
portion (~14%) of the individuals included in the current
analyses had formal language training on record, and only a
subset of this group experienced a loss in ratings, it is
possible that there was not enough power in these analyses
to detect an impact of training on the rate of skill loss.
Further, experiencing a test version change was a marginally
significant covariate for the rate of loss of listening scores,
but not for reading scores.

Figure 4. Loss in reading ratings over time
In contrast, the investigation of achieved proficiency
(the degree of proficiency achieved in the language) and its
effects on the rate of loss were not consistent with previous
research findings. In the event history analyses, initial
proficiency was a significant covariate for the rate of loss
for all three skills, with higher proficiency individuals
projected to have faster loss rates than lower proficiency
individuals. This result is in the opposite direction from
what is typically found when there is a difference in change
for higher and lower proficiency learners (e.g., Clark &
Jorden, 1984; Gardner et al., 1987). The current dataset
contained many more individuals with high proficiency (a
first score of 2+ or higher) than with low proficiency (a first
score of 2 or lower), so it is possible that there was
something unique about the individuals with lower initial
ILR ratings that led to the relationship between initial
proficiency and rate of loss. It is also possible that
maintaining a higher rating is simply more difficult, with a
smaller margin for error, leading to a faster rate of loss for
this group. Further, there may be differences in motivation
between the two groups, with the lower proficiency
individuals more motivated to work to improve their
language skills, and so slower to show loss over time. These
possibilities will be investigated in future studies.

Summary and Conclusion
The findings from the current study are in line with previous
results from studies examining change in foreign language
skills in several ways. Consistent with previous research
investigating the duration of the period of reduced input
(e.g., Murtagh & van der Slik, 2004; Nagasawa, 1999;
Reetz-Kurashige, 1999), the probability of loss increased as
the amount of time since the first test increased for both
reading and listening. These results indicate that, all other
factors being equal (amount of foreign language use,
motivation, etc.), ILR ratings for these individuals will tend
to decrease as the amount of time between test
administrations increases.

Figure 5. Initial proficiency and reading attrition

1354

The current study also found no effect of whether an
individual engaged in formal language training on the rate
of loss for either listening or reading, though engaging in
training did lead to a faster rate of improvement over time.
This result runs counter to previous findings showing that
the extent of target language use and exposure during the
period of reduced input predicts retention (e.g., Clark &
Jorden, 1984; Edwards, 1977; Murtagh & van der Slik,
2004). However, it is important to note that the information
on formal language training was available for only a small
subset of all people (14%), and that it is unclear why this
subset of the sample participated in language training. It
may be that these individuals were selected for training
specifically because they struggled to maintain their foreign
language skills. Further, the records of formal language
training were the only information available about what the
people included in the dataset might have been doing with
their foreign language skills since the first language test in
the dataset. It is very possible that large individual
differences exist in the sample in terms of informal language
training and other types of use and exposure (e.g., watching
TV in the target language) during the period of time since
the first test.
In conclusion, the current study introduced a method
for investigating factors affecting change in adult foreign
language skills in a longitudinal design, and described the
results of an analysis of change in proficiency ratings for
one group of foreign language professionals. Although this
dataset was limited in several ways, including providing
little information about use of the foreign language between
proficiency tests, it did offer two or more data points for
most individuals that were spread across a number of years.
Further, the first ILR rating in the dataset offered a proxy
for achieved language proficiency, so a given individual’s
current performance could be compared against his or her
own previous abilities. A survey is currently being
distributed to collect additional information about language
learning history and current language use for professionals
in this population to provide a more complete picture of the
factors that affect change in foreign language skills.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the University of Maryland
Center for Advanced Study of Language with funding from
the Department of Defense.

References
Bahrick, H. P. (1984). Semantic memory content in permastore:
Fifty years of memory for Spanish learned in school. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 113(1), 1-29.
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Stringer, D. (2010). Variables in second
language attrition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
32(1), 1-45.
Bollen, K. A., & Curran, P. J. (2006). Latent curve models: WileyInterscience.
Carr, L., & Johnston, J. (2001). Morphological cues to verb
meaning. Applied Psycholinguistics, 22(4), 601-618.

Clark, J. L. D., & Jorden, E. H. (1984). A Study of Language
Attrition in Former US Students of Japanese and Implications
for Design of Curriculum and Teaching Materials. Retrieved
August 4, 2011 from ERIC Document Reproduction Service,
http://www.eric.ed.gov, No. ED243317.
De Bot, K., & Weltens, B. (1995). Foreign language attrition.
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 15(1), 151-164.
Edwards, G. (1977). Second language retention in the public
service of Canada. Ottawa: Research Section, Official
Languages Directorate.
Gardner, R. C., Lalonde, R., Moorcroft, R., & Evers, F. (1987).
Second language attrition: The role of motivation and use.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 6(1), 29-47.
Hansen-Strain, L. (1990). The attrition of Japanese by Englishspeaking children: An interim report. Language Sciences, 12(4),
367-377.
Interagency Language Roundtable. (2011). Descriptions of
proficiency levels. Retrieved January 1, 2012, from
http://www.govtilr.org/Skills/ILRscale1.htm
Jordens, P., De Bot, K. D., & Trapman, H. (1989). Linguistic
aspects of regression in German case marking. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 11(2), 179-204.
Kaufman, D. (1995). Where Have All the Verbs Gone? Autonomy
and Interaction in Attrition. Southwest Journal of Linguistics,
14, 43-66.
Lambert, R. D., & Freed, B. F. (1982). The Loss of Language
Skills. Rowley, MA: Newbury House Publishers, Inc.
Murtagh, L., & van der Slik, F. (2004). Retention of Irish skills: A
longitudinal study of a school-acquired second language.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 8(3), 279-302.
Nagasawa, S. (1999). Learning and losing Japanese as a second
language: A multiple case study of American university
students. In L. Hansen (Ed.), Second Language Attrition in
Japanese Contexts (pp. 169-212). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Oxford, R. (1982). Technical issues in designing and conducting
research on language skill attrition. In R. D. Lambert & B. F.
Freed (Eds.), The Loss of Language Skills (pp. 119–137).
Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Reetz-Kurashige, A. (1999). Japanese returnees’ retention of
English-speaking skills: Changes in verb usage over time. In L.
Hansen (Ed.), Second language attrition in Japanese contexts
(pp. 21-58). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Russell, R. A. (1999). Lexical maintenance and attrition in
Japanese as a second language. In L. Hansen (Ed.), Second
language attrition in Japanese contexts (pp. 114-141). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Snow, M. A. (1982). Graduates of the Culver City Spanish
Immersion Program: A follow-up report. Paper presented at the
Sixteenth Annual TESOL Convention, Honolulu, HI.
Snow, M. A., Padilla, A., & Campbell, R. (1988). Factors
influencing language retention of graduates of a Spanish
immersion program. Applied Linguistics, 9, 182–197.
Weltens, B. (1987). The Attrition of Foreign-Language Skills: A
Literature Review. Applied Linguistics, 8(1), 22-38.
Weltens, B., & Grendel, M. (1993). Attrition of vocabulary
knowledge. In R. Schreuder & B. Weltens (Eds.), The bilingual
lexicon (pp. 135-156). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Yoshitomi, A. (1999). On the loss of English as a second language
by Japanese returnee children. In L. Hansen (Ed.), Second
language attrition in Japanese contexts (pp. 80-111). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

1355

