UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Changes in Cognitive Processes upon Learning Mini-Shogi

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gp1n0jv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ito, Takeshi
Takano, Daisuke
Wan, Xiaohong
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Changes in Cognitive Processes upon Learning Mini-Shogi
Takeshi Ito (ito@cs.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Communication Engineering and Informatics
The University of Electro-Communications, 1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo, JAPAN

Daisuke Takeno (takano@minerva.cs.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Communication Engineering and Informatics
The University of Electro-Communications, 1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo, 182-8585, JAPAN

Xiaohong Wan (xhwan@brain.riken.jp)
Laboratory for Cognitive Brain Mapping
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako_shi, Saitama, 351-0198, JAPAN

Keiji Tanaka (keiji@riken.jp)
Laboratory for Cognitive Brain Mapping
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako_shi, Saitama, 351-0198, JAPAN
Abstract
In this research, we investigated cognitive processes while
playing Mini-Shogi through fMRI and cognitive experiments.
Mini-Shogi is a Japanese chess-like game that uses a small
board. In our cognitive experiment, the group of stronger
Mini-Shogi players the stronger group’s total thinking time
shortened and their total number of eye movements decreased.
However, our investigation of search depth revealed different
results from those of past research. The results of our fMRI
experiment revealed that after learning, activity in the caudate
nucleus increased among stronger players. The results of our
experiments suggested that intuitive ability and the capacity
for careful consideration are not independent.

Simon showed that stronger players have bigger chunks of
chess knowledge than do weaker players.
Ito and others have observed cognitive differences
between experts and beginners in Shogi (Japanese chess) as
a follow-up to research on chess (Ito, Reijer and Matsubara,
2004). In that research, they compared the thought processes
of beginners, club players, and experts during the next move
task. The results are shown in the following table (Table 1).
The results suggested that there were not only spatial
clusters (spatial chunks) but time clusters (time chunks)
involved in the experiments on chess.
Table 1: The results of cognitive research on Shogi
Club
Beginners
Experts
players
Recognition of a
slow
fast
very fast
position
Area of eye
very
wide
narrow
movements
narrow
Thought time
short
long
short
Generation of a
a few
many
a few
candidate move
Depth of search
shallow
deep
more deep

Keywords: Expertise; Mini-Shogi; Intuition; fMRI; Eye
movement.

Introduction
Since developments in measurement apparatus have
recently made it easier for physiological data to be measured
more correctly (and in greater detail), the amount of
research comparing cognitive data with physiological data is
increasing. One type of such research, research on learning,
not only clarifies the mechanism of intelligence but will also
be useful for education.
In the field of cognitive science, research examining the
difference between beginners and experts using chess and
puzzles has been executed. In chess, the most famous
cognitive experiments have involved memorizing positions
and were performed by de Groot (de Groot, 1965; de Groot
& Gobet, 1996). The results of those experiments revealed
that experts can memorize more chess pieces of a position
quickly than beginners.
As a follow-up to de Groot’s work, Chase and Simon
introduced the theory of chunking to explain why expert
game players perform so well in memory tasks (Chase &
Simon, 1973). Chunking is the process of dividing a chess
position into smaller parts that have meanings. Chase and

This topic has also been researched in the field of brain
science. With technological progress, measurement of brain
activity came to be accomplished less via PET (positron
emission tomography) and more via fMRI (functional
magnetic resonance imaging). Paolo and others measured
the active parts of the brain by using PET while subjects
were solving chess-related problems (Paolo et al., 1994).
The frontal lobes, the occipital lobes, and the left premotor
area were activated when chess-related problems were
considered.
Atherton, Chen, and others measured which parts of the
brain were activated by solving problems in chess and Go
using fMRI (Atherton et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2003). The

1739

premotor area of the frontal lobes, the parietal lobes, and the
occipital lobes are activated when solving both types of
problems.
Wan and others have observed a physiological difference
between amateur and expert Shogi players (Wan et al.,
2011). They observed changes in brain activity by using
fMRI. They found new brain activity.
When professional Shogi players saw the Shogi problem
during the experiment, selective activity was observed in a
part of the caudate nucleus; this activity was not seen in
amateurs. On the basis of that peculiarity, we guess that this
activity is related to expertise.
Much research using eye trackers has been executed in the
field of cognitive science since the development of eye
movement tracking devices.
Law and others analyzed the eye movements of beginners
and experts in the use of training equipment for laparoscopic
surgery (Law et al., 2004). Experts looked at the affected
part, but beginners looked at the operating instruments. We
can understand this by analyzing experts’ eye movements
and comparing the difference between experts and beginners.
Much past research has separately measured experts and
beginners and observed the differences between them.
Few studies have observed the learning process from
beginner to expert. Therefore, in this research, we planned
an experiment that makes the beginner learn and generates
an expert. We also examined whether experts shared the
features of expertise seen in past experiments.
In this research, we measured both cognitive and
physiological changes. The physiological experiment was
carried out at RIKEN. In this report, we explain the
cognitive experiment and discuss the results of both the
cognitive and physiological experiments.

Mini-Shogi
What is Mini-Shogi?
Shogi is a Japanese chess-like game. Mini-Shogi is also
called 55-Shogi; it is similar to Shogi, but uses a 5 × 5square board. Almost all rules are inherited from Shogi.
Therefore, Mini-Shogi can be said to be “small-board Shogi.”

Figure 1: Initial position of Mini-Shogi
The aim of the game is to checkmate the opponent’s king.
The initial position of the game is shown in Figure 1. There
are six kinds of pieces: fu (Pawn), kin (Gold), gin (Silver),
kaku (Bishop), hisha (Rook), and ou (King). Rook and
Bishop can be promoted to Dragon and Horse, respectively,

as in Shogi rules, in case these pieces move to the end line
of the board. Pawn and Silver can be promoted to Gold. The
“drop rule” states that a taken piece can be reused, as in
Shogi.
Since Shogi is a complicated game, a long period of time
is taken to learn it. However, Mini-Shogi can be learned to a
fixed level in a short period. In this research, since subjects
needed to learn within a limited period, we found MiniShogi to be more suitable than Shogi for efficient
acquisition of expertise.

Experiment
Subject
The subjects were 2nd- or 3rd-year students at the University
of Electro-Communications, and 26 people became subject
candidates. The contents of a questionnaire given to
prospective subjects examined their experience with Shogi,
Mini-Shogi, and Shogi terms. Six people whose
questionnaires reflected too much expertise were excluded.
After the experiment started, one person dropped out on his
personal reasons. Finally, 19 people became subjects.

Learning Environment
The learning term of this experiment lasted three months.
The cognitive experiments were executed three times: the 1st
period lasted from the start of the study to one week later,
the 2nd period lasted from one week later to one and a half
months later, and the 3rd period began after the end of the
learning term. The experiments using fMRI were carried out
in the early stage and the last stage of learning at RIKEN.
We gave the subjects the “K55” Mini-Shogi software
package during the experimental period. “K55” was
developed by Yoshikazu Kakinoki, who is a famous Shogi
programmer. K55 was the champion program at the UEC
Cup 55-Shogi Championship from 2007 to 2009 and the 2nd
place program in 2010. Therefore, it is strong enough for
beginners, and some of its interfaces are suitable for
learning. It can be set to a difficulty level of 1–14, so it can
be pitted against opponents of various ability levels. It is
easy to operate the software, as positional evaluation by
K55 can be displayed numerically, and it has a hint mode
that can be used effectively for learning.
Moreover, we created an environment on which human
players can play on the Internet. This system is called “55floodgate.” After a player completes 30 games, he/she
receives a computed rating; we thought that these ratings
would be useful for improving subjects’ motivation. We
asked subjects to learn about the game as much as possible
(and for at least one hour each day). The duty to present a
report was imposed upon the subjects once per week. The
contents of this report were the following: time spent
learning during the week, things noticed, winning rates
against K55, etc.
In order to maintain a subject’s motivation for learning
during the experimental period, a lecture about Mini-Shogi
was given to the subjects one month after the start of the

1740

experiment. The contents of the lecture ranged from
fundamental to strategic topics, such as the effective usage
of each piece, the value of each piece, and advantageous
openings. A collection of Mini-Shogi next move problems
was distributed to two months after the start of learning, and
subjects were made to answer these. Furthermore, a
tournament was carried out at the end of the experimental
period, and many prizes were awarded on the basis of the
results. This tournament was thought to increase subjects’
motivation.

Recognition of a position [s] *
Amount of eye movement [pixels] *
Thought time [s]
Generation of candidate moves
[number] *
Depth of search [depth]

1st
period
37.8
21089
137.4

3rd
period
52.1
27963
149.8

2.0

1.7

2.6

Cognitive Experiment

Results We selected six subjects for whom we obtained
good verbal protocol and eye movement data in the
cognitive experiment.
We executed three experiments: one each in the first
period, the second period, and the third period of learning.
In order to clarify the differences between subjects’ mental
processes before and after learning, we decided to compare
the data from the first and third periods.
We classified verbal protocol data by categories of
contents. We used the same classification system as did
previous research, using five categories: “recognition of the
position,” “generation of the candidate move,” “prediction,”
“evaluation,” and “decision” (Ito, Reijer and Matsubara,
2004). On the basis of this analysis, we examined what
kind of thinking was performed when the subject thought
about the problems. The “depth of search” means the
longest moves for which they searched, as reflected by
verbal data.
The results are shown in Table 2, which displays the
average changes between the 1st period and the 3rd period.
Each entry in Table 2 consists of data averaged among six
subjects. Statistical significance was assessed via t-tests of
correlations between two samples.
Table 2: Changes between 1st period and 3rd period

Discussion Subjects generated fewer candidate moves
during the 3rd period than they did during the 1st period. This
result corresponds with those of previous research.
However, other aspects of the results were different from
those of previous research. We considered that the reason
for these discrepancies may have been that the six subjects
did not learn enough.

fMRI Experiment
Method Brain activity was investigated using an fMRI
scanner owned by RIKEN. The stimuli were 180 easy
original next move problems (one-move checkmates, etc.).
One hundred sixty of the problem stimuli were between
the early stage and the last stage of learning, and 20 of the
problems were identical during the early stage and the last
stage of learning. In the interrupt task used for initialization
of brain activity, if a Gold piece appeared, subjects were
instructed to press a button. Moreover, a task of reporting
the King’s position was set as the control task. The control
task was used in order to check whether the subject
understood the board position correctly.
We explained that a next move problem or a control
problem were displayed for 2 seconds and required to
answer it within 3 seconds.
Results In the experiment using fMRI, data from all 19
subjects were analyzed. Ten subjects were sorted into a lowrank group and nine subjects, into a high-rank group on the
basis of the percentage of correct answers in the experiment
conducted during the last stage of learning.
Correct response rate at
the 2nd time point

Method We showed the next move problems to subjects
and asked them to speak freely regarding their thought
processes. Eye movements were recorded simultaneously
with verbal data using an eye tracker (QG-PLUS, Ditect,
Inc.). We used a liquid crystal display monitor at a
resolution of 1280 × 1024 pixels (96 dots per inch). We
recorded verbal protocol data according to the traditional
cognitive science approach. We instructed the subjects that
there were no time limits for thinking. We prepared 11 next
move problems devised by an expert Mini-Shogi player.
The next move problems shown to subjects used difficult
positions from which multiple candidate moves can be
considered. The order of presentation was randomized for
each subject. The same problems were shown during each
period, but the order of presentation was changed.
(Incidentally, no subjects realized that the same problems
were used.) A time interval was set between each problem,
and the subject could decide to take breaks freely.

2.5
p < 0.05 (*)

80%
60%
40%
20%
r = 0.659

0%
0%

20%

40%

60%

Correct response rate at the 1st time point

Figure 2: Correct response rates during the 1st and 2nd fMRI
experiments

1741

Strength of activity

Figure 2 expresses the percentages of correct answers in
the early stage and the last stage. The high-scoring group’s
data are represented by circles, and the low-scoring group’s
data are represented by diamonds.
Figure 3 expresses the percentage of correct answers in
the last stage of learning and the strength of caudate nucleus
activity. The high-scoring group’s data are represented by
circles, and the low-scoring group’s data are represented by
diamonds. Strength of activity expresses the ratio of
activation in the last stage to that in the early stage. The
activity was seen in the high score group. Figure 4 shows
the region of enhanced activity.
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
-0.20
-0.40

Discussion It is possible that good early learning rates
could be caused by large caudate nuclei, as a correlation
between the percentage of correct answers in the early stage
and the size of the caudate nucleus was found.
The size has a weak correlation with the percentage of
correct answers in the last stage.
The subjects whose percentage of correct answers was
good have a tendency for caudate nucleus activity to be
strong in the last stage. This result suggests that everyone
can learn regardless of the size of the caudate nucleus.

r = 0.468

0%

50%

Additional Analysis
100%

Correct response rate at the 3rd time point

Figure 3: Strength of activity and correct response rate
at the 3rd time point

Figure 4: Region of enhanced activity

Group analysis
The results of our cognitive experiment may have differed
from the previous research because our subjects did not
become strong enough. Therefore, we decided to take the
subjects’ strength into consideration.
As the scale that measures subjects’ relative strength, we
decided to use a combination of the rankings of the
tournament held at the end of the experiment and the rate of
correct answers to problems in the fMRI experiment
performed at RIKEN. Figure 7 displays the subjects; the
subjects who were used in the cognitive experiment are
expressed as larger points.

[mm3]
6000

100%

Correct response
rate at the 3rd time
point

Size of caudate nucleus

Figure 5 expresses the rate of correct answers and the size
of the caudate nucleus at the early stage. Figure 6 expresses
the rate of correct answers and the size of caudate nucleus at
the last stage. The high-scoring group’s data are represented
by circles, and the low-scoring group’s data are represented
by diamonds.

4000

50%

2000

r = 0.502

0%

20%

40%

60%

Figure 5: Size of caudate nucleus and correct response rate
at the 1st time point

Size of caudate nucleus

[mm3]
6000

4000
2000
r = 0.444

0%

50%

100%

Correct response rate at the 3rd time point

Figure 6: Size of caudate nucleus and correct response rate
at the 3rd time point

0

10

Competition ranking

20

Figure 7: Correct response at the 3rd time point and
competition ranking

Correct response rate at the 1st time point

0

r = -0.712

0%

0

The correlation coefficient between the competition
rankings and the percentage of correct answers was -0.712.
We divided the two groups on the basis of competition
rankings. The high-scoring group was composed of the
subjects placing 3rd, 4th, and 7th in the tournament, and the
low-scoring group placed 15th, 17th, and 18th out of 19
participants.
Results
Table 3 displays the performance characteristics of the highscoring group when the subjects are placed and analyzed in
these groups.

1742

Compared with Table 2, recognition of a position, amount
of eye movement, and thought time have decreased.

caudate head, playing strength, and cognitive activity data
are mainly compared.

Table 3: Changes in the high-scoring group during the study

Results Figure 8 expresses the percentage of correct
answers to the problem used in the cognitive experiment in
the 1st period and the percentage of correct answers to the
problem used in the fMRI experiment at the early stage. The
high-scoring group’s data are represented by circles, and the
low-scoring group’s data are represented by diamonds.
Correlations were not seen between the two variables.

3rd
period
21.1

Amount of eye movement [pixels] *

15560

12411

Thought time [s] *

137.4

88.7

Generation of candidate moves [number]

2.2

2.0

Depth of search [depth]

3.2

2.9

100%

Correct response rate at
the 1st time point

Recognition of a position [s] **

1st
period
31.5

p < 0.05 (*) p < 0.01 (**)
Discussion It seems that these are the features of expertise,
as our results corresponded with those of previous research
on certain points, such as reduction of time necessary to
recognize a position, reduction of the amount of eye
movement, and reduction of thinking time obtained in the
high-scoring group.
A different result from previous research was obtained
regarding whether searching deeply implies that skill is high.
Although the tendency for search to be deep was seen as
subjects became experts in previous research, this tendency
was not seen in our results.
This result indicates that deep searching ability was not
acquired by learning.
The items that differ between the high- and low-scoring
groups at the 1st time point are the following:

We expected that these differences might express
variation in ease of learning. Bransford suggested that there
is a type of beginner called an intellectual beginner
(Bransford et al., 1982). He compared an efficient learner
with an inefficient learner by stating that an inefficient
learner did not notice the difficulty of a study subject and
did not change his/her strategy when study subjects changed.
The difference seen in this experiment may support the
existence of the intellectual beginner.

60%
40%
20%

r = -0.165

0%
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

Correct response rate in fMRI experiment at the…

Figure 8: Relationship between fMRI and cognitive
experiment at the 1st time point (at the early stage)
Correct response rate at
the 3rd time point

Table 4: Difference between low score and high score
low
high
Recognition of a position [s] **
44.1
21.1
Amount of eye movement [pixels] **
26616 12411
Thought time [s]
137.5
88.7
Generation of a candidate moves
1.7
2.0
[number] *
Depth of search [depth] **
2.0
2.9
p < 0.05 (*) p < 0.01 (**)

80%

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

r = 0.824

0%
0%

50%

100%

Correct response rate in fMRI experiment at

Figure 9: Relationship between fMRI and cognitive
experiment at the 3rd time point (at the last stage)
Figure 9 plots the percentage of correct answers to the
problems used in the cognitive experiment in the 3rd period
and the percentage of correct answers to the problems used
in the fMRI experiment at the last stage. The high-scoring
group’s data are represented by circles, and the low-scoring
group’s data are represented by diamonds. There was a
correlation between the two variables.
Table 5: Correlation coefficients between results of the
cognitive experiment and the fMRI experiment
Recognition of time
positions [s]
Amount of eye
movement [pixels]
Thought time [s]
Generation of candidate
moves [number]
Depth of search [depth]

Analysis of Cognitive and fMRI experiment
The cognitive data obtained in the cognitive experiment and
the brain imaging data acquired in the fMRI experiment are
set and examined. Percentage of correct answers, size of the

1743

Strength of
activity

The size of
caudate nucleus

0.021

0.746

-0.292

0.436

0.103

0.807

-0.534

-0.424

0.538

0.282

Table 5 shows correlations between the differences of
results in the cognitive experiment and the fMRI experiment.
Correlations were found a little at a time in order to
recognize the position and size of the caudate nucleus.
Correlation was also found a little at a time between
thinking time and the size of caudate. However, correlations
were seldom seen among other items. Moreover, no
correlation was seen when activity at the 1st and 3rd time
points, brain activity, and the size of the caudate head were
compared.
Discussion Figure 8 shows that there was no difference
between the two groups’ rates of considering carefully or
answering problems intuitively in the 1st period of study.
However, Figure 9 shows the relationship between the
percentage of correct answers on problems that were
considered carefully and the percentage of correct answers
that were answered by intuition in the last stage of the study.
It is therefore possible that intuitive and deliberative
thinking abilities are not totally separate, and that these two
types of thinking have mutually influenced one another.
Table 4 shows that there is a relationship between the time
to understand positions and the volume of the caudate
nucleus. Since there is a close relationship between time to
understand positions and thinking time, it is thought that the
relationship was caused by both types of thinking. Since
there is no relationship between cognitive change and
change of brain activity in other areas, it is suggested that
the changes are independent.
In the fMRI experiment, we investigated what happens to
brain activity when a subject solved a problem by intuition.
Some subjects described intuition in the reports that they
presented once per week. A certain subject reported the
following description during the 10th week of the
experiment:
“A move may flash by intuition or not flash.”
Moreover, another subject gave an analogous description:
“If I encounter an important point in the game, I
generate a move by intuition and search deeply.”
Both of the subjects seem to have considered (in light of
the fact that they gave such descriptions at the end of the
experiment) that intuitive ability is supported by prolonged
learning.

Conclusions
In this research, changes of expertise in Mini-Shogi were
investigated in a cognitive experiment and an fMRI
experiment. In the cognitive experiment, the results were
analogous to those of previous experiments in terms of the
difference between beginners and experts, showing
reduction in thought time and reduction of eye movement
upon position recognition with increasing expertise while
obtaining almost the same level of skill in the subject. In the
fMRI experiment, the high-scoring group displayed higher
caudate nucleus activity, as seen in previous work.
Comparing the results of the cognitive experiment and the
fMRI experiment, a correlation was found between the time

to understand positions and the size of caudate nucleus.
However, correlation was not seen among other variables.
On the basis of this report and the results of our
experiments, we suggest that subjects’ intuitive ability and
deliberation ability are not completely independent and that
they may mutually influence each other.

References
Atherton, O., Zhuang, J., Bart, W. M., Hu, X. P., & He, S.
(2003). A functional MRI study of high-level cognition. I.
The game of chess. Cognitive Brain Research, 16, 26-31.
Bransford, J. D., Stein, B. S., Vye, N. J., Franks, J. J., Auble,
P. M., Mezynski, K. J., & Perfetto, G. A. (1982).
Differences in approaches to learning: An overview.
Journal of Experimental Psycohogy: General, 111, 390398.
Bransford, J. D. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind,
experience, and school., (expanded ed.). Committee on
Developments in the Science of Learning. J. D.
Bransford, A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking (Eds.),
Washington, D.C: National Academy Press.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 81.
Chen, X., Zhang, D., Zhang, X., Li, Z., Meng, X., He, S., &
Hu. X. P. (2003). A functional MRI study of high-level
cognition. II. The game of Go. Cognitive Brain Research,
16, 32-37.
de Groot, A. D. (1965). Thought and choice in chess.
Mouton Publishers.
de Groot, A. D., & Gobet, F. (1996). Perception and
memory in Chess –studies in the heuristics of the
professional eye. Van Gorcum.
Ito, T., Matsubara, H., & Reijer, G. (2004). Cognitive
science approach to Shogi playing processes (2) – Some
results on next move test experiments. Information
Processing Society of Japan, 45(5), 1481-1490.
Ito Lab. 55Shogi portal [Internet monograph]. Retrieved
January 23, 2012 from
http://minerva.cs.uec.ac.jp/~uec55/index.php.
Law, B., Atkins, M. S., Kirkpatrick, A. E., Lomax, A. J., &
Mackenzie, C. L. (2004). Eye gaze patterns differentiate
novice and expert in a virtual laparoscopic surgery
training environment. Proceedings of ACM Symposium of
Eye Tracking Resarch& Applications.Publisher: ACM
Press.
Osaka R., Nakamizo, Y., & Koga, K. (1993). Experimental
psychology of eye movements. The University of Nagoya
Press.
Paolo, N, Jordan, G., Pietro, P., David, A., John, C. C. &
Robert, M. (1994). Brain activity in chess playing.
Nature, 369, 191.
Wan, X., Nakatani, H., Ueno, K., Asamizuya, T., Cheng, K.,
& Tanaka, K. (2011). The neural basis of intuitive best
next-move generation in board game experts. Science,
331, 341-346.

1744

