UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s understanding of hidden emotion, theory of mind, and peer relationship

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/517499d2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Mizuno, Ai
Koyasu, Masuo

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s understanding of hidden emotion, theory of mind, and peer relationship
Ai Mizokawa (aimizokawa@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Meiji Gakuin University
1-2-37 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8636 Japan

Masuo Koyasu (hgb03675@nifty.com)
Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University,
Yoshida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan
Abstract
This study investigated correlations between understanding of
hidden emotion and theory of mind. Five- and six-year-old
children (N = 105, 48 boys and 57 girls) took hidden emotion
tasks (TEC component 7), first- and second-order false belief
tasks, and a vocabulary test. Teachers rated the children’s
social interactions in terms of peer relationships. Individual
differences in children’s understanding of first- and secondorder false belief and understanding of hidden negative
emotion were associated with differences in language ability.
Individual differences in understanding of first-order false
belief and understanding of hidden negative emotion were
correlated, and this association remained after controlling age
and language ability. The results also showed that children
who were more advanced in understanding of first-order false
belief are more likely to have fewer peer problems. These
findings were discussed in terms of social and cognitive
development.
Keywords: young children; hidden emotion; theory of mind;
peer relationship.

Introduction
Over the past 30 years, researchers have demonstrated that
children’s ability to understand mental states (desires,
thoughts, belief, and emotions) develops throughout their
childhood (Astington, Harris, & Olson, 1988; Pons, Harris,
& de Rosnay, 2004). One such ability, theory of mind,
which is narrowly defined as the understanding of other’s
mind, such as false belief, dramatically develops between
the ages of 3 and 6 (see Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001),
while there exist some cultural differences. For example,
several studies have shown that Japanese children lag
significantly behind American and British children on false
belief tasks (Hughes, Ensor, Allen, Devine, De Rosnay,
Koyasu, Mizokawa, & Lecce, 2011; Lewis, Koyasu, Oh,
Ogawa, Short, & Huang, 2009; Naito & Koyama, 2006).
Another important element of social competence,
understanding of hidden emotion (Saarni, 1979, 1999), also
emerges during the preschool period, between the ages of 4
and 6 (Gross & Harris, 1988; Harris, Donnelly, Guz, & PittWatson, 1986). It has been found that there are no
differences in age in regards to understanding of hidden
emotion between American, British, and Japanese children
(Gardner, Harris, Ohmoto & Hamazaki, 1988).
Children’s theory of mind ability is traditionally
measured by their performance in false belief tasks. The
first-order false belief task measures children’s ability to

attribute a first-order false belief to a story character (e.g., a
mistaken belief about an object’s identity or location). Most
children pass the first-order false belief task by the ages 6
(Perner, 1991; Wimmer & Perner, 1983). They then pass the
second-order false belief task between the ages of 6 and 9
(Perner & Wimmer, 1985). The second-order false belief
task measures children’s ability to attribute a second-order
false belief (i.e. a mistaken belief about a belief) to a story
character. Recently, a less demanding second-order false
belief task has been created, making it easier to understand
for young children (cf. Sullivan, Zaitchik, & Tager-Flusberg,
1994).
To measure children’s understanding of emotion,
including hidden emotion, Test of Emotion Comprehension
(TEC; Pons & Harris, 2000) has been widely used for over
the past 10 years. The TEC is an extensive measure of
emotion comprehension, which evaluates nine components
of emotion understanding. Component 7 assesses whether
children understand that one can hide an underlying, or true,
emotional state. Pons et al. (2004) found that 50% of 5-yearolds and 65% of 7-year-olds were able to distinguish
expressed emotion from actual, felt (hidden) emotion, while
only 5% of the 3-year-olds were able to understand the
hidden emotion. The hidden emotion tasks include both
hidden negative emotion tasks, where the protagonist is
motivated to hide inner negative emotion, and hidden
positive emotion tasks, where the protagonist is motivated
to hide inner positive emotion. To distinguish between
expressed apparent emotion and hidden inner emotion, it is
necessary to identify the actual emotion and to keep it
distinct from the apparent emotion. This ability is also
required in false belief tasks. For example, in the
unexpected displacement task, which is one of the most
popular false belief tasks, participants have to retain the
original placement of an object in their mind as well as its
present location. In this light, the cognitive ability to
understand incongruence between apparent and hidden
emotion may relate to the understanding of others’ false
belief that is not based on reality.
Banerjee and Yuill (1999) addressed 4- to 6-year-old
children's understanding of false emotion (hidden negative
emotion: hiding inner negative emotion and expressing
apparent happiness or neutral emotion) with selfpresentational and prosocial motivation, and its association
with second-order mental state understanding. They found
that only an appreciation of self-presentational false

2025

emotional expression was associated with children’s
performance on the second-order false belief task.
Mizokawa and Koyasu (2007) revealed the association
between 4- to 6-year-olds’ understanding of pretend crying
(hidden positive emotion: hiding inner positive emotion and
expressing apparent sadness) and performance of both firstand second-order false belief tasks. These associations
between understanding of hidden emotion and development
of theory of mind stem from the nature of emotion hiding,
which includes the potential that the person who looked at
the false emotional expressions would be deceived and
adopt a false belief.
As noted above, TEC component 7 assesses children’s
understanding of the fact that one can hide an inner
emotional state. Although this component has been used as
an unific index of understanding of hidden emotion, it
seems that the tasks in component 7 include some different
aspects of mental state understanding. One salient feature is
that this component is made up of two hidden positive and
two negative emotion stories. Note that there are some
findings demonstrating that the expressers’ motivation to
hide emotion affects children’s performance in
understanding of hidden emotion (cf. Banerjee & Yuill,
1999; Mizokawa, 2007). However, the protagonist’s
motivation to hide inner emotion is not clearly specified in
each task of TEC component 7.
Previous research suggests that understanding hidden
positive emotion (i.e. revealing negative or neutral emotion
when one actually has positive emotion) is more difficult for
children than understanding hidden negative emotion (i.e.
revealing positive or neutral emotion when one actually has
negative emotion) (Mizokawa, 2007). That may be because,
in some social situations such as receiving unwanted gifts
(Saarni, 1979), parents want and instruct their children to
mask their negative emotion and express positive emotion to
protect another’s (i.e. the sender’s) feelings. Thus, hiding
negative emotion would be internalized through such
socialization processes in their early life. Meanwhile,
children are rarely “taught” in society to hide their positive
emotion as not to hurt others feelings (e.g., it is not
appropriate to celebrate too much when one wins a game
and another loses the game). Moreover, the expression of
positive emotion is likely to be considered as generally
“good” and “desirable” in the sense of strengthening social
bonds. Children are rarely asked to inhibit or hide positive
emotion except in special social situations, such as funerals.
So, it may be relatively difficult for children to guess or
infer the motivation for hiding positive emotion because
they do not have much experience in hiding positive
emotion by themselves or being taught to hide positive
emotion. From this perspective, children understand hidden
negative emotion (i.e. the discrepancy between hidden
negative emotion and expressed positive or neutral emotion)
somewhat automatically, that is, they can understand that
people hide negative emotion without consciously thinking
about the effect that others’ emotional expressions have on
recipients’ mental states, what the recipient of the apparent

emotional expression feel, or whether the recipient has a
false belief about expresser’s actual emotion after
witnessing the apparent emotion. They simply need to
identify the inner emotion and to keep it distinct from the
apparent expressed emotion. After witnessing hidden
positive emotion, on the other hand, they might need to
think more deeply and make guesses about what is going on
in the expresser’s and the recipient’s mind. We expected
that there would be different associations between
understanding of hidden emotion and development of theory
of mind according to positive-negative valence of emotion.
To address these issues, we tested links between young
children’s understanding of false belief, and hidden positive
and negative emotion individually.
In the present study, we also explored the relationship
between mental state understanding (first- and second-order
false belief and hidden emotion) and peer relations. It has
been shown that the development of theory of mind is
central to successful social interactions. Some studies have
shown that the development of theory of mind is related to
important aspects of children’s social interactions (cf.
Astington & Jenkins, 1995; Dunn & Cutting, 1999; Walker,
2005). As for emotion understanding, it has been revealed
that children with greater emotion knowledge demonstrate
more empathic and prosocial behaviors and popularity with
peers (cf. Cassidy, Parke, Butkovsky, & Braungart, 1992;
Denham, 1986; Garner, 1996; Walden & Field, 1990).
However, there is little research addressing the link between
understanding of hidden emotion and social interaction. We
tested the association of individual measures of mental state
understanding (first- and second-order false beliefs, hidden
positive emotion, and hidden negative emotion) to peer
problems. We hypothesized that children’s theory of mind
and their ability to understand hidden positive emotion
would be negatively related to peer problems.
Overall, in the present study, we tested the difference
between children’s understanding of hidden positive
emotion and understanding of hidden negative emotion, the
association between hidden emotion and first- and secondorder false belief understanding, and association between
these mental state understandings and rated peer problems.

Method
Participants
One hundred and five Japanese children (48 boys and 57
girls, mean age = 6:1) and twelve teachers (11 women and
one man) participated in this study. All were native
Japanese speakers.

Materials and Procedures
Tasks for children were administered individually by the
experimenter (the first author) at their school in a quiet
room. These children were also examined in a cross-cultural
study by Hughes et al. (2011). The children’s homeroom
teachers rated each child’s social interactions in terms of

2026

peer relationships. The order of study tasks for children was
counterbalanced across the participants.
PVT-R The children’s language ability was assessed using
PVT-R (Ueno et al., 2008), which requires them to select
the picture named by the experimenter from an array of four
pictures.
False belief tasks The children’s understanding of first- and
second-order false belief was assessed via four stories (cf.
Hughes, Adlam, Happe, Jackson, Taylor, & Caspi, 2000).
These included two first-order false belief tasks (Harris,
Johnson, Hutton, Andrews, & Cooke, 1989), and two
second-order false belief tasks (Sullivan et al., 1994).
In the first-order false belief tasks, participants were
shown puppet-based stories that involved a nice surprise
story and a nasty surprise story, and were required to answer
the protagonist’s first-order false belief question, a reality
question, and control questions.
Following is an example of a story and questions used in
the first-order false belief task (a nice surprise story): I’m
going to tell you a little story about Monty and his lunch box.
Look, here’s Monty. He wants Freddie to put an apple in his
lunch box to take to school. But Freddie says there are no
apples left, so he’ll have to take a pear instead. Monty
doesn’t like pears at all. He really wanted an apple! He’s so
cross about the pear that he stamps all the way upstairs.
[Q1 (control 1): How does Monty feel when he gets a pear?
Does he feel happy or not happy?] [Q2 (control 2): How
does Monty feel when he gets an apple? Does he feel happy
or not happy?] But look, while Monty is out of the kitchen,
Freddie finds one apple left in the cupboard. He decides to
give Monty a nice surprise, and so takes out the pear, and
puts an apple in Monty’s lunchbox instead. Then he puts the
lunchbox in Monty’s bag. Monty comes back, picks up the
bag and hurries off to school. So Monty doesn’t see what’s
inside his lunchbox. Now it’s lunchtime. Monty takes out his
lunchbox. [Q3 (first-order false belief): What does Monty
think is in the box, an apple or a pear?] [Q4 (reality): What
is in the box really, an apple or a pear?]
In the second-order false belief tasks, participants were
shown picture-based stories and asked to answer first- and
second-order false belief questions, a reality question, and
memory control questions.
Following is an example of a story and questions used in
the second-order false belief task: This is Peter. Today is his
birthday, and Peter’s Mum is going to surprise him by
giving him a puppy. She has hidden the puppy in the shed
until it’s time for Peter’s birthday party. Peter says “I really
hope you’ve got me a puppy for my birthday, Mum.” But
remember, Mum wants to surprise Peter. So instead of
telling Peter she has got him a puppy, Mum says, “Sorry, I
didn’t get you a puppy, Peter. Actually, I’ve got you a really
good toy for your birthday.”[Q1 (first-order false belief):
So, what did Peter think he was getting for his birthday?]
[Q2 (reality): What was his Mum giving him really? (If
child passes both Q1 and Q2, continue story. If child fails,
stop story here.) Now Peter decides to go outside to play.

On his way out, he goes into the shed to get his bike, and he
finds the birthday puppy! Peter says to himself, “Wow!
Mum didn’t get me a toy, she really got me a puppy for my
birthday!” Mum didn’t see Peter go to the shed, so she
doesn’t know he found the birthday puppy. Inside, the
telephone rings. It’s Peter’s Granny, calling to find out
what time the party is. Granny says to Mum, “What does
Peter think you’ve got him for his birthday?” [Q3 (secondorder false belief): What does Mum say to Granny?] [Q4
(memory control): Did Mum see Peter go into the shed?]
[Q5 (memory control): What has Mum really got Peter for
his birthday?]
For the two first-order false belief tasks, the children’s
responses were judged as correct when they answered all the
four questions correctly (a first-order false belief question, a
reality question, and two control questions). Each of the two
second-order false belief tasks included first- and secondorder false belief questions, a reality question, and memory
control questions. When children passed both a first-order
false belief and a reality question, they got 1 point for firstorder false belief understanding. When they passed a
second-order false belief question and memory questions,
they got 1 point for second-order false belief understanding.
These tasks yielded two scores: the children’s understanding
of first-order false belief was indexed by summing the
scores across the four tasks (scores ranged from 0 to 4), and
their understanding of second-order false belief was indexed
by summing the two tasks (scores ranged from 0 to 2).
Hidden emotion tasks The children’s comprehension of
hidden emotion was assessed by means of the TEC (Pons &
Harris, 2000), component 7 (Hiding). The children were
read four picture-based stories and asked to attribute an
emotion to a character, who was motivated to hide his or her
real emotion from another child and express a different
emotion. These four stories were made up of two hidden
positive emotion stories (hide inner positive emotion and
express sad or neutral emotion) and two hidden negative
emotion stories (hide inner negative emotion and express
happy emotion). In the hidden positive emotion scenario,
the story character gets a new bicycle, but he tries to hide
how he feels inside in front of his friend, who does not have
his own bicycle (positive 1), and the story character wins a
game but she tries to hide how she feels inside in front of
her friend who loses the game (positive 2). In the hidden
negative emotion stories, the story character falls over in
front of his friend, and he tries to hide how he feels inside
(negative 1), and the story character is teased by her friend
and tries to hide how she feels inside (negative 2). In TEC
component 7, the children were asked to attribute an
emotion to characters in each of the four stories. They were
given 1 point if they attributed the appropriate emotion to
each story character (ranging from 0-2).
SDQ-Peer Problems subscale Teachers completed a
shortened version (in Japanese) of the Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire (Goodman, 1997) that contained
five items. For each item, they rated children’s social

2027

interactions using the 3-point Likert scale (not true,
somewhat true, or certainly true). The five items were: (1)
Rather solitary, tends to play alone; (2) Has at least one
good friend; (3) Generally liked by other children; (4)
Picked on or bullied by other children; (5) Gets on better
with adults than with other children. ‘Somewhat true’ was
scored as 1. ‘Not true’ was scored as 0 in item 1, 4, and 5,
and scored as 2 in item 2 and 3. ’Certainly true’ was scored
as 2 in item 1, 4, and 5, and scored as 0 in item 2 and 3.
The total score is generated by summing the scores from
the five items (scores ranged from 0 to 10). Note that a
higher score indicates greater difficulties in the child’s peer
relationships.

Results
There were no significant gender differences in any of the
study measures. Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for
each study measure.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for all measures
Measure
M
SD
Age (months)
PVT-R
HE positive
HE negative
FB (1st)
FB (2nd)
Peer problem

73.29
28.87
1.09
1.18
2.71
0.57
1.76

Language ability and mental state understanding
(hidden emotion and false belief) There were significant
correlations between language ability (PVT-R score) and the
understanding of hidden negative emotion (r = .27, p <.01).
Children’s language ability was clearly related to first- and
second-order false belief understanding (first-order: r = .52,
p <.01; second-order: r = .36, p <.01). There was no
significant link between language ability and understanding
of hidden positive emotion (n.s.).
Hidden emotion and false belief There was a significant
correlation between understanding of hidden negative
emotion and first-order false belief (r = .32, p < .01).
Significant partial correlations were also found between the
dyads when age, and PVT-R score were partialled out (r
= .21, p < .05). There was no significant link between
understanding of hidden positive emotion and understanding
of first-order false belief, and between understanding of
both positive and negative hidden emotion and
understanding of second-order false belief (all: n.s.).

Relation of Understanding of Hidden Emotion and
False Belief to Peer Problems

3.96
3.63
0.82
0.83
1.36
0.73
1.87

Teachers rated 101 of 105 children’s social interactions.
Thus the data of 101 children-teacher pairs were used for
the analysis. As shown in Table 2, there was significant
negative correlation between the scores for peer problems
and performance in first-order false belief tasks (r = -.24, p
< .05). Significant partial correlations were also found
between the dyads when age, and PVT-R score were
partialled out (r = -.19, p = .05). That is, the children who
were good at understanding other’s first-order false beliefs
have fewer difficulties in their peer relationships. There was
no significant link between the scores for peer problems and
any other mental understanding measures (second-order
false belief, hidden positive emotion, and hidden negative
emotion) (all: n.s.).

Note: HE= hidden emotion, FB = false belief.

Hidden Positive Emotion vs. Hidden Negative
Emotion
There was no significant difference between the mean
scores of hidden positive emotion tasks and hidden negative
emotion tasks (n.s.).

Association between the Study Measures
Correlation and partial correlation coefficients between the
different pairs of measures were calculated. Table 2 shows
the correlation coefficients and partial correlation
coefficients between language ability (PVT-R score), the
hidden positive and negative emotion score, the first- and
second-order false belief score, and the peer problem score.
Table 2: Correlation coefficients and partial correlation
coefficients between study measures
1 PVT-R
2 HE positive
3 HE negative
4 FB (1st)
5 FB (2nd)
6 Peer Problem

1

2

-

.09
.23*
.05
-.10
.11

3
.27**
.25*
.21*
.01
-.08

4

5

6

.52**
.08
.32**
.50**
-.19†

.36**
.13
.11
.59**
-.08

-.15
.11
-.10
.-.24*
-.11
-

Note: The upper off-diagonal elements represent correlation coefficients,
while the lower off-diagonal elements are partial correlation coefficients
controlling age, and PVT-R score. **p < .01, *p < .05, † p < .10. HE =
hidden emotion, FB = false belief.

Discussion
This study investigated differences between children’s
understandings of hidden positive and hidden negative
emotions and examined associations between their
understanding of hidden emotions and theory of mind. We
also addressed the link between understandings of mental
states and peer relationships. Individual differences in
children’s understandings of hidden negative emotions and
first- and second-order false beliefs were clearly associated
with differences in language ability. This result supported
previous research demonstrating an important role for
language in the development of theory of mind (Happé,
1995).
We found no significant differences between the mean
scores for hidden positive emotion tasks and hidden
negative emotion tasks, but did find a correlation between
children’s understandings of hidden positive and hidden
negative emotions. The result was not consistent with that of
a previous study, which reported that understanding hidden

2028

negative emotions was more difficult than understanding
hidden positive emotions (Mizokawa, 2007). This
inconsistency may be attributable to differences between the
tasks used in the previous study and those used in the
current study, especially with respect to those used to
address hidden positive emotions. In component 7 of the
Test of Emotion Comprehension (TEC), each protagonist in
the hidden positive emotion tasks had a motivation to “hide”
happiness. On the other hand, because Mizokawa’s study
focused on fake crying, each protagonist in the hidden
positive emotion tasks had a motivation to “hide” happiness
and “express” sadness. Given that the expression of negative
emotions is generally construed to be undesirable, the TEC
hidden positive emotion tasks used here may have been
easier than those used in the previous study.
Although we found no significant difference between
children’s scores on hidden positive and hidden negative
emotion tasks, the two kinds of hidden emotions (positive
and negative) differed in their relationships to aspects of
theory of mind. However, the direction of this correlation
was opposite to our expectation. We found an association
between understanding of others’ minds and hidden
negative emotions, whereas no significant link between
children’s performances on hidden positive emotion tasks
and false belief tasks was observed. One possible
explanation of the association between these dyads may be
that language ability facilitates children’s understanding of
both first-order false beliefs and hidden negative emotions.
However, this seems unlikely because these associations
remained even after controlling for language ability and age.
Although we had expected children to think deeply and
make guesses about what was going on in the expresser’s
and recipient’s minds when in the presence of someone
else’s hidden positive emotion, the results revealed the
opposite pattern. It is necessary to conduct further
investigations into how children use their ability to
understand what is going on in others’ minds in hidden
emotion tasks to clarify the meaning of this finding.
In terms of children’s social interactions, the data
indicated that children who were more advanced in their
understanding of first-order false beliefs were more likely to
have and be liked by peers. No association was found
between understanding hidden emotions and peer problems.
Children who understand first-order false beliefs may have
more sophisticated communication skills based on their
understanding of others’ minds. Interestingly, language
ability per se was not associated with children’s peer
relationships. These findings suggest that the development
of theory of mind transforms and/or is transformed by
children’s social interaction skills, as Hughes and Leekam
argued (Hughes & Leekam, 2004). Moreover, these results
also suggest the possibility that training related to
understanding first-order false beliefs leads to fewer peer
problems (cf. Ozonoff & Miller, 1995; Slaughter, Dennis, &
Pritchard, 2002).
The findings of our study also suggest that understanding
hidden emotions, as measured by component 7 of the TEC,

is not a unitary concept. That is, understanding hidden
positive and hidden negative emotions should be viewed as
related but distinct aspects of emotional understanding. In
the hidden positive emotion tasks in component 7 of the
TEC, children need to think more deeply and make guesses
about another’s mind, which differs from the requirements
of the hidden negative emotion tasks. We found no
relationship between children’s performance on the hidden
emotion tasks and their performance on the second-order
false belief tasks or between peer problems and performance
on the second-order false belief tasks. This may be due to a
floor effect in the second-order false belief tasks.
Our study found a relationship between children’s
understandings of first-order false beliefs and their
understanding of hidden negative emotions. Although these
measures are correlated with each other, only the
understanding of first-order false beliefs was linked to peer
relationships. When we observe children’s communication
with peers, we can see that children who are good at
understanding how people control emotional expression
have complex relationships (e.g., those involving
negotiation) with their peers. It may be expected that aspects
of social interactions other than peer problems are linked
with understanding hidden emotions. Future research is
needed to reveal whether and how children’s understandings
of mental states such as hidden emotions come to be
reflected in their social interactions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from MEXT to
Masuo Koyasu (grant 70115658). We would like to express
our thanks to the children who participated in this study and
their parents and teachers.

References
Astington, J. W., Harris, P. L., & Olson, D. R. (Eds.) (1988).
Developing Theories of Mind. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Astington, J. W., & Jenkins, J. M. (1995). Theory of mind
and social understanding. Cognition and Emotion, 9, 151165.
Banerjee, R. & Yuill, N. (1999). Children’s understanding
of self-presentational display rules: Associations with
mental-state
understanding.
British
Journal
of
Developmental Psychology, 17, 111-124.
Cassidy, J., Parke, R. D., Butkovsky, L., & Braungart, J. M.
(1992). Family-peer connections: The roles of emotional
expressiveness within the family and children's
understanding of emotions. Child Development, 63, 603618.
Cutting, A. L., & Dunn, J. (1999). Theory of mind, emotion
understanding, language, and family background:
Individual differences and interrelations. Child
Development, 70, 853-865.
Denham, S. A. (1986). Social cognition, prosocial behavior,
and emotion in preschoolers: Contextual validation. Child
Development, 57, 194-201.

2029

Dunn, J., & Cutting, A. L. (1999). Understanding others and
individual differences in friendship interactions in young
children. Social Development, 8, 201-219.
Gardner, D., Harris, P. L., Ohmoto, M. & Hamazaki, T.
(1988). Japanese children’s understanding of the
distinction between real and apparent emotion.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 11,
203-218.
Garner, P. W. (1996). The relations of emotional role taking,
affective/moral attributions, and emotional display rule
knowledge to low-income school-age children's social
competence. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 17, 19-36.
Goodman, R. (1997). The Strengths and Difficulties
Questionnaire: A research note. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 38, 581-586.
Gross, D. & Harris, P. L. (1988). False belief about
emotion: Children’s understanding of misleading
emotional displays. International Journal of Behavioral
Development, 11, 475-488.
Harris, P. L., Donnelly, K., Guz, G. R., & Pitt-Watson, R.
(1986). Children's understanding of the distinction
between real and apparent emotion. Child Development,
57, 895-909.
Happé, F. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability in the
theory of mind task performance of subjects with autism.
Child Development, 66, 843-855.
Harris, P. L., Johnson, C., Hutton, D., Andrews, G., &
Cooke, T. (1989). Young children’s theory of mind and
emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 3, 379-400.
Hughes, C., Adlam, A., Happe, F., Jackson, J., Taylor, A.,
& Caspi, A. (2000). Good test-retest reliability for
standard and advanced false-belief tasks across a wide
range of abilities. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 41, 483-490.
Hughes, C., Ensor, R. A., Allen, L. L., Devine, R. T., De
Rosnay, M., Koyasu, M., Mizokawa, A., & Lecce, S.
(2011, April). Theory of mind performance in British,
Australian, Japanese and Italian children: Contrasts in
culture or age of school entry? Paper presented at the
Society for Research in Child Development (SRCD)
Biennial Conference, Montreal, Canada.
Hughes, C., & Leekam, S. (2004). What are the links
between theory of mind and social relations? Review,
reflections and new directions for studies of typical and
atypical development. Social Development, 13, 590-619.
Lewis, C., Koyasu, M., Oh, S., Ogawa, A., Short, B., &
Huang, Z. (2009). Culture, executive function, and social
understanding. New Directions in Child and Adolescent
Development, 123, 69-85.
Mizokawa, A. (2007). Young children’s understanding of
false sadness. The Japanese Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 18, 174-184. (in Japanese with English
abstract).
Mizokawa, A. & Koyasu, M. (2007). Young children's
understanding of another's apparent crying and its
relationship to theory of mind. Psychologia, 50, 291-307.

Naito, M., & Koyama, K. (2006). The development of falsebelief understanding in Japanese children: Delay and
differences? International Journal of Behavioural
Development, 30, 290-304.
Ozonoff, S., & Miller, J. N. (1995). Teaching theory of
mind: A new approach to social skills training for
individuals with autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 25, 415-433.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Perner, J., & Wimmer, H. (1985). “John Thinks That Mary
Thinks That. . .” Attribution of second-order belief by 5to 10-year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 39, 437-471.
Pons, F., & Harris, P. L. (2000). Test of Emotion
Comprehension. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Pons, F., Harris, P. L. & de Rosnay, M. (2004). Emotion
comprehension between 3 and 11 years: Developmental
periods and hierarchical organization. European Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 1, 127-152.
Saarni, C. (1979). Children's understanding of display rules
for expressive behavior. Developmental Psychology, 15,
424-429.
Saarni, C. (1999). Developing emotional competence. New
York: Guilford.
Slaughter, V., Dennis, M. J. & Pritchard, M. (2002). Theory
of mind and peer acceptance in preschool children. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 545-564.
Sullivan, K., Zaitchik, D. & Tager-Flusberg, H. (1994).
Preschoolers can attribute second-order belief.
Developmental Psychology, 30, 395-402.
Ueno, K., Nagoshi, N. & Konuki, S. (2008). PVT-R manual.
Nihon Bunka Kagakusha, Tokyo. (in Japanese)
Walden, T., & Field, T. (1990). Preschool children's social
competence and the production and discrimination of
affective expressions. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 8, 65-76.
Walker, S (2005). Gender differences in the relationship
between young children's peer-related social competence
and individual differences in theory of mind. The Journal
of Genetic Psychology, 166, 297-312.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child Development, 72, 655-684.
Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. (1983). Belief about belief:
Representation and constraining function of wrong belief
in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13, 103-128.

2030

