UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Color word learning is a gradual inductive process

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vh2x8vs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Wagner, Katie
Dobkins, Karen
Barner, David

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Color word learning is a gradual inductive process
Katie Wagner
kgwagner@ucsd.edu
Dept. of Psychology, UCSD

Karen Dobkins
kdobkins@ucsd.edu
Dept. of Psychology, UCSD

Abstract

According to some, the moment of abstraction resembles a
conceptual epiphany. For example, according to Franklin
(2006), “Children seem to struggle with their first color
word yet learn most of the other basic terms fairly rapidly
over the next several months…. This seems to suggest that
there is some kind of ‘switch’ for children’s ability to learn
and map color words correctly¬” (p. 324). On this view,
once children have mapped their first color word, mapping
of other color words to adult-like meanings is relatively
simple and fast (see Franklin, 2006; Soja, 1994).
The idea that the mapping process ought to be rapid
comes from two main lines of research. First, in an oftencited study of color words in 110 languages, Kay and
colleagues reported evidence for cross-linguistic universals
in linguistic color categories (Kay et al.,, 2009) and argued
that the number of color categories cross-linguistically is
relatively small and constrained. Second, there is mounting
evidence suggesting that pre-linguistic infants possess
perceptual color categories very similar to those found in
adults (e.g., Bornstein, Kessen & Weiskopf, 1976;
Bornstein, 1976; Franklin et al., 2008; Franklin et al.,
2005). In each case, the purported existence of constraints
on language and perception have led researchers to
conclude that color word learning is a simple mapping
problem, whereby largely innate perceptual categories are
associated with labels provided in language input.
Examples of this view are common in the literature, with
important consequences for how color word learning is
studied. For example, according to Pitchford and Mullen
(2004), “Developmental studies have shown young
children's perceptual colour space is organized in a similar
manner to that of the adult… Thus, when children engage
in the learning of colour terms, they already possess colour
percepts on which colour concepts can be mapped.” (p.53)
The implication of such arguments is that, because color
words can be mapped to pre-existing perceptual categories,
the lag between production and adult-like understanding
must not be due to the problem of determining boundaries.
Instead, the delay must be due to the prior problem of
identifying color as a domain of linguistic meaning.
There are good reasons, however, to believe that the
acquisition of color words is not a simple mapping
problem. Despite being restricted by universals of human
perception, languages vary both in the number of color
words they have (2 to 12) and how these words encode
color (Kay et al, 2009). For example, some languages that
have four basic color terms mark a boundary between red
and yellow (e.g., Culina, spoken in Peru; Waorini, spoken
in Ecuador) whereas others do not (e.g., Chácobo, spoken
in Bolivia; Múra-Pirahã, spoken in Brazil; Kay et al.,

Most current accounts of color word acquisition propose that
the delay between children’s first production of color words
and adult-like understanding is due to problems abstracting
color as a domain of meaning. Here we present evidence
against this hypothesis, and show that, from the time
children produce color words in a labeling task they use
them to represent color. In Experiment 1, an analysis of early
color word production errors finds that, before acquiring
adult-like understanding, children make systematic
hypotheses about color word meanings, which are best
characterized as overextensions of adult meanings.
Experiment 2 analyzes comprehension errors and finds that
these overextensions result from overly broad categories,
rather than a communicative strategy. These results indicate
that the delay between production and adult-like
understanding of color words is largely attributable to the
problem of determining language-specific color boundaries.
Keywords:
Concepts
and
Categories;
Acquisition; Cognitive Development

David Barner
barner@ucsd.edu
Dept. of Psychology, UCSD

Language

Introduction
Color words like red, green, and blue pose a difficult
problem to children learning language. According to early
reports from the turn of the 20th century, children did not
acquire the meanings of color words until as late as 8 years
of age. Recent reports suggest that children now acquire
color words earlier around 3 or 4 years of age (possibly
due to early education, see Shatz et al., 1996), but
nevertheless struggle to learn them (e.g., Backscheider &
Shatz, 1993; Sandhofer & Smith, 1999). The primary
evidence of children’s difficulty is that, similar to the
domains of number (Wynn, 1990) and time (Shatz et
al.,2010), children produce color words well before they
use them with adult-like meanings. Also, it’s often argued
color word use is initially “haphazard and inconsistent”
(p.70, Pitchford & Mullen, 2003). By most current
accounts, this delay between production and adult-like
understanding is caused by a difficulty abstracting color as
a dimension of linguistic meaning (e.g., O’Hanlon &
Roberson, 2006; Kowalksi & Zimilies, 2006; Sandhofer &
Smith, 1999). Here we present evidence that children’s
initial use of color words is in fact systematic rather than
haphazard, and that children have abstracted color by the
time they begin using color words. We argue that the main
source of children’s delay is the problem of inferring
category boundaries for color words.
Current accounts of color word acquisition typically
assume that once children have conceptualized color as a
domain relevant to word meaning, the mapping of color
words to their target color categories proceeds quickly.

1096

Experiment 1

2009). Also, Russian, Korean and English have roughly the
same number of basic color terms (11-12; Berlin & Kay,
1969), but divide the blue-green region of color space
differently (e.g. Roberson et al.,2009; Winawer et al.,
2007). In sum, while infants may perceive color like adults,
the categories encoded by language are not fully
determined by perception, suggesting that inductive
learning plays a significant role in color word learning.
In the present study, we explored the idea that children
acquire preliminary meanings for color words well before
they converge on adult-like meanings, and thus abstract
color much earlier than typically thought. On this
hypothesis, the delay between color word production and
adult-like understanding is mostly due to a gradual process
of determining language-specific color word boundaries.
Past studies have typically failed to address the nature of
the mapping problem because of how they characterized
children’s color word meanings. For example, researchers
often classify children according to their knowledge of
adult-like meanings – e.g., using red to label only red
objects (e.g., Kowalski & Zimiles 2006; Soja, 1994;
O’Hanlon & Roberson, 2006). In doing so, such studies
may underestimate children’s color word knowledge, and
thus the point at which they first abstract color. Consistent
with this concern, a number of studies have found that
before children acquire all 11 adult-like color word
meanings, they make errors that are systematic in nature
(Pitchford & Mullen, 2003; Davies et al.,1998; Bartlett,
1977). For example, Pitchford and Mullen found that 3year-olds often use their color words to incorrectly label
hues adjacent to the target category (e.g., labeling orange
as red). On the basis of this, they argued that pre-linguistic
perceptual categories strongly constrain early color word
meanings. However, proximity errors are not easily
explained by this hypothesis. Instead, such errors most
strongly support the existence of categories that are
broader than those used by adults, and thus that are not
acquired on the basis of pre-defined perceptual categories.
In the current study, we investigated the first meanings
that children assign to color words by analyzing the errors
they make in both language production and
comprehension. Although some past studies have reported
error data in early color word use (see above), here we
present new evidence and analyses that directly address the
nature of the delay between production and adult-like
understanding. In Experiment 1, we present data from a
color-labeling task sampled from a large group of children
including a subset who have not yet acquired any adult-like
meanings. This experiment finds that children make errors
that are systematic in nature prior to acquiring any adultlike meanings. These data suggest that children in our
study have abstracted color and possess partial knowledge
of color words by at least the time they begin producing
them. In Experiment 2, we corroborate these findings using
a language comprehension task, and show that children’s
early overextensions of color words reflects overly broad
meanings, rather than a communicative strategy.

Methods
Participants 141 children (68 girls) participated. Children
with a 25% chance or higher of protanopia or deuteranopia
color deficiency (based on family history) were excluded
(n=5). Children who made no errors (n=21), used only one
color term (n=6) or did not cooperate (n=11) were also
excluded. Data from the remaining 98 children (50 girls)
were analyzed (mean age 3;0, range 22 to 61 months).
Stimuli Stimuli were constructed using 11 pieces of
colored posterboard, which were chosen by a consensus of
five experimenters as being prototypical of the 11 basic
color terms in English (i.e., red, orange, yellow, green,
blue, purple, pink, brown, black & gray). The posterboard
was cut into a set of 11 fish shapes (Fish Task) and a set of
11 squares (Book Task). For the Fish Task the colored fish
were glued to black foam and were presented on a black
background. For the Book Task, the colored squares were
glued onto black pages and covered with white flaps.

Procedure
Fish Task. Each child was presented with a black box
containing the 11 colored fish, placed color-side down. The
experimenter (E) began by announcing, “My turn!” and
randomly picking up one of the fish asking, “What color is
it?” After the child responded, E placed the labeled fish on
the table and told the child, “Your turn!”, indicating that
the child should pick up a fish. E and the child continued
taking turns until each fish had been selected and labeled.
Book Task. Following the Fish Task, E presented the child
with a book that contained the colored squares. For each
page, the child lifted the flap that covered the color and E
asked, “What color is it?” Colors were presented in the
following order: orange, blue, yellow, pink, white, purple,
gray, brown, green, red, black. When children did not
respond, E repeated the question and gave the child another
chance to respond. Trials with no response (103 trials,
4.7%) or with two responses (e.g., the child said both blue
and red, 13 trials, 0.05%) were not analyzed.

Results
Color-Knowledge Groups Children were separated into
four groups based on the number of Basic Color Terms
they used in an adult-like manner (e.g., using red
consistently and exclusively for red stimuli).
Level 1: Adult-like knowledge of 0 color terms.
Produced between 2 and 6 color terms during experiment
(mean=3.1). Mean age of 2;5 (n=8, 1 girl).
Level 2: Adult-like knowledge of 1-3 color terms
(mean=2.0). Produced between 3 and 9 color terms during
experiment (mean=6.6). Mean age of 2;8 (n=16, 5 girls).
Level 3: Adult-like knowledge of 4-6 color terms
(mean=5.1). Produced between 8 and 10 color terms during
experiment (mean=9.1. Mean age of 3;2 (n=19, 9 girls).

1097

Level 4: Adult-like knowledge of 7-9 color terms
(mean=8.2). Produced between 9 and 12 terms during
experiment (mean=10.3). Mean age of 3;2 (n=53, 34 girls).
Error Consistency Analysis. Given that a child used an
incorrect label for a particular stimulus color on one task
(using red to label the orange stimulus on the Fish task),
we asked how likely it was for the child to repeat the error
on the other task (using red to label orange on the Book
task). Using a binomial test, we asked whether the
proportion of consistent trial pairs was greater than chance.
For this analysis, we excluded trial pairs in which the
child labeled the stimulus correctly on both tasks (725
pairs). The remaining 275 pairs were classified as either
consistent (the same incorrect label for a color on both
tasks, 122 pairs) or inconsistent (153 pairs).
The probability of repeating any single label on two
separate trials was defined as the square of the proportion
of total trials a child used that label. For example, if a child
used red on 6 of 22 trials, that child’s probability of using
red incorrectly on both the orange fish trial and the orange
book trial was (6/22)2. A child’s overall chance probability
of consistency was defined as the sum of the probability of
repeating each label. Each color knowledge group’s overall
chance probability of consistency was defined as the
average of the individual participant probabilities,
weighted by the number of data points each individual
contributed to the analysis. In other words:

adult color categories. For example, a child may correctly
know that red refers to red objects, yet have a broader
meaning for red than adults and overextend it to orange
and yellow objects. Given that a child used a label
incorrectly for at least one trial (e.g., using red to label an
orange or yellow stimulus), we asked whether they used
that label consistently for its target color (i.e., using red to
label both the red book and red fish stimulus). In other
words, when a child used the word red to label orange and
yellow, was this a case of overextension of the red
category? For this analysis, if the child did not produce
responses for the target hue on both tasks, that color word
was not included in the analysis (19 incidences). Using a
binomial test, we asked whether the proportion of errors
that reflect overextensions was greater than chance.
As noted in the consistency analysis (above), the
probability of repeating any single label on two separate
trials is the square of the proportion of total trials a child
used that label. In contrast to the consistency analysis in
which consistent use of any incorrect label to any color
stimulus was sufficient, in order for an incorrectly applied
red label to be classified as an overextension a child must
specifically use red (not any other color) in response to the
red stimulus in both tasks. To calculate chance for this
analysis, we first squared the base rates of every term a
child used incorrectly (e.g., using red for purple) to
calculate the probability that each of these incorrect terms
would also be used on both trials containing the correct
color stimulus (e.g., red fish and red book trial). We then
took the mean of these probabilities to calculate the child’s
overall probability of overextension. To calculate the
overall probability of overextension for each group, we
calculated a group mean, weighted by how many labels
each child used incorrectly. In other words:

where i is the total number of stimulus pairs in which at
least one label (either book or fish) was incorrect, ic is the
number of such incorrect pairs that each child, c,
contributed to the analysis, lj is the number of times a child
produced each label j and n is the total number of
responses a child produced. Note that by this definition, the
chance probability of consistency appropriately decreases
as a child adds more color words to his/her lexicon.
Averaged across the different Color-Knowledge groups,
the proportion of incorrect trial pairs that was consistent
(0.44) was greater than expected by chance (0.28), using a
binomial test, p<0.001. When this analysis was conducted
separately for the different Color-Knowledge groups, rates
of consistency were greater than chance for all groups
except Level 1, see Table 1.

where i is the total number of labels that were used
incorrectly at least once, ic is the number of such incorrect
labels that each child, c, contributed to the analysis, icj is
the number of times a child produced each incorrect label j,
and n is the total number of responses a child produced.
A very large proportion of children’s errors – 0.76 – were
overextensions, which was significantly greater than
expected by chance (chance = 0.054), as measured by a
binomial test (p<0.001). This high proportion indicates that
if a child produced a color word, they were very likely to
use it correctly when presented with its target hue. Thus, it
suggests that most of children’s errors were overextensions
of color terms that were anchored to adult-like focal hues.
Critically, rates of overextension were statistically greater
than chance and above 0.72 for each Color Knowledge
Group (all ps<0.001, see Table 1), including children who
had no adult-like color meanings (Level 1).
Proximity Analysis The overextension analysis indicates
that before children acquire adult-like color word
meanings, they use color words correctly for their target
hues. However, the analyses described so far do not

Table 1: Chance and Observed Rates for Exp 1 Analyses
Consistency
Chc
Obs
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Total

0.57
0.27
0.14
0.11
0.28

0.61
0.41*
0.31*
043*
0.44*

Overextension
Chc
Obs

Proximity
Chc
Obs

0.23
0.062
0.028
0.024
0.054

0.18
0.25
0.33
0.54
0.27

0.72*
0.73*
0.75*
0.81*
0.76*

0.26*
0.44*
0.66*
0.82*
0.52*

Overextension Analysis This analysis asked whether, in
some cases, children’s color errors were overextensions of

1098

address errors were made to proximal colors or to distant
ones. An error was considered proximal if the stimulus
color and the correct referent color for the misused label
were from adjacent categories in Munsell Color Space
(Long & Luke, 2001). Critically, although overextension to
distant hues would be consistent with a gradual inductive
process (e.g., since children’s initial categories may be
very large), the inclusion of proximal hues should be
significantly more likely even in this case, since any
category that includes red and yellow, for example, should
also include intervening hues like orange.
Given that a child used a color label incorrectly, we
asked whether the label and its referent stimulus were from
perceptually adjacent categories. Using a binomial test, we
asked whether the proportion of errors that were from
proximal color categories was greater than expected by
chance. Chance was defined using both the frequency with
which children made errors for each stimulus and the
frequency with which they used each label incorrectly. It
was necessary to account for these base rates because some
color words are proximal to a greater number of color
categories than others. For example, red is considered
proximal to orange, pink, purple, and brown, while gray is
proximal to black and white. To determine chance, we
calculated the probability of each label-stimulus error pair
(the probability of using red for an orange stimulus) as
equal to the product of the base rates. For example, if 20%
(0.2) of errors were in response to an orange stimulus and
80% (0.8) of errors involved the label red, the probability
of using red to label orange would be 0.2*0.8, or 0.16.
To compute the chance probability of proximal errors,
we summed across the probability of all label-stimulus
pairs that are classified as proximal. In other words:

have abstracted color around the time they begin using
color words to label stimuli, and thus well before they
acquire their adult-like meanings, and (2) they learn color
words by making overly broad hypotheses about their
meanings, and gradually narrowing these meanings as they
acquire additional, contrasting words.
Several pieces of evidence support these conclusions.
First, in our Error Consistency Analysis we found that all
but the Level 1 children made highly consistent in their
errors, demonstrating that these children were able to
abstract color across different objects despite their other
differences, and use this knowledge to formulate
hypotheses about color word meanings. Although Level 1
errors were not consistent, these children were nonetheless
highly systematic, as shown by our two other analyses. In
our Overextension Analysis we found that, at all colorknowledge levels, a majority of children’s errors were
overextensions. This indicates that children have partial
knowledge of the specific color properties denoted by a
color word when they first begin producing it. Specifically,
children appear to know the focal color denoted by the
color words they use, though they frequently overextend
these words. Finally, our Proximity Analysis revealed that
the errors made by children at all levels were likely to be
labels for perceptually similar colors.
In sum, the data from Experiment 1 demonstrate that
children with adult-like understanding of no color words
have nonetheless abstracted color. These data are
consistent with the idea that children begin acquisition of
color words by positing overly broad color categories and
that these categories are gradually narrowed as children
gain experience and acquire other color words that contrast
in meaning. We refer to this as the “Broad Color
Categories” hypothesis. Another possibility, however, is
that overextension errors instead reflect a pragmatic
strategy (for a similar discussion in the domain of nouns,
see Clark 1978). For example, imagine a child who has an
adult-like meaning for red but not for orange. When
presented with an orange stimulus, the child may recognize
that this color is not red, but use the word red to describe it
nonetheless since no better word is available to them. We
refer to this as the “Communicative Strategy” hypothesis.
One way of testing these hypotheses is to use a
comprehension task, where the experimenter selects the
label, thereby removing the possibility of communicative
overextensions (Clark, 1978, Gelman et al. 1998). If a
child has a broad meaning for red (that includes both red
and orange), when asked for red, they should provide a
stimulus that satisfies their meaning of red (e.g., either a
red or orange one). By contrast, if the child has adult-like
color categories, when asked for red they should always
prefer a red stimulus over an orange one (even if they use
red to label orange as a communicative strategy).

where, p(si|incorrect) is the probability of a particular
stimulus i given an incorrect response; p(lj|incorrect) is the
probability of a particular elicited label j given an incorrect
response to stimulus i; and r is the probability of
proximity. Note that p(r|lj∩si) is either 1 or 0 because a
given label/stimulus pair is either proximal or not.
The proportion of total errors that were proximal was
0.52. This was significantly greater than the rate predicted
by chance (0.27), p<0.001. Rates of proximity were
statistically greater than chance for all Color-Knowledge
groups, including Level 1 children who had no adult-like
color word meanings (see Table 1). Like the findings of the
overextension analysis, this indicates that even before a
child acquires the adult meanings of any color terms, they
already have partial knowledge of some color words.

Discussion
Experiment 1 examined children’s color word
production errors in early acquisition. Our results revealed
that if children used a word in the study, they were very
likely to have a systematic meaning for the word, despite
the fact that these meanings were often non-adult-like in
nature. Together, these results suggests that (1) children

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we presented children with stimuli
identical to those used in the Fish task in Experiment 1 and

1099

General Discussion

asked them to find fish of different colors and asked
whether children made proximity errors. Note that by the
Communicative Strategy hypothesis, proximal errors
should not occur because responding should either be
correct for known color words (above example, red) or
random for unknown color words (above example, orange)
because children do not possess broad categories (e.g., that
include both red and orange). Proximal errors are only
expected under the Broad Category Hypothesis, since it
claims that children possess linguistic categories that
include multiple adult categories (e.g. red including both
red and orange).

We tested the hypothesis that the delay between color
word production and acquisition of adult-like meanings is
due to the gradual construction of linguistic color
categories, rather than the process of abstracting color as a
domain of word meaning. Consistent with this idea, we
found that if children used color words in our study, they
typically used them in a meaningful and consistent way.
When children made errors, the vast majority (75%) were
overextensions of adult-like categories. Also, these errors
were frequently to proximal hues. This was true for
children at all levels of color word competence – even
those who had no adult-like meanings. Further, the results
of a comprehension task corroborated this finding, and
indicated that overextension is not the product of a
communicative strategy, but instead reflects broad
linguistic color categories.
These results have important implications for our
understanding of color word acquisition. First, contrary to
past reports, the results suggest that children abstract color
at the earliest stages of color word production, and that
there is little, if any, lag between children’s use of color
words as labels and their construction of preliminary
meanings for these words. Although abstraction may pose
a problem to children early in acquisition, it is likely
resolved by the time children begin using colors to label
things in their environment. Second, our results suggest
that the observed delay between production and adult-like
understanding of color words is likely due to the problem
of constructing language-specific category boundaries. Our
data suggest that children begin acquisition by making
overly broad inductive inferences regarding the scope of
their color words, and that they gradually shrink their early
categories as they gain experience with the words and
acquire other color words that contrast in meaning.
These data are consistent with earlier data from Carey
and Bartlett (1978), which are commonly cited as evidence
for children’s ability to “fast map” color words to their
referents. Bartlett and Carey’s fast mapping proposal,
unlike some theories of color word learning that followed
it, did not assume that learning color word meanings was
fast, or that it was a simple mapping problem. Instead, they
argued that fast mapping was a first step in the learning
process, used to link labels to particular referents, and that
acquiring the adult-like meanings of color words involves
much more additional learning (see also Swingley, 2010;
Clark, 1997). Consistent with this, many of the children in
Carey and Bartlett’s study used the novel word chromium,
which was used by experimenters to refer to an olivecolored stimulus, to refer to perceptually similar colors
(e.g., green, brown) and often did not converge on the
intended narrower meaning for chromium even after many
trials (also, see Bartlett, 1977; Pitchford & Mullen, 2003).
These results, like ours, suggest that color word learning
is a gradual inductive process, and that children form
interim meanings for their color words well before they
attain adult-like understanding. However, because these

Methods
Stimuli Items were those of the Fish Task in Experiment 1.
Participants A total of 28 children (14 girls) participated.
Children were screened for color deficiency via a family
history questionnaire. Eight children were excluded
because they made no errors. Data from the remaining 20
children (8 girls) were analyzed. These children ranged in
age from 23 to 48 months (mean=2;10). Unlike in
Experiment 1, we did not group children into different
Color-Knowledge groups, for two reasons. First, children
in this study were not asked to produce color labels, and
we therefore could not test how many color terms they
knew. Second, the number of subjects required to test the
hypothesis of this experiment was relatively small, and
thus there was insufficient power to analyze subgroups.
Procedure Children were presented with the fish stimuli
placed color-side up and in a random configuration. In
succession, the experimenter (E) asked the child to find a
specific colored fish, “Give me a (red) fish. Can you put a
(red) fish in my hand?” After the child handed a fish to E,
it was returned to its place on the table (back with the other
fish), and E requested the next color fish. Colors were
requested in the order of Experiment 1: red, brown, green,
orange, white, blue, gray, pink, black, yellow, and purple.
If the child did not respond on a particular trial (e.g., they
got distracted), E repeated the question, giving the child an
additional opportunity to respond. Trials with no response
(n = 3 trials) or on which two or more fish were provided
(n = 1 trial) were not included in the analysis.

Results and Discussion
Proximity Analysis. Across all 216 trials, 79 trials (36%)
were errors and were included in the analysis. The mean
number of correct responses was 6.85 (range 0 to 10).
As in the proximity analysis of Experiment 1, we
accounted for the base rate of errors that involved each
color stimulus and the base rate of errors made to a
particular request (e.g., red). Consistent with the results of
Experiment 1, the proportion of errors that were proximal
in the comprehension task was 0.58. This was significantly
greater than the rate predicted by chance (0.30), p<0.001.
This
suggests
that
the
systematic
production
overextensions in Experiment 1 reflected broad color
categories rather than a communication strategy.

1100

studies focused on samples of children who for the most
part had acquired at least one adult-like color word, their
data do not address the delay between onset of color word
production and children’s first adult-like color word
meaning. In contrast, our study addressed this question
using data from a wider range of children (including those
who had not acquired any adult-like meanings of color
words), and using a novel set of analyses that tested not
only proximity errors but also consistency and
overextension. Consequently, our study was able to show
that children possess broad, overextended color categories
early in acquisition, before they have acquired their first
adult-like meaning, and perhaps even from the time they
first begin producing color words.
This view of color word learning is consistent with
findings in other domains of language and conceptual
development. In the case of number, children quickly
recognize that numerals form a class of words that contrast
in meaning (Wynn, 1992; Brooks et al., under review),
despite taking years to learn what these meanings are.
Similarly, young children recognize that time words like
minute, second, and hour form a lexical class, but take
many years to acquire their individual meanings (Shatz et
al., 2010). Finally, children produce emotion words from
early in development, and understand that they belong to a
class of words that describe human sentiment, but
nonetheless take years to master their adult-like meanings,
and form many interim hypotheses along the way (Widen
& Russell, 2003). Our study suggests that the case study of
color is not an exception to this general pattern, and that as
in other cases that involve identifying abstract content,
children begin formulating preliminary meanings early in
acquisition, and take years to attain adult competence.

Carey, S. & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Proceedings of the Stanford Child Language
Conference, 15, 17-29.
Clark, E. (1978). Strategies for communicating. Child Dev,
49, 953-959.
Clark, E. (1997). Conceptual perspective and lexical choice
in acquisition, Cognition, 64, 1-37.
Davies, I., Corbett, G., McGurk, H. & MacDermid, C.
(1998). A developmental study of the acquisition of
Russian colour terms. J Child Lang, 25, 395-417.
Franklin, A. (2006) Constraints on children’s color term
acquisition. J Exp Child Psychol, 94, 322-327.
Gelman, S., Croft, W., Fu, P., Clausner, T. & Gottfried, G.
(1998). Why is a pomegranate an apple? The role of
shape, taxonomic relatedness, and prior lexical
knowledge in children’s overextensions of apple and
dog, J Child Lang, 25, 267-291.
Kay, P., Berlin, B., Maffi, L., Merrfield, W. R. & Cook, R
(2009). The World Color Survey. Palo Alto, CA: CSLI
Press.
Kowalski & Zimiles (2006). The relation between
children’s conceptual functioning with color and color
term acquisition. J Exp Child Psychol, 94, 301-321.
Long, J. & Luke, J. (2001). The New Munsell Student
Color Set, Second Edition. Fairchild Books: New York.
O’Hanlon, C. & Roberson, D. (2006). Learning in context:
Linguistic and attentional constraints on children’s color
term learning. J Exp Child Psychol, 94, 275-300.
Pitchford, N. & Mullen, K. (2003). The development of
conceptual colour categories in pre-school children:
Influence of perception on categorization. Vis Cogn, 10,
51-77.
Roberson, D., Hanley, J.R. & Pak, H. (2009). Thresholds
for color discrimination in English and Korean speakers.
Cognition, 112, 482-487.
Sandhofer, C. & Smith, L. (1999). Learning color words
involves learning a system of mappings. Dev Psychol,
35, 668-679.
Shatz, M., Behrend, D., Gelman,S., & Ebeling, K. (1996).
Colour term knowledge in two-year-olds: evidence for
early competence. J Child Lang, 23,177-199.
Shatz, M. Tare, M., Nguyen, S.P., Young, T. (2010).
Acquiring non-object terms: The case for time words.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11, 16–36.
Soja, N. (1994). Young children’s concept of color and its
relation to the acquisition of color words. Child Dev, 65,
918-937.
Swingley, D. (2010). Fast Mapping and Slow Mapping in
Children’s Word Learning. L, L & D, 6, 179-183.
Widen, S. & Russell, J. (2003). A closer look at
preschoolers’ freely produced labels for facial
expressions, Dev Psychol, 39, 114-128.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., &
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects of
language on color discrimination. PNAS, 104, 7780-5.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36, 155-193.

References
Backscheider, A. G. & Shatz, M. (1993). Children's
acquisition of the lexical domain of color. In K. Beals et
al. (eds), What we think, what we mean, and how we say
it, Papers from the parasession on the correspondence of
conceptual, semantic and grammatical representations,
CLS 29, v. 2. Chicago: The Chicago Linguistic Society.
Bartlett, E. J. (1978). The acquisition of the meaning of
color terms: A study of lexical development. In R. N.
Campbell & P. T. Smith (Eds.), Recent Advances in the
Psychology of Language (pp. 89–108). NY: Plenum.
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969). Basic Color Terms: Their
Universality and Evolution. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Bornstein, M., Kessen, W., Weiskopf, S. (1976). Color
vision and hue categorization in young human infants.
Exp Psychol Human, 2, 115-129.
Brooks, N., Audet, J., & Barner, D. (under review).
Pragmatic inference, not semantic competence, guides 3year-olds' interpretation of unknown number words.
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. New York:
Oxford University Press.

1101

