UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Models of Intuitive Physics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0zc2w3fq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Battaglia, Peter
Ullman, Tomer
Tenenbaum, Joshua
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Models of Intuitive Physics
Peter Battaglia (pbatt@mit.edu)
Tomer Ullman (tomeru@mit.edu)
Joshua Tenenbaum (jbt@mit.edu; moderator)
MIT, BCS Dept.,77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Kenneth Forbus (forbus@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University, EECS Dept., 2133 Sheridan Rd
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Tobias Gerstenberg (t.gerstenberg@ucl.ac.uk)
David Lagnado (d.lagado@ucl.ac.uk)
Cognitive, Perceptual, and Brain Sciences Dept., UCL,
26, Bedford Way, London WC1H 0AP, UK

Adam Sanborn (a.n.sanborn@warwick.ac.uk)
Dept. of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL UK
Keywords: Intuitive physics; qualitative reasoning;
probabilistic programming; Bayesian models; psychophysics.

their results as computational models with sufficient clarity
and power to explain people's physical reasoning in complex
and varied scenes.
Crucial computational progress has come from the fields
of human and computer vision, artificial intelligence (AI),
and machine learning. Human and machine vision
researchers have recently developed computational models
of natural scene understanding (Oliva & Torralba, 2007),
but their focus has been on knowledge about the geometry
and semantics of scene layouts, not the role of physical
constraints and how physical properties are represented and
exploited for prediction, reasoning and planning. AI
researchers have been developing frameworks for
qualitative reasoning (QR) and applying them to physical
domains for over 30 years, and these approaches have now
matured to the point that they can both solve challenging
real-world inference problems and engage directly with
behavioral experiments, giving state-of-the-art accounts of
people’s intuitive reasoning in a wide range of science and
engineering domains (Forbus, 2011). The framework of
Bayesian reasoning in probabilistic generative models has
revolutionized AI and machine learning, and in the last
decade has also come to provide a lingua franca for
sophisticated reverse-engineering models of human
perception, action and cognition (Chater et al, 2006;
Tenenbaum et al, 2011). But only in the last few years have
Bayesian models been applied to challenging physical
reasoning problems, and been shown to give strong
quantitative accounts of human physical judgments
(Sanborn et al, 2009; Hamrick et al, 2011).
This symposium brings together leading researchers
modeling intuitive physics from the QR, Bayesian cognition
and perceptual modeling traditions, to discuss highlights of
recent models and points of contact and contrast between
different modeling approaches. The talks and discussion will
explore several axes in the space of possible models,
including the following: rational reverse-engineering vs.
descriptive or heuristic accounts; qualitative vs. quantitative
reasoning; probabilistic vs. deterministic inference; lowerlevel perceptual vs. higher-level cognitive inferences;
implicit vs. explicit reasoning; analog simulation vs.
symbolic rule-based representations; the role of memory-,
experience- and learning-dependent reasoning; the role of

People have a powerful “physical intelligence” – an
ability to infer physical properties of objects and predict
future states in complex, dynamic scenes – which they use to
interpret their surroundings, plan safe and effective actions,
build and understand devices and machines, and
communicate efficiently. For instance, you can choose
where to place your coffee to prevent it from spilling,
arrange books in a stable stack, judge the relative weights of
objects after watching them collide, and construct systems of
levers and pulleys to manipulate heavy objects. These
behaviors suggest that the mind relies on a sophisticated
physical reasoning system, and for decades cognitive
scientists have been interested in the content of this
knowledge, how it is used and how it is acquired. In the last
few years, there has been exciting progress in answering
these questions in formal computational terms, with the
maturation of several different traditions of cognitive
modeling that have independently come to take intuitive
physics as a central object of study. The goals of this
symposium are to: 1) highlight these recent computational
developments, focusing chiefly on qualitative reasoning
(QR) models and Bayesian perceptual and cognitive models;
2) begin a dialog between leading proponents of these
different approaches, discussing a number of dimensions
along which the approaches appear to differ and working
towards bridging those differences; 3) enrich these models
with perspectives from empirical work in cognitive science.
Background. The research to be discussed builds on
several decades of prior work from multiple traditions in
cognitive science. Cognitive psychologists since the 1970s
have studied the role that human intuitive physics plays in
development, perception, education, and reasoning.
Behavioral research with adults focused on identifying
errors and biases in people's general understanding and
theories about physical rules (McCloskey, 1983), as well as
psychophysical studies of how sensory cues drive specific
judgments in dynamic displays (Todd & Warren, 1982).
Early and ongoing developmental work has identified
milestones in cognitive sensitivity and expectations about
core physical principles (Baillargeon, 2007). Though these
efforts have made significant progress, they did not frame

32

causal, counterfactual and explanatory reasoning; reasoning
about simple rigid bodies vs. complex physical entities and
concepts, like non-rigid objects, non-solid substances, fluids,
gasses, heat; simple scenarios with few objects moving in
simple ways vs. compound scenes of many objects
interacting and moving according to complex dynamics.
The speakers come from various avenues of artificial
intelligence and cognitive science: Sanborn studies
computational models of memory and cognition; Battaglia,
computational perception and motor control; Forbus, AI and
qualitative reasoning; Tenenbaum, learning and inference in
humans and machines.
Sanborn: Reconciling intuitive and Newtonian
mechanics for colliding objects
People have strong intuitions about the masses of objects
and the causal forces that they exert upon one another when
they collide. These intuitions appear to deviate from
Newtonian physics, leading researchers to conclude that
people use a set of heuristics to make judgments about
collisions. We show that people's judgments about mass are
indeed consistent with Newtonian physics, provided
uncertainty about the velocities of the objects is taken into
account. The resulting rational model of intuitive dynamics
easily extends to accommodate other aspects of people's
inferences about physical causation, such as judgments of
whether one object caused another to move. We argue that
intuition and physics need not be divorced, and that a simple
psychological process - stochastically approximating
Bayesian inference by recalling previous collisions - can
bring them together.
Battaglia: Intuitive mechanics in physical reasoning
I will explore the idea that the brain has an "intuitive
mechanics", a realistic model of physics that can estimate
physical properties and predict probable futures. This
intuitive mechanics is surprisingly faithful to the laws of
classical mechanics, it captures statics, dynamics, forces,
collisions, and friction. It is fundamentally probabilistic, it
supports Bayesian inferences that robustly handle
uncertainty, and, like people, its predictions can deviate
from objective reality. And, it is resource-bounded,
supporting only judgments that can be made based on a few
low-precision, short-lived simulations. We conducted a
series of psychophysical experiments in which participants
made physical judgments about various complex, 3D scenes,
and found that this formal model of intuitive mechanics
well-predicts people's responses by accounting for their
accuracy and several systematic biases. These results
suggest that an approximate, probabilistic model of physics
forms the basis of human physical reasoning. More
generally, this principled computational approach provides a
unifying framework for analyzing and understanding this
crucial part of human cognition.
Forbus: Qualitative modeling: Capturing human
reasoning about the physical world
There is ample evidence that qualitative representations of
space, quantity, and causality capture important regularities
of human reasoning about physical situations and systems

(Forbus, 2011). Qualitative reasoning has been used to
model intuitive phenomena, such as motion, liquids, and
heat. It has also been used to model aspects of the reasoning
of scientists and engineers, such as guiding the solution of
quantitative problems and extracting insights about complex
dynamical systems from visual data. Qualitative
representations of space provide a bridge between
perception and conceptual knowledge, and can be used to
model visual problem solving. When combined with
analogical reasoning, qualitative models can provide
explanations for aspects of conceptual change (eg. Friedman
& Forbus, 2010). This talk will summarize recent work on
modeling conceptual change concerning intuitive notions of
force, the human circulatory system, and how the seasons
change. There is great potential for synthesis between
qualitative and Bayesian modeling: Qualitative modeling
provides formal languages for hypotheses, while statistical
information (in our case, computed automatically via
analogical generalization over examples) provides criteria
for accepting hypotheses.
Tenenbaum: Integrative perspectives
I will discuss the prospects for building computational
models of intuitive physical reasoning that integrate features
of qualitative and probabilistic approaches introduced earlier
in the symposium, and present preliminary results on several
lines of work exploring this integration. Specific points will
include (1) using qualitative reasoning to generate efficient
proposals for Monte Carlo-based approximate inference in
probabilistic models; (2) using dynamic probabilistic models
as the basis for linguistic ascriptions of causal responsibility
and explanatory reasoning (joint work with Gerstenberg and
Langado); (3) modeling conceptual change in intuitive
physics via hierarchical Bayesian inference over symbolic
expressions for physical laws (joint work with Ullman).
References
Baillargeon, R. (2007). The acquisition of physical knowledge in
infancy: A summary in eight lessons. Blackwell handbook of
childhood cognitive development. Blackwell.
Chater, N., Tenenbaum, J.B., & Yuille, A. (2006). Probabilistic
models of cognition: Conceptual foundations. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10, 292-293.
Forbus, K. (2011). Qualitative Modeling. WIRES: Cognitive
Science. 2(4), pp 374-391, July/August.
Friedman, S. & Forbus, K. (2010). An integrated systems approach
to explanation-based conceptual change. Proc. AAAI10.
Hamrick, J., Battaglia, P.W., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2011). Internal
physics models guide probabilistic judgments about object
dynamics, Proc. 33rd Ann. Conf. Cognitive Science Society.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Intuitive physics. Scientific American,
248(4), 122–130.
Oliva, A. & Torralba, A. (2007). The role of context in object
recognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(12), pp. 520-527.
Sanborn, A., Mansinghka, V., & Griffiths, T. (2009). A Bayesian
framework for modeling intuitive dynamics. Proc. 31st Ann.
Conf. Cognitive Science Society.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., and Goodman, N. D.
(2011). How to Grow a Mind: Statistics, Structure, and
Abstraction. Science, 331 (6022), 1279-1285.
Todd, J., & Warren, W. (1982). Visual perception of relative
mass in dynamic events. Perception, 11(3), 325-335.

33

