UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Complex First? On the Priority of Nouns in Language Acquisition and Evolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3v21g54q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Werning, Markus

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Complex First? On the Priority of Nouns in Language Acquisition and Evolution
Markus Werning (markus.werning@rub.de)
Department of Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum
44780 Bochum, Germany

(P4) For a cortically implemented syntax-semantics
interface, the more widely distributed a concept’s
neural realization is, the more effort it takes to
establish a link between the concept and some lexical
expression thereof.
(P5) In ontogeny and phylogeny, capabilities demanding
more effort, all other things being equal, develop and,
respectively, evolve later than those demanding less
effort.

Abstract
The paper points to an apparent paradox in the science of
language. It regards the semantics of nouns and consists of a
set of together incompatible, but individually well confirmed
propositions about the evolution and development of
language, the semantics of word classes and the cortical
realization of word meaning. Theoretical and empirical
considerations support the view that the concepts expressed
by concrete nouns are more complex and their neural
realizations more widely distributed in cortex than those
expressed by other word classes. For a cortically implemented
syntax-semantics interface, the more widely distributed a
concept’s neural realization is, the more effort it takes to
establish a link between the concept and its expression. If one
assumes the principle that in ontogeny and phylogeny
capabilities demanding more effort develop, respectively,
evolve later than those demanding less effort, the empirical
observation seems paradoxical that the meanings of concrete
nouns, in ontogeny and phylogeny, are acquired earlier than
those of other word classes.
Keywords: evolution of language, language acquisition,
compositionality, modularity, complexity, frames, situated
conceptualization

Introduction
When one conjoins relatively well supported views on
language acquisition and typology with frequently held
views on the neural realization of meaning and some general
principles of evolution and development, one seems to
arrive at what I shall call the Complex-First Paradox. At its
core is the question why concepts of substances, typically
expressed by concrete nouns, seem to lexicalize
ontogenetically and phylogenetically so early, even though
they are apparently semantically far more complex than
concepts that lexicalize later. The paradox consists of five
propositions each of which seems plausible in its own right
and is supported by empirical or theoretical reasons. The set
of propositions – as is the nature of paradoxes – is
apparently inconsistent, though, and thus points to an
explanatory deficit in linguistic theory (Werning, 2008,
2010):
(P1) The meanings of concrete nouns, in ontogeny and
(probably) phylogeny, are acquired earlier than those
of many – eventually even all – other word classes.
(P2) The meanings of concrete nouns are substance
concepts.
(P3) Substance concepts are semantically more complex
and their neural realizations more widely distributed
in cortex than those expressed by the other word
classes in question.

The paradox should be obvious now: Assume that the
meanings of concrete nouns like daddy, milk, and cat are
indeed semantically more complex or, to use another word,
thicker than the meanings of other word classes, e.g.,
adjectives like blue, big, and bold. If one accepts that
meanings are mental concepts, the view is illustrated as
follows: The substance concept [milk] has not only
perceptual components of various modalities like [white],
[fluid], and [sweet], but also components that relate to
affordances like [to drink]. The attributive concept [blue], in
contrast, seems to be relatively thin: it does not decompose
into distinct conceptual parts and seems to pertain to the
visual domain only. Assume, furthermore, that conceptual
complexity correlates with a wider distribution of the
conceptual parts, respectively, their neural realizations in the
cortex. One then expects the neural correlate of [milk] to
pertain to visual, tactile, gustatory, and action-related
regions. In contrast, the correlate of [blue] seems to be
bound to the visual cortex. Following another of the
assumptions, a word-to-meaning assignment ought to be
more easily tractable for a cortically realized syntaxsemantics interface if the neural correlate of the meaning is
relatively local, rather than widely distributed.
Consequently, the link between the adjective blue and the
attributive concept [blue] should require less effort than the
link between milk and [milk].
Take it as a quite general principle of evolution now that
with regard to one and the same domain incrementally more
complex capabilities ceteris paribus evolve later than
simpler ones. There had to be feathers first, only then some
reptile species could evolve wings. Vision could succeed in
evolution only after light-detection had evolved. It seems to
be a simple truth that lies behind it: Natura non facit saltus.
There is an outright analogy in development: A child must
have acquired the capability to hold a stick before it will be
able to use a hammer. Children have to acquire simple
closed syllables (CVC, e.g., come) before they are able to
pronounce syllables with complex codas (CVCC, e.g., cast).
Given those assumptions, how can it be that the meaning
of the noun milk ontogenetically and phylogenetically still is

1137

acquired earlier than that of the adjective blue? Since the
concept [milk] is semantically more complex than [blue], its
neural correlate should be more widely distributed, the link
between the concept and its expression should imply more
effort, and thus ought to be established later in ontogeny and
phylogeny. Rather than the empirical claim made by the
first proposition, we should on the basis of the other four
assumptions expect that the meanings of concrete nouns, in
ontogeny and phylogeny, be acquired later than those of
other word classes. In the paper I would like to press the
paradox a little further by putting forward arguments for
each of the five propositions and rejecting objections against
them. Even though my résumé will be rather pessimistic, I
will conclude with some more speculative remarks on a
potential solution. The paper is primarily intended as an
exposition of the paradox, rather than as its solution. Due to
limited space and time I defer to Werning (2008, 2010) for a
more elaborate discussion of each of the five propositions.

Words and Concepts
The primary role for concepts is the integration of
perception and action control. In order to survive in a world
with a multitude of things, subjects must subsume them
under concepts. Categorization allows the subject to
recognize objects and events in the world as well as states of
the body, to generate generalizations, and to preserve this
information over time. Only thus goal directed interaction
between one’s body and the world is possible to the degree
we observe it in many species.
With regard to humans, concepts are assigned a twofold
explanatory role: (i) as content providers and (ii) as meaning
providers. In their first role concepts provide contents to
intentional states. In their second role concepts are identified
with the meanings of linguistic expressions. Concept are apt
to fulfill the two roles because they are individuated as
internal states of the system that essentially bear a causalinformational relation of co-variation to external contents
(Fodor, 1992). This way, concepts may explain why
intentional states are about things and why the meanings of
expressions in a given context determine which things are
referred to.
Intentional states include such diverse modes as
perception,
belief,
desire,
memory,
expectation,
imagination, emotion, and the will. Concepts provide the
satisfaction conditions of intentional states, enter into
inferential relations, and play a role in the causation of
action. The twofold role of concepts suggests a view that
intimately links meaning to intentionality. A unified
approach of meaning and intentional content holds that the
meaning of the sentence There is milk in the bottle, the
perception of milk being white, the belief that milk is
nutritious, and the desire to drink a glass of milk have one
thing in common: they involve the concept [milk]. This at
least follows if one assumes (i) the compositionality of
linguistic meaning, and (ii) the compositionality of
intentional content. The compositionality of meaning is the

principle that the meaning of a complex expression is in a
syntax-dependent way determined by the meanings of its
parts. It explains how the concept [milk] contributes to the
meaning of the sentence There is milk in the bottle. The
compositionality of content says that the content of a
complex intentional state is in a structure-dependent way
determined by the contents of its parts. It explains how the
content of the concept [milk] determines the contents of the
perceptual, doxastic, and volitional states just mentioned
(for a discussion of the reasons for compositionality see
Werning, 2005; Werning et al. eds., 2012).
In our context, the most important distinction in the
domain of concepts is that between attributive concepts and
substance concepts. Attributive concepts represent features
of objects that are volatile in the sense that one and the same
object can fall under different attributive concepts at
different times: An object may, e.g., change its color, size,
or speed, but still continues to exist. [blue] thus is a
paradigmatic attributive concept.
Substance concepts, in contrast, are governed by the
identity conditions of objects: A mug ceases to exist when it
no longer falls under the substance concept [mug], say,
because it has been shattered. Substance concepts serve to
re-identify things over time in spite of their contingent
changes of attributes and so allow us to gather, store and
update information in a systematic and enduring way
(Millikan, 1998). They are typically expressed by concrete
nouns. Attributive concepts, in contrast, are typically
expressed by adjectives or abstract nouns.

Nouns and Adjectives
The paradox arises from the fact that substance concepts are
ontogenetically and probably phylogenetically earlier
lexicalized than attributive concepts. The great mass of
children’s earliest words are concrete nouns. During the socalled naming explosion, when children around 18 months
of age first systematically organize their concepts by means
of a lexicon, they preponderantly pair substance concepts
with concrete nouns, whereas the assignment of adjectives
and abstract nouns to the attributive concepts they express
comes much later (Ingram, 1989). Some languages even
don’t have adjectives or just a closed set of them (Dixon,
1999), while the class of concrete nouns is arguably
universal and always open. One may thus also argue that
nouns in phylogeny are prior to adjectives. With respect to
the typology of the earliest words, Barrett (1995) in a
handbook article provides the following overview:

1138

0th-100th word: high proportion of common nouns.
200th-..: proportion of common nouns decreases.
50th-100th word: proportion of verbs begins to
increase.
400th-500th word: verb proportion continues to
increase and finally begins to level out.
50th-100th word: proportion of adjectives begins to
increase.

100th-500th word: proportion of adjectives continues to
increase.
Even authors like Bloom (2000) who are more critical of the
notion of a naming explosion concede that in the earliest
phase of language development there is an “object bias”: A
new word by default is interpreted as a name of an object
(i.e., as a concrete noun). It needs some counterevidence for
the child to realize that a word (an adjective or verb)
expresses a property or an action, instead.
If the data are interpreted correctly, we can make the
following inference: Since concrete nouns express substance
concepts and prototypical adjectives express attributive
concepts, and since concrete nouns are earlier acquired by
the child than adjectives, it logically follows that substance
concepts are ontogenetically earlier lexicalized than
attributive concepts.
With respect to the claim on phylogeny, the evidence is
more indirect and less compelling – hence the qualification
“probably”. It is an undenied fact that in all languages, in
which the types of nouns and adjectives exist, there are
more concrete nouns than adjectives (Dixon, 1999). Even in
English (Givon, 1970) most adjectives are derived from
either nouns or verbs, while there are only very few original
adjectives. One can still defend the claim that the noun type
is universal (Mithun, 2000). Even in languages like
Iroquoian, which is sometimes said to have no nouns, there
are at least very noun-like words. The adjective type, in
contrast, clearly is not universal. If adjectives were
phylogenetically earlier than concrete nouns, we should
expect the situation with regard to universality be the other
way round. In light of the available evidence, proposition P1
is hence relatively well supported, at least if one identifies
the contrasting word class with the class of adjectives.

The Structure of Meaning
One of the main controversies regarding the processing and
neuro-cognitive implementation of meaning is whether the
semantics of language is processed in a modular or nonmodular way. According to modular approaches, the
meanings of words and sentences are processed in an
informationally largely encapsulated, autonomous, and
amodal way (Clifton & Ferreira, 1987). Candidates for
cortical correlates of semantic processes are often supposed
to be localized in left temporal and partially frontal regions
(Friederici, 2002). Regions typically associated with either
perceptual or motor processes in this paradigm are typically
not regarded as contributing to semantics.
Modular approaches towards perception, in turn, argue for
informationally
encapsulated,
domain-specific
and
cognitively impenetrable modules for various perceptual
tasks (Barrett & Kurzban, 2006, for review). Modularism
with respect to semantics, perception, and perhaps other
types of intentional states would thus be hardly compatible
with the view that the same mental concept, respectively its
neural correlate, is both a meaning provider for linguistic
expressions and a content provider for various types of

intentional states. A manifold of concept tokens with the
content of milk would thus be required: the concepts [milk]in-meaning, [milk]-in-perception, [milk]-in-desire, etc. –
eventually even [milk]-in-desires-to-drink, [milk]-indesires-to-cook, etc. It is easy to imagine that such a view
would quickly lead to an ontological explosion of concepts,
at least, if concepts are supposed to exist in a realist manner.
Much more compatible with a realist attitude towards
concepts and the methodological goal of ontological
parsimony is the anti-modularist view of situated
conceptualization (Barsalou, 2005). Here concepts are
regarded as situated, i.e., largely based on sensori-motor
schemata. The controversy between semantic modularism
and semantic anti-modularism relates to the question
whether some lexical concepts – i.e., concepts listed in the
lexicon and thus expressed by single words – decompose
into conceptual parts. Some authors believe that lexical
concepts are altogether not decomposable (Fodor & Lepore,
1992). According to those so-called atomist positions, only
concepts that are linguistically expressible by syntactically
explicitly combined expressions can be complex. In
neuroscience some researchers hold that substantial features
like that of being an elephant or even features as specific as
that of being Halle Berry are represented by highly
specialized single neurons (Quian Quiroga et. al., 2005).
Lexical atomism is a view semantic modularists can easily
live with. For, if meanings are unstructured, it is completely
unproblematic to conceive them as localizable elements in
an encapsulated module. Proponents of a situated view of
meaning, in contrast, will assume that at least some lexical
meanings are structured so that parts of the meaning
providing concepts may involve various sensori-motor
schemata. Semantic anti-modularism seems to exclude
lexical atomism.
Our propositions P3 and P4 seem hardly tenable for
someone who shares the views of lexical atomism or
semantic modularism. Proposition P3 saying that substance
concepts expressed by nouns are semantically more
complex than concepts expressed by other word classes
immediately contradicts lexical atomism, according to
which all lexical concepts have the same complexity, viz.
zero. Proposition P4 seems to be empty if lexical atomism is
true and largely unmotivated if semantic modularism holds.
The proposition says that for a cortically implemented
syntax-semantics interface, the more widely distributed a
concept’s neural realization is, the more effort it takes to
establish a link between the concept and its lexical
expression. Now, if lexical atomism is true, there simply
should not be any concepts with a widely distributed neural
realization. For, how could this be the case if all lexical
concepts are unstructured? If semantic modularism were to
hold, the meanings even of words that are semantically
complex – modularism does not entail atomism – would still
be locally realized in the postulated semantics module.
There would thus be no reason to assume that significantly
more effort is needed to assign a word to its meaning, even
if the expressed concept is complex.

1139

Since the doctrines of lexical atomism and semantic
modularism conflict with P3 and P4, the natural way to
defend the two propositions is to argue against lexical
atomism and semantic modularism. This is what I will do in
the next section. I will outline a view of situated
conceptualization which refutes atomism and modularism.

Situated Conceptualization
In psychology, philosophy and linguistics various theories
have been proposed to account for the decomposition of
concepts. For the present purpose the choice of frame theory
as a starting point seems most fruitful (Barsalou, 1992).
Frame theory provides us with a universal account not only
for categorization and its link to action-control, but also for
the decomposition of concepts. Frames are recursive
attribute-value structures. Attributes assign unique values to
objects and thus describe functional relations. The values
can be structured frames themselves. A frame is defined for
a large domain of things and contains a fixed set of
attributes (e.g., color, form) each of which allows for a
number of different values (red, green, ... ; round, square,
...). The attributes in question are not constrained to
perceptual modalities, but may as well involve attributes of
motor affordances. Frames can be nested hierarchically and
mutual constraints between attributes (e.g., between states
of an object and actions directed to it) and between larger
frames can be incorporated (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Hypothetical fragment of the frame for the concept
[banana]. The substance concept to be decomposed is
marked by a double-circle as the referring node of the
frame. The labeled arrows denote attributes, the nodes their
values. Nodes are themselves regarded as concepts and thus
as conceptual parts of the central concept. Whereas, in
English, feature attributes (shown on the right) are
frequently lexicalized – their arguments typically enter
possessive constructions like The color of the banana is
yellow or The banana has the color yellow – affordance
attributes (on the left) are rarely overtly expressed. Based on
linguistic and neurobiological evidence, we assume that
affordances often relate to body parts and hence use the
convention “@ + body part”. Formally, attributes are
mappings from domains of some type into domains of some
other type. Petersen & Werning (2007) provide an explicit
account of frames using a calculus of typed feature
hierarchies and incorporating typicality effects.

For many attributes involved in perceptual processing one
can anatomically identify cortical correlates. Those areas
often exhibit a twofold topological structure and justify the
notion of a feature map: (i) a receptor topology (e.g.,
retinotopy in vision, somatotopy in touch): neighboring
regions of neurons code for neighboring regions of the
receptive field; and (ii) a feature topology: neighboring
regions of neurons code for similar features (See Figure 2).
With regard to the monkey, more than 30 cortical areas
forming feature maps are experimentally known for vision
alone (Felleman & van Essen, 1991). Also affordance
attributes seem to have cortical correlates, predominantly in
the premotor cortex. The discovery of the so-called mirror
neuron system (Rizzolatti. & Craighero, 2004, for review)
may provide a basis to integrate affordances into frames.

Figure 2. Cortical realizations of frame attributes. Fragment
(ca. 4mm²) of the neural feature map for the attribute
orientation of cat V1 (adapted from Crair et. al., 1997). The
arrows indicate the polar topology of the orientation values
represented within each hypercolumn. Hypercolumns are
arranged in a retinotopic topology.
The fact that values of different attributes may be
instantiated by the same object, but are processed in distinct
regions of cortex poses the problem of how this information
is integrated in an object-specific way: the binding problem.
A prominent and experimentally well supported solution
postulates oscillatory neural synchronization as a
mechanism of binding: Clusters of neurons that are
indicative for different properties sometimes show
synchronous oscillatory activity, but only when the
properties indicated are instantiated by the same object in
the perceptual field; otherwise they are firing
asynchronously. Synchronous oscillation, thus, might be
regarded to fulfill the task of binding together various
property representations to form the representation of an
object as having these properties (Singer, 1999). Using
oscillatory networks as biologically motivated models, it
could be demonstrated how the topological organization of
information in the cortex, by mechanisms of
synchronization, may yield a logically structured semantics
of concepts (Werning, 2005). Oscillation functions play the
role of object concepts. Clusters of feature sensitive neurons
play the role of attributive concepts. Schnitzler et al. (2006)
could experimentally demonstrate the essential role of
neural synchronization for action control. This may justify

1140

the extension of the synchrony-based neuro-frame approach
from features to affordances.
Provided that a concept is completely decomposable into
a fully specified frame and provided that neural maps for
each attribute can be identified in the cortex, the degree to
which the cortex represents an object as an instance of the
concept is rendered by a general pattern of synchronizing
neural activity distributed over neural clusters that
correspond to the basic values of the frame. This pattern
may be called the cortical fingerprint of the concept.
Support for the theory of neuro-frames also comes from a
number of neuro-linguistic studies. Based on a review of
neurobiological data, Pulvermüller (1999) suggests that
neural assemblies that pertain to the sensori-motor cortices
and are bound by neural synchronization play an important
role in understanding the meanings of words. FMRI studies
(Pulvermüller, 2005) regarding the understanding of verbs,
e.g., hint to a differential top-down activation of motor and
pre-motors areas. We know that the understanding of
concrete nouns like hammer, for which not only features,
but also affordances are salient, results in an activity
distributed over the premotor and the visual cortex (Martin
et. al. 1996). The hypothesis that words for substance
concepts arouse more widely distributed activity than words
for attributive concepts is, furthermore, supported by EEG
studies (Rappelsberger et al., 2000).
From this and further evidence (reviewed by Martin,
2007, Werning, 2012) we may conclude that the correlates
of substance concepts are highly distributed neural states.
Substance concepts are thus not expected to be realized by
single cells, or locally circumscribed regions of the cortex,
but by cell assemblies that may pertain to highly distinct
parts of the cortex and involve perception as well as motor
areas. In contrast, the neural correlates of attributive
concepts would be constrained to local cortical regions. The
view that substance concepts decompose into complex
frames and that their neural realizations are widely
distributed in cortex contradicts the doctrines of atomism
and modularism.

Evolution and Development of the Syntaxsemantics Interface
Another strategy to avoid the paradox is to limit the scope of
the assumption P2 that the meanings of concrete nouns are
substance concepts. One might advocate a meaning shift of
a certain kind in nouns during development or evolution:
Whereas for modern adults concrete nouns express
substance concepts with a complex semantics, it might be
that the child’s usage of the noun mama only labels a salient
person in his or her daily life or that, for an early human, the
noun for water just expressed the affordance of being
drinkable. It is indeed very likely that the concepts
expressed by nouns change in development and evolution.
[birth-giving] is not a conceptual part of [mama] for the
two-year old as it is for us. Early humans did not represent
water as molecularly complex. However, is it plausible that

nouns of young children and early humans do not at all
express substance concepts with some decent, if only
different, semantic complexity? How could the word mama
in the child’s language be a label for a particular person if
the child were not able to recognize and treat that person as
mama (in his/her sense)? To recognize and treat mama as
mama, the child mentally represents a number of salient
features and affordances. Otherwise we would have to
withdraw to a rather unwarranted iconic theory of
representation.
In the case of phylogeny, the challenge could also be
phrased as follows: Was there a time when [water] was an
attributive concept – for a simple affordance or feature?
That substance concepts finally reduce to a single attributive
concepts is the tenet of essentialism: If essentialism about
conceptual representation is true, we represent a substance
by an essential feature or affordance which the substance
must never change. The problem is that for most everyday
substances one can hardly find any cognitively plausible
candidates for essences. Being H20 is essential for water, but
is this how humans cognitively represent water? The
alternative is to decompose a substance concept into a
structure of feature and affordance concepts, none of which
specifies an essential property, but only a typical one. Even
though water prototypically is tasteless, there is salty water.
Water can change its color, taste, aggregate state, etc., even
though some values for each of those attributes are more
typical than others. Water is also used in typical ways: for
drinking, washing, swimming, but it can also be burned by
magnesium torches.
There are, of course, lots of nouns in English that express
single attributive concepts: abstract nouns. The large
majority of them are morphologically derived or, at least,
syntactically marked (compare water to beverage, fluidity,
etc.). This indicates that nouns expressing single attributive
concepts are evolutionarily rather late. There is thus little
evidence that [water] in the early stages of language
evolution ever was a semantically simple attributive
concept, rather than a semantically complex substance
concept as it is today. P2 holds also for the early stages of
development and evolution.
The remaining option to attack the paradox seems to be
the principle P5 that capabilities demanding more effort,
ceteris paribus, develop and, respectively, evolve later than
those demanding less effort. One might argue that the
demand of effort is not the only, maybe not even the most
important factor that determines evolutionary priority. One
may point out that there is stronger evolutionary pressure to
lexicalize concepts as complex as substance concepts than
to lexicalize attributive concepts. It arguably is rather
economic to lexicalize concepts for often recurring, highly
specific entities of great survival value. Telling someone
that there are bananas somewhere is not only shorter, but
also more exact than telling someone that there are sweet,
longish, bowed, bright, yellow things around that one may
peel and eat. However, an appeal to greater selection
pressure does not suffice to explain evolutionary priority:

1141

To explain why proto-birds evolved wings, one has to
appeal to some sort of evolutionary pressure to fly. If flying
did not have a selective advantage for proto-birds, wings
would not have evolved. Maybe proto-birds had to reach or
leave trees quickly to escape predators. However, if protobirds had not had feathers in the first place (maybe for
cooling as some hypothesis goes), wings would not have
evolved either. Even if selection pressure were maximal and
flying the only way a certain reptile species could have
survived, if the species did not have feathers and very winglike forelimbs, it would have died out rather than evolve
wings. In addition to evolutionary pressure any explanation
of capabilities must appeal to some step-by-step evolution
of mechanisms: from the more primitive to the more
complex.
What we still have no answer for is the following
question: How could a mechanism evolve that enables
certain regions of cortex that are involved in representing a
word (phonologically, syntactically, etc.) to address those
regions of the sensori-motor cortices that represent the
word’s meaning, i.e., the concept it expresses. Given that
semantically complex words are evolutionary prior such an
interface must have had strong distributive capacities from
the beginning.

References
Barrett, H., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modularity in cognition.
Psychological Review, 113, 628–47.
Barrett, M. (1995). Early lexical development. In P. Fletcher & B.
MacWhinney (Eds.), The handbook of child language (pp. 362–
92). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Barsalou, L. (1992). Frames, concepts, and conceptual fields. In A.
Lehrer & E. Kittay (Eds.), Frames, fields, and contrasts (pp. 21–
74.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barsalou, L. (2005). Situated conceptualization. In H. Cohen & C.
Lefebvre (Eds.), Handbook of categorization in cognitive
science (pp. 619–50). St. Louis: Elsevier.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of words.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boas, F., & Deloria, E. (1939). Dakota grammar. Memoirs of the
National Academy of Sciences, 23(2).
Clifton, C., & Ferreira, F. (1987). Modularity in sentence
comprehension. In J. Garfield (Ed.), Modularity in knowledge
representation and natural-language understanding (pp. 277–
90). MIT Press.
Crair, M., Ruthazer, E., Gillespie, D., & Stryker, M. (1997). Ocular
dominance peaks at pinwheel center singularities of the
orientation map in cat visual cortex. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 77, 3381–5.
Crowley, T. (1995). Inalienable possession in Paamese grammar.
In H. Chappell & W. McGregor (Eds.), The grammar of
inalienability (pp. 383–432). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Dixon, R. (1999). Adjectives. In K. Brown, J. Miller, & R. Asher
(Eds.), Concise encyclopedia of grammatical categories (pp. 1–
8). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Felleman, D., & van Essen, D. (1991). Distributed hierarchical
processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 1, 1–
47.
Fodor, J. (1992). A theory of content and other essays. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Fodor, J., & Lepore, E. (1992). Holism: A shopper’s guide.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Friederici, A. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence
processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 78–84.
Givon, T. (1970). Notes on the semantic structure of English
adjectives. Language, 46, 816–37.
Ingram, D. (1989). First language acquisition; method, description
and explanation. Cambridge: CUP.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in the
brain. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 25–45.
Martin, A., Wiggs, C. L., Ungerleider, L., & Haxby, J. V. (1996).
Neural correlates of category specific knowledge. Nature, 379,
649–52.
Millikan, R. G. (1998). A common structure for concepts of
individuals, stuffs and real kinds: More mama, more milk, and
more mouse. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 55–100.
Mithun, M. (2000). Noun and verb in Iroquoian languages:
Multicategorisation from multiple criteria. In P. Vogel & B.
Comrie (Eds.), Approaches to the typology of word classes
(pp.397–420). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Petersen, W., & Werning, M. (2007). Conceptual fingerprints:
Lexical decomposition by means of frames – a neuro-cognitive
model. In U. Priss, S. Polovina, & R. Hill (Eds.), Conceptual
structures: Knowledge architectures for smart applications
(LNAI 4604) (pp.415–28). Heidelberg: Springer.
Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain’s language. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 253–79.
Pulvermüller, F. (2005). Brain mechanisms linking language and
action. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 576–82.
Quian Quiroga, R., Reddy, L., Kreiman, G., Koch, C., & Fried, I.
(2005). Invariant visual representation by single-neurons in the
human brain. Nature, 435, 1102–7.
Rappelsberger, P., Weiss, S., & Schack, B. (2000). Coherence and
phase relations between EEG traces recorded from different
locations. In R. Müller (Ed.), Time and the brain (pp. 297–330).
Harwood.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system.
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169–92.
Schnitzler, A., Timmermann, L., & Gross, J. (2006). Physiological
and pathological oscillatory networks in the human motor
system. Journal of Physiology, 99, 3–7.
Singer, W. (1999). Neuronal synchrony: A versatile code for the
definition of relations? Neuron, 24, 49–65.
Werning, M. (2005). The Temporal Dimension of Thought:
Cortical Foundations of Predicative Representation. Synthese,
146, 203–24.
Werning, M. (2008). The complex first paradox why do
semantically thick concepts so early lexicalize as nouns?
Interaction Studies, 9(1), 67–83.
Werning, M. (2010). Complex first? On the evolutionary and
developmental priority of semantically thick words. Philosophy
of Science, 77, 1096–1108.
Werning, M. (2012). Non-symbolic Compositional Representation
and Its Neuronal Foundation: Towards an Emulative Semantics.
In Werning, M., Hinzen, W., & Machery, M. (Eds.), The Oxford
Handbook of Compositionality. OUP, Oxford.
Werning, M., Hinzen, W., Machery, E. (2012, eds.). The Oxford
Handbook of Compositionality. Oxford: OUP.

1142

