UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Concepts in context: Evidence from a feature-norming study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1619p7f6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Frassinelli, Diego
Lenci, Alessandro

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Concepts in context: Evidence from a feature-norming study
Diego Frassinelli (d.frassinelli@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

Alessandro Lenci (alessandro.lenci@ling.unipi.it)
Dipartimento di Linguistica “T. Bolelli”, Via Santa Maria 36
56126 Pisa, Italy
Abstract
Concepts are typically conceived as context-free knowledge
structures. Recently, a different view has emerged according to
which subjects produce situation-specific conceptualizations,
thereby raising important questions about the level of contextual dependency in conceptual representations. In this paper,
we present a feature-norming study in which subjects are asked
to generate properties of concepts presented in context. Collected data are analysed to investigate the actual amount of
conceptual variation induced by contexts and the effect of context modality.
Keywords: Semantic feature norms; property generation; context.

Concepts and contexts
Both in classical and in post-classical models, concepts have
been conceived as substantially context-free knowledge structures. Regardless of the particular theory (e.g. exemplar, prototype, and connectionist), it is generally assumed that concepts result from abstracting critical information about an entity per se (such as shape, colour, etc.), leaving behind background situations (i.e. the contexts) in which these entities
are experienced. Concepts thus become invariant to different
contexts of use. Accordingly, the same representation of an
apple is used both when categorizing an entity on a tree, and
when categorizing the same entity in a supermarket.
Recently, this view has been overtly criticized. For instance, Yeh and Barsalou (2006) argue that concepts not
only contain a large array of situational information about
the physical settings, events, and subjective perspectives of
agents, but they also produce different conceptualizations
in different contexts. For instance, the supermarket situation would activate context-specific information concerning
an apple, different from that activated by a different context,
such a tree in a garden. These two claims directly follow
from the perceptual simulation model adopted by the authors,
but more in general they raise important questions about the
level of contextual dependency in our conceptual representations. Wu and Barsalou (2009) used a property generation task to investigate the situated nature of concepts, and
reported that approximately 26% of the features produced
by subjects were indeed situation-related. Subjects generated properties (semantic feature norms) provide interesting
evidence about conceptual representations, but one intrinsic
limit of the study in Wu and Barsalou (2009) is that stimuli

were presented out of context, as it is customary in semantic norming. This way, it becomes impossible to address and
test the more specific and crucial issue concerning the relation between concepts and context, that is the actual effect of
the context in modulating and biasing conceptual representations.
In this paper, we present a feature-norming study in which
subjects are asked to generate properties of concepts presented in context. To the best of our knowledge this is the
first property generation task with this design. While we do
not commit ourselves to any specific model of conceptual representation, collected data allow us to address directly three
key issues concerning the effects of different contexts on concepts: i.) the actual amount of conceptual variation induced
by contexts, and ii.) the property types that are more subject to contextual variation, and iii.) the effect of the context
modality. In particular, we will investigate the effect of both
linguistic contexts (i.e. a sentence in which the context noun
appears) and extralinguistic contexts (i.e. an image of a situation in which an entity can be experienced).

Semantic Feature Norms
Nowadays there is a strong consensus on the fact that it is
possible to describe the internal structure of a concept in
terms of a set of semantic properties (Garrard, Lambon Ralph,
Hodges, & Patterson, 2001; Baroni & Lenci, 2008). A traditional way to access and study the structure of conceptual
knowledge is the use of semantic features norms. These are
lists of properties that participants produce describing and
defining a specific concept; moreover they include several
measures and statistics calculated according to feature production frequencies.
As suggested by McRae and colleagues (McRae, Cree, Seidenberg, & McNorgan, 2005) these lists do not provide a
static and definitive representation of concepts, however, they
are the most direct way to study the dynamics associated with
the online process that takes place when subjects have to process a specific concept.
Different researchers used these lists to investigate various
aspects of human cognition. They have been used to test the
psychological validity of cognitive theories (Wu & Barsalou,
2009), and as stimuli for different experiments such as semantic similarity (McRae, Sa, & Seidenberg, 1997) and property
verification tasks (Cree, McNorgan, & McRae, 2006).

1566

One of the most widely used norms is the collection of
McRae et al. (2005). This is the largest set of semantic properties freely available: it includes properties for 541 living
and non-living concepts. Another smaller example is represented by the collection of Vinson and Vigliocco (2008). In
this case, the authors extended their analysis to the domain of
actions and events. They collected norms for 167 living and
non-living objects and for 287 events and actions.
The pros of these collections are relatively straightforward;
however they exhibit also different limitations (McRae et al.,
2005). The process of collection, normalization and classification is extremely long and expensive. Moreover, the linguistic nature of the task favours the information which is
easily verbalized, penalising spatial and temporal relations
between entities. During the classification phase, the annotators have to reinterpret the intents of the subjects and cannot
always preserve the original information. Finally, as we said
above, all existing norms were collected by presenting words
in isolation and not associated with a specific context. In this
work, we will focus our attention on this last feature.

of the linguistic context, the sentence containing the target
word appears instead of the target word. For the visual context,APPENDIX
the picture
appearsAND
on the
left of the
blank lines. Figure
C. VISUAL
LINGUISTIC
CONTEXTS
104
1 shows the visual and linguistic contexts for apple.

Collecting context-sensitive feature norms

Stimuli The 8 normed concepts correspond to the following English nouns: apple, banana, bear, horse, bike, car,
hammer, and knife. The nouns were sampled in order to have
an equal number of animate and inanimate concepts belonging to the semantic classes traditionally used in these studies,
that are fruits, animals, vehicles, and tools.
For each concept, we identified two alternative situations frequently associated with the correspondent object.
We downloaded from the Web 16 colour pictures depicting
the two contexts for each concept and we downsized them
(288*320 pixels). The pictures do not include the target object unless it is strictly necessary for the correct interpretation
of the context (e.g. a showroom without some cars inside
would not be identifiable). This way, participants are not biased in their descriptions by a specific instance of the concept
appearing in the picture. A native English speaker produced
16 sentences describing the context depicted in the correspondent picture. Unlike the visual contexts, the sentences include
the target concept noun (written in capital letters).
For every trial, the target concept noun (in capitals) appears
on the top of the screen and is followed by 10 blank lines that
participants have to fill in with concept properties. In the case

Procedure The entire experiment included 40 different
combinations of the 8 concepts and the 5 different context
types (2 visual, 2 linguistics, and 1 no context). 125 lists of 8
items each were created: the distribution of the items across
lists was based on a Latin Square design, ensuring that every list comprised only one occurrence of each concept and
one of each specific context. Every list included the 8 concepts as follow: one or two out of context, three or four in
(a) theand
BANANA
is ripening
on
(b) a man is buying
BANANA
a visual
linguistic
context
respectively.
The aorder
of the
the palm-tree
at the market
trials was semi-random: all the out of context trials appeared
Figure C.2 – Banana: Visual and Linguistic Contexts
before the linguistic ones and those before the visual ones. In
this way, the complexity of the stimulus increased during the
experiment.
125 native English speakers recruited online performed the
experiment. Each participant saw the 8 items of one of the
125 lists; in this way, every concept and context were seen
only once. The experiment started after written instructions
of the task and 3 examples. The task required to read the
word (or the sentence) at the top of the screen and to produce
a maximum of 10 properties per concept describing different
aspects of it. The instructions clearly stated that the aim of
the experiment was to study how people process the meaning
of words; subjects were not instructed to take contextual variability into account. Moreover, we provided a list of possible
qualities of the concepts to take into account during the actual experiment: colours (e.g. CHERRY red)2 , tastes (e.g. ICE
CREAM good), shapes (e.g. BALL round), functions ( TRAIN
transportation), typical locations (SHARK ocean), emotions
(C HRISTMAS excitement), evaluations (SOUP hate), etc. We
did not set a maximum amount of time for a single trial however, on average, the entire experiment lasted about 15 minutes.

1 The
collection
is
freely
http://sesia.humnet.unipi.it/norms

2 In this work, we use caps to indicate
indicate the properties produced.

(a) the APPLE is ripening on the
tree

Figure C.1 – Apple: Visual and Linguistic Contexts

Figure 1: apple: visual and linguistic contexts.

The main goal of this work is to describe the collection of
semantic feature norms for 8 concrete concepts and to analyse
the effects that contextual variability exerts on the number and
types of properties produced.1

Design
The collection was performed on-line using a website interface.

available

at

(b) A man is buying an APPLE
at the market

1567

CONCEPTS

and italics to

Post Processing
Data Codification After collecting the features, a process
of data filtering and normalization was carried out. We identified all the synonym properties and we normalized them to
the same feature (e.g., “bike” and “bicycle” were coded as a
bike). Coordinate or disjunctive features providing more than
one piece of information were split into separate tokens. For
example, “is red, green or yellow” became is red, is green,
and is yellow. We removed all the quantifiers (e.g. “can be”,
“generally”, “usually”) and other materials not relevant to the
analysis (e.g. miscellanea, incoherences, and free associations). Finally, one of the authors coded the resulting properties according to a specific set of patterns (e.g. BEAR beh eats honey codes “to eat honey” as a prototypical behaviour
(beh) of bears) and classified them according to the scheme
described below.
Coding Scheme The properties were classified according
to a partially simplified version of the coding scheme proposed by Wu and Barsalou (2009). The scheme includes 24
property types grouped into 4 main categories:
• Taxonomic properties (TAX): properties describing taxonomic relations (hypernyms, hyponyms, synonyms, and
coordinates).
• Entity properties (ENT): properties describing the entity
per se (e.g. internal and external properties and elements,
prototypical behaviours).
• Situation properties (SIT): properties associated with the
contextual background (e.g. locations, time, participants,
functions).
• Introspective properties (INT): properties describing feelings and mental states (e.g. evaluations, contingencies).

Results

Table 1: Average (AVG) and Standard Error (SE) of the number of features produced by each subject for each concept
grouped according to broad property class and modality.
Class
TAX
ENT
SIT
INT

No Context
AVG
SE
1.20 0.09
3.82 0.40
2.34 0.26
1.61 0.19

Visual
AVG
SE
1.34 0.15
3.64 0.36
2.66 0.31
1.59 0.19

Linguistic
AVG
SE
1.24 0.11
3.86 0.41
2.15 0.25
1.64 0.19

Analysis
Model We analysed the data adopting the framework of the
linear-mixed effects models with a Poisson linking function
(Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). The dependent variable
was the property frequency. Table 2 presents the coefficients
and p-values of the mixed model. To investigate the effects
exerted by contextual variability we included two factors in
contrast coding: the factor Modality for the effects of visual
(+.5) and linguistic context (-.5), and the factor Context for
the effects produced in the out-of-context (-.5) and in the incontext (+.25) conditions. We also analysed the effects associated with the type of feature produced: the factor Property
compared the object related properties such as entity and taxonomic properties (-.25) and the context related properties
such as situation and introspective properties ( +.25); the factor ObjectProp coded the effects of taxonomic (-.5) and entity (+.5) properties; and the factor SituationProp the effects of situation (-.5) and introspective (+.5) properties. The
random effects were Subject and Concept, which were intercepts in the model. We also included random slopes for all
the main effects (Modality, Context, Property, ObjectProp,
and SituationProp).

Table 2: The coefficients for the linear-mixed effects model.

Participants produced 6922 properties in total: 3619 entity
properties, 2025 situation properties, 644 introspective properties, and 634 taxonomic properties. Table 1 reports the average number of features (and Standard Error) produced by
every subject for each item and grouped by property class
and modality. There are no noticeable differences among
modalities (visual, linguistic, and no context): this suggests
that different contexts are not exerting a significant effect on
the number of properties generated. The differences arise
analysing the property classes. The properties describing different aspects of the target concept (ENT) are the most frequent (52% of the total). Properties providing contextual information related to the target concept (SIT) are produced the
29% of the time (interestingly, this figure is close to the one
reported by Wu and Barsalou (2009)). Properties describing
mental states (INT) and taxonomic relations (TAX) are less
frequent (around 9%).

Predictor
Coefficient Signif.
(Intercept)
0.66
***
Property
-0.28
ObjectProp
1.10
***
SituationProp
-0.43
***
Context
0.01
Modality
0.04
Context:Property
-0.09
Context:Object
-0.17
Context:Situation
-0.06
Modality:Property
0.14
Modality:Object
-0.13
Modality:Situation
-0.29
**
∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .001

1568

Property Types The factor Property compares the overall mean of entity and taxonomic properties (properties more
associated with the object) with the overall mean of situation
and introspective properties (properties that are more associated with the context). We find a slightly significant effect
(p < .1) in favour of the first group of properties: object related properties are produced more frequently than context
related properties. The factor ObjectProp shows a significant positive main effect for the entity properties compared
to the taxonomic ones. The factor SituationProp reveals a
positive effect for situation properties compared to the introspective ones.

class at the end of each group of properties (e.g. the 80% of
taxonomic properties are context independent). In brackets
there is the number of properties of each type out of the total number of properties in the same class (e.g. the 78% of
taxonomic properties are superordinates).
Table 3: Percentage of the features that are context dependent
(associated with only one context) and context independent
(associated with both contexts).
Property
C-super (.78)
C-subord (.19)
C-coord (.02)
C-syn (.02)
Taxonomic
E-exsurf (.27)
E-excomp (.24)
E-sys (.21)
E-beh (.07)
E-incomp (.06)
E-insurf (.06)
E-mat (.06)
E-quant (.02)
E-whole (.01)
Entity
I-cont (.68)
I-eval (.30)
I-emot (.02)
Introspective
S-func (.47)
S-assoc (.15)
S-loc (.15)
S-action (.08)
S-particip (.08)
S-origin (.06)
S-time (.01)
S-socart (<.01)
Situation

Context and Modality As expected, there is no significant
main effect for Context and Modality. We only find a not
significant effect associated with the visual context. Participants produced almost the same number of properties independently of the presence and type of contextual information
they are exposed to.
Interactions The interactions reported in table 2 do not
reveal significant effects. The only significant effect is described by the interaction Modality:SituationProp where
situation properties are positively biased by visual contexts,
while introspective properties are more biased by linguistic
properties.

Qualitative Analysis of Feature Types
In this section we present a qualitative analysis of the data to
determine the main effects exerted by contextual information
on specific property types.
For each concept, we divided the features produced in both
contexts from those associated only with a specific context.
We did the same procedure for visual and linguistic contexts independently. The aim of this analysis is to determine
which property types are more dependent on a specific context (context dependent) and which are produced in both contexts (context independent). We are interested in a general
evaluation of this effect without taking into account interconceptual variability: for this reason we combined the results obtained for each concept. After a preliminary analysis,
we discovered that property types show an almost coherent
trend both in a visual and linguistic context. We analysed the
effects exerted by the two modalities using a linear model.
We did not find a significant difference between visual and
linguistic modality as main effect (βVisual = 3.90, p = 0.94)
and also in interaction with the context dependent vs context independent variable (βVisual:ContextInd = 4.54, p = 0.88).
For that reason, table 3 reports the results from a general point
of view, without modality distinction. If there is a difference
between the two modalities we will discuss it separately. We
report the percentage of context dependent and context independent properties out of the total number of properties of the
same type (e.g. the 92% of hypernyms are context independent). We also present in bold the percentage for the entire

Dependent
0.08
0.57
1
0.5
0.2
0.15
0.12
0.28
0.39
0.24
0.17
0.07
0.53
0.21
0.2
0.62
0.38
0.5
0.54
0.25
0.58
0.44
0.33
0.48
0.1
0.59
1
0.35

Independent
0.92
0.43
0
0.5
0.8
0.85
0.88
0.72
0.61
0.76
0.83
0.93
0.47
0.79
0.8
0.38
0.62
0.5
0.46
0.75
0.42
0.56
0.67
0.52
0.9
0.41
0
0.65

Taxonomic Properties Taxonomic properties describe
highly stable relations among concepts. As expected, the 80%
of these properties are equally produced in different contexts.
The hypernyms (C-super, e.g. CAR a vehicle) are the 78% of
the entire taxonomic class. These properties are represented
by a small number of highly frequent feature types (in total
only 22 for the visual and linguistic modalities) describing
associations strictly language related. Hyponyms (C-subord,
e.g. APPLE Granny Smith) include a high number of infrequent property types (in total 48 subordinates) and are more
context dependent. This can be expected, given that each concept is associated with many hyponyms, which in turn might
become differently prominent depending on the context. Co-

1569

ordinates (C-coord, e.g. APPLE a pear) and synonyms (Csyn, e.g. CAR an automobile) are only a small group of properties.

Entity properties The trend of this class is consistent:
all the properties describing objects’ qualities are not sensitive to contextual variability (the 80% of the total). The only
exception is represented by those properties describing frequency or intensity (E-quant, e.g. APPLE different varieties);
however this group includes a very small number of features
and it is valid only for the linguistic modality (65% of context
dependent properties).

Introspective properties The most substantial group
among introspective properties is represented by contingency
properties (I-cont, e.g. APPLE is good with cinnamon). These
properties describe the “common sense knowledge” associated with a specific object in specific conditions. For this
reason, it is not surprising to see a strong contextual effect.
On the other hand, evaluations about the object (I-eval, e.g.
APPLE is delicious) are less context dependent: participants
have a personal opinion about every object that is unlikely to
change in different situations. Emotions (I-emot, e.g. BEAR
is scary) are very few cases.

Situation Properties The behaviour of this group of data
is more various, given also the high heterogeneity of the properties in this class. Some properties are intrinsically related
to an entity, and, therefore, less variable across situations: for
instance, typical functions (S-func, e.g. CAR used for transportation), actions (S-action, e.g. APPLE used by cooking),
origins (S-origin, e.g. APPLE grows on trees) and locations
(S-loc, e.g. BANANA grows in tropical climates). Instead,
other property types are more context-related, and, therefore,
subject to stronger cross-situation variation, such as associations (S-assoc, e.g. CAR associated with speed). Participants (S-particip, e.g. BANANA eaten by monkeys) are almost
equally present in both sets.

Analysis of Feature Density
The last analysis we carry on compares the distribution of
specific features in terms of feature density: how many subjects produce the same feature for the same stimulus. We
analysed the features divided into the context dependent and
context independent sets. In the context dependent set the
85% of specific properties are produced by only one person, the 11% by two different subjects. The remaining 4%
is shared by properties produced from 3 to 10 people. On the
other hand, in the context independent set we have the 21% of
features produced only by 2 subjects (the minimum value for
having an overlap). The maximum number of subjects that
produced the same feature is 47 (KNIFE is sharp).

General Discussion
The experiment described in this work was aimed to test the
effects exerted by contextual variability on the production of
semantic properties by human beings. We gave both quantitative and qualitative evidence of these effects. Neither modality nor context variability has significant effects on the number of features produced. People list almost the same number of properties in different contexts. However, these properties are not equally distributed and the differences among
them are statistically significant. As already emerged in the
literature, subjects produce more entity properties than taxonomic ones and more situated properties than introspective
ones. It is interesting to note that merging together the properties more object related (entity and taxonomic) and the properties more context related (introspective and situation) the
difference decreases considerably with only a slightly significant effect in favour of the first group. This suggests that
people are including in their dynamic representation of concepts both information describing the object per se but also almost the same amount of background information. To gather
more evidence, we performed also a qualitative analysis. In
this case, we extracted from the collection only the properties
produced in context and we identified those occurring with
both contexts and those associated with only one. The results
are straightforward for the taxonomic and entity properties:
almost the 80% of all the properties classified in this way are
produced in both contexts. We assist to an opposite effect
when we move to the introspective properties. More complex
is the dynamic of situation properties: some of them are more
related to the object, some others to the context.
These results suggest that the context sensitivity of concepts is strongly limited to certain property types. A possible explanation can be found in Barsalou (1982). In this
work, the author suggests the existence of two different kinds
of properties: context independent properties strictly associated with the object per se, and context dependent properties
associated with the specific context in which the word appears. Our data point in the same direction. It is possible to
identify a large group of “core” properties that are not biased
by contextual variability (in particular entity and taxonomic
properties, as expected) and a smaller group of more dynamic
properties produced less frequently and only associated with
specific contexts (introspective properties, and partially situation properties).

Acknowledgements
The experiment was funded by the Computational Linguistics
Lab (University of Pisa) and the European Research Council under award number 203427 “Synchronous Linguistic and
Visual Processing”. We thank Larry Barsalou, Marco Baroni,
Frank Keller and Moreno I. Coco for their help and suggestions.

1570

References
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects
and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390–
412.
Baroni, M., & Lenci, A. (2008). Concepts and properties in
word spaces. Italian Journal of Linguistics, 20(1), 53–86.
Barsalou, L. (1982). Context-independent and contextdependent information in concepts. Memory and Cognition, 10(1), 82–93.
Cree, G. S., McNorgan, C., & McRae, K. (2006). Distinctive
features hold a privileged status in the computation of word
meaning: Implications for theories of semantic memory.
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(4), 643–658.
Garrard, P., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Hodges, J. R., & Patterson, K. (2001). Prototypicality, distinctiveness, and intercorrelation: Analyses of the semantic attributes of living
and nonliving concepts. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 18(2),
125–174.
McRae, K., Cree, G. S., Seidenberg, M. S., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research Methods, 37(4), 547–59.
McRae, K., Sa, V. R. de, & Seidenberg, M. S. (1997). On the
nature and scope of featural representations of word meaning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 126(2), 99–130.
Vinson, D. P., & Vigliocco, G. (2008). Semantic feature
production norms for a large set of objects and events. Behavior Research Methods, 40(1), 183–190.
Wu, L., & Barsalou, L. (2009). Perceptual simulation in conceptual combination: evidence from property generation.
Acta Psychologica, 132(2), 173–89.
Yeh, W., & Barsalou, L. (2006). The situated nature of concepts. American Journal of Psychology, 119(3), 349–84.

1571

