UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptual Change through Socially Constructive Interaction in the Classroom

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/71h0f80r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Saito, Moegi
Miyake, Naomi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptual Change through Socially Constructive Interaction in the Classroom
Moegi Saito (saitomoegi@coref.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Consortium for Renovating Education of the Future, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 113-0033 JAPAN

Naomi Miyake (nmiyake@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Consortium for Renovating Education of the Future, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 113-0033 JAPAN

Abstract
While collaborative learning is common in schools, most
research has focused on small group collaborative processes,
in one shot practice. In order to investigate the nature and the
mechanism of collaborative learning in a larger group, this
paper presents analysis of a classroom discussion in which 21
third-graders (8- to 9-year-old students) collaboratively
discussed predictions about the results of a series of
experiments as a whole class over 12 course hours and
became able to grasp a rudimentary scientific concept of
atomic theory.
We analyzed students’ levels of achievement, conversation
patterns, selection sequences of predictions of the
experimental results, and the contents of their utterances of
two students who were most active. The results revealed that
all the children succeeded in expressing their grasp of
rudimentary atomic theory, yet their routes to this
achievement were individualistic and diverse. A preliminary
qualitative analysis of two children’s utterances shows that
while their models were similar during the first half of the
course, their differences became more explicit toward the end,
which resulted in intense discussion between the two. The
diversity observed in the entire course of this class and these
two children’s explicit, focused dialogue could have
contributed to the successful conceptual change for all class
members.
Keywords: Collaborative conceptual change, HEI class,
Socially constructive interaction,

Introduction
While the amount of research on collaborative learning has
increased sharply in the last 10 to 15 years，many studies
deal with small groups of learners in mostly one-time
practice. Studies of entire-class discussions, which are the
norm in regular schools, are still few.
In regular elementary to middle school classes in Japan, it
is quite common for 10 to 20 students to discuss their ideas
about textbook descriptions and experiment demonstrations,
under the teacher’s guidance. In science classes, this is a
common practice aimed at helping the students change their
concepts from rules of thumb to more scientifically rigorous
ones. Understanding what actually happens in these
practices should be beneficial for developing practically
feasible collaborative classrooms.
In the similar vein, in STEM education engaging the
learners in demonstrations and experiments has been
considered effective. In real classrooms, these activities

often take place in a series of course hours rather than in
one time practice. Understanding how these cumulative
activities may affect children’s conceptual change would
also be informative regarding the quality of such classes.
In order to address these needs, this paper presents
analysis of the learning processes observed in a welldesigned STEM class. In the class, 21 third-graders
collaboratively discussed predictions of the results of a
series of experiments and were able to grasp a rudimentary
scientific concept of atomic theory. The children were
encouraged to discuss alternative predictions of carefully
ordered experiments as a whole class in order to realize that
water cannot enter “where there is air and vice versa” with
justifications ranging from heavily relying on their daily
experiences to abstracting theory-like reasons based on
accumulated observations of the results of previous
experiments.
For this class, we tried to answer the following questions.
1. How well did the 21 children understand the concept at
the end of the course?
2. What was the trajectory of understanding of the whole
class qualitatively? More concretely, in terms of choices of
the experiment results and the number of similar
explanations by the children, did the class converge toward
the “same” answer (as possibly expected by many teachers
as well as some convergence-oriented theoreticians), or was
divergence among the children maintained? Divergence
here means that each individual child creates his or her own
explanations of understanding, even at the very end of the
course, with some different degrees of understanding
underlying their seemingly or apparent “same successful”
understanding (e.g., “everybody answers correctly”). It is
important to make this distinction so that the teacher can
create a class atmosphere that focuses on either divergence
or convergence. In our own preliminary study, orientation
toward more diversity has been identified as having more
potential for successful collaboration.
3. What was the qualitative nature of the children’s
process of conceptual change, if it happened? In order to
gain some insight, we analyzed the utterances of the two
most active participants. We analyzed how they changed
their expressions of their models as the course developed.

2258

Research context:
Hypothesis-Experiment-Instruction
Our research context here is the series of science classes
designed using the Hypothesis-Experiment Instruction
(HEI) framework (Itakura, 1963) and the target content of
the “Air and Water” unit (Itakura, 1970). The objective of
this unit is to understand that water cannot enter where there
is air and vice versa, to serve as the basis of a rudimentary
grasp of atomic theory. HEI is a strategy to teach basic
scientific concepts. An HEI “unit” consists of multiple such
“problems,” or experiments, carefully ordered to guide the
development of scientific concepts underlying the problem
set. The teacher uses a problem set sheet for each
experiment; the sheet explains the experiment and
alternatives of possible answers. Each student chooses one
alternative, and the result of their selections is written on the
blackboard so that the students know the distribution. They
then are encouraged to give reasons for their choices, to
question others, and to discuss among themselves in order to
make a better prediction. They are allowed to change their
prediction before the experiment that will confirm the
correct answer. At the end of the class, each student writes
comments about the activities. By repeating this activity to
cover the entire set of problems in a unit, each student in an
HEI class is expected to integrate the results of the
experiments in her/his own way in order to formulate an
individualized “hypothesis,” or the student’s rudimentary
scientific concept.
The “Air and Water” unit consists of the 11 problems
explained in Table 1. These problems can be classified into
two subsets, Problem 1 (P1) through Problem 6 (P6) and the
rest. The first set deals with problems whose answers are
justifiable with daily experiences. In contrast, situations of
P7 to P10 do not occur often in children’s daily lives; thus,
they are difficult for children to imagine.
Table 1: Wordings of the 11 problems in the “Air and Water”
HEI unit
P1
P2
P3

P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9

P10

When an empty glass is pushed into water upside down, will the
water come into the glass?
If you place a crumpled piece of paper in the glass and do the same
as in Problem 1, will the paper get wet?
An upside-down glass with water inside is in the water. When you
lift it up through the surface of the water, what will happen to the
water in the glass?
What will happen when you suck air through a straw from an
upside-down glass in the water?
Which dropper sucks more water, one whose tip is deep in the
water or one whose tip is shallow?
Can water be sucked through a 1m straw?
A can of juice has just one hole on top. When the can is turned
upside down, will some juice come out of it?
Will some juice come out of a can that has two holes on its top and
is turned upside down?
Suppose you put the can used in problem 8 deep into the water,
keeping your finger tight on one of the holes. Will some water go
into the can?
What will happen to the can in problem 9 if you remove your
finger?

P11

Will some soy sauce come out of its container if you put your
finger onto the hole on its top?

The latter problems require learners to rely on their newly
formed “hypotheses,” from accumulating predictions and
observations of the experimental results in the previous
problems. The learners are expected to realize that water
cannot enter where there is air and vice versa, with
justifications starting from relying on their daily experiences
to abstracting theory-like reasons. The last problem, P11,
can be answered by relying on either daily experiences or
newly learned understanding, or both. This is to confirm
their achieved levels as well as to let the children connect
the hypotheses to daily life, so that they may see that their
clearer understanding is usable in everyday situations.
The targeted concept of this unit is “water cannot enter
where there is air and vice versa,” according to Itakura
(1970), the developer of this curriculum. From the
perspective of modern science, we should use such concepts
as “atmospheric pressure” and “surface tension” to fully
explain the results of the P7 through P10 experiments;
however, the learners were not expected to understand these
concepts in this unit. Instead, the emphasis was on having
the children experience “how to think scientifically.” The
idea of “water cannot enter where there is air and vice versa”
itself is not sufficient for high school education, but it is
adequate to give a general justification to cover all of the 11
experiments. Thus, becoming able to predict the results of
an experiment and to justify the prediction requires a change
in concept, tying experience-based rules of thumb to more
scientifically justifiable explanations.
In order to identify the levels of conceptual change
discussed here, we use the four-level model that ties the
children’s daily experiences and the scientific concepts
(Miyake, 2009) listed in Table 2. The learner can create a
rule of thumb based on one incidence of experience (e.g.,
coming too close to a heated stove lets the child create a
useful rule of thumb of “red, warm, could be extremely hot,
to be avoided”). Usually these experiences should be
repeated numerous times so that the child can create a more
stable rule of thumb and understand the world around
her/him. These are individually created, experience-based
“concept” levels of Level 1 (based on one incident) and 2
(repeated and summarized). The other side of the model,
Level 4, includes the consensus reached by the scientific
community, the state-of-the-art concepts shared by
professionals. These are the concepts explained in textbooks
and expected to be taught at school. In between, at Level 3,
is a wide zone for learners needing to change their Level 2
basic experience-based rules of thumb to Level 4
scientifically
community-shared
concepts.
Many
instructional methods have been developed and tested to
facilitate this conceptual change (Vosniadou, 2008), Some
of these methods heavily utilize the power of social
construction in the form of collaborative design (c.f.,
Roschelle, 1992; Howe,et.al. 2005; Vosniadou, et.al.2007;
Miyake, 2008). HEI is such a method (Saito & Miyake,
2011).

2259

According to this model, the targeted conceptual change
for the “Air and Water” unit is to reach Level 3, starting
from Level 2.
Table2 : Four-stage model of conceptual change
Theories
constructed
through
collaboration

Lv.4

Knowledge and
rules
from
individual
experience

Lv.2

Lv.3

Lv.1

Scientific concept, created and shared
in the scientific community
A socially constructed, yet individually
understandable “story” tying abstracted
ideas created on their own as well as
borrowed from others and the the rulesof-thumb accumulated in daily life.
A rule of thumb created by
accumulating one’s own (yet many)
experiences from different situations
A rule -of- thumb based on one
incidence

Children’s conceptual change
Data
The data come from the “Air and Water” unit in an HEI
class conducted in May and June 2002. Twenty-one third
graders participated in 12 lessons taught by a highly
experienced HEI teacher, Yuko Saito, who voluntarily kept
records of the distributions of students’ predictions before
and after the class discussions, the students’ discussions
using hand-written notes, and voice recordings. She also
kept copied records of the notes taken by all the students
during class. The transcribed voice recordings and the
copied notes are the data we analyzed here.

experiences. It could be assumed that the entire class
somehow successfully formed a rudimentary concept of
physical identity, at least with regard to whether or not air
and water could share the same physical space.
However, this conceptual shift did not occur smoothly.
For P7 and P8, the problem situation significantly deviated
from the children’s daily experiences, thus making it
particularly difficult for them to make correct predictions.
After their complete failure on these problems, the children
somehow recovered their performance over P9 and P10, and
were able to correctly predict 100% on the transfer problem
of P11.

Shift of levels of the children’s concepts
Because the shift pattern of predictions indicated successful
learning at least at the end, we could expect to observe a
corresponding shift of concept levels in the children’s
utterances and the note descriptions. We coded the contents
of the students’ discussions during the classes and the
written comments after the classes according to the levels
described in Table2. The operational definition used for this
coding and the corresponding example of each level are
presented in Table3. The correspondence rate of coding by
two coders was 94%.
Table3: Categorization for level of conceptual change in
“Air and Water”

Lv.3

Predictions of answers to the problems
Fig. 1 plots the percentage of correct predictions made by
the children upon reading the explanation of the experiment,
prior to discussion.

Lv.2

Lv.1

Operational definition
Explanation based on
understanding of “water
cannot enter where there
is air and vice versa,
“which could lead the
learners
to
correctly
answer one or more
problems.
Explanation based on
generalized
rules
of
thumb
Explicit reference to a
particular experience

Examples
“The seal stops the air.
When the air can’t move,
the water won’t move,
either” for P11

“When the can has two
holes, water can move” for
P10
“I have tried such an
experiment with a wash
bowl in the bath.” for P1

Figure 1: The percentage of correct predictions.
All the children made correct predictions for the last
experiment, whose result was not readily obvious from daily

Figure 2: The accumulated number of Lv3 expressions

2260

If the class successfully changed their concept, each
student could express Lv 3 understanding at least once.
Figure 2 plots the accumulated number of students whose
justification fell at Lv 3 for each problem.
Twenty of the 21 children’s expressions of reasons for
their choices were coded as Lv 3 explanations at the end.
Thus, we could conclude that the class was successful in
helping each child construct a starting scientific model
about air and water.

number of utterances among the children, as well as a
relatively smooth decline of the number of utterances from
the beginning problems to the ending ones.
Fig. 3 plots the number of utterances for each problem.
We do not observe any clear decline of utterance
frequencies across the problems. The children seem to have
been motivated to speak up for some problems and not for
others, even in the middle of the course, though a clear
decrease is observed toward the end.

Quantitative analysis of the children’s
collaborative learning paths
Shift pattern of predictions of each student
What was the qualitative trajectory of this successful
conceptual shift in the whole class? In terms of choices of
alternatives of the experiment results and the similarities of
explanations given by the children, did the class converge to
the “same” answer, or did the individual students diverge?
Each student could choose one of three possible
predictions for each problem. This allowed many possible
paths of choices, but for 7 of the 11 problems, more than
half of the students chose the same prediction (Fig. 1). If
students had chosen the same prediction because they
understood in a similar manner, there could not have been
so many patterns of choices. When we asked teachers who
often teach HEI classes how many courses there could be
for an 11-problem unit, they typically said there would be
only three or four paths in one class of 20 to 30 students.
For analysis, we checked the alternative that each child
chose for each problem. We then compared the sequence of
such predictions for each child against that of the other
children. Every child had a unique sequence of alternatives
for the 11 problems; thus, we concluded that there were 21
paths of selections. For P1, P5, and P10, student’s selections
were evenly distributed among the three alternatives. Thus,
they did not tend to converge to fewer selections toward the
end of the unit. This diversity could have made the
interaction among students constructive, promoting
conceptual change in the class, as confirmed above.

Similarity of models used in discussions
As for the similarity of explanations given by the children,
did the class converge to the “same” answer, or did it
diverge among them? A simple prediction could indicate
convergence, as some previous research indicates (c.f.,
Roschelle), however, a detailed analysis of individual paths
of understanding indicates the opposite, that they diverge as
the discussion progresses (c.f., Miyake, 1986). In order to
test this idea, we counted each child’s utterances for each
problem, as an indicator of convergence of their models.
When their models converge, the learner who sufficiently
explains one problem would not be motivated to repeat it for
another, while a new member who comes to a definite
understanding based on the model might wish to express it
for a different problem. This would give us a relatively even

Figure 3: Number of utterances during discussion for each
problem in the “Air and water” unit
When we counted the number of utterances for each child,
we found a clear pattern of some kids talk more while some
don’t. The pattern may mean that the children could learn a
lot while just being silent, attentively listening the others’
talks and discussions (Saito&Miyake,2011).

Qualitative aspects of the process of
collaborative conceptual change among the
core members
Shift pattern of predictions
In order to investigate the qualitative aspects of the
conceptual change process in this class, we selected the two
most active children (A and B), and analyze the contents of
their utterances. The purpose of this analysis is to
understand the results described above. Quantitative
analysis of the pattern indicates more diversity than
normally expected by both teachers and researchers who
believe in a convergent pattern of collaborative conceptual
change. The qualitative aspects of the processes imply
value in this diversity. We would like to know whether the
most active two worked as a convergent target model for
final success, or if their divergence contributed to their
success. Were the two similar to each other in making
predictions by choosing similar alternatives, sharing similar
models for justification at the beginning, and gradually
converging and uttering their understanding to compensate
each other so that the rest of the class could use their model
as a target and “learn” after them? Or were they different
until the end to stimulate the thinking of the rest of the

2261

class? For analysis, we examined their prediction paths
from their chosen alternative for each problem, and inferred
the cognitive models they could have adopted, based on
their utterances.
First, we compared the prediction paths of A and B, and
then inferred their models based on what they said and how
they said it (Table 4).
Table 4 : Predictions and justifications of A and B for
each problem
P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8
P9

P10

P11

A
○ I tried this yesterday in the
bath. There was no water at the
top of the tuned-over bucket;
there could be air there.
○The paper would not get wet,
when even half the cup is filled
with air.
○I tried this; the water was to
the top of the glass, maybe
because of the buoyancy force.
○When sucked there would be
nothing in the glass, so the
water should come up.
○The strength of push does not
have anything to do with it.
○Where there is no air, water
should comes up, even when
the length is 1m.
×If there were a hole on top,
the juice would come out, but
with a little hole on the bottom,
the juice would only drip.
×(SEE TABLE 5 for detail)
○Because the upper hole is
covered, the water would not
go in.
○Now there is a hole on top,
so the water pushed in, and
pushed the air out.

B
○I tried this also. The turnedover bucket is heavy to pull up.
There may be air in it (to make
it heavy).
○Air comes first, so the paper
in the cup would not get wet.
○Just pulling up the glass
would not do anything. The
water inside stays there.
○The air would escape if there
is enough time (for the air to do
so).
○I have tried this with a toy;
when I pushed it hard, the
water rushed out.
○Teacher said she would do
her best, so I think she could do
it.
×When I made a hole in a
small drink bottle, the juice
dripped. When I made the hole
bigger, then juice came out
continuously.
×(SEE TABLE 5 for detail)
○ (no mention of justification)

×Water will come in about
halfway.
→○This time a large amount
of water will come in.
○I tried a similar thing, and
only a little soy sauce came out,
so it would not come out.

○When some air goes in, it
pushed the soy sauce. If you
cover the hole, no air goes in,
so no sauce would come out.
N.B. ○is the correct prediction, × indicates a wrong choice

Both students chose correct answers from the beginning to
the middle (P1 to P6), indicating they possibly shared the
model correctly enough to choose the correct answer. Yet in
the latter part of the course, they did not answer correctly,
and their choices differed for P8 and P10. This pattern could
mean at least two things. First, they were similar to each
other when they based their judgments on their experiences
(i.e., they shared more or less the same set of experiencebased rules of thumb), but their shifted concepts differed.
Second, they may have held different models or rules of
thumb from the very beginning, both of which were correct
enough for each to choose the correct answer (for different
reasons); and the difference became sharper as the problems

became more difficult and required more sophisticated use,
or expressions of justification for their choices.

Diversity of models
A closer look at the students’ utterances indicates that for P1
through P6, though both students based their justifications
on their daily experience, they apparently formed some
generalizable model of “when air goes out, water gets in.”
This explanation became more sophisticated as the problem
progressed. Both talked about their bath experiences in P1.
However, for P5 student A mentioned “when there is the
same amount of force to push, the amount of air coming out
should also the same,” whereas student B said “because the
same amount of air is lost, so should be the amount of
water.” These explanations were applicable not only to the
problem at hand but also to previous problems, indicating
increased abstraction levels.
Yet slight differences were observed even in these earlystage justifications. While A repeatedly used the word “top”
in his explanation, B did not use it at all. This difference
becomes more readily apparent in their justification
explanations after P7, where the children’s models stopped
working.
For P7, A’s repeated use of the word “top” indicated that
he was trying to use the same model until P6. However, B
began to consider the size of the hole, introducing a new
factor in his model (he did not mention size before P7). For
P8, their explanations clearly differed as they engaged in a
lively discussion in front of the class. Table 5 presents
details of the beginning of their explanations.
Table5: Example of utterances of A and B during P8
discussion
A
This time, there are two holes at
the bottom of the can. I think,
if one hole is above the other,
it is easy for the air to enter
from that hole and the juice
would come out from the other
hole below. But in this
problem, both of the holes are
on the bottom so no air could
get in. That is, because the air
is outside, no juice could come
out, or no air could go in
either. The two are separated
at the bottom.

B
For me, it does not matter
which hole lets the juice out,
but the air goes in from here, it
goes up to fill half of the can,
then the juice would get
pushed out from the other hole
and drips out.

A distinguished between the positions of the two holes
punched in the can. This distinction enabled him to explain
“if one hole is above the other, it is easy for the air to enter
from that hole,” and “the juice would come out from the
other hole below.” From these utterances, we infer that A’s
model has components like “air is above, while water is
below.” His perspective is on the relative positioning of the
air and water. We call this model the “positioning model.”
In contrast, B mentioned that “it does not matter which hole

2262

lets the juice out.” Thus, we infer that he did not pay
attention to the positions. Instead his explanation that “air
goes in …to push the juice out” indicates that he focused
more on the interaction between air and water. We call this
model the “interaction model.”
For the entire discussion of P8, A kept using the same
model, emphasizing the significance of the relative positions.
His last comment was “if there were any air in the can, it
stays on top, so no juice would come out. In contrast,
toward the end of this discussion, B began referring to the
relative positions of the two holes in his model as “the air,
when it somehow gets in, may move through there to reach
the top, and the air on the top would let the juice come out
from the bottom,” indicating his awareness of the possible
integration of A’s model into his. Many questioned B’s
choice, so B had to explain his position repeatedly. This
could have contributed to B’s refinement of his model,
while A could stay with his older model.
Preliminary analysis indicates that A and B preserved
their differences and never converged to the same model.
At the end of class, their explanations solicited by the
teacher made this difference clear. Both drew their models
on the blackboard, with explanations (Table 6).
Table 6: Last drawings and comments of A and B during
P10 discussion

A

B
air
water

Though my choice is the
same as B, the air becomes
foamy when water comes,
doesn’t it? As the foam
climbs up and up, stops on
top and goes out. The
bottom hole lets out not air,
but water. The bottom is
water first.

air
water
air
water

Because there are holes on
both, perhaps a lot goes in.
Water goes in like this, and
the water rushes out.

This difference between A and B was maintained even at
the very end of this course. We cannot deny the possibility
that this difference kept both A and B engaged in the
discussion, which remained the focus for the rest of the class
and made everyone stay on task, thus fostering successful
conceptual change for the whole class.

Conclusion and Discussion
Analysis of the data gained from this HEI class on “Air and
Water” indicated three patterns. Through the course of 12
classes covering 11 experiments or problems, the 21
children discussed their predictions of possible answers.
This design successfully led them to change their
experience-based rules of thumb into more scientific
understanding of “air and water do not share the same space.”

Each child’s path of this conceptual change was unique,
allowing each to create her/his own understanding. As
indicated by qualitative analysis of the utterances of the two
most active students, each could preserve her/his own model,
possibly from the very beginning to the end. Yet this
diversity among the children could be the source of
prolonged discussion on the same topic for the length of this
course, allowing both fast and slow learners to change their
models. We plan to devise a better way to infer the
cognitive models from these sporadic yet rich and complex
utterances of children, in an effort to determine conditions
for successful classroom discussion patterns that lead to
conceptual change for every individual child in regular
classes.

References
Clement,J.(2008) The Role of Explanatory Models in
Teaching for Conceptual Change. Vosniadou, S. (Ed.),
〝Handbook of research on conceptual change〟 London,
Taylor & Francis Group, 2008. pp.417-452
Howe, C., McWilliam, D. & Cross, G. (2005). “Chance
favours only the prepared mind: Incubation and the
delayed effects of peer collaboration. British Journal of
Psychology 96, 67-93.
Itakura, K. (1963). "Kasetsu-Jikken-Jugyo no Teisho, (The
proposotion of Hypothesis-ExperimentInstruction), " Rika Kyoshitsu (The Journal of Science
Education), November,1963
Itakura, K. (1970). The workbook of Hypothesis-Experiment
instruction <Air and Water>. Tokyo:Kasetsu-Sha.
(Original version [in Japanese] 1970, English Version
2007)
Miyake, N.(1986)."Constructive interaction and the iterative
process of understanding," Cognitive Science, 10, 151177.
Miyake,N,(2008).Conceptual Change through Collaboration.
In Vosniadou, S., ed. International Handbook of Research
on Conceptual Change. London, Taylor & Francis Group.
Miyake , N. (2009). Conceptual change through
collaboration, Paper presented at AERA 2009, San Diego.
Roschelle,J.(1992)Learning by Collaborating: Convergent
Conceptual Change. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
2(3), 235-276
Saito, M., & Miyake, N. (2011) “Socially constructive
interaction for fostering conceptual change,” Proceedings
of the 9th International Conference on ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, (CSCL2011), Hong
Kong, 96-103.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H. (2002)
Cognitively active externalization for situated reflection,
Cognitive Science, 26(4), 469-501.
Vosniadou, S. (Ed.), (2008)〝Handbook of research on
conceptual change〟 London, Taylor & Francis Group.

2263

