UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptual alignment in reference with artificial and human dialogue partners

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/810353ft

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Van Lierop, Koen
Goudbeek, Martijn
Krahmer, Emiel

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptual alignment in reference with artificial and human dialogue partners
Koen van Lierop (koenvanlierop@gmail.com)
Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Faculty of Humanities, Tilburg University,
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract
Previous work on reference in dialogue has shown that
speakers adapt to the concepts that were used in earlier
references during an interaction (such as orientation when a
dialogue partner describes a chair as “the chair seen from the
front”), even if these concepts are generally dispreferred.
Here, we investigate to what extent it matters whether
speakers interact with an artificial or a human dialogue
partner (Study 1) and whether this adaptation indeed takes
place at the conceptual level (Study 2). For Study 1
participants interacted either with a computer or with a human
confederate and it was found that participants adapt in similar
ways and just as much to a human dialogue partner as to a
computer. Study 2 used a cross-language interaction
paradigm, in which bilingual participants listened to English
descriptions after which they had to refer in Dutch (thereby
reducing the possibilities for lexical and syntactic alignment).
The results showed that even with crosslinguistic prime-target
pairings, participants aligned with the attributes used by their
dialogue partner, providing further evidence for alignment at
the conceptual level.
Keywords: referring expressions, alignment,
computer interaction, conceptual alignment

human-

Introduction
During conversations, people continuously refer to other
people, objects or events, for example using descriptions
such as the man with the beard or the blue chair. Since such
descriptions are so common (Poesio & Vierra, 1998), their
underlying production process has drawn many researchers’
attention, both from a computational and from a
psycholinguistic perspective. Much of this research focusses
on the question of what makes people choose one possible
way of referring to an object over another. Why do speakers
include certain properties in their descriptions and others
not?
Computational studies of reference often frame the
production of referring expressions as a problem of choice
where a (usually fixed) preference order determines the
order in which attributes (such as color or orientation) are
considered for inclusion in a referring expression. The
Incremental Algorithm (Dale & Reiter, 1995), for instance,
which is probably the most widely used algorithm in this
field, operates according to this principle, assuming the
existence of a domain-dependent preference order on the

relevant attributes, and first tries out preferred attributes
before less preferred ones are considered, thereby modeling
the intuition that speakers prefer certain attributes over
others, partly based on findings of Pechmann (1989). For
example, when referring to a chair, speakers are more likely
to refer to its color (the blue chair) than to its orientation
(the chair facing left) even though both may be successful in
singling out a particular chair.
However, one could argue that the Incremental Algorithm
is “addressee-blind” (Clark & Bangerter, 2004) in that it
pays no attention to references that were produced earlier in
an interaction (the same holds, incidentally, for the various
alternatives that have been proposed to the Incremental
Algorithm and which are surveyed in Krahmer and van
Deemter, 2012). Indeed, it has been shown that speakers do
take prior references into account during reference
production. One study, for example, found that if one
dialogue participant refers to a couch as a sofa, the next
speaker is more likely to use the word sofa as well
(Branigan, Pickering, Pearson, & McLean, 2010). This can
be seen as a lexical form of “alignment” (Garrod &
Pickering, 2004; Pickering & Garrod, 2004) between
speaker and addressee. Pickering and Garrod argue that
alignment may take place on all levels of interaction, and
indeed it has been shown that participants also align, for
example, their intonation patterns and syntactic structures.
Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010, 2012) have shown that a
similar kind of adaptation can take place at the conceptual
level of attributes. While the Incremental Algorithm and its
ilk only predict the use of dispreferred attributes when
preferred attributes alone are unable to uniquely identify a
given target object, Goudbeek and Krahmer showed that
participants do use dispreferred attributes when these were
used earlier in an interaction. In particular, they found that
when one dialogue partner used a dispreferred attribute to
refer to an object, the other dialogue partner was more likely
to use values of that attribute in subsequent references as
well. For example, in the furniture domain used in their
experiments, participants could always uniquely identify an
object by using its color (e.g., the green chair1) or its
orientation (the chair seen from the front). Of these two
attributes, color is the preferred one, in the sense that
1

Here and elsewhere we provide English translations of Dutch
originals.

1066

without prior context speakers are more likely to use color
than orientation, as was firmly established independently for
Dutch (Koolen, Gatt, Goudbeek, & Krahmer, 2011) and
English (van Deemter, Gatt, van der Sluis, & Power, 2012).
Yet, Goudbeek and Krahmer found that when the
participants had been exposed to descriptions such as the
chair seen from the front, they were themselves more likely
to use the dispreferred orientation attribute in their own
references, despite the fact that using color would have been
perfectly sufficient. Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010, 2012)
established these effects in two different referential domains
(people and furniture).
Crucially, Goudbeek and Krahmer suggest that their
findings cannot be explained in terms of lexical alignment:
participants were primed, for instance, with seen from the
front, while the target was facing left. They argue that
instead they found evidence for what they call “conceptual
alignment”, where participants align at the level of attributes
(such as orientation) and not values (such as seen from the
side). However, two potential criticisms could be levelled
against this claim: first, in their experiments, participants
interacted with a computer rather than with another
participant, and it is conceivable that this influenced the
conclusions; and second, given that primes and targets were
always referred to using Dutch descriptions, the possibility
that some, possibly indirect, form of lexical alignment
influences the results cannot be discarded. In this paper, we
address these two criticisms.
The first question we therefore ask is to what extent the
results obtained with participants interacting with a
computer, using a procedure in which participants had to
repeatedly listen to a prerecorded description and respond
with a description in front of a computer screen, are
representative for human-human interaction. While using a
computer-based paradigm offers several advantages in an
experimental context (especially concerning controllability),
Branigan et al. (2010) point out some dangers in drawing
conclusions about alignment in human-human interactions
from human-computer interactions (HCI). They indicate that
alignment in the latter kind of interactions is mainly based
on considerations of communicative success, the speaker’s
model of the computer and what they think the computer
might or might not be able to know. Such considerations
can override strong linguistic preferences, which Branigan
and colleagues interpret as signs of HCI not always being a
reliable predictor of real interactions between humans.
Branigan et al. (2010) also argue that alignment in HCI is
potentially stronger than alignment in interactions between
humans; humans, they reason, may have doubts about the
communicative capabilities of computers, and hence might
be more inclined to adapt to the computer. This suggests
that the previous findings of Goudbeek and Krahmer could
have overstated the amount of alignment in interactive
referring expression generation.
On the other hand, one could also argue that the
participants in these studies did not strictly engage in
human-computer interaction, but rather could be argued to

be interacting with an “imaginary audience”. Various recent
studies, including Ferreira, Slevc and Rogers (2005) and
Van der Wege (2009), have shown that there generally are
only small differences between referring for a real and an
imagined audience. References produced by participants are
not more precise when they are interacting with a real
instead of an imaginary addressee (Van Der Wege, 2009)
nor do participants avoid potential ambiguities in their
references more when they are speaking to a real addressee
(Ferreira et al., 2005).
Ultimately, however, this an empirical question, which
we address in Study 1. In this study, we attempt to replicate
the previous findings from Goudbeek and Krahmer with
human dialogue partners. Here, participants took part in an
otherwise identical interactive alignment paradigm, the only
difference being that instead of with a computer,
participants communicated with another person which
(unbeknownst to them) was a confederate of the
experimenter. The participants and the confederate took
turns in referring to objects and identifying objects based on
the descriptions produced by their dialogue partner. As in
the original paradigm of Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010),
participants could always use either a preferred or a
dispreferred attribute to refer to an object, and depending on
the condition, the confederate either included a preferred or
a dispreferred attribute when referring to an object. We
compute the amount of alignment, and compare it with the
amount of alignment observed in the earlier, computerbased study.
The second question we address in this paper is to what
extent the alignment observed in the referential tasks indeed
occurs at the conceptual level. In Levelt’s model of speech
production (Levelt, 1989; 1999), the conceptual level is the
level at which the speaker decides which information to put
into an utterance. In contrast to lexical alignment, where the
use of sofa by one dialogue partner may trigger the switch
from couch to sofa in the other partner, conceptual
alignment refers to alignment with respect to the attribute
and not necessarily with the value used by the speaker. In
the previous experiments, there certainly was no direct
relation between the attribute value of the prime and that of
the target (and the prime and target were always separated
by a pair of unrelated fillers). Nevertheless, it could be that
attribute values occurring elsewhere in the experiment as
primes somehow lexically primed values over longer
distances, or that some other form of lexical or syntactic
alignment played a role in one way or another.
To more directly test the claim of conceptual alignment, a
crosslinguistic version of the interactive alignment paradigm
was devised, inspired by earlier crosslinguistic priming
experiments (e.g., Loebell, & Bock, 2003; Schoonbaert,
Hartsuiker, & Pickering, 2007). In this experiment,
described as Study 2, bilingual participants are exposed to
primes in English (the chair seen from the side), and
subsequently have to describe (after two fillers items) a
target in Dutch (e.g., de stoel van voren; English (literally)
“the chair from the front”). If Dutch participants align

1067

equally frequent with English as with Dutch primes, this
would be further, and arguably more compelling evidence
for conceptual alignment, since lexical and syntactic
priming are relatively less likely between two different
languages, even when they are relatively similar as Dutch
and English (Schoonbaert et al., 2007). Again, we compare
the amount of alignment when primes are in Dutch (as in the
original studies) with the amount of alignment when primes
are in English.

Table 1: The attributes and their possible values.
Attribute
type
color
orientation

Possible values
chair, desk, fan, sofa, television
red, green, blue, grey, black
front, back, side

Procedure Participants took part in an interactive
understanding and referring task, closely modelled on the
paradigm presented in Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010). In
this study, however, participants interacted with a female
confederate (a student of the same age as the participants)
instead of with a computer. The experiment consisted of two
blocks, each featuring 30 trials3. During block one, the
confederate systematically used preferred attributes when
referring to furniture items (e.g., the green chair), during
block two, the confederate systematically used dispreferred
attributes (e.g., the chair seen from the front). The order of
blocks was counterbalanced across participants. In every
trial, participants first had to listen to the confederate
describing a critical target (to which we refer as the prime),
who referred to one of three pieces of furniture, which
participants subsequently had to identify on their screen.
After doing so, the next slide of images (three persons)
appeared for both participant and confederate, and the
participant had to describe a filler target from the person
domain to the confederate, who identified it on her screen.
Third, the confederate would describe a filler target (again
from the people domain). In the fourth turn, the participant
described a critical target that could be described with a
preferred or dispreferred attribute (or both) to the
confederate. Figure 1 shows an example of a critical trial.

Study 1: Artificial vs. Human Partner
This first experiment tests whether the finding of Goudbeek
and Krahmer (2010), that people align with their interaction
partner by using a dispreferred target attribute in their
referring expressions, also holds when the interaction
partner is a real person rather than a computer.

Method
Participants 29 Students (23 female) from Tilburg
University participated in this experiment, either for partial
course credit or a small payment. All participants were
fluent speakers of the Dutch language, and had normal
hearing and normal (or corrected to normal) vision. None
had participated in one of the earlier studies of Goudbeek
and Krahmer (2010; 2012).
Materials The stimulus material for this study consisted of
a set of furniture images and images of people, which have
frequently been used in previous research on the production
of referring expressions (e.g., van Deemter et al., 2012) and
which where also used in Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010;
2012)2. The target images were always one of five different
furniture items, which varied in both color and orientation.
An overview of the possible combinations is provided in
Table 1.
The pictures from the people domain (all black and
white photographs of famous mathematicians) served as
filler images, and were included to distract participants’
attention from the goal of this study. Target images were
always presented together with two distractors from the
same domain, and were shown to participants on two
synchronized monitors, to ensure that the set up was
identical for the confederate and participant, in order to not
raise any suspicions about the confederate with the
participants. Targets could always be distinguished both in
terms of color (preferred) and in terms of orientation
(dispreferred). That color information is preferred and
orientation information is not was determined independently
from corpus data for Dutch and English (van Deemter et al.,
2012; Koolen et al., 2011), showing that speakers frequently

2

use color spontaneously and that they rarely use orientation
when referring to the furniture items under study here.

Figure 1. Example of a critical trial. The target is
indicated by a red border and can be distinguished both in
terms of its color (blue) or its orientation (facing left).

The pictures of furniture items were taken from the Object
Databank, developed by Michael Tarr at Brown University and are
freely distributed. URL:
http://titan.cog.brown.edu:8080/TarrLab/stimuli/objects/

The use of a confederate was motivated from the fact
that participants were unlikely to systematically use
dispreferred properties, which would hinder a direct
comparison with the results of Goudbeek and Krahmer
(2010; 2012). The confederate was instructed to engage in
each interaction and ask questions when participants
provided insufficient information to identify a target. After
3

The order of the trials within a block was the same for every
participant

1068

Study 2: Crosslingual priming

the experiment participants were debriefed. None suspected
the other person to be a confederate.

Results
The number of times participants aligned with the attribute
they were primed with was used as the dependent variable.
This includes cases in which participants used an
overspecified referring expression, where both preferred and
dispreferred attributes of the target where used by the
participant, even though only one of them would suffice for
the purpose of identification.
The analysis focuses on the proportional use of
dispreferred attributes (orientation) when participants are
exposed to dispreferred primes (note that when participants
use a preferred prime, i.e., color, we cannot tell whether
they used it because it is preferred or because it was
primed). The results show that with dispreferred primes, the
proportion of dispreferred attributes used by participants is
considerable (M = 0.41, SD = 0.46). Contrary to the
predictions of the Incremental Algorithm, the proportion of
dispreferred attributes is significantly larger than zero; t(28)
= 4.82, p < .001.
To investigate whether it matters if participants were
interacting with a computer or a real person, the data of
Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010) was compared with the data
from the current experiment. Figure 2 displays the
proportion of alignment of the participants who had been
interacting with a computer (M = 0.53, SD = 0.43) and those
of who interacted with a confederate (M = 0.41, SD = 0.46).
A one-way analysis of variance with interaction partner
(computer versus confederate) as the independent variable
and proportion of alignment as the dependent variable
showed no significant difference between interacting with a
computer and interaction with a human F(1,48) = 2.20, p =
.14).
Study 1 revealed that participants have a strong tendency
to align with their conversation partner; when their partner
uses a dispreferred attribute (referring to a piece of furniture
in terms of its orientation) they are more likely to do so
themselves later on. Whether their conversation partner is a
computer of person has no significant influence.

The second study aims to find more conclusive evidence for
the claim that the kind of alignment under discussion here
takes place at the conceptual level, rather than the
realization one. This is addressed using a cross-language
priming experiment, where bilingual participants are not
primed in their native Dutch, but in English. They do have
to refer in Dutch, however, as in the previous experiment.

Method
Participants 40 Students (31 female) participated in this
experiment in exchange for partial course credit. All were
unbalanced bilinguals, namely native Dutch speakers with
formal instruction in English for 7 years or more. All had
normal hearing and (corrected to normal) vision. None had
participated in Study 1 or in any of the other studies
described in Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010; 2012).
Materials The stimuli were identical to those described in
Study 1, except that primes were now pre-recorded
descriptions produced by a native English speaker (of
roughly the same age as the participants), that referred to the
objects (e.g., the chair seen from the left) with the same
preferred and dispreferred attributes (colour and orientation,
respectively) as before.
Procedure Before starting the experiment, participants were
told they had to identify pre-recorded descriptions provided
by an English speaker but had to describe the objects
themselves in Dutch. In this experiment, following
Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010), descriptions were once
again produced by a computer, which was warranted by the
findings of Study 1. The remainder of the procedure was
identical to that of the previously described study.

Results
As in Study 1, the number of times participants aligned with
the dispreferred attribute when this attribute was used earlier
in the interaction was used as the dependent measure. If this
alignment indeed takes place on the conceptual level, it
should not matter whether primes were in English or in
Dutch. If, however, the alignment that participants’ showed
in Krahmer and Goudbeek (2010) was of a lexical or
syntactic nature, we predict that people in this study will
align not or to a lesser extent with the dispreferred primes,
since the linguistic realization of the prime and the target
differ considerably.
Figure 3 shows the use of color (the preferred attribute)
and orientation (the dispreferred attribute) for each prime
type. Clearly, when participants were primed with the
dispreferred attribute orientation, they start using that
attribute themselves more often (and the color-attribute
less).

Figure 2. The proportion of alignment in humancomputer and in human-human interaction

1069

Discussion

Figure 3. Participants’ proportional use of the
preferred and dispreferred attribute following
preferred and dispreferred primes.
Statistical analysis of the data shows that despite the
primes being in English, people still use the dispreferred
attribute orientation significantly more than zero with t(39)
= 7.29, p < .001, contrary to the prediction of the
Incremental Algorithm. Moreover, participants used the
dispreferred target attribute more often when they had been
primed with a dispreferred attribute than when they had
been primed with a preferred attribute, F(39) = 10.92, p <
.005.
Furthermore, a comparison was made between the current
data and the data that was collected through the experiment
conducted by Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010) to test whether
the language of the primes influenced the level of
alignment. The results of this comparison are depicted in
Figure 4. A statistical analysis showed no significant effect
of the language of the primes on the amount of alignment
with the dispreferred target attribute, with t(57) = 0.83, p =
0.41. Given that the experimental set-up was exactly the
same, apart from the manipulation of the primes (English
here, Dutch in the earlier study), this shows that the
language of the prime has no impact on the amount of
alignment with the dispreferred attribute, which we take as
further evidence for the claim that the kind of alignment
observed here is conceptual rather than lexical.

Figure 4. A comparison of the amount of alignment with
the dispreferred attribute as a function of the language of the
prime.

In this paper, we studied how speakers refer to objects in an
interactive setting, and how this influences speakers’
decision of which attributes to include in a description. In
both studies, we found that speakers have a strong tendency
to use dispreferred attributes in their descriptions when
these were used earlier in the interaction, even though there
was always the possibility to rely only on a preferred
attribute. These results replicate the earlier findings of
Goudbeek and Krahmer (2010; 2012), and extend them in
two important directions.
The results of the first study show that alignment between
humans is statistically indistinguishable from alignment
between humans and computers. This indicates that the use
of a pre-recorded conversation partner in the earlier studies
did not influence the results, and is in line with the claims
from Ferreira et al. (2005) and van der Wege (2009) that
referring for an “imaginary audience” is similar to referring
for a real audience. The results of the second study show
that participants which are primed with dispreferred
attributes in English, use these attributes to the same extent
in their descriptions in Dutch as participants that were
primed with dispreferred attributes in Dutch. This strongly
suggests that the kind of alignment under study here is
conceptual, rather than lexical or syntactic. What seems to
be primed is a way to conceptualize or look at an object (in
terms of orientation rather than color, for instance), rather
than a specific property (such as facing left or being blue).
It is interesting to contrast the current findings with the
predictions of state-of-the-art computational models for
Referring Expression Generation (REG), including the
Incremental Algorithm (Dale & Reiter, 1995) as well as
more recent extensions and variations of these models.
Generally, these models fail to account for the alignment
results presented here; the Incremental Algorithm, for
instance, predicts that a dispreferred attribute would never
be used if a preferred attribute is sufficient to uniquely
characterize a target object. The basic problem is that these
algorithms treat the decision of which attributes to include
in a description as a decision that can be made independent
of context, and hence does not need to take into account the
reference history, something which our data clearly
contradict.
To make these algorithms suitable for the generation of
referring expressions in interactive settings (as is required
for many applications), they should become more sensitive
to the preceding interaction and the references that were
produced in it. For the Incremental Algorithm, this could be
achieved, for example, by combining the (fixed, domain
dependent) list of preferred attributes with a (flexible) list of
“previously mentioned” attributes. The relative weighting of
these two lists can be estimated based on data such as those
presented here.
Gatt, Goudbeek and Krahmer (2011) go one step further,
proposing a new model for alignment in reference
production that integrates alignment and preference order

1070

based attribute selection. Their model consists of two
parallel processes: a preference-based search process based
on the Incremental Algorithm, and an alignment-based
process. These two processes run concurrently and compete
to contribute attributes to a limited capacity working
memory buffer that will produce the referring expression.
Gatt et al. (2011) show that their model can account for the
alignment findings well.

Conclusion
When producing referring expressions in interactive
settings, speakers have a strong tendency to re-use attributes
that were used before, even if these attributes are otherwise
dispreferred. The frequency with which dispreferred
attributes are re-used does not depend on whether the
interaction is with a computer or with another person, nor on
whether the preceding primes where produced in a different
language or not. Taken together, these results suggest that
the alignment is automatic, and of a conceptual nature.
Current state-of-the-art computational models of reference
production fail to account for this, since they tend to be
“addressee-blind” and mostly rely on domain-dependent
preferences only.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper forms part of the VICI
project “Bridging the gap between psycholinguistics and
Computational linguistics: the case of referring
expressions”, funded by the Netherlands Organization for
Scientiﬁc Research (NWO grant 277-70-007). We thank
Manon Yassa for serving as the confederate in Study 1 and
Elsa Jonker for assistance in running Study 2.

References
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., Pearson, J., & McLean, J.
F. (2010). Linguistic alignment between people and
computers. Journal of Pragmatics, 42(9), 2355-2368.
Clark, Herbert H., & Bangerter, A. (2004). Changing ideas
about reference. In Ira A. Noveck and Dan Sperber,
editors, Experimental Pragmatics. Palgrave Macmillan,
Basingstoke, pages 25–49.
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretations
of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring
expressions. Cognitive Science, 19(2), 233-263.
van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van der Sluis, I., & Power, R.
(2012). Generation of Referring Expressions: Assessing
the Incremental Algorithm. Cognitive Science, in press.
Ferreira, V. S., Slevc, L. R., & Rogers, E. S. (2005). How
do speakers avoid ambiguous linguistic expressions?
Cognition, 96(3), 263–284.
Garrod, S. & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8–11.
Gatt, A., M. Goudbeek and E. Krahmer (2011). Attribute
preference and priming in reference production:

Experimental evidence and computational modeling.
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2011), July 20-23,
Boston, Massachusetts, 2627-2632.
Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2010). Preferences versus
adaptation during referring expression generation.
Proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). July
2010, Uppsala, Sweden, 55-59.
Goudbeek, M., & E. Krahmer (2012). Alignment in
interactive reference production: Content planning,
modifier ordering and referential overspecification.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 269-289.
Koolen, R., Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2011).
Factors causing overspecification in definite descriptions.
Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 3231-3250.
Krahmer, E., & van Deemter, K. (2012). Computational
Generation of Referring Expressions: A Survey.
Computational Linguistics, 38(1), 173-218.
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levelt, W. (1999). Producing spoken language: A blueprint
of the speaker. In C. Brown & P. Hagoort (red.), The
Neurocognition of Language (p. 83-122). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Loebell, H., & Bock, K. (2003). Structural priming across
languages. Linguistics, 41, 791-824
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 89–110.
Pickering, M. & Garrod, S. (2004). Towards a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioural and Brain Sciences,
27, 169–226.
Poesio, M., & Vieira R. (1998). A corpus–based
investigation of definite description use. Computational
Linguistics, 24, 183–216.
Schoonbaert, S., Hartsuiker, R., & Pickering, M.J. (2007).
The representation of lexical and syntactic information in
bilinguals: Evidence from syntactic priming. Journal of
Memory and Language, 56, 153-171.
van der Wege, M. M. (2009). Lexical entrainment and
lexical differentiation in reference phrase choice. Journal
of Memory and Language, 60, 448-463.

1071

