UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Connectionist Model Accounting for Retardation of Cognitive-Dissonance Reduction Caused
by Attention-Focus Switching

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3rs880hk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Matsumoto, Takao

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Connectionist Model Accounting for Retardation of Cognitive-Dissonance
Reduction Caused by Attention-Focus Switching
Takao Matsumoto (matsumoto@c.dendai.ac.jp)
Tokyo Denki University
5 Senju-Asahi-cho, Adachi-ku, Tokyo 120-8551, Japan

Abstract
A novel connectionist model accounting for cognitive
dissonance is described, in which the concepts of self and
attention are considered. The model makes it possible to use
mathematical formulas to represent the cognitive-dissonance
process. Analysis reveals that the model fits experimental data
of major paradigms in cognitive dissonance theory and that
attention-focus switching causes building-up of cognitive
dissonance and retardation of its reduction.
Keywords: cognitive dissonance; connectionist model;
attention; self-concept; mathematical analysis

Introduction
Cognitive dissonance theory insists that dissonance is a
psychological state of tension that people are motivated to
reduce (Festinger, 1957). Dissonance causes feelings of
discomfort, unhappiness, or distress. Any two cognitions are
dissonant when one of them follows from the obverse of the
other. To reduce dissonance, people add consonant
cognitions or change evaluations for one or both cognitions
to make them more consistent.
Cognitive dissonance theory makes a clear prediction
when a firm expectancy is involved as one of the cognitions
in question (Aronson, 1969). A well-known example of this
is the famous Aesop’s fable “The fox and the grapes.” In the
story, a fox wanted to get some grapes hanging high on
vines and leaped with effort, but couldn’t get them. Walking
away, the fox said, “The grapes are surely sour, and I do not
need them.” Since the expectation and experience were
inconsistent, the fox had cognitive dissonance, which he
reduced by convincing himself that the expectation was not
appropriate.
Shultz and Lepper (1996) proposed a connectionist model
accounting specifically for the mechanism of cognitive
dissonance. A constraint satisfaction neural network model
was used to simulate data from the several major cognitive
dissonance paradigms (Shultz, Leveille, & Lepper, 1999). In
it weights between nodes are fixed and activations of units
are changed. Dissonance is defined by a formula that is a
function of activations of units and weights applied to links
in the network. Networks tend to settle into a less dissonant
state as activations of units are changed according to update
rules. Another connectionist model was proposed by Van
Overwalle and colleagues (2002, 2005). They represented
attitudes in a feed-forward neural network with the deltalearning rule in which weights are allowed to change. Input
nodes represent the features of the environment and two

output ports represent behavior and affect. Dissonance is
defined as the discrepancy between expected and actual
outcomes. They also simulated the experimental results of
major cognitive dissonance paradigms. Several other
computational models have been reported that deal with
attitude phenomena through simulation using constraintsatisfaction or non-constraint-satisfaction networks (Mosler
et al., 2001; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; Read & Miller; 1994;
Spellman, Ullman, & Holyoak, 1993).
People are motivated to prioritize to protect their selfsystem. Self-consistency theory (Aronson, 1969; Thibodeau
and Aronson, 1992) emphasizes that self is involved in
dissonance arousal and that not only cognitions but also
self-concept need to be considered in discussing dissonance.
Judgment and assessment for cognitions performed by self
possibly become motives for arousal of cognitive
dissonance.
On the other hand, attention is an important phenomenon
of information processing in cognitive systems (Pisapia,
Repovs, & Braver, 2008). It is a function for selecting and
enhancing a limited area of information, while suppressing
other areas. Cognitions are included in these areas of
information.
To the author’s knowledge, connectionist models for
cognitive dissonance taking the concepts of self and
attention into account have not been presented. In this paper,
a novel model considering these concepts is described and
reduction of cognitive dissonance based on the model is
discussed.

Connectionist Model
Figure 1 shows our connectionist model accounting for
cognitive dissonance. In accordance with the cognitive
dissonance theory (Festinger, 1957), two cognitions are
adopted in the model, which are depicted as units R and I.
We assume that unit R is a reality-based cognition such as
the cognition of behavior, experience, or actual situation,
while unit I is an imagination-based cognition such as the
cognition of expectancy, hope, or belief. In the case of the
previously mentioned fable, the imagination-based
cognition held by the fox is “The grapes can stave off my
hunger” and the reality-based cognition is “The grapes do
not stave off my hunger.”
Attention plays an important role in cognitive systems. It
selects and enhances limited cognitions and suppresses
others. If we consider two cognitions alone, when one of
them is selected and enhanced, the other is rejected and

1978

+ 1
xR = 
− 1

R
Attention

wIR = -1
Switching

wRS
S

wRI = -1
I

of all elements for a cognition is assumed to be the
evaluation of the cognition. In our connectionist model,
such an evaluation of cognition is represented by the weight
of the link between the unit of the cognition and that of self.
If the cognition is attractive for self, the evaluation or
weight is positive, and if not, negative. The links are
assumed to be unidirectional with directions from units R
and I to unit S. The weight of the link between units R and S
is wRS and that between units I and S is wIS. These weights
take values between -1 and +1.
When we respectively represent the activation levels of
units R, I, and S by xR, xI, and xS, the model’s cognitive
dissonance can be described according to the definition
given by Shultz and Lepper (1996) as follows:

for attentive state 1
for attentive state 2

xS = +1

wIS

− 1 for attentive state 1
xI = 
+ 1 for attentive state 2

Figure 1: Connectionist model adopting the concepts of
attention and self.

CD = (2 xR xI − wRS xR xS − wIS xI xS ) / 4 .

suppressed. Thus, the units of these cognitions perform a
bistable operation. In order to achieve this operation, the
units must be bidirectionally connected through links having
negative weights as shown in Figure 1 (Rojas, 1996). In our
model, to simplify the discussion, it is assumed that the
activation level of units R and I is “+1” or “-1”, which
correspond respectively to excited and inhibited state, and
the weights between the units, i.e., wRI and wIR, are -1. The
bistable operation is determined by inputs to the unit pair
applied through some additional links connected to the unit
pair. The inputs’ condition depends on the attentive state.
Since attention is usually focused on the cognition of unit R,
the bistable operation is not perfectly symmetrical. There
might be some bias difference between the inputs to the unit
pair. In order to pick up the elements closely related to
cognitive dissonance, such additional links are excluded
from Figure 1.
Aronson (1969) emphasized that dissonance theory can
make the clearest prediction of cognitive dissonance when
we deal with the self-concept and cognitions about some
behavior. Self is regarded as the key for arousing cognitive
dissonance. In accordance with this view, we introduce a
unit corresponding to self in our connectionist model, which
is depicted as unit S in Figure 1.
Self is a complex system in which cognitive and affective
elements are integrated. It is extremely difficult to
rigorously represent the self in a simple connectionist model.
Here, we assume that self is characterized by static
equilibrium, in which there is resistance to incoming
information that would change the status of elements
(Nowak et al., 2000), and that, as pointed out in many
studies of cognitive dissonance, people have a high or
positive self-concept. Thus, we boldly introduce a single
unit for self whose activation level is constant and takes a
value of +1.
Cognition is composed of several elements having
different attributes, each of which is related to the self with
some evaluation given by the person. Cumulative evaluation

(1)

Focus of attention determines the state of the bistable
operation of the unit pair composed of units R and I. We
define attentive state 1 as the state in which attention is
focused on the cognition of unit R and (xR, xI) = (+1, -1),
while attentive state 2 is defined as the state in which
attention is focused on the cognition of unit I and (xR, xI) =
(-1, +1). Using Equation (1) and the previously-mentioned
assumption that xS = +1, cognitive dissonances for the two
states are described as
(w − wRS − 2) / 4 , for attentive state 1,
CD =  IS
(wRS − wIS − 2) / 4 , for attentive state 2.

(2)

Analysis of Evaluation Change
In neural networks, the weight of a connection between two
neurons changes according to the activation condition of the
neurons. When the two neurons are excited simultaneously,
the weight of the link between them increases and when
they are not decreases. We assume that the weights in our
connectionist model perform similarly to those of neural
networks. The modified Hebbian learning rule presented by
Oja (1982) incorporates the saturation characteristics of
neurons into the original Hebbian rule. It represents the
changes in weight as a function of the activation levels of
input and output units, the weight between them, and a
constant representing the learning rate during a time interval
(O’Reilly & Munakata, 2000).
When we assume that the time interval is infinitesimal,
the rule can be represented by the following differential
equation:

(

)

dw
= ε ′ xy − y 2 w ,
dt

(3)

where ε ’ is a constant representing the learning rate during
a unit time interval.
In order to consider the behavior of wRS we substitute wRS
for w in Equation (3). Since x = xR = +1 and y = xS = +1 for

1979

attentive state 1 and x = xR = -1 and y = xS = +1 for attentive
state 2, we obtain general solutions of Equation(3) as
follows:

5.23 6.19
5.98

3.54
− ε ′t

 K1e + 1 , for attentive state 1,
wRS = 
 K 2e −ε ′t − 1 , for attentive state 2.

Experiment
1
(Brehm,1956)

(4)

For wIS, similar to the above, we can derive following
solutions:

Theory

-1

2

3

4

5

-0.5

0

 K 3e − 1
wIS = 
 K 4e −ε ′t + 1

, for attentive state 1,
, for attentive state 2.

7

+0.5

8

+1

+0.42

-0.27
− ε ′t

6

(wRS)

(wIS)

(5)

+0.21 +0.48
(wIS)

(wRS)

: Easy decision
: Difficult decision

K1, K2, K3, and K4 are constants determined by initial
conditions. Since the weights represent evaluations as
previously mentioned, Equations (4) and (5) represent the
time dependence of evaluations for cognitions R and I.

Figure 2 : Correspondence of the initial values of
evaluation.

Comparison with Experimental Results

1980

Evaluation change

0.4

Chosen item

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

Rejected item

-0.8
Difficult
decision

Easy
decision

(a) Experiment (Brehm, 1956)

Evaluation (weight) change

To confirm the validity of our connectionist model and
analysis, here we take up the free-choice paradigm as the
first example, and compare theoretical results of our
analysis and experimental results reported in the literature.
In an experiment carried out by Brehm(1956), subjects were
asked to rate each of a variety of items on desirability. They
were next required to make a difficult choice, i.e., a choice
between two items that they had rated high, or an easy
choice, i.e., a choice between one item they had rated high
and one they had rated low. The chosen items were given to
the subjects who then rated them again. The experimenter
measured the differences between the first and second
ratings.
Applying our model to the experiment, we regard units R
and I as the chosen and rejected items, respectively. This is
because after a choice is made, its result is the reality for the
subject and the chosen item becomes the element of the
reality-based cognition, while the rejected item becomes
that of the imagination-based cognition. Weights wRS and
wIS are evaluations of the two items. We assume that the
choice is carried out at ε’t = 0. Weights’ initial values at ε’t
= 0 used in our theoretical examination are presented in
Figure 2. The theoretical values are determined by making
their maximum and minimum possible values, i.e., +1.0 and
-1.0, correspond to the experimental maximum and
minimum evaluations used in rating, i.e., 8 and 1,
respectively. The values in the experiment and those in the
theory are linearly related, and their correspondence is
schematically shown in Figure 2. Since we consider the
situation on the basis of reality, transitions of the weights or
evaluations are calculated for attentive state 1.
Figure 3 shows our theoretical results at ε’t = 0.7 as well
as the experimental data reported by Brehm(1956). Our
theoretical results show that for both the difficult and easy

0.4

Chosen item (wRS)

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

Rejected item (wIS)

-0.8
Difficult
decision

Easy
decision

(b) Theory based on our model at ε’t = 0.7
Figure 3: Evaluation change in free-choice paradigm.

choices, wRS increases and wIS decreases, i.e., the separation
between them increases, with the increase of time after the
choice. The degree of separation increase is substantial for
the difficult choice. Our results in Figure 3(b) are similar to
the experimental data depicted in Figure 3(a).
We take up the insufficient-justification paradigm as the
second example. In an experiment carried out by Freedman
(1965), school children were forbidden to play with a
desirable toy under either a mild or severe threat and the
experimenter either stayed in or left the room while the
children played. Actual play with the previously forbidden
toy later indicated that derogation was greater under the
mild than under the severe threat conditions only when there
was no surveillance.
Applying our model to this experiment, we assume that
units R and I are respectively the cognitions “I do not play
with the toy” and “I play with the toy”. This is because,
since the children are forbidden to play with the toy and are
ordered to obey the directions, their reality-based cognition
is “I do not play with the toy.” Weights wRS and wIS are
respectively evaluations for not playing with and playing
with the toy.
Here, we assume that weight wIS is a compound of three
subweights w0(t), wt, and ws as shown in Figure 4. The
intrinsic evaluation given by the subject for the cognition of
unit I is w0(t) ( − 1 ≤ w0 (t ) ≤ 1 ). Since the evaluation may
change, it is represented by a function of t. The subweights
wt and ws are additional weights caused respectively by the
effects of threat and surveillance. Since the effects are
independent of time, wt and ws are constants.
As mentioned above, we assume that the weights are
bounded and take values between -1 and +1. Thus, we
represent wIS as follows:
 w0 (t ) + wt + w s , for − 1 ≤ w 0 ( t ) + wt + w s ≤ + 1 ,

w IS =  − 1,
for w0 ( t ) + wt + w s < − 1 ,
(6)
 + 1,
for w0 (t ) + wt + w s > + 1 .

Considering the situation on the basis of reality, we
assume the attentive state is 1. Since threat and surveillance
are unpleasant for the subject and thus function as negative
elements of the cognition represented by unit I, we assume

w0(t)
S

I
wt

wIS

ws

Figure 4: Weights in the connection between units I and
S for insufficient-justification paradigm.

Table 1: Weights used in the theory for insufficientjustification paradigm.
Non-surveillance

Surveillance

Mild threat

w0 (0) = +1.0
wt = -0.2
ws = 0

w0 (0) = +1.0
wt = -0.2
ws = -2.0

Severe threat

w0 (0) = +1.0
wt = -1.8
ws = 0

w0 (0) = +1.0
wt = -1.8
ws = -2.0

wt < 0 and ws < 0 . Applying Equation (6) to the theory
described in the previous section, we obtain
for w0 (0) + wt + ws < −1,
w0 (0),

w0(t) = (w0 (0) + wt + ws +1) e− ε t −wt −ws −1,

for w0 (0) + wt + ws ≥ −1 .

'

(7)

Table 1 presents the values of the weights (evaluations)
used in our theoretical examination. Since the toy might be
very attractive for the subjects, we assume that w0(0) takes
the maximum value, i.e., +1.0. As surveillance seems to be
effective for forbidding and induce highly negative feeling
in the subject, the absolute value of ws under surveillance is
assumed to be large so that wIS takes the minimum value, i.e.,
-1.0.
Transitions of the weights or evaluations are calculated
for attentive state 1. Figure 5 shows our theoretical results
for w0(t) at ε’t = 2 as well as the experimental data reported
by Freedman (1965). The theoretical result shown in Figure
5(b) indicates that derogation is greater under the mild than
under the severe threat conditions only when there was no
surveillance, which is similar to Freedman’s experimental
result.

Attention-focus Switching
Here, following the Aesop’s fable, we anticipate a case in
which a person has a certain expectation concerning
something, and he fails to realize it in spite of his effort. The
object of expectation is the cognition of unit I in Figure 1,
and the result of failure is the cognition of unit R. Since the
expected object is attractive for the person and causes
positive feeling, the cognition of unit I is positively
evaluated and thus we assume wIS >0. In contrast, since the
failure result is disagreeable and causes negative feeling, the
cognition of unit R is negatively evaluated and thus we
assume wRS <0. Since cognitive dissonance occurs when we
experience the failure and thus attention is focused on the
cognition of unit R, we consider here the situation in

1981

fable might say after a short time, “I have gotten hungrier. If
I could get the grapes now, even if they were not ripe, I
might eat them and be feeling full now”. In this way, the
focus of attention is switched from reality-based to
imagination-based cognition. However, since one cannot
live on imagination only and must act on the basis of reality,
it is not long before the focus of attention is switched back
to reality-based cognition. Thus, we assume here that the
focus of attention is switched and the attentive state is
changed such that 1 → 2 → 1.
Transitions of evaluation and cognitive dissonance under
such switching are calculated and depicted by the solid lines
in Figure 6. In the first period of 0 ≤ ε’t < 0.1, where the
attentive state is 1, cognitive dissonance is monotonically
reduced with the increase of ε’t. At ε’t = 0.1, the focus of
attention is switched to the cognition of unit I and cognitive
dissonance is reduced stepwise. During the period of 0.1 ≤
ε’t < 0.15, where the attentive state is 2, reduction of
cognitive dissonance continues with a small reduction rate.
At ε’t = 0.15, the focus of attention is switched back to the
cognition of unit R. Cognitive dissonance is then built up
stepwise and takes an amount greater than would be taken
when switching is not performed at all. After that, attentive
state 1 is retained and monotonical reduction of cognitive

Surveillance

0.7
Proportion playing

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

Non - surveillance

0.2
Mild

Severe
Threat

Evaluation (weight) of playing, w0

(a) Experiment (Freedman, 1965)

1.0

Surveillance

0.5
0
-0.5
Non - surveillance
-1.0
Severe

Mild
Threat

1
Evaluation (weight)

(b) Theory based on our model at ε’t = 2.0
Figure 5: Evaluation change in insufficient-justification
paradigm.

0

wRS

-0.5

with attention-focus switching
without attention-focus switching

-1

0

0.1

ε’t

0.2

0.3

(a) Change in evaluation with increase of time.
0
Cognitive dissonance

attentive state 1. Assuming that, as an example, wIS = +0.6
and wRS = -0.4 are the initial conditions at ε ′t = 0 , we can
obtain wIS, wRS, and cognitive dissonance (CD) at ε ′t ≥ 0 by
using Equations (2), (4), and (5), which are shown by the
dotted lines in Figure 6. The abscissa is ε’t, which is a
parameter proportional to the time passed after the person
made the trial and failed.
The decrease of wIS and increase of wRS with the increase
of time shown in Figure 6(a) indicate adaptation or
rationalization of the person under cognitive dissonance. In
accordance with these changes, CD is reduced with the
increase of time as shown in Figure 6(b). Such changes
appeared in wIS, wRS, and CD corresponds to the
phenomenon predicted by the cognitive dissonance theory
(Festinger, 1957).
Conventional research on cognitive dissonance does not
seem to have amply discussed the effect of attention. Since
the occurrence of cognitive dissonance induces unpleasant
feeling, the person mentioned above might strive to reduce
it. He might recall the expectation and imagine the result
that could be obtained in success of his trial. The fox in the

wIS
0.5

1982

with attention-focus switching
without attention-focus switching

-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

Retardation of
reduction

-0.8
-1
0

0.1

ε’ t

0.2

0.3

(b) Change in cognitive dissonance with increase of time.
Figure 6: Changes in evaluation and cognitive dissonance
under attention-focus switching.

dissonance continues. Consequently, attention-focus
switching causes retardation of cognitive-dissonance
reduction as shown in Figure 6(b), which induces lingering
of unpleasant feeling or discomfort. If the switching is
frequently repeated, cognitive dissonance remains for a long
time.
The well-known saying “What’s done is done” might
imply that it is not worth worrying about an unfavorable
situation caused by past behavior. It might also warn of the
building-up of cognitive dissonance caused by attentionfocus switching and suggest that attention not be focused on
imagination-based cognition. Another well-known saying,
stated by Dante Alighieri, is that “There is no greater grief
than to recall a time of happiness when in misery.” This
implies that to obtain peace of mind, it is important to focus
one’s attention on the reality and discard the imagination
even if one finds the reality unpleasant. The insistence
common to these sayings might support the results shown in
Figure 6(b).

Conclusion
This paper described a novel connectionist model
accounting for cognitive dissonance, in which the concepts
of self as well as attention-focus switching are adopted. The
model was investigated not with the computer simulation
widely used in conventional research, but with a
mathematical analysis based on a differential equation.
Predictions based on the model were confirmed to coincide
with experimental data reported in the literature. It was
shown that attention-focus switching between reality-based
and imagination-based cognition causes building-up of
cognitive dissonance and retardation of its reduction. This
coincides with the implication of well-known sayings
suggesting ways to keep the mind away from feelings of
suffering or discomfort.

References
Aronson, E. (1969). The theory of cognitive dissonance: A
current perspective. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology, Vol.4, 1-34. NY:
Academic Press.
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision change in the desirability
of alternatives, Journal of abnormal and social
psychology, 52, 384-389.
Festinger, L.(1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Freedman, J. L. (1965). Long-term behavioral effects of
cognitive dissonance. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 1, 145-155.
Mosler, H., Schwartz, K., Ammann, F., & Gutsher, H.
(2001). Computer simulation as a method of further
developing a theory: Simulating the elaboration
likelihood model, Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 5(3)201-215.

Nowak, A., Vallacher, R. R., Tesser, A., & Borkowski W.
(2000). Society of self: The emergence of collective
properties in self-structure. Psychological Review, 107,
39-61.
Oja, E. (1982). A simplified neuron model as a principal
component analyzer. Journal of Mathematical Biology,
15, 267-273.
O’Reilly, R. C., & Munakata, Y. (2000). Computational
explorations in cognitive neuroscience. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and
persuasion. NY: Springer-Verlag.
Pisapia, N. D., Repovs, G., & Braver, T. S. (2008).
Computational models of attention and cognitive control.
In R. Sun (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
computational psychology, NY: Cambridge University
Press.
Read, S. J., & Miller, L.C. (1994). Dissonance and balance
in belief systems: The promise of parallel constraint
satisfaction processes and connectionist modeling
approaches. In R. C. Schank & E. Langer (eds.), Beliefs,
reasoning, and decision-making: Psycho-logic in honor
of Bob Abelson. Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rojas, R. (1996). Neural networks: A systematic
introduction, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Cognitive dissonance
reduction as constraint satisfaction. Psychological Review,
103, 219-240.
Shultz, T. R., Leveille, E. & Lepper, M. R. (1999). Free
choice and cognitive dissonance revisited: Choosing
“Lesser Evils” versus “Greater Goods”. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 40-48.
Spellman, B. A., Ullman, J. B., & Holyoak, K. J. (1993). A
coherence model of cognitive consistency: Dynamics of
attitude change during the Persian Gulf War. Journal of
Social Issues, 49(4), 147-165.
Thibodeau, R. & Aronson, E. (1992). Taking a closer look:
Reasserting the role of the self-concept in dissonance
theory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18,
591-602.
Van Overwalle, F., & Jordan, K. (2002). An adaptive
connectionist model of cognitive dissonance. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 6, 204-231.
Van Overwalle, F., & Siebler, F. (2005). A connectionist
model of attitude formation and change. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 9, 231-274.

1983

