UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conscious and unconscious thought preceding complex decisions: The influence of taking
notes and intelligence.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86j9058v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sevenants, Aline
Daniels, Dieter
Janssens, Leen
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conscious and unconscious thought preceding complex decisions:
The influence of taking notes and intelligence.
Aline Sevenants (aline.sevenants@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Dieter Daniëls (dieter.daniëls@student.kuleuven.be)
Leen Janssens (leen.janssens@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Walter Schaeken (walter.schaeken@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract

believed to have an equal performance, no matter the
difficulty level of the choice. Consciousness, in contrast, is
especially good at making easy choices, even better than
unconsciousness. But as decisions get more complex,
consciousness has more problems with decision making,
thereby performing worse than unconsciousness
(Dijksterhuis et al., 2006) The deliberation-withoutattention hypothesis is drawn from the Unconscious
Thought Theory (UTT; Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006),
which explains the different characteristics of conscious
and unconscious thought.
UTT and the deliberation-without-attention effect
seemed to explain findings in earlier research (e.g., Wilson
& Schooler, 1991; Wilson et al., 1993; Halberstadt &
Levine, 1999). Research by other authors, however, led to
conclusions that cannot be explained by UTT. In Experiment
1 of Thorsteinson and Withrow (2009), participants had to
recall as many attributes as possible, before or after judging
the different choice options. Only when judgement
preceded recall, results provided evidence for the
deliberation-without-attention hypothesis. The authors
argued, however, that by recalling attributes, the
participants in the unconscious-thought condition engaged
in a form of conscious thought. It was also argued that the
weighting principle of UTT is based on a weighted-additive
model (WADD), but that a TALLY-model is used in research
by Dijksterhuis (2004) and Dijksterhuis et al. (2006) to
measure the quality of the choice (Newell et al., 2009). A
weighted-additive model calculates the quality of a choice
by the weight of every attribute, for example, if a cup
holder is less important in a car than a good mileage, the
cup holder should not get as much weight in the calculation
of the quality of the cars. A TALLY-model calculates the
options by simply adding the number of positive attributes.
A cup holder thus has as much influence on the car’s score
as a good mileage.
In order to clarify the contradicting findings in the
literature, a meta-analysis was conducted by Acker (2008),
which showed a large heterogeneity between different
studies. It revealed a small but unconvincing advantage in
favour of unconscious thought. Since different studies led
to other conclusions, more research is needed to clarify
under which conditions unconscious thought can be useful.
Previous research showed that unconscious thought
does not necessarily perform better under certain
circumstances. One specific condition under which
unconscious thought seems to lose its advantages is when
participants are not obligated to rely on their memory when

For many years, research has been done to find the best way
to make decisions. Dijksterhuis and Nordgren (2006)
formulated the Unconscious Thought Theory (UTT), stating
that when making complex decisions it is better not to think
consciously, but to direct your attention elsewhere, letting
the unconscious make the decision. However, a wealth of
research has found evidence against the predictions of UTT.
Thorsteinson and Withrow (2009) found that participants,
who were allowed to take notes during the information
intake stage, made better decisions thinking consciously.
The current study is a replication of Thorsteinson and
Withrow (2009), being a four conditions design (immediate
decision, unconscious thought, conscious thought or
conscious thought with notes) with the addition of
intelligence as a variable. The conclusion of Thorsteinson
and Withrow (2009) is supported: The best complex
decisions are made when participants take notes and use
them while thinking consciously. Moreover, it is shown that
intelligence is positively correlated with better decisions.

Introduction
When you buy a new house or car, you face a complex
decision with many choice options that have different
advantages and disadvantages. There are several ways to
make this decision. You could try to list up all the different
attributes of all the choice options, and think deeply about
which option best suits your needs. Another strategy would
be to make sure you are well informed about the different
options, but not to decide immediately. After a good night
of sleep, a gut feeling will arise, a preference for one of the
options, even though you don’t know where it came from.
These are two completely different ways of making a
complex decision, and throughout the years, there has been
a lot of discussion about the intriguing question which of
these strategies results in the best decisions.
For a long time, decision-making has been seen as a
matter of rationality, objectivity and reflection. According
to this view, a good decision can be made by breaking
down the decision into small amounts of information,
which have to be evaluated separately (e.g., Edwards, 1961;
Dawes & Corrigan, 1974).
Later, this view has been challenged. Dijksterhuis, Bos,
Nordgren, and van Baaren (2006) formulated the
deliberation-without-attention hypothesis, stating there is a
trade-off between the complexity of a decision and the
usefulness of conscious thought when making the decision.
To make an easy decision, it is better to think consciously,
whereas unconscious thought should be used to solve more
complex, broader decision problems. Unconsciousness is

2310

for this participant, and higher than zero if he/she chose
another car. This way, a WADD-model was used to measure
the quality of a choice. The current research will include
both a TALLY and two WADD calculations (a dichotomous
WADD measurement and a continuous variant), in order to
find the model that represents best human decision-making.
Despite the diversity of phenomena related to IQ, few
have attempted to understand – or even describe – its
influences on judgment and decision making (Frederick,
2005). Studies on time preference, risk preference,
probability weighting, ambiguity aversion, endowment
effects, anchoring, and other widely researched topics
rarely make any reference to the possible effects of
cognitive abilities (or cognitive traits).The majority of
studies approach the deliberation-without-attention effect as
a universal effect, being applicable to all participants.
However, it could be possible that one mode of thought
would be more beneficial for some participants, but not
necessarily for others. Therefore, individual differences in
intelligence will be studied in the current research. The
short version of Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices
(Bors & Stokes, 1998) will be used to measure intelligence.
To our knowing, no research on the influence of
intelligence on the deliberation-without-attention effect has
been done to date. However, it might influence the decision
quality. A higher intelligence level could be an advantage
when processing the information. Furthermore, when using
conscious thought to make a decision, the quality of the
analysis of the information could be influenced by
intelligence.

making a decision. Some research already exists on this
topic, but the current study will try to further elaborate
some missing parts. Of special interest for the current study,
is Experiment 2 of Thorsteinson and Withrow (2009). In
this experiment, participants were given the opportunity to
overcome their memory limitations, thereby changing the
outcomes of the deliberation-without-attention effect.
Laboratory studies by Dijksterhuis and colleagues
(Dijksterhuis, 2004; Dijksterhuis et al., 2006) follow the
same paradigm. Participants are given information about
different choice options (e.g., cars, apartments or
roommates). After having consciously read all the attributes
of the different choice options, they have to make a
decision immediately (immediate-condition), after a few
minutes of conscious thought (conscious-thought condition)
or after a few minutes of distraction (unconscious-thought
condition). Thorsteinson and Withrow (2009) included a
fourth condition in this paradigm, the conscious-thoughtwith-notes condition. Participants in this condition were
allowed to take notes of the attributes during the
presentation period, and use these notes while thinking
consciously about their decision. Memory limitations would
not influence the quality of the choices of these
participants. Participants in the conscious-thought-withnotes condition turned out to make better decisions than
participants in the other conditions. The mean unconscious
score did not differ significantly from the mean score in the
conscious-thought condition without notes. This study thus
was unable to replicate the findings of Dijksterhuis et al.
(2006), but showed that, when overcoming memory
limitations, conscious thought seems to be beneficial for
complex decisions. Newell et al. (2009) also included a
conscious-thought condition with information in their
second experiment. In this condition, participants were
provided with an information sheet containing all the
attributes, while thinking consciously. Participants in this
condition made better choices, but the difference was only
significant compared with the immediate condition, not
with the unconscious-thought condition. Rey et al. (2009)
found that participants in their conscious-thought condition,
who also had access to the information while thinking
consciously, performed worse. The effect of using a
memory aid does not seem clear yet. Too little research has
been done to date to draw a clear conclusion. The current
study aims to provide a valuable addition on this topic.
Also important is the method Thorsteinson and
Withrow (2009) used to measure the quality of the choice.
Participants were asked to rate the attributes on importance
for them. The description of the four choice options, in this
study: non-existing cars (materials from Dijksterhuis et al.,
2006), is formulated in bipolar attributes, for example, a car
does or does not have a cup holder. Therefore, a score for
each car can be calculated for each participant by
multiplying the importance score of an attribute with either
minus one (if the attribute is negative for this car) or one (if
the attribute is positive for this car). As a dependent
measure, Thorsteinson and Withrow (2009) calculated the
difference between the score of the car with the highest
score and the score of the chosen car. A participant thus had
a score of zero if the chosen car was the best possible car

Experiment
Method
Design and Participants
A total of 341 participants were taken over different
educational levels. Participants were recruited from
university students and students in secondary education.
The sample thus contained participants engaging in
academic education (n = 213), general secondary education
(n = 37), technical secondary education (n = 41), and
vocational secondary education (n = 24). University
students participated in exchange for course credits,
secondary educational students did so voluntarily. Ages of
the participants ranged from 16 to 30, of which 99.1% was
24 or younger. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of the four conditions (immediate, unconscious-thought,
conscious-thought,
and
conscious-thought-with-notes
condition).
Procedure and Material
As in most research on UTT, the paradigm of
Dijksterhuis (2004) was used. All participants were
presented 48 attributes from four different, nonexistent cars
(12 attributes per car). These stimulus materials were taken
from Dijksterhuis et al. (2006), the same as used in
Thorsteinson and Withrows (2009) second experiment.
Each attribute was formulated either positive or negative.
All cars were described on the same 12 features. The
Hatsdun had 75% positive attributes, whereas the Nabusi
was characterized by only 25% positive features. Two more

2311

After these tasks, all participants were asked to fill in
the short version of Raven’s Advanced Progressive
Matrices (Bors & Stokes, 1998). During the last decade,
this has been one of the most widely used instruments by
researchers interested in participants’ inductive or analytic
reasoning capacities or fluid intelligence (Cattell, 1963).
Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices (Raven, Court, &
Raven, 1988) or APM is a version of these matrices
intended for use with people above average aptitude and
designed to reliably differentiate among those in the top
25% of the population (Bors, & Stokes, 1998). In the
present study a short version of the APM (Bors, & Stokes,
1998) has been used. It is a selection of 14 items with
increasing difficulty drawn from Set 2 of the original APM
(item 3, 10, 12, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, 28, 30, 31 and 34). For
all 14 items, participants had to indicate which was the
missing segment required to complete a 3x3 matrix, which
takes about 20 minutes. All parts of the experiment were
presented in Dutch.

neutral cars were included, with the Kaiwa having 58% and
the Dasuka 50% positive attributes.
Because participants were also recruited under the
national legal age for a driving licence, it could possibly be
hard for them to imagine buying a car. To make sure that
these younger participants would perceive the materials the
way intended by the researchers, a pre-test was conducted
with a small sample of secondary education students, none
of whom participated in the real experiment (n = 13). The
materials used by Thorsteinson and Withrow (2009) in their
first experiment, which contained attributes from
apartments, were tested at the same time, to find out which
materials suited best the needs of participants their age.
Half the sample were given the attributes in a positive
formulation (e.g., “The car has good mileage.”), and were
asked to rate the importance of the attributes. The other half
received the same attributes, but negatively formulated
(e.g., “The car has poor mileage.”) and were asked to rate
how bad they felt about the car not having the feature. A
mean score for each choice option was calculated, by
multiplying the mean score of each attribute by either
minus one (if the choice option did not have the feature) or
one (if the choice option did have the feature), and
summing these. The results showed that, for both sets of
materials, features that were intended to be positive, were
perceived as positive, and those intended to be negative,
were perceived as negative. The choice options were ranked
in the same order as intended. Since both sets were suitable,
the car-materials were used to make comparison with
Thorsteinson and Withrows (2009) second experiment
easier.
In the real experiment, participants in the consciousthought-with-notes condition were instructed that they were
allowed to write down whatever they wanted during the
presentation of the information, whereas participants in the
other conditions were just instructed to pay attention to the
attributes presented. They all knew they would have to
make a decision on which car they preferred, resulting in
impression forming (Lassiter et al., 2009). The 48 attributes
were presented in a random order, for eight seconds each,
using E-prime software (Psychological Software Tools,
Pittsburght, PA).
After the presentation of the information, participants in
the conscious-thought conditions had four minutes to think
carefully about the different cars. After four minutes, they
had to choose the car they preferred. Then they were asked
to rate the 12 different attributes on importance, on a scale
from one, meaning “no importance at all”, to seven,
meaning “very important”. This made it possible to
calculate the subjective preferences of each participant. In
the unconscious-thought condition, participants were
distracted for four minutes by solving anagrams, before
they had to make their decision and rate the attributes. In
the immediate condition, participants had to choose their
preferred car immediately after the presentation of the
information, followed by the rating of the attributes, and
were then instructed to solve the anagrams as a filler task in
order to obtain the same the experiment duration in all
conditions.

Results
First, the proportions of participants choosing the best
car according to a TALLY-model, were compared between
the different conditions, following Dijksterhuis (e.g.,
Experiment 2 in Dijksterhuis, 2004). As shown in Figure 1,
participants in the conscious-thought-with-notes condition
performed best, with a proportion of 0.578 choosing the
Hatsdun, which had the most positive features. Participants
in the conscious-thought condition, who did not take notes,
performed only slightly worse (.54). Participants in the
unconscious-thought condition made the worse choices,
with a proportion of only.32 choosing the Hatsdun. Those
who couldn’t engage in any form of thought, in the
immediate condition, scored in between the conscious and
unconscious-thought conditions, with a proportion of .48
choosing the objectively best car. An ANOVA showed that
the main effect was statistically significant: F(3, 337) = 4.64, p
< .01, MSE = .24. Tukey contrasts showed that the
differences between both conscious-thought conditions and
the unconscious-thought condition were significant, with p
< .01 for the conscious-thought-with-notes condition and p
< .01 for the conscious-thought condition.
Since UTT is based on a WADD-model, and the
proportion of participants choosing the Hatsdun is a TALLY
measurement, the best weighted subjective choice options
were calculated. For each participant, a unique rating for
each car was calculated according to a WADD-model, by
summing the importance ratings of each attribute, with the
ratings of attributes that the particular car did not have,
being counted negative.
It turned out that the Hatsdun was, subjectively, not the
best car for each participant. For 23.2% of the participants,
another car than the Hatsdun had a higher or equal
subjective score, so not choosing the Hatsdun was not
necessarily a bad decision for them. Therefore, the
proportions of participants choosing their subjectively
highest rated car were compared between the four
conditions, making it a dichotomous WADD measure (see
Figure 2).

2312

much. For example, one participant had chosen the Kaiwa,
with a subjective score of 22, but the best option for this
person would have been the Hatsdun, with a score of 24.
This choice was not as bad as the choice of another
participant who had also chosen the Kaiwa, with a
subjective score of -6 as opposed to his best option, the
Hatsdun, with a subjective score of 18. Therefore, to
measure the real quality of a participant’s choice, the
continuous WADD calculation of Thorsteinson and Withrow
(2009) was used. For each participant, the subjective score
of the chosen car was subtracted from score of the car with
the highest subjective score. Participants that chose the car
that suited them best thus had a difference score of zero.
The higher the difference score, the worse the choice made
by the participant. This continuous WADD measurement
seemed to fit participants’ decision patterns best, because
14.2% of those who did not choose their best option
according to the dichotomous WADD-model, had a
difference score of only two. With difference scores
ranging up to 68 in the total population, these choices were
not necessarily bad ones. When using the difference score
as the dependent variable, the pattern remained the same
but the relative difference between the unconscious-thought
and the conscious-thought-with-notes condition increased.
Participants engaging in unconscious thought had a mean
difference score of 6.87, thereby performing only slightly
worse than participants in the immediate (6.60) and
conscious-thought condition (5.10), but remarkably worse
than those in the conscious-thought-with-notes condition,
with a mean difference score of only 2.467 (see Figure 3).
An ANOVA showed that this effect was significant, F(3, 327) =
2.99, p < .01, MSE = 122.29. Post-hoc Tukey contrasts
indicated that the difference between the consciousthought-with-notes condition and the unconscious-thought
condition was significant, p < .01. The mean difference
score of the conscious-thought-with-notes condition was
also marginally significantly lower than the mean score of
the immediate condition, p < .05.
Finally, intelligence seems to influence decision
quality. In the total population1, a positive correlation2 was
found between the scores on the short version of Raven’s
Advanced Progressive Matrices and the proportion of
participants making the best decision according to a
dichotomous WADD model (.17). A negative correlation
with the difference scores (-.10) also provided evidence that
a higher intelligence level leads to better decisions. Within
the different conditions, no correlations with the difference
scores were found, but the dichotomous WADD scores
correlated positively with the intelligence measure in the
immediate (.21) and unconscious-thought conditions (.27).
In the immediate condition, a correlation with the TALLY
measurement (.20) was found.

Figure 1. Proportion of participants choosing the best car according to a
TALLY-model (the Hatsdun) under different conditions.

Figure 2. Proportion of participants choosing their best option according
to a dichotomous WADD-model under different conditions.

In all conditions, the proportions of participants
choosing their subjectively best car were higher than the
proportions of those choosing the Hatsdun, indicating that
participants in all conditions followed a weighted decision
model. The pattern of differences between the conditions
changed, but the ranking remained the same. Unconscious
thinkers scored relatively better with this weighted
measurement, with a proportion of 0.553 choosing their
subjectively best car. However they still performed worse
than participants in all other conditions. Participants in the
immediate condition chose their subjectively best choice
option with a proportion of .62, in the conscious-thought
condition with a proportion of .66 and in the consciousthought-with-notes condition with a proportion of .76. An
ANOVA revealed that this effect was significant, F(3, 337) =
2.83, p < .01, MSE = .23. Post-hoc Tukey contrast showed
that participants in the conscious-thought-with-notes
condition made significantly better decisions than those in
the unconscious-thought condition, p < .01.
It could be argued that not choosing the car that suits
one’s subjective needs best, does not mean the choice was
necessarily a bad one, since for some participants the
subjective scores of some choice options didn’t differ

1

To make sure the different levels of intelligence were equally
spread over the different conditions, t-tests were conducted. No
significant differences were found.
2
All reported correlations are significant at the .05 level except
for the correlation with the dichotomous WADD model in the
total population, which is significant at the .01 level.

2313

overall population, intelligence seemed beneficial for the
decision quality, but in the conscious thought conditions, no
correlation could be found. This might be due to the overall
better decisions made in these conditions.

References
Acker, F. (2008). New findings on unconscious versus
conscious thought in decision making: Additional
empirical data and meta-analysis. Judgment and
Decision Making, 3(4), 292-303.
Bors, D. A., & Stokes, T. L. (1998). Raven’s advanced
progressive matrices: Norms for first-year university
students and the development of a short form.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 58, 382398.
Dawes, R. M., & Corrigan, B. (1974). Linear models in
decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 81(2), 95-106.
Dijksterhuis, A. (2004). Think different: The merits of
unconscious thought in preference development and
decision making. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87(5), 586-598.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & van
Baaren, R. B. (2006). On making the right choice: The
deliberation-without-attention effect. Science, 311,
1005-1007.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Meurs, T. (2006). Where creativity
resides: The generative power of unconscious thought.
Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 135-146.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Nordgren, L. F. (2006). A theory of
unconscious thought. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1(2), 95-109.
Dijksterhuis, A., & van Olden, Z. (2006). On the benefits of
thinking unconsciously: Unconscious thought can
increase
post-choice
satisfaction.
Journal
of
Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 627-631.
Edwards, W. (1961). Behavioral decision theory. Annual
Review of Psychology, 12, 473-498.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19,
25-42.
Halberstadt, J. B., & Levine, G. M. (1999). Effects of
reasons analysis on the accuracy of predicting
basketball games. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 29(3), 517-530.
Newell, B. R., Wong, K. Y., Cheung, J. C. H., & Rakow, T.
(2009). Think, blink or sleep on it? The impact of
modes of thought on complex decision making. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62(4),
707-732.
Rey, A., Goldstein, R. M., Perruchet, P. (2009). Does
unconscious thought improve complex decision
making? Psychological Research, 73, 372-379.
Thorsteinson, T. J., & Withrow, S. (2009). Does
unconscious thought outperform conscious thought on
complex decisions? A further examination. Judgement
and Decision Making, 4(3), 235-247.
Wilson, T. D., & Schooler, J. W. (1991). Thinking too
much: Introspection can reduce the quality of
preferences and decisions. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 60(2), 181-192.

Figure 3. Means of difference scores (continuous WADD-model) under
different conditions.

Discussion
The results of this experiment did not support the
predictions of UTT. Using three different methods to
measure decision quality, including the measurement used
by Dijksterhuis (2004), no evidence for a beneficial effect
of unconscious thought was found. In contrary, participants
in the unconscious-thought condition performed worst of all
participants, significantly worse than participants in the
conscious-thought-with-notes condition. It thus seems that
overcoming memory limitations is enough to make
conscious thought a better decision strategy. But even
without notes, participants engaging in conscious thought
outperformed those engaging in unconscious thought. Even
though this difference was only significant when a TALLYmodel was used to measure the decision quality, the results
of the other measurement methods still show the opposite
pattern as predicted by UTT. The results of Thorsteinson and
Withrow (2009) were confirmed.
Another important finding is that participants seemed to
follow a WADD-model to make their decisions. In all
conditions participants chose the car that was best for them,
as calculated with a weighted additive model, more often
than the car that was best according to a TALLY-model. A
continuous WADD-model measured decision quality even
better. This finding adds up to the findings of other research
in support of using a WADD-model to measure decision
quality (Newell et al., 2009; Thorsteinson & Withrow,
2009). Also from a theoretical point of view, a WADDmodel should be used, since it reflects the weighting
principle of UTT better. However, even when using this
weighted measure, conscious thought seems to outperform
unconscious thought when notes can be taken. These
participants had an advantage since they were able to
structure the information and select what to write down,
writing only down what they consider important for their
decision. These advantages made weighting easier. Under
these circumstances, it thus seems that conscious thought is
beneficial.
Individual differences also seemed to influence
decision quality, but not under all circumstances. For the

2314

