UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constraints, Inferences, and the Shortest Path: Which paths do we prefer?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8x78q7fm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ragni, Marco
Wiener, Jan

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constraints, Inferences, and the Shortest Path: Which paths do we prefer?
Marco Ragni (marco.ragni@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science,
University of Freiburg, Germany

Jan M. Wiener (jwiener@bournemouth.ac.uk)
Psychology Research Centre,
Bournemouth University, UK

Abstract

Problems (TSP): A salesman has to visit a number of cities
and start from a speciﬁc location to which he will also return
after visiting each city. The traveling salesman will aim for
the shortest possible route and avoid any detours (Wiener &
Tenbrink, 2008). Formally, TSP-Problems are NP-complete
(Garey & Johnson, 1979).

How do we reason about incomplete spatio-temporal
descriptions? How might a map influence formerly
constructed preferred mental models? Little research so far
focused on a combination of two central fields important for
successful route planning: the way humans deal with
constraint based reasoning (especially with some sort of
spatio-temporal constraints) and the way in which humans
plan with a given map (especially with problems inspired by
typical Traveling Salesman Problems). This, however,
becomes even more interesting in cases in which the spatiotemporal constraints allow for several solutions. Do the
predictions of the preferred mental model theory still hold
true in such situations? This article investigates the influence
of maps on the generation of preferred models. The goal is to
bring together the theory of (preferred) mental models and
route planning.

Keywords: Spatial reasoning; preference effects

Introduction
In everyday life we often reason with incomplete information or have to take constraints into account during
reasoning. Cognitive processes involved in such reasoning
about spatial relations and the construction of according
mental models have recently been the subjects of interest in
studies about spatial relations (Knauff, Rauh, Schlieder, &
Strube, 1998; Rauh et al., 2005). However, the question of
how external representations of space such as maps, or maprelevant knowledge influences and interacts with reasoning
processes is widely unknown. The research communities
concerned with how people use maps to solve spatial or
navigational problems and how people solve reasoning
problems are mostly distinct. There are, however, many
situations in which people reason with maps or with maplike knowledge. In this paper we present and investigate two
classes of problems.
Path planning from maps. Imagine planning a sightseeing
trip through the downtown area of an unfamiliar city: you
do have a map and you want to visit multiple sites of
interest. Of course, you are interested in minimizing the
distance you have to traverse along your tour. Problems of
this kind are typically referred to as Traveling Salesperson

Human performance and the cognitive strategies
employed when solving TSPs have been investigated in real
environments involving movement through space (e.g.,
Gärling & Gärling, 1988) as well as in more abstract visual
or map-like versions of the TSP in which a number of dots
are displayed on a computer screen which have to be
connected such that the resulting tour is as short as possible
(e.g., MacGregor & Ormerod, 1996). When planning actual
site seeing trips, however, we often face additional
constraints besides minimizing distances: some sites of
interest may close before others and therefore have to be
visited earlier. Or, you may want to be at a specific site at a
particular time, for example, to have lunch. In addition, you
are still striving to minimize path length. Similar challenges
arise when planning shopping trips during which multiple
stores have to be visited. Here, we also often face additional
constraints besides minimizing distances: Frozen food or
ice-cream, for example, is best be bought towards the end of
the shopping tour to avoid defrosting before returning home.
Moreover, in order to minimize the effort of carrying
purchased goods, heavy items should be bought towards the
end of the trip. Again, path length should be minimized. All
these factors impose constraints on the path-planning
problem and have to be taken into account when planning a
trip. Below is an example of combined spatial optimization
and reasoning problem:
(1) Buy bread before ice-cream.
Buy eggs after ice-cream
Buy a gallon of water after eggs.
Buy a chair after a gallon of water.
Problems (1) belongs to a class of problems that are referred
to as determinate problems, as they allow only for a single
solution:
bread ice-cream eggs water chair

2216

Problem (2) belongs to a class of problems that are referred
to as indeterminate problems, as they allow for multiple –
three – solutions.
(2) Buy bread before ice-cream.
Buy eggs after ice-cream.
Buy a gallon of water after ice-cream.
Buy a chair after a gallon of water
Which is consistent with the following three models:
bread ice-cream eggs water chair
bread ice-cream water eggs chair
bread ice-cream water chair eggs
The key idea of the mental model theory is that reasoners
translate these constraints into a mental model – an
abstraction or analogical reflection – of the state of affairs
and use this representation to solve the reasoning problem.
An important finding is that when faced with indeterminate
problems featuring multiple solutions, humans tend to
construct only one initial model – the so-called preferred
mental model (Rauh et al., 2005; Ragni, Fangmeier,
Webber, & Knauff, 2007), which is easier to maintain in
working memory than any other mental model (Ragni et al.,
2007; Knauff, 2006). Preferred mental models have been
initially identified for Allen’s interval calculus (Knauff,
Rauh, & Schlieder, 1995), a more detailed introduction of
preferred mental models is given in the next section. What
happens when reasoning about a problem – as the one
described above – when the shortest path does not
correspond to the preferred mental model? Is any influence
measurable? Although this question is of high ecological
validity, to the authors’ knowledge, it has not yet been
approached. In this paper we will present a first experiment
to analyze from the perspective of a mental model theorist
whether – and if so, how – preferred mental models can be
“overriden” by external stimuli.

Background
The theory of preferred mental models
A central question in the context of incomplete information is: How are indeterminate problems such as
Problem (2) processed? Are there preferred interpretations?
The mental model theory (MMT), introduced by JohnsonLaird and Byrne (1991), suggests that people draw
conclusions by constructing and inspecting a spatial array
that represents the state of affairs described in the premises.
It is a three-stage process consisting of a comprehension,
description, and validation phase. In the comprehension
phase, reasoners construct a mental model that reflects the
information from the premises. If new information is
encountered during the reading of the premises it is
immediately used in the construction of the model. During

the description phase, this model is inspected to find new
information that is not explicitly given in the premises.
Finally, in the validation phase alternative models are
searched that refute this putative conclusion. However,
some questions remain open with regards to how people
deal with multi-model problems. For example, which model
is constructed first, and does this model construction adhere
to certain principles? And, why do reasoners neglect some
models? None of these questions are answered by the
classical mental model theory. In contrast the preferred
mental model theory (PMMT) has been developed to
explain why humans in general tend to construct a preferred
mental model (PMM). The PMM is the starting point for
deriving a putative conclusion. In the model variation phase
the participants tend to make local and continuous
transformations starting from the PMM to search counterexamples (Rauh et al., 2005).
Several predictions of the PMMT about insertion principles
as well as transformation strategies in spatial relational
reasoning can be shown (Ragni et al., 2007). Assume we
have two premises of the form
(1) A is to the left of B and
(2) A is to the left of C.
Humans tend to process these premises sequentially, i.e.
first a model A B is generated and then object C is inserted
into the model. There are two possibilities where C can be
inserted, in-between A and B (first-fit principle) and to the
right of B (first-free-fit principle). The latter principle has
been empirically confirmed in small-scale descriptions (e.g.,
Ragni et al., 2007; Jahn et al., 2005). An interesting aspect,
however, is how this might influence reasoning if a map is
given?
Path planning and Distance Optimzation. Path planning
and optimization with maps has primarily been investigated
by means of visual versions of the TSP (e.g., Graham, Joshi,
& Pizlo, 2000; Vickers, Butavicius, Lee, & Medvedev,
2001). In these experiment, participants are presented with a
number of target locations on a computer screen – usually
presented as identical black dots on a white background –
and are asked to connect these locations with straight lines
such that the resulting path is as short as possible. Results
from these studies demonstrate that humans reach very good
performance levels even with as many as a few dozen target locations. The strategies and heuristics applied are a
matter of ongoing debate. The convex hull has been
suggested to be part of the problem solving strategy
(MacGregor & Ormerod, 1996), the crossing avoidance
hypothesis states that participants avoid crossing tours, as
they know that crossings lead to sub-optimal solutions (Van
Rooij, Stege, & Schactman, 2003), and the hierarchical
nearest neighbor strategy assumes that in a first step clusters
of several neighboring dots are established, which are then
sequentially linked into a tour, using the nearest neighbor
algorithm (Vickers, Bovet, Lee, & Hughes, 2003).

2217

Only few studies investigating TSPs with maps used richer
environments in which different target locations could be
visually distinguished requiring some form of memory. In a
recent study, Tenbrink and Wiener (2009) presented
participants with maps depicting a regular 5x5 grid of
locations each of which could be identified by a unique
symbol. Participants were given so-called shopping lists
depicting the symbols of a start location and four to nine
target locations. Their task was to identify the locations in
the grid and then mark the shortest possible round trip from
the start that visits all target locations in the map. By
analyzing participants’ planning performance, their chosen
paths, as well as retrospective linguistic representations, a
number of cognitive strategies applied when solving the
TSPs could be identified. Most importantly, participants
flexibly employed and connected a repertory of multifaceted strategies allowing them to simplify and structure
the problem space across subtasks involved in solving the
TSPs (for a navigational version of this paradigm, see
Wiener, Ehbauer, & Mallot, 2009).
As mentioned before, path planning in every-day life often
requires taking into account additional constraints besides
minimizing distances. Hayes- Roth and Hayes-Roth (1988)
presented one of the view studies investigating complex
planning from maps with additional constraints (but see also
the related Plan-A-Day paradigm, Nellen & Funke, 2002).
Participants were given a map of a town depicting multiple
shops and other locations along with a list of errands. These
errands included buying vegetables at the grocery, buying a
toy for a dog at the pet store (both purely spatial
constraints), but also picking up a car at a certain time in a
certain location (spatio-temporal constraint). Moreover,
more errands were specified than the subject could possible
accomplish in the time available, which required him/her to
sort out (less important) errands to formulate a realistic plan.
Hayes-Roth & Hayes-Roth developed a general model of
complex planning, assuming that the planning process
comprises many distinct specialists contributing decisions to
a tentative plan that is refined incrementally.

Experiment – Reasoning, Route Planning,
and Maps

premises were optimal or clearly sub-optimal with respect to
path length.

Participants.
Nineteen students from the University of Freiburg took part
in this experiment (9 females, M = 23.3/22.1, SD = 2.2/2.1).
They were paid for their participation or received course
credits.

Materials.
To investigate the impact of map like presentation of target
locations on reasoning performance and the selection of
preferred mental models, we generated four types of
reasoning problems (see Fig. 1).
1.

Optimal determinate problem (D-optimal): The
correct solution to these reasoning problems
always matches the shortest possible – optimal –
route to visit all target destinations.

2.

Suboptimal determinate problem (D-suboptimal): The correct solutions to these reasoning
problems were clearly suboptimal with respect to
their length.

3.

Preferred optimal indeterminate problems (IPoptimal): The preferred mental model to these
reasoning problems matched the shortest possible –
optimal – route. Two alternative correct solutions
existed that were not identical with the preferred
mental model and that were sub- optimal with
respect to their length.

4.

Preferred suboptimal indeterminate problems
(IP-suboptimal): The preferred mental models to
these reasoning problems were clearly suboptimal
with respect to their length. Two alternative correct
solutions existed, one of which was optimal with
respect to metric length.

Methods.

In this experiment we investigated the connection between
the construction of (preferred) mental models from a set of
premises and the subsequent task of planning a trip
consistent with the premises. In order to do so, participants
were presented with determinate and indeterminate
reasoning problems describing spatio-temporal relations
between sets of destinations. After processing the premises
and (possibly) constructing a (preferred) mental model, they
were asked to draw a round trip into a map visiting the
destinations in an order that is consistent with the premises.
If the planning task in fact interfered with the constructed
mental model, we expected performance differences depending on whether or not the round trips defined by the

Each participant was presented with 16 reasoning problems,
four of each type described above. To control for the
influence of the specific configuration of start and target
places, we used four different configurations and balanced
the types of reasoning problems across the configurations.
Each reasoning problem was presented on three pages: The
first page contained the first two premises; the second page
contained the third and fourth premises, and the third page
contained a regular 5 × 5 grid in which the 5 positions
mentioned in the premises were marked (see Figure 1).
Participants were instructed to read premises 1 and 2, to turn
the page over, read premises 3 and 4, turn the page over, and

2218

to connect the positions in the layout in order to mark a
round trip that was consistent with the premises. They were
instructed not to scroll back after having turned a page or to
take any notes.

Hypotheses & Predictions.
Given the specific procedures of the experiment, two
competing hypotheses are conceivable: First, the external
representation and the task of sketching the corresponding
route do not influence the reasoning process. This is based
on the assumption that the mental model is generated while
reading and processing the premises. Hence, the external
representation that is provided only after the last premises
was processed does not influence the mental model.
Participants would then simply sketch the tour that
corresponds to their mental model. In case of determinate
problems this would lead to identical performance (with
respect to error rate) between the types of reasoning
problems
(D-optimal/D-suboptimal).
In
case
of
indeterminate reasoning problems, we expect that
participants will select the preferred mental model,
regardless of whether or not the according path was optimal
or suboptimal (IP-optimal/IP-suboptimal). Second, the
external representation influences the mental model, as the
task of sketching a round trip for the shopping route
implicitly requires choosing a short solution. In this case,
we expect interferences between finding the correct solution
to the reasoning problem and planning the shortest path.
Such an interference would have a selective impact on
performance for determinate reasoning problems of type Dsuboptimal, for which the shortest (optimal) path and the
correct solution to the reasoning problem were different, but
not for determinate reasoning problems of type D-optimal,
for which the optimal path and the correct solution to the
reasoning problem were identical. The predictions for
indeterminate problems are not as straight forward, as each
indeterminate problem features three different solutions.

(determinate, indeterminate) and solution (optimal,
suboptimal) was carried out. We did not observe a main
effects for type of reasoning problem [F(1,17.99) = 0.12, p =
.91] or for solution [F(1,18.28) = .06, p = .81]. However,
the interaction type of reasoning problem x solution was
significant [F(1,16.72) = 8.96, p < .01].
To further investigate the nature of this interaction, we
performed post hoc t tests revealing that performance for
determinate problems of type D-optimal was better than for
determinate problems of type D-suboptimal (93.2% vs.
82.8%; t-test: t(15)=2.24; p=.04, see Figure 2). For
indeterminate reasoning problems, the pattern was different:
surprisingly, participants performance was better for
problems of type IP-suboptimal than for those of type IPoptimal (97.8% vs. 82.8%; t-test: t(14)=2.38; p=.03, see
Figure 2).

Results.
Three out of the 19 participants were removed from the final
data as their performance on finding the correct solution for
determinate problems was clearly below 50% (12,5%,
12.5%, 37.5%). In addition, thirteen trials were removed
from the final data set, as these solutions featured branching
points – participants had drawn two arrows from one
location.
The different spatial configurations had no influence on
participants’ performance (F(3, 46.35)=.27, p=.85). For the
remaining analyses we therefore pooled the four different
configurations. On average, participants found a correct
solution to 89.1% of the reasoning problems. A 2x2
ANOVA with the factors of type of reasoning problem

Figure 1: The four different types of reasoning problems
along with exemplary data by participants. All participants
received the premises (in German) with full names, e.g. der
Trevibrunnen vor dem Kolosseum (the Fountain of Trevi
before the Colosseum) instead of initials.
For correct solutions to indeterminate problems, we
evaluated whether or not participants chose the preferred
mental model. In 87.8% of the cases, they did choose the
preferred mental model (t-test against chance level [with
three possible solutions, chance level was 33.33%]: t(15) =
15.79, p < .001).

2219

Figure 2: Results of the Experiment: left: the determinate
problem description – allowing for one path solution only;
right: the indeterminate problem description, allowing for
three solutions.
Preference for the preferred mental model did not differ
between types of indeterminate problems (IP-optimal:
87.2% versus IP-suboptimal: 85.0%: t-test: t(14)=0.29;
p=.78).

Discussion.
The findings for the determinate problems to which only a
single correct solution exists, revealed a clear difference in
performance. Specifically, participants showed better
performances for problems in which the correct solution to
the reasoning problem was identical to the shortest possible
path (D-optimal) as compared to reasoning problems in
which the correct solution and the optimal path were
different (D-suboptimal). This finding suggests interference
between the reasoning process and the task of planning a
round trip. In other words, the map influenced the reasoning
process.
Contrary to classical deduction tasks, indeterminate
reasoning problems do not appear to be more diﬃcult than
determinate ones. A possible explanation for the lack of a
systematic difference in the current paradigm comes from
the fact that the higher number of possible solutions in
indeterminate problems in the specific task allows for a
higher error tolerance (in all cases the objects 3, 4, and 5 in
the premises).
Some of the participants had drawn routes with branching
points, i.e., they had drawn two arrows from one object.
Such branching solutions were mostly found in
indeterminate problem cases (14 out of the 17 cases in
total). We had to remove these cases from the final data set
as we were not able to extract a single unambiguous
solution. However, these branching solutions clearly reflect
a special type of errors, as they usually reflected the
indeterminate nature of the problems. Note, however, that
by removing these trials from the analysis, we artificially
increased performance primarily for in- determinate
problems, which might explain the surprisingly high
performance in these problems.

An analysis of the chosen solutions for indeterminate
problems clearly demonstrated that participants did not
choose randomly between the three possible solutions, but
preferred one over the others. The preferred solution was
identical to the one generated by the first-free fit strategy, a
preferred mental model generation strategy identified in
previous experiments (Ragni et al., 2007) on small-scale
scenarios. Then again, the constraints in this experiment
were clearly spatio-temporal in their nature – the premises
“the fountain of Trevi before the colosseum” refers to the
sequence of the events. In that sense, it is not surprising that
the identified preferences were similar to those identified in
small-scale scenarios (Schaeken, Johnson Laird, &
d’Ydewalle, 1996).

General Discussion
In dealing with maps there is one important and new
question: What is the influence of the (implicit) task of
planning a short path using maps while taking into account
spatio-temporal constraints? The way reasoners typically
construct preferred mental models when reasoning about
indeterminate problems has been identified in several
experiments (cp. Ragni et al., 2007). The most prominent
encoding strategy applied in such cases is the first-free- fit
strategy. This strategy, however, does not al- low for
predicting how external constraints such as the length of the
routes resulting from reasoning problems influence the
reasoning process itself. In this study we combined
reasoning about spatio-temporal constraints with the task of
planning short paths with a map (without explicitly stating
that the shortest path must be found). The planning task
influenced the reasoning task: In de- terminate problems –
in which only a single solution existed – participants
showed better performance if that solution was identical to
the shortest possible path. Furthermore, for indeterminate
cases, we found strong preferences for the solution that
corresponded to the first-free-fit strategy. Participants’
performance in finding a possible solution for IP-suboptimal
problems was greater than for IP- optimal problems. This
result is surprising and was not predicted, as the optimal
solution to the route-planning problem – i.e., the shortest
possible route – was identical to the preferred mental model
for IP- optimal problems but not for IP-suboptimal
problems. Future research will address this interesting
effect.

Acknowledgments
This paper presents work done in the project R8- [CSPACE]
of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR
8 Spatial Cognition. Funding by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) is gratefully acknowledged.

2220

References
Gärling, T., & Gärling, E. (1988). Distance minimization in
downtown pedestrian shopping. Environment and
Planning A, 20 , 547-554.
Graham, S. M., Joshi, A., & Pizlo, Z. (2000). The travelling
salesman problem: A hierarchical model. Memory &
Cognition , 28 (7), 1191-1204.
Hayes-Roth, B., & Hayes-Roth, F. (1988). A cognitive
model of planning. In A. Collins & E. E. Smith (Eds.),
Readings in cognitive science: A perspective from
psychology and artificial intel- ligence (p. 496-513). San
Mateo, CA: Kaufmann.
Jahn, G., Knauff, M., Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2007). Preferred
mental models in reasoning about spatial relations.
Memory & Cognition, 35, 2075-2087.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991).Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knauff, M. (2006). Deduktion und logisches Denken. In J.
Funke (Ed.), Denken und Problemlösen. Enzyklopädie der
Psychologie (Vol. 8). Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen’s calculus. In (p. 200-205).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Mental models in spatial reasoning. In Spatial cognition
(p. 267-292).
MacGregor, J. N., & Ormerod, T. C. (1996). Human
performance on the traveling salesman problem.
Perception and Psychophysics, 58 , 527-539.
Nellen, S., & Funke, J. (2002). The role of exploration and
forward checking in human scheduling. Cognitive
Science 2002 Conference, Fairfax, Virginia, August 8-10,
2002.
Ragni, M., Fangmeier, T., Webber, L., & Knauff, M.
(2007). Preferred mental models: How and why they are
so important in human spatial reasoning. In C. Freksa, M.
Knauff, B. Krieg- Brückner, B. Nebel, & T. Barkowsky
(Eds.), Spatial cognition v. Berlin: Springer.
Rauh, R., Hagen, C., Knauff, M., Kuss, T., Schlieder, C., &
Strube, G. (2005). Preferred and alternative mental
models in spatial reasoning. Spatial Cognition and
Computation , 5 , 239-269.
Schaeken, W., Johnson Laird, P. N., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(1996). Mental models and temporal reasoning.
Cognition, 60, 205-234.
Tenbrink, T., & Wiener, J. (2009). The verbalization of
multiple strategies in a variant of the traveling salesman
problem. Cognitive Processing , 10 (2), 143-161.
Van Rooij, I., Stege, U., & Schactman, A. (2003, Mar).
Convex hull and tour crossings in the Euclidean traveling
salesperson problem: implications for human performance
studies. Memory & Cognition , 31 (2), 215–220.

Vickers, D., Bovet, P., Lee, M. D., & Hughes, P. (2003).
The perception of minimal structures: performance on
open and closed versions of visually presented Euclidean
travelling salesperson problems. Perception , 32 (7), 871–
886.
Vickers, D., Butavicius, M., Lee, M., & Medvedev, A.
(2001). Human performance on visually presented
traveling salesman problems. Psychological ResearchPsychologische Forschung , 65 (1), 34-45.
Wiener, J., Ehbauer, N., & Mallot, H. (2009). Planning
paths to multiple targets: memory involvement and
planning heuristics in spatial problem solving.
Psychological Research , 77 (5), 644-658.

2221

