UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cooperation in Prisoner’s Dilemma Game: Influence of Social Relations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/28291269

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Grinberg, Maurice
Hristova, Evgenia
Borisova, Milena

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cooperation in Prisoner’s Dilemma Game:
Influence of Social Relations
Maurice Grinberg (mgrinberg@nbu.bg)
Evgenia Hristova (ehristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Milena Borisova (borisova_milena@abv.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract

As PD game is used as a model for describing social
dilemmas and studying the phenomenon of cooperation,
there is a great interest in the conditions that could promote
or diminish cooperation.

The paper explores the influence of the type of relations
among players on cooperation in the Prisoner’s dilemma
game. The relations between players are operationalized
according to Fiske’s relational models theory (Fiske, 1991):
communal sharing, authority ranking, equality matching, and
market pricing. This is achieved by using various ways of
distributing the total payoff gained by a dyad of players in a
series of Prisoner’s dilemma games: each player receives the
total payoff (unity), one of the players receives more than the
other (hierarchy), each player receives half of the total payoff
(equality), each player receives a portion of the total payoff
proportional to his/hers individual payoffs (proportionality).
For these four conditions, the cooperation rates, the mutual
cooperation, the mutual defection, and the payoffs gained are
analyzed and compared for a series of forty games. The
results show that in the proportionality condition there is less
cooperation, less mutual cooperation, more mutual defection
and less total payoff than in the other three conditions.

C

R, R

S, T

D

T, S

P, P

Player II
C
D
Player I

Player I

Player II
C
D
C

3, 3

1, 4

D

4, 1

2, 2

Figure 1: Payoff tables for the PD game – with standard
notation for the payoffs and an example. In each cell the
comma separated payoffs are the Player I’s and Player II’s
payoffs, respectively.
In game theory several assumptions about the game and
the players are made. The agents are assumed to be perfectly
rational and to have perfect information about the game.
Under these conditions, they are supposed to try to
maximize their payoffs in a completely selfish manner
(Colman, 2003). From this point of view the dominant
strategy in the game is defection (in one-shot or in repeated
PD games with a fixed and known number). This prediction
is in contrast with the behavior of the players observed in
laboratory settings or in real life situations.
In human societies, people cooperate all the time and
often cooperation is seen as one of the foundations of
human civilization (see e.g. Gärdenfors, 2003). Sally (1995)
provides a meta-review of the experiments involving PD
games published between 1958 and 1995 and shows that in
its iterated version (the game is played many times),
cooperation choices are made in 20-50 % of the games
(mean 47.4 %) and even in one-shot games many players
cooperate although much less than in the iterated version.
Several studies have shown how cooperation can emerge
from expected utility or anticipatory reinforcement models
without any specific relations between the players
(Grinberg, Hristova, & Lalev, 2010; and the references there
in).
However, it is clear that the deeper understanding of how
people make decisions while playing PD games should
account for the role of the social relations involved in the
interactions. Moreover, as the PD game is central in the

Keywords:
Prisoner’s
Dilemma,
decision-making,
cooperation, social interaction, relational models

Introduction
Prisoner’s Dilemma Game
The Prisoner’s dilemma (PD) game is one of the most
extensively studied social dilemmas. PD is a two-person
game. The interest in studying PD game arises from the idea
that many social situations and problems such as
overpopulation, pollution, energy savings, participation in a
battle, etc. have such a dilemma structure (Dawes, 1980).
The payoff table for this game is presented in Figure 1. In
the PD game the players simultaneously choose their moves
– C (cooperate) or D (defect), without knowing their
opponent’s choice.
In order to be a Prisoner’s dilemma game, the payoffs
(see Figure 1) should satisfy the inequalities T > R > P > S
and 2R > T+S. Because of this game structure a dilemma
appears – there is no obvious best move. On one hand, the D
choice is dominant for both players – each player gets larger
payoff by choosing D (defection) than by choosing C
(cooperation) no matter what the other player chooses. On
the other hand, the payoff for mutual defection (P) is lower
than the payoff if both players choose their dominated C
strategies (R for each player).

408

modeling of social interactions it can be used to explore the
existence and limits of the relational social types as posited
by relational social models (see e.g. Haslam, 2004).
Exploring the potential of games like the PD game as
modeling relational types is one of the goals of this paper.

al., 1996). From an altruistic perspective, cooperation can
yield higher payoffs than defection.
Although these social theories of cooperation have been
proposed to explain cooperative behavior unexpected by
normative game theory, it is interesting to consider more
general social theories that are more closely related to the
game theoretic analysis of social relations. In our opinion
such a theory is the relational models theory proposed by
Alan Fiske (Fiske, 1991).

Social Interactions and Cooperation
How decision-making in PD games is influenced by social
interactions has been explored in many studies that try to
account for the contradiction between the normative
predictions and the experimental results in PD games.
Several studies have established the influence of social
interaction on cooperation. For instance, Durkin, Frost,
Aronov & Breslow (1967) found that cooperative moves
double when participants have visual contact with each
other compared to the condition where they don’t have such
contact. Sally (2001) investigated the behavioural changes
in participants who know each other or are psychologically
or socially close and discussed the importance of such
closeness in game strategy building. According to this
account, participants play differently depending on how
they perceive their opponent – as a friend or a stranger. In
both cases, according to Sally (2001), the social interaction
is essential and the social dilemmas like PD need to be
investigated from the perspective of a general relational
theory.
There are several theories that account for the cooperative
behavior in PD games in terms of socially established
values and stress the importance of social interaction and
relationships as tools for achieving cooperation. Among
them are theories that explain cooperation by altruism,
reciprocity or reputation building.
Reputation building theory (Kreps et al., 1982; Andreoni
& Miller, 1993) is one of the main theories aimed to explain
cooperation in iterated PD game. This theory assumes that
players are self-interested (not altruists), but the repetition in
iterated PD games creates incentives to cooperate.
According to this model, the player is building himself a
reputation of a cooperative player and expects that the other
player will also cooperate.
Reciprocity, according to many researchers, is a
widespread norm and is the basis of many relationships and
societies (Trivers, 1972). People reciprocate cooperation
with cooperation. One of the most studied strategies that are
based on reciprocity is the tit-for-tat strategy. A player using
this strategy cooperates initially, and then plays the same as
his/her opponent did in the previous game. It has been
demonstrated in computer tournaments that in the long run
the tit-for-tat strategy results in higher payoffs compared to
other strategies (Axelrod & Hamilton, 1984; Komorita,
Hilty, & Parks, 1991).
Another influential theory about cooperation in PD game
is based on the concept of altruism. In contrast to reputation
building theory, this theory assumes that some players are
not strictly self-interested and view more benefit in
cooperation than the actual payoffs they receive (Cooper et

Relational Models Theory
Relational models theory (Fiske, 1992; Fiske & Haslam,
1996; McGraw, Tetlock, & Kristel, 2003; Rai & Fiske,
2011) states that there are four basic schemas that are used
to build, organize and maintain relationships and
interactions among individuals in a society. These models
are supposed to be universal and all relations could be
described by these models or by combination of them. The
four types of relations generate four modes for every aspect
of the interactions between people – resource allocation,
moral judgments, decision-making, etc.
These four relation models are the following (Fiske,
1992):
• Communal Sharing – relations in an
undifferentiated group of people with equivalent
status. Everyone in a community - which could
consist of two members or could be very large –
has some rights and some duties. The focus is on
commonalities and not on distinctions;
• Authority Ranking – implies an ordinal ranking in
society and this ranking scheme determines one’s
relative status. For instance, military hierarchy can
be considered a prototype of such relations;
• Equality Matching – relations are based on a
model of one-to-one correspondence as in turntaking, tit-for-tat strategies, etc. The social
prototype would be friendship networks, in which
reciprocity is a norm which rules the distribution of
wealth;
• Market Pricing – based on a model of
proportionality in social relations in which people
reduce their interaction to some ratios of utility
measures. Examples of relations of this type are the
ones governed by prices, rational calculations,
expected utilities, etc.

Payoff Distribution in PD and Fiske’s Relational
Model Types
Fiske’s relational model theory (Fiske, 1992) claims that
different relational models influence and are manifested in a
lot of domains and activities, e.g. reciprocal exchange,
distribution, contribution, work, significance of time, social
influence, constitution of groups, motivation, moral
judgments, etc.
Here, we focus on the type of distribution of group
resources using one and the same game, namely the PD

409

game. We focus on social interaction related to social
exchange as instantiated by contribution and distribution of
a common resource. We share the opinion that situations
involving exchange are the most appropriate to study the
four types of relational models in isolation (Haslam, 2004).
In the classical PD game experiments each player is
rewarded according to his/hers personal payoffs. However,
Fiske’s relational model theory states that in real-life
situations the distribution of payoffs and resources depends
on the type of the relational model behind the social
interaction. There are four types of distributions,
corresponding to the four relational types described above
(Fiske, 1992, Table 1, p. 694):
• communal sharing – ‘corporate use of resources
regarded as common, everything belongs to all
together’;
• authority ranking – ‘the higher the person’s rank,
the more he or she gets’;
• equality matching – ‘to each the same, everyone
gets identical shares’;
• market pricing – ‘to each in due proportion’.

5 training games (results from these games are not included
in the analysis) thus the total sequence comprised 45 games.

Player II
Player I

C

D

C

40, 40

10, 50

D

50, 10

15, 15

Figure 2: Payoff table for the PD game used in the
experiment.

Experimental Conditions
The distribution of the total payoff is varied in accordance
with the four relational models described above in a
between-subjects design. There are four experimental
conditions that differ in the way that the total payoff of a
pair is divided between the players in that pair:
•
Unity condition – each player receives the total payoff
earned by the pair (communal sharing relational
model);
•
Hierarchy condition – one of the players receives
more than the other – 2/3 vs. 1/3 of the total payoff of
the pair (authority ranking relational model);
•
Equality condition – each player receives equal
portion of the total payoff (equality matching relational
model);
•
Proportionality condition – each player receives a
share of the total payoff proportional to his/hers
individual payoffs (market pricing relational model).

Goals of the Study
The main goal of the present study is to make a first step in
the mapping of Fiske’s relational models theory to games
from game theory. More specifically, we want to study how
the four relational types, implemented as distinct payoff
distributional models, influence cooperation in PD games.
As relational models are complex and encompass various
domains, in the present study the focus is on the different
distribution schemas within the same type of games (the
PD game).
We aim to explore what is the influence of the type of
relation among players on a set of game outcomes that
characterize the playing of a PD game – cooperation, mutual
cooperation, and mutual defection. It is also important to
check the influence of the distribution model on the overall
payoffs that are received – e.g. what type of model is more
beneficial in terms of total payoff earned in interactions with
the strategic structure of the PD game.
Cooperation is expected to be the highest if the payoff
distribution is in accordance with the communal sharing
model. Cooperation is expected to be lowest if the
distribution follows the rules of market pricing model, e.g.
when everyone is rewarded depending on his/her personal
contribution – in this scenario we expect more
individualistic orientation of the players.

Procedure
Subjects were tested in pairs. After receiving the appropriate
instructions for the experimental condition they were in,
each dyad played 5 training games, followed by 40 games
that were analyzed. The experimenters secured that the
participants will not have visual, verbal and any kind of
other contact before and during the experiment. Therefore,
no player knew who the other player was before the end of
the experiment.
Instructions for the experiment explained in details the
rules of the game and included several test questions to
make sure that the participants understood correctly the
rules. There were four instructions that varied only in the
explanation for the total monetary payoff distribution. They
are quoted below because they define the relational models
in the four conditions:
•
Unity condition – ‘Each of you will receive the amount
of money you have earned together’;
•
Hierarchy condition – ‘You will get 2/3 of the total
amount of money of the pair, and the other player will
get 1/3 of it (for one of the players). You will get 1/3 of

Method
Stimuli
A sequence of 40 Prisoner’s dilemma games is used in the
experiment. All of the games used had the payoff matrix
given in Figure 2. At the beginning of the series there were

410

the total amount of money of the pair, and the other
player will get 2/3 of it (for the second player)’;
•
Equality condition – ‘The total amount of money of the
pair will be split equally between you and the other
player’;
•
Proportionality condition – ‘The total amount of
money of the pair will be split between you and the
other player in accordance with the number of points
each of you has earned’.
The game was presented in a formal and a neutral
formulation. On the interface, the cooperation move was
labeled ‘1’ and the defection move was labeled ‘2’.
However, further in the paper, for convenience, we will
continue to use cooperation instead of move ‘1’ and
defection instead of move ‘2’. Matlab 7.6.0 (R2008a) was
used for presenting the game and recording the choiches of
the players.
After each game the subjects got feedback about their own
and the other player’s choice and payoffs in the current game.
They could also constantly monitor their own total payoff; the
total payoff of the other player; the total payoff for the pair,
and the monetary equivalent of the total payoff of the pair
(that is to be distributed among them).
Participants were instructed to try to maximize the amount
of money they will get. Subjects were paid real money
accordingly to the final payoff in the game. Players in the
unity condition received the same amount of money for
1000 points as participants in the other 3 conditions received
for 500 points. Thus we tried to equate the absolute
magnitude of the monetary payoff that the participants could
receive during the experiment.
Each session lasted about 20 minutes.

Average total payoff for a dyad (in points) is analyzed
to assess which type of payoff distribution led to higher
profits.
Each dependent variable is analyzed in ANOVA with
distribution model as between-subject factor with 4 levels
(unity vs. hierarchy vs. equality vs. proportionality).

Participants

Post-hoc LSD test shows that the cooperation rate in the
proportionality condition is significantly lower than the
cooperation rate in the unity condition (p = 0.003) and in the
equality condition (p = 0.002). The difference between
cooperation rates in proportionality condition and hierarchy
condition is marginally significant (p = 0.065). All other
differences are non-significant.
It seems that the type of distributional model influences
the cooperation rate. Cooperation is lower when each player
gets a portion of the total payoff that is proportional to
his/her payoffs during the game. In the terminology of the
Fiske’s theory, the market pricing relational model leads to
diminished cooperation in comparison to the other three
relational models. When the final payoff for the player
depends on his/her individual results, the choices are more
non-cooperative in comparison to the cases in which the
total payoff of the pair is divided between players (no matter
in what predefined proportions) and when each player
received the total amount earned by both of them.

Cooperation
The cooperative choices (%) for each distribution type are
presented in Figure 3. The analysis shows a significant
influence of the distribution type on the number of
cooperative moves (F(3, 76) = 4.49, p = 0.006).

Figure 3: Average percentage of cooperative choices in each
distribution condition (‘*’ means p < 0.05; ‘(*)’ –
marginally significant difference).

80 participants (47 female, 33 male) took part in the
experiment. All of them were university students, mean age
23.3 years.
They were tested in 40 pairs – 10 pairs in each
experimental condition. Participants were randomly assigned
to the experimental condition. In the hierarchy condition, it
was randomly determined which player will get 1/3 and wich
player – 2/3 of the total payoff of the pair.
Subjects who have previously played the Prisoner’s
dilemma game were not allowed to participate in the study.

Results
To explore the influence of payoff distribution model on
choices and cooperation in the PD games, the following
dependent variables are analyzed: number of cooperative
choices for each player; number of games with mutual
cooperation in a pair; number of games with mutual
defection in a pair. In the figures results are presented in
percentages for clarity. However, the analysis is performed
using the specified dependent variables.

Mutual Cooperation
Average percentage of games in which there is mutual
cooperation (both players have chosen to cooperate) is
presented in Figure 4.

411

The ANOVA does not identify a statistically significant
influence of the distribution type on the number of mutual
cooperative game outcomes (F(3, 36) = 1.94, p = 0.141).
However, a further conducted Post-hoc LSD test shows that
difference exists between the proportionality and equality
condition (p = 0.038). A marginally significant difference is
observed between the proportionality and unity condition (p
= 0.079).

thus the dilemma structure of the game arises as the
opposition between individual and collective rationality.

Figure 5: Average percentage of mutual defection in a
pair in each distribution condition (‘*’ means p < 0.05).

Average Payoff
Figure 4: Average percentage of mutual cooperation in a
pair in each distribution condition (‘*’ means p < 0.05; ‘(*)’
– marginally significant difference).

The payoff analysis was conducted on the basis of the
average payoff per pair (in points) for the sequence of 40
games (Figure 6). The ANOVA shows a significant
influence of the distribution type on the payoff (F(3, 76) =
3.271, p = 0.026).

It turns out that mutual cooperation is lower when the
payoff of each player depends on his individual contribution
compared to the situations in which players divide their
joint winnings in equal shares or receive the total amount
earned. This is a rather logical result in line with the
assumption of the current study that the distribution type
representing communal sharing or equality matching will
promote collectivistic orientation; while money pricing
relationship will most probably trigger an individualistic
behavior among subject.

Mutual Defection
Average percentage of games with mutual defection (both
players have chosen to defect) is presented in Figure 5.
For the number of games with mutual defection the
ANOVA shows a significant influence of the distribution
type (F(3, 36) = 3.943, p = 0.016). Post-hoc LSD test
identifies differences between the proportionality condition
and every other condition in the experiment – unity (p =
0.006), hierarchy (p = 0.032), and equality (p = 0.005).
Therefore, it can be concluded that when distribution of
payoff is conducted according to individual results, mutual
defection is a much more typical choice in comparison to all
other distribution cases. In all other conditions this outcome
(mutual defection) is relatively low. It should be noted that
mutual defection leads to the lowest possible payoff for the
pair. As noted in the introduction, the defection is dominant
strategy for each individual player; however, mutual
defection leads to the worst possible payoff for the society –

Figure 6: Average payoff per sequence of 40 games for a
pair in each distribution condition (‘*’ means p < 0.05; ‘(*)’
– marginally significant difference).
Significant differences were established through post-hoc
LSD test between the proportionality and unity condition (p
= 0.011) and between the proportionality and equality
condition (p = 0.006). Marginally significant is the
difference between the proportionality and hierarchy
condition (p = 0.093).
The total payoff of a pair is lower when its distribution
among the players depends on the individual contribution
and points earned. This is a rather paradoxical result taking

412

into account that such a distribution is representing the
market pricing relational model, which is mostly related to
individualistic attitude and profit orientation. However,
taking into account that in the proportionality condition
there is the highest number of games with mutual defection,
the result is not surprising and could be explained by the
lower payoff that the players get when both are noncooperative.

Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of
cooperation. Science, 211, 1390-1396.
Colman, A. (2003). Cooperation, psychological game
theory, and limitations of rationality in social interaction.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26, 139-198.
Cooper, R., DeJong, D. V., Forsythe, R., & Ross, T. W.
(1996). Cooperation without reputation: Experimental
evidence from Prisoner's dilemma games. Games and
Economic Behavior, 12,187-218.
Dawes, R. (1980). Social dilemmas. Annual Review of
Psychology, 31, 169-193.
Durkin, J., Frost, M., Aronow, E., & Breslow, M. (1967).
Moment of truth encounters in prisoner's dilemma.
American Psychologist, 22, 595.
Fiske, A. P. (1991). Structures of social life: The four
elementary forms of human relations: Communal sharing,
authority ranking, equality matching, market pricing.
New York, NY: Free Press.
Fiske, A. P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality:
framework for a unified theory of social relations.
Psychological Review, 99, 689-723.
Fiske, A. P., & Haslam, N., (1996). Social cognition is
thinking about relationships. Current directions in
psychological science, 5, 143-148.
Gärdenfors, P. (2003). How Homo became Sapiens. Oxford
University Press.
Grinberg, M., Hristova E., & Lalev, E. (2010) Models for
cooperative decisions in prisoner’s dilemma. In: Nefti, S.
& Gray, J. (Eds.), Advances in Cognitive Systems. IET:
London.
Haslam, N. (Ed.) (2004). Relational models theory: a
contemporary overview. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Komorita, S., Hilty, J., & Parks, C. (1991). Reciprocity and
cooperation in social dilemmas. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 35, 494-518.
Kreps, D., Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., & Wilson, R. (1982).
Rational cooperation in the finitely repeated Prisoner’s
dilemma’. Journal of Economic Theory, 27, 245-252.
McGraw, A. P., Tetlock, P. E., & Kristel, O. V. (2003). The
Limits of fungibility: relational schemata and the value of
things. Journal of Consumer Research, 36, 219-229.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. (1965). Prisoner’s dilemma:
a study in conflict and cooperation. Univ. of Michigan
Press.
Rai, T. S., & Fiske, A. P. (2011). Moral psychology is
relationship regulation: Moral motives for unity,
hierarchy, equality, and proportionality. Psychological
Review, 117, 57-75.
Sally, D. (1995). Conversation and cooperation in social
dilemmas. A meta-analysis of experiments from 1958 to
1992. Rationality and Society, 7, 58-92.
Sally, D. (2001). On sympathy and games. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 44, 1-30.
Trivers, R. (1972). The evolution of reciprocal altruism.
Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 35-37.

Conclusions and Discussion
The current paper presents an experimental study on the
phenomenon of cooperation in Prisoner’s dilemma game in
the light of Fiske’s Relational models theory. The
experiment was designed to explore the influence of the
different distribution types of the total payoff (thus
reflecting the four elementary human relations according to
Fiske’s theory) on the level of individual and mutual
cooperative and non-cooperative behavior.
The results show that the distribution type corresponding
to the individualistic Market Pricing relational model is
characterized by a lower cooperation, lower mutual
cooperation, higher mutual defection and lower total payoff
of the participating subjects in comparison to the other
distribution situations. When players are rewarded based on
their individual results, they cooperate less and receive
lower payoffs (for each player and for the dyad of players).
This is an interesting result taking into account the fact that
in formal game theory, in many experiments, in many real
life situations, the players are perceived as individualistic
beings. And there are attempts to apply policies aimed at
achieving higher collective payoff by profit distribution
accordingly to the contribution of each individual. Current
results demonstrate that such distribution in fact leads to
significantly lower total collective earnings.
An interesting topic for reflections and further research is
whether a behavioral model representing competitiveness
and profit-orientation might actually be effective in
achieving its goals within the Prisoner’s dilemma game
model, respectfully within real life situations depicting this
model.
Another related direction for exploration is hierarchy
condition. Generally speaking, this condition could lead to
higher cooperation despite the difference in received payoffs
if the relation between the players is perceived as an in-team
relation. This could be achieved by justifying the role
attribution in this condition with some game related
advantage (e.g. a better strategy in the test games).
A broader implications of these results might be
applicable not only to studies of decision making in games,
but also to socio-economical policies employed by
organizations, governments, etc.

References
Andreoni, J., & Miller, J. (1993). Rational cooperation in
the finitely repeated Prisoner’s dilemma: experimental
evidence. The Economic Journal, 103, 570-585.

413

