UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Creative Process of Improvised Street Dance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/48d9p90x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Shimizu, Daichi
Shultz, Takeshi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Creative Process of Improvised Street Dance
Daichi Shimizu (tothefuture0415@yahoo.co.jp)
Graduate School of Education, University of Tokyo
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Takeshi Okada (okadatak@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, &
Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, University of Tokyo
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
Abstract

suggested that they often utilized specific formulas (50-90%
of each performance) in their performances.
Tayanagi (2010) investigated the literature and the
biographies of professional jazz musicians theoretically, and
claimed that accepting inevitable errors in performance and
utilizing these errors is very important for innovation and
the production of new patterns in jazz music. This
suggestion is consistent with the claim of Pressing (1984).
Bailey (1980) investigated the cognitive process of
improvisation by interviewing professional musicians in
many genres of music. Based on anecdotal evidence, he
suggested that there are differences in music between
improvisations by one person and improvisations by
multiple persons.
From these suggestions, we could summarize the features
of improvisations as follows. 1) Performers use fixedpatterns. 2) Performers utilize the errors which are
inevitably generated to make new patterns. 3) The number
of person participating in the improvisation makes some
difference.

This paper presents findings from our empirical study of the
creative process of improvisation, which has rarely been the
subject of research in cognitive science. In this study, battle
scenes in street dance were selected as an example of
improvised performances. We conducted an experiment to
investigate real-time cognitive processes. The results
indicated three features: 1) Dancers mainly used wellpracticed patterns, and discovered new patterns of dance; 2)
In the process of discovering new patterns, dancers often
utilized errors in their performance; 3) The processes of
discovery were different in the performance of one dancer
(solo scene) and the performance of two dancers (battle
scene). In solo performance, dancers discovered new patterns
by concentrating on their patterned dance. In battle
performance, dancers discovered new patterns by utilizing
stimuli from the situation (e.g. the music, their opponent) and
using errors as an opportunity to loosen the constraints of
their well-practiced patterns.
Keywords: Improvisation; Street dance; Personal discovery;
Utilizing errors; Battle scenes

Personal discoveries of new ideas in improvisations

Introduction
Improvisations such as jazz or improvisational dance or
drama are complicated human activities which seldom
become research subjects in cognitive science. However,
improvisations are thought to be the origin of many
activities in the arts (see Bailey, 1980). The moment when a
person gains new ideas is considered to be related to
improvisational patterns (Pressing, 1984). Based on these
suggestions, improvisations are thought to be a core element
in human creativity.

Features of improvisational activities
Most previous studies dealing with improvisation have
investigated jazz music (e.g., Mendonça & Wallace, 2004;
Tayanagi, 2010; Weisberg et al., 2004). Mendonça &
Wallace (2004) investigated the duo performance of jazz
musicians, and suggested that musicians use some fixed
patterns in improvisation. They also suggested that a
musician utilizes the music of the other musician as a
guideline for his own musical performance.
Weisberg et al. (2004) examined records of the
improvisations of professional jazz musicians, and

In this study, we investigated the process of improvisational
activities, paying special attention to “personal discoveries”.
“Personal discovery” is defined as the discovery of new
ideas, expressions or techniques occurring in creative
activities, which the performers (creators) did not envisage
prior to these activities. This concept mostly focused on the
cognitive process of creators, and from this point of view,
personal discovery is strongly related to Psychological
Creativity (creativity which results in processes or products
that are new and useful to the creators themselves), as
Boden (1991) suggested. The personal discovery in dance is
a movement which may not be new in a general sense, but is
new to the dancer performing it. Many researchers have
suggested that unpredicted findings like personal
discoveries play important roles in creating new products or
making scientific discoveries (e.g., Dunbar, 1993; Suwa &
Tversky, 1997). In the case of improvisations, personal
discoveries also play important roles when creating new
products, expressions or techniques which performers did
not envisage in advance (Bailey, 1980). In this sense,
improvisation involves personal discovery as its core.

Breakdance as an improvisational activity

2321

This study deals with the battle scenes of breakdance (a
major genre in street dance) as an example of improvisation.
Breakdance first appeared in Manhattan in the late 1970s,
and has spread widely around the world. This dance consists
of four patterns: entry (dance in a standing position),
footwork (dance performed on the floor), power moves
(dance with acrobatic movements like rolling), and freeze
(dance poses held in acrobatic positions) (OHJI, 2001). In
the battle scenes, dancers stand facing one another and
perform their improvisational dance for 30-40 seconds in
turns. Dancers in break dance have to perform while
listening to unfamiliar music, communicating with an
opponent, and responding to the dance of the opponent.
Hence, the battle scenes of breakdance are highly
improvisational. Therefore, it is appropriate to use battle
scenes as the object of research into improvisational
activities.

Purposes of this study
This study investigates the cognitive processes of dancers in
battle scenes of breakdance, which are considered to be an
example of an improvisational activity. Specifically, we
focus on three questions based on the findings of previous
studies: 1) How often are fixed patterns of dance used? In
previous studies, it has been hypothesized that fixed patterns
are used in improvisation more than 50% of the time. 2) Do
dancers utilize the errors which are inevitably generated in
improvisational dance to find new patterns of dance
movements? If so, how do they utilize these errors? 3) Are
the improvisational activities of a solo dancer different from
the improvisational activities of multiple dancers? In order
to answer these questions, we conducted an experiment with
dancers.

Methods
Participants
Fourteen semi-expert dancers participated in this experiment
(mean age 24.5 (SD=3.8), mean experience 6.5 years
(SD=4.4)). The level of skill of the dancers was evaluated
from the following two aspects: the acquisition and use of
the basic skills required for the four patterns of dance, and
the acquisition and use of advanced skills relating to power
moves (highly skilled movements). The evaluation was
conducted by the first author using a videotape recorded
during the experiment. As a result of this evaluation, we
found that all the subjects had advanced levels of skill in
addition to the basic skills of breakdance and were able to
perform various patterns of movements in breakdance.

Procedure
In this experiment we set two conditions, the solo scene
condition and the battle scene condition. The only
difference between the solo scene and the battle scene was
that there was no opponent (dance partner) and so no dance
by an opponent in the solo scene. This solo condition was

set to investigate question 3, relating to differences arising
from the number of persons. Both scenes used the same
music (Bomb the Bass, “Megablast”). The experiment was
conducted in one room of the gymnasium of the university.
The room size was 14.4 x 14.5 meters. The performances
were recorded on video.
This experiment consisted of three different sessions: 1)
Preparative session (explanation of experimental procedure
and warm up); 2) Performance session; 3) Post-performance
session (dancers’ reflections on their own movements and
thoughts during the dance performances).
1) We explained to the participants the outline of this
experiment, i.e., the design of the experiment (two
independent variables, solo scene and battle scene), and
the resting time between the two sections. Then, we
told the subjects to take about 30 minutes to warm up.
2) Each dancer performed the solo or the battle scene. For
each scene, the dancers performed for about 30-40
seconds and then took a 30-40 seconds interval (in the
solo scene, they just waited without dancing, and in
battle scene, they watched the opponent dancing). They
repeated this set three times. Music was continually
playing during each scene. Just before the performance,
we explained to the dancers the details of each scene
(three sets of dances and intervals), and asked them to
perform naturally as in a usual battle scene. For the solo
scene, we instructed the dancers to perform as if it were
a battle scene, pretending there was an opponent.
3) We asked the dancers to reflect on their dance
performances and report their thoughts during the dance
(Figure 2). First, the dancers watched videos of their
dance performances, and they segmented their dance
movements into meaningful units. Then the dancers
evaluated each dance segment using a creativity score
(novelty and dexterity), and reported what they were
thinking while dancing each segment.
We conducted these three sessions for one scene (solo or
battle), took a break of about an hour, then repeated sessions
2 and 3 for the other scene. The order of the scenes was
counterbalanced.

Outline of analyses
In this study, we analyzed the processes of improvisation
with three sets of data: 1) Creativity score of dancers (selfevaluation); 2) Self-report of cognitive process by dancers
(report of thoughts): 3) Categorization of dance movements
based on the usage of the four types of movements
(categorization of dance movements).
1) We used the data from the creativity scores of dancers.
Through the use of these data, we aimed at investigating the
features of dance movements from the dancers' own
viewpoints. The objects of the creativity score (novelty1 and

1

This consists of 3 rating scores: Dance 1) is well practiced; 2) is
not well practiced, but has been performed before; 3) has never
been performed. We used these scores because in the preliminary
interviews with other dancers, the dancers told us that to judge the

2322

Table 1. Mean number and percentage of dance movements corresponding to each novelty score (sum of three trials)
Scene

Score 1
(well-practiced)

Solo
Battle

8.2(4.64) 66%
8.1(4.95) 66%

Score 2 (not well-practiced, but
has been performed before)

Score 3
(has never been performed)

3.1(2.88) 25%
3.0(1.66) 25%

1.1(1.41) 9%
1.1(1.29) 9%

Table 2. Mean number and percentage of dance movements corresponding to each dexterity score (sum of three
trials)
Scene
Solo
Battle

Score 1
(very poor)
1.64(1.60) 13%
2.00(2.18) 16%

Score 2
(poor)

Score 3
(moderate)

3.36(1.22) 27%
3.50(2.03) 29%

4.64(3.05) 37%
4.29(2.92) 35%

dexterity2) were based on previous studies of creativity (e.g.,
Finke et al., 1992).
We summed up the data of the creativity scores and
conducted statistical analyses. In addition, we identified
dance movements with high creativity scores (2 or 3 for
novelty and 4 or 5 for dexterity), and analyzed the data.
These high-scoring dance movements reflect the dancers’
personal discoveries, because they reported the new and
useful movements that they had “discovered”. By analyzing
them, we were able to investigate the features of “personal
discoveries” in each scene.
2) We used the answers to the question, “What were you
thinking while you were dancing these particular
movements?” in the report on cognition. In the analyses, we
categorized the focus of consideration of the dancers while
dancing and classified each statement according to the
category. By analyzing what the dancers were giving their
consideration, we were able to investigate the points about
which the dancers thought deeply in each scene. In addition,
we identified the statements about high-scoring dance
movements which were thought to reflect their personal
discovery, and analyzed them using these categories. By
analyzing them, we were able to investigate the focus of
consideration of the dancers when generating new patterns.
3) We used the data from the performances of the dancers
(dance movements in performance sessions), and
categorized them into the four types of breakdance. By
comparing the number of movements of each type between
the solo scene and battle scene, we were able to investigate
the nature of dance movements in each scene objectively.

Results and Discussion
Before analyzing the details of the data, we compared the
basic features of both scenes (the time of performance, the
number of dance segments). We conducted a paired t-test on
practice level, a 3-point rating was much more suitable than a 5point rating.
2
This consists of five rating scores: Dance is: 1) very poor; 2)
poor; 3) moderate; 4) good; 5) very good).

Score 4
(good)
2.29(2.27) 18%
2.00(2.25) 16%

Score 5
(very good)
0.57(0.94) 5%
0.43(0.85) 3%

these data and found that there was no statistical difference
between the two scenes (solo: 95.4 (23.26) 3 seconds, battle:
86.3 (16.52) seconds, t (13) =1.68, p=.12) (solo: 12.5 (5.07),
battle: 12.2 (4.93), t (13) =0.75, p=.75) 4

Creativity score of dancers
Novelty score (Table 1)
Using a sign test, we conducted a contrast analysis of each
novelty score (score 1 - score 3) in the solo scene and the
battle scene. As a result, we found that there were no
differences between the two scenes (the p-values of scores 1,
2, 3 were p=.79, p=.58, p=1.00). Then we examined the
number and percentage of each novelty score in each scene
to determine which scores frequently appear. As shown in
Table 1, there were high degrees of appearance of score 1 in
both scenes. The percentages of score 1 are 66% in mean
rate in both scenes. These results show that dancers mainly
use well-practiced, somewhat patterned dance movements in
improvisational activities.
Dexterity score (Table 2)
Using a sign test, we conducted a contrast analysis of each
dexterity score (score 1 - score 3) in the solo scene and the
battle scene. As a result, we found that there were no
differences between the two scenes (the p-values of scores 1,
2, 3, 4, 5 are p=.79, p=.58, p=1.00, p=1.00, p=.63). Then we

3

In this study, we used the mean score which sums up the three
trials in the performance session in each scene.
4
These data have high degrees of SD and are thought to be out of
Gaussian distribution. We conducted a sign test to eliminate the
influence of individual differences. Analyses show the same results
as the t-test (time of performance: p=.12, number of dance
movements: p=.75). The reason why high degrees of SD appear
seems to be as follows. Each dancer performs a trial using a
subjective time scale acquired through his/her dance experience.
Each one may have a different subjective time span. The sizes of
chunks of dance that dancers think of as a dance unit may differ
individually. Based on this supposition, we employed a statistical
test that utilizes the comparison of each individual (like a sign test).

2323

Table 3. Definition of the categories and mean number (sum of three trials)
Higher category

A: Consideration of
their own dance

Lower category
a: Well-practiced
dance movements
b: New patterns
c: Dance composition
d: Music

B: Consideration of
information about
the situation

e: Opponent (partner)
f: Physical position

C: Consideration of
other factors

g: No specific
consideration
h: Other factors

Definition
Dancers consider well-practiced
dance
Dancers give consideration to new
patterns of dance
Dancers give consideration to the
composition of their dance
Dancers give consideration to the
music
Dancers give consideration to their
partner
Dancers give consideration to their
physical position
Dancers give no consideration to
anything specific
Dancers give consideration to other
factors

examined the number and percentage of each dexterity score
in each scene. The results showed that scores 2 and 3
frequently appeared in both scenes. Hence, we are able to
suggest that dancers mainly use dance movements which
show similar dexterity to well-practiced dance movements.
Dance movements corresponding to personal
discoveries
We identified high creativity scoring dance movements (2
or 3 for novelty and 4 or 5 for dexterity) and examined their
rates of appearance in both scenes.
The results show that there are 14 high-scoring dance
movements (8% of all the dance movements) in the solo
scene, and 17 high-scoring dance movements (10% of all
the dance movements) in the battle scene. Even in the shorttime performances (80-100 sec.) in this experiment, dancers
found new patterns and made personal discoveries. The
result that there are high-rated uses of patterned dance
movements indicates that dancers in improvisation mainly
use patterned dance movements and gradually find new
patterns through improvisation. To compare the rate of
appearance between each scene, we conducted a sign test
and found that there was no statistical difference (p=.51).

Consideration of dancers in performances
Analyses of statements about all dance movements
(Table 3)
The κ coefficient was calculated by the first author and a
researcher who did not know the purpose of this study,
using about 20% of all the data, 70 dance movements, to
check the reliability of the rating. The κ coefficient was
74.1%, which guarantees the reliability of the ratings. Using
a sign test, we conducted a contrast analysis to compare the
number of each category in the solo and the battle scenes.
The results show that there were statistical differences in c)

Solo

Battle

3.1 (2.57) 27%

2.4 (2.03) 21%

0.6 (0.93) 4%

0.5 (0.76) 4%

1.6 (1.09) 10%

0.8 (0.70) 6%

2.5 (2.14) 19%

2.6 (2.34) 23%

0.2 (0.43) 2%

1.7 (1.20) 14%

1.4 (1.28) 10%

2.1 (1.46) 16%

2.3 (1.98) 21%

1.5 (2.35) 11%

0.9 (1.10) 7%

0.5 (0.65) 5%

Consideration of dance composition, e) Consideration of the
opponent, f) Consideration of the dancer's own physical
position (p=.039, p=.003, p=.065). In the solo scene,
dancers often think about the composition of whole dance
movements. In contrast, in the battle scene, the dancers
consider information about the situation (opponent, physical
position).
We also compared the numbers and percentages in each
category in each scene to determine frequently appearing
categories. As shown in Table 3, in the solo scene, a)
Consideration of well-practiced dance movements, d)
Consideration of the music, g) No specific consideration,
and in the battle scene, a) Consideration of well-practiced
dance movements, d) Consideration of the music, e)
Consideration of opponent, f) Consideration of the physical
position appeared more frequently than other categories.
Thus, we conclude that in the solo scene, dancers think
about well-practiced dance movements or the music, and
construct performances considering the whole composition
of their dance movements. In contrast, in the battle scene,
dancers consider the situation (music, opponent, physical
position) more closely than their own movements. The
reason why these differences were shown was as follows.
Since in the solo scene with no opponent, dancers did not
have to communicate with the opponent, they could
concentrate on their own performance. However in the
battle scene, dancers need to communicate with the
opponent and to deal with changes in the situation (OHJI,
2001), so they concentrated on information about the
situation. We describe the details of these processes below.
Analyses of statements about dance
corresponding to personal discoveries

2324

movements

Table 4. Example statement about the process of personal
discovery in a solo scene

Table 5. An example statement about the process of
personal discovery in a battle scene

S171: Why did you rate this dance as novelty score 2?
G173: What should I say? I did an uprock in this dance.
Usually, I don’t perform this movement a lot.
S172: Is that this movement? (Watching the video).
G174: Yes. Because of this movement, I rated this dance as
score 2.
S173: Why did you suddenly sit down? When you
performed this movement, what were you thinking?
G175: I thought that in trial 1 or 2, I had danced in a
standing position a lot, and I didn’t do a move like sitting
down. So I did this sitting movement in trial 3.
S174: So was this a movement which you tried to do
intentionally?
G176: Yes, I decided on it just before the movement.
In this section, we focus on the objects of consideration of
dancers in personal discoveries by analysing the data of
high creativity score dance movements. Because of the low
number of corresponding dance movements, we could not
find a statistical difference between the two scenes.
However, the results suggest that c) Consideration of
composition, d) Consideration of the music, and g) No
specific consideration frequently appeared in the solo scene
(numbering 4 dance movements, 5 dance movements, 4
dance movements, out of a total of 14 dance movements). In
the battle scene, d) Consideration of the music, e)
Consideration of the opponent, f) Consideration of physical
position frequently appeared (respectively, 8 dance
movements, 3 dance movements, 4 dance movements, out
of a total of 17 dance movements). From these results, we
conclude that dancers consider their dance movements and
make personal discoveries in the solo scene, while dancers
in the battle scene consider information about the situation
more closely and make personal discoveries.
Besides these implications, two statements (Table 4, 5)
about personal discoveries suggest that in the solo scene,
dancers considered the context of each dance movement,
and intentionally made new patterns of dance movements.
In contrast, in the battle scene the dancers tried to consider
the situation, and deal with changes in the situation.
However, they were able to make use of only limited
patterns of well-practiced dance movements. Failure in
dynamical dance movements such as power moves (one of
the four core patterns in breakdance) leads to a loosening of
the restrictions of the patterned dance movements, and the
dancers are able to find new patterns.
Differences between the solo scene and the battle scene
We investigated the reasons why differences between the
solo scene and the battle scene existed. One participant
clearly mentioned how the two scenes differed (Table 6). In

S141: Do you usually find new patterns in a battle scene?
B144: I usually don’t use only fixed patterns. When
performing, I just think what techniques (movements) I
should use next. So, that was it. I just wanted to do a short
one. I also thought that I would use free and flexible dance
movements in the rest of the performance. I'm always
ready for freeze movements anytime when it's necessary.
S142: So, do you dance with flexible combinations of
movements when you dance freely?
B145: Yes, I always use flexible combinations, maybe.
However, even in those combinations, I might have a
tendency to use some particular combinations of fixed
patterns.
S143: What do you think about this dance in terms of your
tendency?
B146: This dance is not in keeping with that tendency. It
goes against the tendency. T (the opponent) might have
thought that this dance looked great.
S144: Why do you think you performed dance in this way?
B147: Hmm, my physical position after doing Trax5 in that
situation was probably a little different from the usual one.
I didn't think of anything when performing.
S145: You didn't think of anything during the performance,
but the physical position was different from usual.
B148: It's different, but maybe the music is one of the
factors that caused it.
the solo scene, which had no opponent, dancers tended to
perform well-practiced dance movements, not to fail and to
arouse the audience, and they concentrated on their own
performance. In contrast, in the battle scene, the dancers had
to consider the improvisational communications with their
opponent, which were thought to be an important factor in
the battle scene, and they tried to think about the
information (music, opponent) and to perform dynamical,
impressive dance movements such as power moves.

Features of dance movements in each scene
We conducted a contrast analysis to compare the features of
dance movements in solo and battle scenes in terms of the
frequency of the four types of movement. The results of the
sign test show that there were statistical differences in entry
(dance movements in a standing position) (solo scene: 42.4
(22.18) seconds, battle scene: 33.3 (12.18) seconds) and
power moves (dance with acrobatic movements like rolling)
(solo scene: 15.1 (13.5) seconds, battle scene: 17.5 (10.55)
seconds) (p=.057, p=.092). These results suggest that
dancers perform dynamical movements (like rolling or
5
One of the dance movements which is categorized as a power
move.

2325

Table 6. An example statement about the difference
between the two scenes
M94: In the battle scene, I usually compose my dance
movements, taking the situation of the place into account,
while watching the dance of opponent. But in the solo
scene, since I’m used to performing in public, I use wellpracticed and skilled dance movements.
S94: You use mainly well-practiced dance movements?
M95: Yes, it was so in the solo scenes. In the battle scene, I
wanted to pay more attention to my partner.
S95: What do you think makes this difference between the
two scenes?
M96: Partners are an essential part in battle scenes.
Communication with the partner is important and an
interesting aspect of the battle scene. A dancer who is
good at that communication looks cool, I think. In the solo
scene, however, to be applauded is important, and I want
to give a skilled performance to accomplish it. So I tend to
use well-practiced dance movements.
jumping) more frequently in the battle scene. This result
matches with the inference of the previous section, which
suggested that dancers considered the opponent and tended
to perform dynamical dance movements more frequently in
the battle scene.

General Discussion
This study has investigated the cognitive processes of
dancers in improvisational activities such as the battle scene
of breakdance, focusing on personal discoveries. The results
have shown the following three findings. 1) Dancers mainly
used fixed patterns of dance movements (about 60-70% of
the whole dance) and gradually found new patterns of dance
movements in improvisational activities. 2) By failing in
dynamical movements, they were able to loosen the
constraints of fixed patterns of dance movements, and found
new patterns. 3) The processes of personal discovery
(finding new patterns) varied with the presence of an
opponent (partner). With reference to point 3, the following
two processes have been revealed. In the absence of an
opponent, the dancers thought about their own dance
movements, and found new patterns by considering
carefully the composition of their dance movements. In
presence of an opponent, dancers considered the
information about the situation (such as the music,
opponent), and tended to perform dynamical dance
movements more frequently. Then, when failing in these
dynamical movements, they had to continue their
performance from the present physical position that was
different from their dominant (fixed) patterns, and they were
able to find new patterns that were beyond fixed patterns.
This study has contributed new and clear findings about
the features of improvisation based on the findings of
previous studies (e.g., Mendonça & Wallace, 2004; Pressing,
1984; Tayanagi, 2010). Through a concrete example, we

describe the process by which dancers utilized errors to
make new movement patterns, relaxing the constraints of
their fixed patterns. In addition, we have focused on the
original aspect of “the differences between improvisational
activity of one person and that of multiple persons”. The
fact that there are differences between solo and
collaborative activities has been suggested in many domains,
especially in the domain of creativity (e.g., Okada & Simon,
1997, in scientific discovery). However, there has been no
clear suggestion of these differences in the domain of
improvisation. This study contributes original insight into
the domain of improvisation.
In order to acquire more detailed understandings of
improvisation, further studies are needed to solve problems
such as the problem of generalization and research method.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our gratitude to all the participants
for having spent so much time on our research and for
giving us extremely useful suggestions about breakdance.

References
Bailey, D. (1980). Improvisation: Its Nature and Practice in
Music. Buxton: Moorland Publishing.
Boden, M. A. (1991). The creative mind: Myths and
mechanisms. New York: Basic Books.
Dunbar, K. (1993). Concept discovery in a scientific domain.
Cognitive Science, 17, 397-434.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
cognition: Theory, research, and applications. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Mendonça, D. & Wallace, W. A. (2004). Cognition in Jazz
Improvisation: An Exploratory Study. Proceeding of the
26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
5-10). Chicago, IL: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
OHJI. (2001). ROOTS OF STREET DANCE. Tokyo:
Bunkasha.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Collaborative discovery
in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 22, 107-130.
Pressing, J. (1984). Cognitive processes in improvisation. In
Crozier, W. R., & Chapman, A. J. (Eds.), Cognitive
processes in the perception of art. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Suwa, M., & Tversky, B. (1997). What do architects and
students perceive in their design sketches？ A protocol
analysis. Design Studies, 18, 385-403.
Tayanagi, E. (2010). Performance design and innovation in
music: A case of improvisation and innovation in modern
jazz. Cognitive Studies, 17, 459-473.
Weisberg, R. W., Brinkman, A. R., Folio, C. J., Dick, A.,
Fleck, J. I., Niederberg, B., & Barrett, F. (2004).
Towards a cognitive analysis of creativity: Improvisation
in jazz. In R. Parncutt, & A. Kessler, & F. Zimmer, (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Conference on Interdisciplinary
Musicology (CIM04). Graz/Austria: University of Graz.

2326

