UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Designing Better Scaffolding in Simulation-Based Learning Environments Teaching Science
Systems: A Pilot Study Report

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40x6755b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Li, Na
Black, John
Gao, Mengzi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Designing Better Scaffolding in Simulation-Based Learning Environments
Teaching Science Systems: A Pilot Study Report
Na Li (nl2284@tc.columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th street
New York, NY 10025 USA

John Black (black@exchange.tc.columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th street
New York, NY 10025 USA

Mengzi Gao (mg3220@tc.columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th street
New York, NY 10025 USA

refers to the roles of the elements or the outcomes caused by
the elements’ behaviors (Hmelo-Silver, Marathe& Liu,
2007). Explaining mechanism and causality is usually
difficult for learners especially when the systems have
hierarchical levels (Duncan & Reiser, 2007). One important
pedagogical implication from these studies is to provide
hierarchical instructional scaffolding based on the SBF
framework to help learners iteratively modify their
conceptual representations (Liu & Hmelo, 2009).

Abstract
Systems are an important part in today’s science education.
Computer simulations have many advantages in teaching
science systems. Our research goal is to test whether a
hierarchical instructional scaffolding framework embedded in
simulation-based learning environments and retrospective
mental modeling task could facilitate mental model
construction in learning science systems. This pilot study was
conducted with a sample of adult learners who didn’t have
strong science background. They were asked to learn a
chemical system in a simulation-based environment. The
results show that participants in the hierarchical scaffolding
condition performed better than the non-hierarchical
scaffolding condition. The retrospective mental modeling task
could enhance learning only within the hierarchical
scaffolding condition; while in the non-hierarchical
scaffolding condition, the task was detrimental to learning.
Based on the results from the pilot study, an 8 session
curriculum teaching ideal gas laws to middle school students
has been designed for our future study.

Mental Models of Science Systems

Keywords: Science systems; simulation-based learning
environments; scaffolding.

Research Background
Systems thinking skills have become increasingly important
in today’s science education. Scientific explanation of
mechanism is usually difficult in learning a system
(Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). Studies have demonstrated
that learning systems thinking skills go through several
sequential stages before learners are able to grasp a network
of mechanics-function relations (Assaraf & Orion, 2005);
for example, studies on the reasoning processes of complex
systems show that novices focus more on the structure of
the system, while experts tend to reason around mechanism
and functions of the system (Jacobson, 2001).
Structure-Behavior-Function framework (SBF) provides a
language to describe experts’ and novices’ conceptual
representations of systemic knowledge (Hmelo-Silver,
Marathe& Liu, 2007). Structure refers to the elements of the
system, behavior refers the mechanism of how the elements
act and interact leading to certain outcomes; and function

Mental models are internalized representations of the
structural and functional relations of the reality (JohnsonLaird, 1983). The constructivist perspectives imply that
mental model construction goes through trajectories, and
iterative mental model modification could be very effective
(Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992). Learning science systems
usually require learners to construct mental models with
various entities and a network function relations among the
entities, well scaffolded step-wise learning could produce
better structured conceptual representations (Clement &
Steinberg, 2002).
Active mental modeling, or active rule-driven
visualization, involves cognitive processes such as mentally
manipulate the visual information to solve a problem
(Briggs & Bodner, 2005). Learners’ knowledge of a system
could still be fragmented after initial learning, retrospective
mental modeling around system functions with “what” and
“how” questions could facilitate internal information
organization, and enhance reflective thinking.

Using Computer Simulations to Teach Science
Systems
Deep understanding of a system involves constructing a
mental perceptual simulation for information retrieval and
reasoning (Black, 2010). Computational modeling and
visualizing technology makes it possible to show the
otherwise invisible mechanism of systems (Wilensky&
Resnick, 1999), which could provide rich perceptual
information to ground the abstract concepts (Barsalou,

1888

2008). Multiple dynamic representations at different
abstract levels could provide complimentary information,
constraining interpretation of any singular representation,
and support deep understanding (Ainsworth & VanLabeke,
2004). Active integration of multiple structurally and
conceptually mapped representations can potentially
facilitate deep learning (van der Meij & de Jong, 2006;
Plass, Homer & Hayward, 2009). At different learning stage,
different representation could be used for different learning
purposes. For example, a concrete graphical representation
can be used to depict system phenomena, and an abstract
flowchart representation can be used to model symbolic
systemic mechanism after sufficient perceptual information
has been delivered.
Although multiple dynamic representations in simulationbased environments have the potential to facilitate mental
model construction in learning difficult science systems, the
instructional scaffolding should be well designed to help
learners make full use of the learning environments. Our
research question in this pilot study and future studies is:
How to design better scaffolding in simulation-based
environments teaching science systems? Pedagogical
research implies that mental model construction has a
hierarchical nature and goes through stages, thus the
scaffolding should support sequential and step-wise learning.
Additionally, retrospective mental modeling around system
function might facilitate internal organization of systemic
knowledge.

Hypotheses
H1: Hierarchical scaffolding based on the StructureBehavior-Function framework produces better learning
performance.
H2: Retrospective mental modeling task facilitates internal
reconstruction of the system knowledge.

Method
Participants
Participants for this pilot study were 36 adult learners
(Mean age: 29.7, SD=7.61) from a graduate school of
Education with a diversity of ethnicity. 29 of them were
females and 7 were males. Most of them majored in social
sciences and humanities fields, and didn’t have strong
background in science. One case was dropped because the
participant totally misunderstood the learning goals and
didn’t complete the posttest. Another pilot study earlier
showed that reasoning across different levels of a complex
system and scientific reasoning about causality was difficult
even for this population, and that was why we conducted a
pilot study in this population before designing the
curriculum for the junior high population.

learn how Temperature, Volume and Pressure of a certain
amount of ideal gas interact and reason about the
relationship between lower-level molecular activity and the
emergent function. One simulation was a realistic model
(see Figure 1) and the other was a conceptual flowchart
model (see lower part of Figure 2). These two dynamic
representations are structurally and conceptually mapped,
depicting and describing the system knowledge at different
abstract levels. The realistic model provides rich visual
information of the system phenomena while the flowchart
model emphasizes the mechanism and causality in the
system. The function of a realistic graphic simulation is to
provide rich perceptual information grounding the abstract
symbolic concepts, and the function of a conceptual model
simulation is to constrain the processing of the visual
information, reinforce the symbolic level of understanding.

Design
This study employed a 2x2 factorial design testing the effect
of hierarchical scaffolding based on SBF conceptual
framework (HS), the effect of the retrospective mental
modeling task (RMM) and their interaction effect.
Regarding the procedure of the experiment, the
manipulation of “RMM vs. N-RMM” came after the
manipulation of “HS vs. N-HS”.

Procedure
1.
Participants signed the consent form
2.
Participants read through powerpoint slides which
gave them an introduction to what they were going to learn
3.
Participants interacted with the simulations for a
couple of minutes to get familiar with the interface
4.
Learning stage: participants were randomly
assigned to a condition, given the worksheet which guided
them through the whole learning process. They were asked
to think aloud as they were learning. Eight sessions were
randomly selected to be videotaped and the verbal protocols
transcribed.
5.
Posttest
The whole session lasted around 70-80 minutes in total
for each participant.

Figure 1: The realistic model simulation-an experiment

Instrument
Two computer-based simulations teaching three Ideal Gas
Laws were used in this study. Participants were asked to

1889

in the N-HS condition had same amount of questions asking
about the system functions and behaviors compared to the
HS condition, while there were no structured progressive
learning steps in this condition.
Retrospective Mental Modeling & Control Condition.
There were three ideal gas laws for the participants to learn
in this experiment. After a participant completed learning
one ideal gas law, the other experimental variable
(Retrospective mental modeling task) was manipulated. For
the retrospective mental modeling condition (RMM), after
learning each ideal gas law by interacting with the
simulations, the participants were asked to close their eyes,
describe the processes of how the phenomenon happens. For
the no-retrospective mental modeling condition (N-RMM),
there was simply no such a step.

Figure 2: Two simulations displayed on the same page, and
dynamically linked

Manipulation
Hierarchical Scaffolding. The instruction was divided into
three steps:
Step 1. Learners observed the higher level system
function;
Step 2. Learners Described system lower level behaviors;
Step 3. Learners modeled the system causality around the
system function.
In step 1, participants played with only the concrete
graphic simulation (see Figure 1), and were asked to
describe higher level phenomena for each ideal gas law (e.g.:
how temperature and volume interact when pressure is
constant). In step 2, they were asked to observe and describe
lower level element behaviors (gas particle velocity,
particle-container collision). In step 3, the instruction is
function-centered with questions such as “when pressure is
constant, why increasing temperature will lead to increased
volume?” With both the concrete graphic simulation and the
conceptual flowchart simulation (see Figure 2), participants
were required to explain the lower level mechanism in a
coherent matter for each ideal gas law. Simply speaking, in
the HS condition, participants observed and described
system structure and function, integrated fragmented
behavior information, then connected the molecular
behavior and the emergent T-V-P relationship, and
explained the mechanism or causality in a coherent manner.
Non-Hierarchical Scaffolding. Indicated in a previous
pilot study, when two simulations were displayed on the
same page at the very beginning, participants tended to
regard the flowchart concept model as complimentary
fragmented behavior information, thus described each bar
diagram separately, rather than using it as a modeling tool to
explain the system causality. So for the no hierarchical
scaffolding condition (N-HS), participants were given the
combined simulations interface at the very beginning (see
Figure 2); given the worksheet including all the questions
asking about the system function and lower-level behaviors
for each ideal gas law. The participants were asked to
describe the structure, function and behavior knowledge for
each ideal gas law, and were not guided to iteratively
interrogate with the system. It was ensured that participants

Measures
The posttest included four sections:
1.
Comprehension task: participants were given three
questions asking them to explain the mechanism for each
ideal gas law phenomenon.
2.
Four multiple-choice questions on problem solving
3.
Explaining new diagrams: participants were given
three new line diagrams representing the events happening
from time A to time B, and they were required to visualize
and describe the what happened in the system
4.
Transfer task: participants were asked to explain
everyday gas law problems

Results
The posttest results indicate that the groups differ in their
understanding of the lower-level molecular activity (the
mechanism and processes of the system) but not higherlevel structure and function of the system.
Task 1 (Comprehension task) and Task 3 (Explaining
diagrams task) measured the understanding of lower-level
behaviors and their functions (molecular activity). The
answers for Task 1 (Comprehension task) were coded on the
presence and absence of lower-level mechanism knowledge
units (highest possible score: 7), by two raters blinded to the
condition of the participants. The agreement was 93.2%,
and the rest was resolved through discussion. The results of
Task 1 are displayed in Table 1 and Figure 3.

1890

Figure 3. Comprehension task mean scores

Table 1. Comprehension task mean scores

Group

Mean

HS&RMM

4.1250

8

1.72689

HS&N-RMM

3.0000

9

1.00000

N-HS&RMM

1.4444

9

1.13039

N-HS&N-RMM

2.2222

9

1.09291

2.6571

35

1.55190

Total

N

Std. Deviation

Significance tests show that HS has significant effect on
learning lower-level element behaviors and their functions,
F(1, 31)=16.63, p< .001, no main effect is found for RMM,
F(1, 31)=.168, n.s., while the interaction of HS and RMM is
significant, F(1, 31)=5.03, p=.032<.05. Post-hoc tests show
that HS&RMM performed significantly better than the NHS&RMM and N-HS&N-RMM group, and the N-HS&
RMM performed the worst, which indicates that without
hierarchical scaffolding, the retrospective mental modeling
will do no good but interfere with the learning.
Task 3 was also coded on the presence and absence of
lower-level behavior and function knowledge units (possible
highest score 8) by two raters blinded to the condition. The
agreement is 95.9%. Participants who described more
molecular activity in explaining the abstract line diagrams
were believed to notice and appreciate the importance of
behavior-function interdependence. The results of Task 3
(see Figure 4 and Table 2) show a similar pattern as in Task
1.

The main effect of HS is marginally significant, F(1,
31)=4.13, p=.051; although the interaction of HS and RMM
is not statistically significant, it is mostly due to a small
sample size.
No difference was found in Task 2 (multiple choice
questions, highest possible score 4, see Table 3). It might be
because the participants tended to do abstract rule-based
reasoning rather than applying their mental models in
solving the problems, as indicated in the interviews with
some of the participants. e.g., one question is “If you want
to maintain pressure at a constant level, which of the
following combination would work?” Participants will tend
to draw abstract rules (e.g., Pressure constant, Temperature
increases, Volume increases) and then make the judgment
for each choice, without visualizing the molecular activity
and the processes of the system.
Table 3. Multiple choices task mean scores

Group
Mean

Deviation

HS&RMM

2.7500

8

1.16496

HS&N-RMM

2.6667

9

.86603

N-HS&RMM

2.7778

9

1.09291

N-HS&N-RMM

2.8889

9

1.26930

2.7714

35

1.05957

Total

Table 2. Explaining diagrams task mean scores

Group

Mean

HS&RMM

4.2500

8

2.81577

HS&N-RMM

2.7778

9

2.86259

N-HS&RMM

1.5556

9

1.50923

N-HS&N-RMM

2.2222

9

2.04803

2.6571

35

2.46078

Total

N

In task 4, although participants were originally expected
to describe lower-level system behaviors to explain the
everyday ideal gas law phenomena, many of them focused
only on the higher-level structure and function of the system,
so the answers were coded on the important system
behavior and function knowledge units (both higher-level
and lower-level, highest score: 8, see Table 4) The
agreement between the two raters was 85.2%. In this task,
the participants were only asked to explain the phenomena
without explicit questions asking about the molecular
activity. The data also imply that in order to help the
learners to integrate the invisible lower-level system
behaviors into their explanation, another level of scaffolding
for transfer might be needed.

Figure 4. Explaining diagrams mean scores

N

Std.

Std. Deviation

1891

Table 4. Transfer task mean scores

Group

Mean

HS&RMM

4.2500

8

2.81577

HS&N-RMM

4.2222

9

2.10819

N-HS&RMM

4.2222

9

1.30171

N-HS&N-RMM

4.1111

9

2.42097

4.2000

35

2.11159

Total

N

Std. Deviation

Some Qualitative Analysis
For better understanding of the effect of hierarchical
scaffolding, eight verbal protocols (4 from HS condition,
4 from N-HS condition) were transcribed and analyzed. It
was hypothesized that more clear and efficient
trajectories of mental model construction could be found
in the HS condition. The qualitative data does indicate
that the participants in the HS condition were more likely
to progressively modify their mental models.
Below are parts of a participant’s verbal transcript (HS
condition) which demonstrate how he gradually construct
scientific causal model of the system.
When the participant was learning the structure and
fragmented behavior knowledge (step 1):
“As the temperature goes down, the volume decreases,
the volume goes down, the temperature decreases I guess…
yeah … ha … I ’ ve no idea how that works … but that ’ s
what the simulation tells me. Why would that happen?
‘cause the Temperature goes up, the Pressure goes up, the
volume goes down, the pressure goes up…when pressure is
constant … when the temperature goes down, volume goes
down…hum…”
Here the participant was dealing with the higher-level
system function (when pressure is constant, temperature
changes cause volume to change), he was curious about how
that happens, which prepared him to actively integrate and
connect the lower-level molecular behaviors knowledge.
This also supports the idea of function-centered scaffolding.
The second part of the transcript indicates the participant
was now trying to connect the two levels of information. He
was trying to clarify the causal relationship among all the
lower level and higher level elements.
“so the temperature and velocity are clearly related,
because as I bring the Temperature down, the velocity of
particles move. If we wanna keep the pressure the same…So
I am guessing, if I move this back, the pressure is probably
gonna go…oh the pressure stays the same, the temperature
will have to go up … yeah … so as volume increases … the
temperature has to go up because … how can I explain
that…so we have a constant pressure here, so that means…
all of these have to collide at the same rate, that means
when there is less space, they have to move a lot slower to

maintain the same pressure … yeah …… now they have to
move a lot faster, the temperature has to go up”
After successfully integrating the information, when the
participant was asked to answer the question “why
temperature increases, volume increases” in the
retrospective mental modeling stage, the participant was
able to provide a very sophisticated answer while
visualizing the system processes.
“so if the pressure is constant, then as volume decreases,
the temperature also has to decrease because the particles
have to move at a slower rate in order to maintain the
pressure in a smaller volume.”
Below are parts of a participant’s verbal transcript (N-HS
condition):
“so pressure is gonna be controlled…and…temperature
and volume…temperature affects volume…so…when you
increase the temperature, you increase the volume, you
decrease the temperature, you decrease the volume…the
velocity also corresponds…and now container-collision is
gonna go up…(confused)”
Here the participant was trying to learn the TemperatureVolume relationship when pressure is controlled. She was
given the combined simulations interface at the very
beginning (see Figure 2.) and had to construct a hierarchical
mental model without the progressive scaffolding. It could
be seen that she was trying to integrate all the functional and
behavior knowledge, but she struggled in trying to give a
coherent explanation.
When she was asked to answer the question “why
temperature increases, volume increases” in the
retrospective mental modeling task, she failed in integrating
lower-lever behavior knowledge in her explanation, as can
be seen in the following transcript:
“The temperature increased, the volume increased. When
the temperature decreased, volume decreased…Why? I have
no idea.”
The qualitative data implies that learners might need to
interrogate with the system progressively and iteratively in
order to form deep understanding. Experiencing the system
function and integrate the system behavior knowledge based
on the system function could be very effective. Another
implication is that modeling causality after learners have
observed all the system behaviors lead to more compact and
sophisticated mental models.

Discussion
This pilot study demonstrates that hierarchical scaffolding
(HS) could help learners better integrate the lower-level
system behavior knowledge and learn the causality. The
interaction
between
hierarchical
scaffolding
and
retrospective mental modeling is interesting. It seems
retrospective mental modeling could enhance learning only
when the learning process itself is well scaffolded. One
explanation is that learners need to internalize the
knowledge in a well structured way before they can
mentally reorganize the information in a coherent manner.

1892

Without such a structure, mentally reorganizing the
information might counter learning.

References

Limitations and Future Study
This pilot study only included three-step scaffolding
because we assumed the adult learners should be already
familiar with the everyday ideal gas law phenomena. The
total learning time was very short since this system was not
too challenging to the adult learners. Based on the
implications from this pilot, we have designed an 8 session
curriculum teaching ideal gas laws for 7th and 8th graders.
The hierarchical scaffolding is now operationalized into 5
steps, which help the junior high students gradually
construct better mental models of the systems. Everyday
ideal gas law problems are also incorporated into the
simulation environment (e.g., students are able to
manipulate the fire icon to make a soda can explode, etc). In
our future study, learners’ learning trajectory will also be
recorded and analyzed to better answer our research
question. To reduce the cognitive load in integrating the
system behaviors and modeling system causality , two
techniques are used in designing the simulations: a. the
everyday ideal gas law simulation and the gas molecules
simulation are dynamically linked for students to compare
and analyze the different levels of the system (example, see
Figure 5). b. Concrete icons instead of bar diagrams are
used in the flowchart simulation which helps learners to
model system causality (see Figure 6).

Figure 5. The everyday gas law problem and the
molecule simulation dynamically linked

Figure 6. The flowchart simulation with concrete
dynamic icons

Ainsworth, S. & van Labeke, N. (2004) Multiple forms of
dynamic representation. Learning and Instruction, 14,
241–255.
Assaraf, O. B., & Orion, N. (2005). Development of system
thinking skills in the context of earth system education.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(5), 518-560.
Black, J. B. (2010). An embodied/grounded cognition
perspective on educational Technology. In Issa Saleh (Ed.)
New science of learning: Cognition computers and
collaboration in education. Springer Publishing.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Briggs, M., & Bodner, G (2005): A Model of Molecular
visualization. In J. K. Gilbert (Ed.): Visualization in
Science Education, pp. 61-72. Springer.
Clement, J., & Steinberg, M. (2002). Step-wise Evolution of
Mental Models of Electric Circuits: A “Learning-Aloud”
Case Study. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(4), 389452.
Duncan, R. G., & Reiser, B. J. (2007). Reasoning across
ntologically distinct levels: Students' understandings of
molecular genetics. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 44(7), 938-959.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish
swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-novice
understanding of complex systems. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 16(3), 307-331.
Jacobson, M. J. (2001). Problem solving, cognition, and
complex systems: Differences between experts and
novices. Complexity, 6(3), 41-49.
Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensiy, U. (2006). Complex systems
in education: Scientific and educational importance and
implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of
Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, interferences and
consciousness. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Liu, L., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2009). Promoting complex
systems learning through the use of conceputal
representations in hypermedia. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 46(9), 1023-1040.
Plass J., Homer B., & Hayward E. (2009). Design factors
for educationally effective animations and simulations.
Journal of Computing and Higher Education, 21, 31-61.
van der Meij, J., & de Jong, T. (2006). Supporting students’
learning with multiple representations in a dynamic
simulation-based learning environment. Learning and
Instruction, 16, 199–212.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of
the earth: A study of Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535-585.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A
dynamic systems perspective to making sense of the
world. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
8(1), 3-19.

1893

