UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Diagramming Phenomena for Mechanistic Explanation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1cs113rv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Bechtel, William
Abrahamsen, Adele

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Diagramming Phenomena for Mechanistic Explanation
William Bechtel (bechtel@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92014 USA

Adele Abrahamsen (aabrahamsen@ucsd.edu)
Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92014 USA
Abstract

thoughts or sentences. The idea of mechanistic explanation
quickly took root in biology. Although resisted by vitalists,
who contended that something beyond physical processes
was required for the functions of life, other early investigators of physiological phenomena embraced mechanistic explanations. As their inquiries progressed, researchers expanded the range of operations involved in biological mechanisms beyond Cartesian physical contact. Newtonian forces, chemical bonding, and electrical conductance were
among the operations used in explaining such phenomena as
metabolism, nerve transmission, and heredity.
Mechanistic explanation was largely overlooked by 20th
century philosophers of science, who drew from physics the
idea that scientists explain phenomena by deriving them
from laws (Hempel, 1965). More recently, philosophers
focusing on the life sciences have moved the spotlight once
again to mechanistic explanation (Bechtel & Richardson,
1993/2010; Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2005; Machamer,
Darden, & Craver, 2000). Typically, life scientists treat the
system that generates a phenomenon as a mechanism. They
decompose it into parts and operations and then recompose
it (conceptually, physically, or mathematically) to arrive at
an account of how the coordinated performance of these
operations could indeed generate the phenomenon.
Although one may try to describe linguistically the parts
and operations of a mechanism and how they interact, often
telling a narrative about how each part in succession performs its operation, diagrams generally provide a more useful representational format for conceptualizing and reasoning about a mechanism. Parts may be represented by labels,
symbols, or abstract shapes, and the operations by which
they interact represented by arrows. Diagrams can illustrate
the structural and functional relations between many components and allow viewers to direct their attention successively to different activities that may be occurring concurrently in the mechanism.
The initial step in mechanistic research, though, is delineation of the phenomenon to be explained, and that is where
we begin our inquiry into diagrams. Linguistic descriptions
of phenomena have been the focus in many philosophical
accounts of mechanistic explanation (e.g., “proteins are synthesized by constructing strings of amino acids in the order
specified in a sequence of DNA”). However, scientists typically work with much more specific accounts of phenomena, often incorporating numerical values determined in their
research. Frequently the numerical data relied upon in char-

As part of an inquiry into how diagrams figure in scientific
practice, we examine diagrams that represent phenomena involving circadian rhythms. Different diagrammatic formats
are developed and revised over time to best represent different
phenomena for which explanations will be sought. Some diagrams are less transparent than others, so learning is often required in order to see the information conveyed.
Keywords: Diagrams; Graphs, Mechanistic explanation, Visual representation; Circadian rhythms.

Introduction
The notion of representation covers a lot of territory in cognitive science, encompassing both internal and external encodings of information and a variety of formats. Cognitive
scientists have long focused on language-like internal representations, with some dispute over possible ways they might
be supplemented by analog formats. Recent years have
brought increased attention to external representations and
especially to those incorporating analog formats—that is,
diagrams. For example, Hegarty (2004) has shown how individuals perform simulations with diagrams in solving
problems, and Cheng (2011) has explored how alternative
diagramming techniques can foster learning. However, except for the pioneering analysis by Nessessian (2008) of the
role of diagrams in Maxwell’s discoveries, there has been
little investigation of the use of diagrams in science. Almost
all scientific papers include diagrams, and readers often
focus on these as they navigate a paper. They are well suited
not only for displaying instruments, techniques, multistep
procedures, and results but also scientific reasoning. Most
generally this involves the construction, evaluation and revision of hypotheses but our particular interest is in sciences
pursing mechanistic explanations, notably the life sciences.
The project of explaining a phenomenon by identifying
and understanding the mechanism responsible for it has
roots in the scientific revolution beginning in the 16th century. Descartes posited that phenomena such as magnetic
attraction are generated by the coordinated activities of constituent parts (in his case, hypothesized corpuscles). He applied the idea of contact action between particles to explain
not just physical phenomena, but nearly all phenomena exhibited by living organisms. The only exceptions were reasoning and language use, which he attributed to an immaterial mind because he could not conceive of a mechanism
capable of constructing novel, semantically appropriate

102

acterizing the phenomenon is presented in tables. As Bogen
and Woodward (1988) made clear, however, explanations
are directed not at the data but rather at the pattern extracted
from the data—the phenomenon. Some data patterns can be
captured in one or a few equations, such as ΔI / I = k (Weber’s law). Even when equations suffice, but especially
when they do not, scientists turn to diagrams to present the
phenomenon. Diagrams turn out to be extremely useful for
phenomena that exhibit interesting dynamics—patterns of
change over time. Well-known examples include tide tables
and EEG recordings.
To gain an understanding of these uses of diagrams in the
actual practice of science, we focus on a domain of biology
in which dynamics are fundamental: circadian rhythm research. Circadian rhythms are oscillations in activity with an
approximately 24-hour cycle. They are endogenously generated but entrained to the timing of the day-night cycle in
specific locales at different times of the year. They have
been identified wherever sought, not only in animals but
also in plants, fungi, and even cyanobacteria. They regulate
a vast array of physiological processes (e.g., basic metabolism and body temperature) and behaviors (e.g., locomotion
and reaction times in cognitive tasks).
Diagrams, of course, are processed visually. Although
visual processing is highly complex (involving nearly half
of the cortex in primates; see van Essen & Gallant, 1994),
seeing often seems transparent: as we look out into the
world, we have the impression that we directly perceive the
identity and arrangement of objects in the visual field. The
apparent transparency of diagrammatic representations of
phenomena is part of their appeal—but this is deceptive.
Transparent seeing is often the result of a great deal of
learning. There are numerous experiments showing this,
using complex scenes or illusory stimuli, but diagrams offer
potent demonstrations as well. Some techniques of diagramming are so familiar and straightforward that we readily see what the diagram is meant to convey. But other techniques are new to us, and we must go through a process of
learning before we see what is presented in the diagram.
This is clearly true of scientific diagrams, as we will illustrate in examining what are likely for most readers to be
unfamiliar diagrammatic formats developed by circadian
researchers.
A related characteristic of diagrams on which we will focus is that scientists develop techniques for diagrammatic
representation over time. Sometimes in seeking to represent
new phenomena, they can borrow a format that had been
developed elsewhere and is already well understood. However, existing formats may not offer the best vehicle for
revealing what is significant in the phenomenon or for engaging in further reasoning about it. This drives scientists to
develop new representational formats. Like other innovators, scientists typically must apply multiple rounds of revision to their first attempts at novel diagrams, finally achieving a format that meets their cognitive needs. Accordingly,
representational formats employed in a science are not static
but are developed and changed, and such changes can in

turn alter the cognitive processes of the scientists who construct them.
In this paper we examine several diagrammatic formats
that researchers have developed to represent circadian phenomena. We especially focus on how these formats were
introduced and revised and show what users of the diagrams
must learn in order to interpret them.

Diagrammatic Representations of Circadian
Rhythms
A very familiar way of representing rhythmic oscillation is
to employ a Cartesian coordinate system in which time is
presented on the abscissa and values of a variable of interest
on the ordinate. Many such examples can be found in diagrams of circadian phenomena. Figure 1 shows Aschoff &
Wever’s (1981) plot of potassium levels in urine samples
taken every four hours from six individuals. To make the
circadian pattern immediately apparent, they shaded the
hours of darkness and connected each individual’s data
points to yield six superimposed line graphs.

Figure 1. Circadian oscillations in potassium levels for six
individuals across four days, measured every four hours
(From Aschoff & Wever, 1981).
Such diagrammatic representations make manifest whether the oscillations are regular and sustained (versus
damped), the duration of each cycle, and the average amplitude and extent to which it varies across cycles. These can
also be compared across diagrams for different individuals
(as in Figure 1), variables, or conditions. But there are limitations to the transparency of such diagrams; some types of
information are much less perspicuously represented. Accordingly, circadian rhythm researchers have developed
other diagrammatic formats, each making particular phenomena manifest.

Actograms
Even when Cartesian plots incorporate some representation
of a reference oscillation (e.g. the light-dark cycles in Figure
1), they are not the ideal display for tracking the variable of
interest with respect to those cycles across multiple days. A
far more suitable format for this purpose is an actogram, in
which stacked horizontal lines represent successive days,
and short vertical lines mark each time the variable exceeds
some threshold. (Where the vertical lines are dense, some
investigators simplify the plot by substituting a solid horizontal bar.) Visual inspection then quickly makes clear any
systematic changes across days in the circadian cycles.

103

The technique of representing activity in actograms appears to have been developed by Johnson (1926), who was
investigating the nocturnal versus diurnal behavior of various mammals. Johnson devised the use of a disk rotated by
a clock on which movements of a mouse in a cage were
recorded as deflections in an otherwise smooth tracing (Figure 2, left side). While one could compare multiple circular
tracings to assess changes or stability over successive days,
Johnson introduced the actogram as a better format for this
purpose. In essence, he unrolled each circular tracing (one
day’s data) into a straight line and placed each line below
the previous one such that the hours of all days were in
alignment. In this first actogram (Figure 2, right side), three
sets of lines were presented so as to compare mice from
three different environments (greenhouse, from lab to
woods, and woods). Within a set, the top line is Day 1, second line is Day 2, and so forth. Comparison was made
more precise by running a vertical line at two-hour intervals,
beginning and ending at 6 am. A shorter vertical line
marked the onset of sunset, a convention not maintained by
subsequent researchers. A major virtue of the actogram is
that viewers can employ their visual ability to detect differences in the pattern of marks so as to compare circadian
rhythms across days or conditions. It can be seen that these
nocturnal animals are active primarily at night, with variations between conditions in onset time and in the extent of
daytime activity but considerable stability across days within each environmental condition.

cycles to constant darkness, but shifted dramatically when
light was reintroduced in reverse: with the dark hours now
in daytime, the mouse became active during day rather than
night hours. This altered pattern was maintained when constant darkness was reintroduced. Thus, once entrained to a
particular light-dark pattern (normal or reversed), mice kept
to the same activity cycle when the entrainment stimulus
(light) was removed.

Figure 3. Johnson’s (1926) second actogram, which shows a
mouse’s activity as light-dark conditions were changed as
indicated on the right.
Since introduced by Johnson, the actogram has become a
standard way of representing circadian activity, especially in
animals. While the basic format has been preserved (one
line per 24 hours, hours aligned vertically, active times
marked along the line), many variations have been introduced to make specific features of circadian behavior more
explicit. As just illustrated, chronobiologists are particularly
interested in activity under constant darkness (known as
freerunning behavior). Since this condition eliminates any
effects of daily entrainment to sunlight, it can reveal the
animal’s normal endogenously generated rhythm or (as in
Figure 3) the enduring effects of resetting that rhythm via an
abnormal light-dark condition. Various conventions have
been adopted for conveying lighting conditions visually,
rather than by labels along one side as in Figure 3. One is
background shading of the actogram across those hours the
organism is in darkness (similar to the shading superimposed on the Cartesian plot in Figure 1). Another common
convention is horizontal bars at the top or bottom of the
actogram, in which white indicates hours of light and black
indicates hours of darkness. Thus, in Figure 4 the top bar
indicates the normal light-dark condition used as a baseline
on days 1-7 and the bar below it indicates that constant
darkness was imposed thereafter. It can be seen that once in
constant darkness, the mouse’s activity begins about a half
hour earlier each day. From this it can be concluded hat the
endogenous period is about 23.5 hours.

Figure 2. On the left, Johnson’s (1926) tracing from a rotating disk illustrating periods of activity by a mouse. On the
right, his first actogram in which activity for each day under
different conditions is shown on successive lines and the
time of sunset is indicated by a vertical line.
In a subsequent investigation (Figure 3) Johnson showed
the effects of exposing a deer mouse to different light-dark
conditions (as indicated by labels along the right edge rather
than by spatially separating conditions): (1) normal lightdark cycle (light during daytime hours, dark at night); (2)
constant darkness for several 24-hour periods; (3) reversed
light-dark cycle (dark from 8 am to 8 pm, then light from 8
pm to 8 am); (4) again, constant darkness. One can immediately see that the periods of activity showed little change
when the mouse was transferred from normal light-dark

104

A variety of conventions have been developed to indicate
temporary changes in conditions. In Figure 4, the gray arrow
indicates a day on which a light pulse was presented four
hours after activity onset. This not only caused activity to
mostly cease for that evening, but also inserted a phase delay the next day into what was otherwise a continuing pattern of phase advance due to constant darkness.

Figure 5. Double-plotted actogram from Pittendrigh (1960),
in which data across the 24-hour boundary can be viewed in
the middle of its redundant 48-hour display.
Because they provide an effective visual display by which
researchers can immediately see variations in patterns of
circadian activity, especially in relation to different lighting
conditions, actograms have remained an important part of
the toolkit for those circadian researchers who use animal
behavior measures.

Figure 4. Contemporary actogram in which the top bars indicate a normal light-dark condition for the first seven days
and constant darkness for subsequent days. The grey arrow
identifies the day a light pulse was administered. (From
http://www.photosensorybiology.org/id16.html.)

Phase Response Curves
The circadian cycle can be thought of as a progression
through phases, beginning at the time designated hour 0
(typically dawn) and ending at hour 24. The term phase may
be used with respect to particular points on the curve (the
peak and the trough being of particular interest) or for intervals (e.g., subjective day and subjective night under constant
darkness). When two different cycles are closely aligned,
they are said to be in phase. As already noted in the discussion of Figure 4 above, an actogram can show whether and
by how much a rhythm is reset following a light pulse (its
phase shift). As they explored this phenomenon in the
1950s, circadian researchers soon recognized that the direction and extent of the phase shift depended on the timing of
light-dark cycles relative to the animal’s current circadian
cycles. Individual instances of resetting could be shown in
actograms, but to identify and represent the systematic pattern of resetting, researchers developed what are known as
phase response curves.
Examining one of the first attempts to represent the effect
of light on circadian phase makes evident the challenges in
developing an easily interpreted diagrammatic format. Hastings and Sweeney (1958) grew Gonyaulax polyedra, a photosynthetic marine dinoflagellate that produces luminescence when disturbed, first under a normal light-dark cycle
and then in constant darkness. Next they exposed these
organisms to a three-hour pulse of light, varying the time of
the pulse so as to determine how much that shifted the time
of maximal luminescence. Their results are shown in Figure
6, where hour 0 is the onset of constant darkness. The time
of maximal luminescence in control organisms (who were

A major innovation in actograms was the introduction of
double-plotting—a procedure in which data from the next
24-hour period is plotted not only on the next line but also
to the right of the current data. Thus, each line shows data
from 48 hours, but the left half of the actogram stacks all
24-hour periods as usual (as does the right half, redundantly). One of the first uses of this technique, by Pittendrigh
(1960), well illustrates its particular advantage when activity
periods extend across the 24-hour boundary. Pittendrigh was
seeking to represent what he called an “after effect”: altered
circadian rhythms in the activity of a nocturnal animal after
exposure to continuous light. He began with normal lightdark cycles (LD). As shown in the top third of Figure 5, the
mouse is inactive when the light is “ON” and becomes active when the light switches to “OFF” (with some subtleties
in the data we need not discuss). When he then imposed
continuous light (LL), the resultant progressive delay in
activity onset indicated the mouse’s day had been stretched
longer than 24 hours. After a few weeks, however, it spontaneously shifted back to a nearly 24-hour period. Since
double-plotting was new, Pittendrigh marked the divide
between the two 24-hour periods with a double vertical line,
a convention later dropped as researchers became accustomed to double-plotting. (The convention of indicating
lighting conditions with white/black horizontal bars had not
yet been adopted, hence Pittendrigh’s ON/OFF markers).
The virtue of double-plotting is that one can easily see the
full active phase even when it crosses the 24-hour boundary.

105

not exposed to the pulse) is shown by the vertical lines at 7,
31, and 55 hours. The horizontal lines represent organisms
exposed to the three-hour pulse at different hours of delay
after the onset of darkness (3, 7, 11, . . .). Curves have been
fit to data points marked by small triangles, which indicate
the time of their subsequent maximum luminescence. The
distance of each data point from the nearest vertical line
represents the degree of advance or delay. It can be seen by
following the horizontal line labeled “23” that organisms
exposed to a 3-hour light pulse beginning 23 hours after
onset of darkness show maximum luminescence at hour 32
rather than 30, a phase delay of 2 hours. In contrast, pulses
beginning 7 hours after darkness produce a large phase advance. While this diagram does encode the crucial information, interpreting it takes considerable effort.

24 hours) and, often, flipped the ordinate so that advances
are shown as up and delays as down. Represented in this
fashion, as in Figure 8, researchers were able to contrast two
patterns of resetting—one producing gradual advances or
delays (Type 1) versus an alternative (Type 0) in which, rather than small advances or delays, at a critical point the
organism exhibits a large delay. If this delay is more than 12
hours, it can be seen as a large advance.

Figure 7. DeCoursey’s (1960) phase response curve, which
shows the advance or delay of a rat’s activity onset for light
pulses at different times relative to normal activity onset.

Figure 6. Hastings and Sweney’s (1958) diagram showing
the changes in peak luminescence of Gonyaulax polyedra
after 3-hour light pulses. These changes are represented by
the distance left or right from the vertical lines.
Shortly thereafter DeCoursey (1960) introduced a different format for representing the same information (Figure 7).
In her study of flying squirrels kept in constant darkness she
indicated on the abscissa the time of a ten-minute light pulse
relative to the usual onset time of an animal’s running-wheel
activity. The data points indicate the consequent advance or
delay in onset of running for two squirrels. With this representation, it is easy to see that light around the beginning of
this nocturnal animal’s usual activity period (corresponding
to the beginning of its subjective night) delays its activity,
whereas light 8 to 12 hours later (corresponding to the end
of its subjective night) advances its activity. Light during its
subjective day (from approximately 12 hours to 0 hours) has
no effect. Having represented the phenomenon this way, one
can also readily make sense of it—light exposure during
subjective day does not indicate a need to reset the phase of
one’s activity, whereas light at the beginning of subjective
night indicates either that the endogenous rhythm is out of
synchrony with the external environment or that the period
of daylight has expanded. The appropriate adjustment is to
delay activity. Likewise, light experienced at the end of the
subjective night indicates a need to stop its activity sooner.
DeCoursey’s phase response curves quickly became the
established means of representing the effect of a stimulus on
the phase of an organism’s circadian oscillation, although
later researchers simplified the abscissa to circadian time (0-

Figure 8. Type 1 and Type 0 phase response curves, with a
simplified abscissa (0=dawn). From Johnson (1999).
To facilitate characterization of these two types of resetting, circadian researchers developed yet another diagram
format, the phase transition curve, in which the new phase,
not the amount of advance, is plotted on the ordinate. Diagonal lines indicate the situation in which the phase does not
change. To see what happens in Type 0 resetting, one must
plot 48 hours on the ordinate. As seen in figure 9, Type 1
resetting is characterized by a curve that stays very close to
the diagonal and so approximates a slope of one (from
which the name Type 1 is derived). In Type 0 resetting there
is an abrupt jump from one diagonal to another, approximating a slope of 0. A virtue of the phase transition curve is that
it makes clear the relation of the new phase to the old, which
is not directly displayed in phase response curves.

106

latter job, but do not display phase changes after a switch to
free-running.
New representational formats make new cognitive demands on audiences. If these formats were new to you, you
you also experienced the learning that is required to see
what each diagrammatic format is representing. Only after
learning to see the phenomenon in the diagram can the scientist use that format to efficiently reason about the phenomenon and begin the work of explaining it.

References
Aschoff, J., & Wever, R. A. (1981). The circadian system of
man. In J. Aschoff (Ed.), Biological rhythms. Volume 4 of
Handbook of Behavioral Neurobiology (pp. 311-331).
New York: Plenum.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A
mechanist alternative. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 36, 421-441.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. C. (1993/2010). Discovering
complexity: Decomposition and localization as strategies
in scientific research. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1993
edition published by Princeton University Press.
Bogen, J., & Woodward, J. (1988). Saving the phenomena.
Philosophical Review, 97, 303-352.
Cheng, P. C. H. (2011). Probably good diagrams for learning: Representational epistemic recodification of probability theory. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3, 475-498.
DeCoursey, P. J. (1960). Daily light sensitivity rhythm in a
rodent. Science, 131, 33-35.
Hastings, J. W., & Sweeney, B. M. (1958). A persistent
diurnal rhythm of luminescence in Gonyaulax polyedra.
Biological Bulletin, 115, 440-458.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental
simulation. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8, 280-285.
Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation. In
C. G. Hempel (Ed.), Aspects of scientific explanation and
other essays in the philosophy of science (pp. 331-496).
New York: Macmillan.
Johnson, C. H. (1999). Forty years of PRCs-What have we
learned? Chronobiology International, 16, 711-743.
Johnson, M. S. (1926). Activity and distribution of certain
wild mice in relation to biotic communiities. Journal of
Mammalogy, 7, 254-277.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
Nersessian, N. (2008). Creating scientific concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pittendrigh, C. S. (1960). Circadian rhythms and the
circadian organization of living systems. Cold Spring
Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 25, 159-184.
van Essen, D. C., & Gallant, J. L. (1994). Neural
mechanisms of form and motion processing in the primate
visual system. Neuron, 13, 1-10.

Figure 9. Resetting represented in both phase response
curves (left) and phase transition curves (right). From Johnson (1999).

Discussion
Of the representational formats used by scientists in performing and communicating their research, diagrams are
particularly important but not yet extensively studied. We
began our exploration of this topic by examining the use of
diagrams to delineate phenomena. More specifically, we
examined how actograms, phase response curves, and phase
transition curves each highlight, and enable scientists to see,
different circadian phenomena. Once delineated, such phenomena are explained by working out the responsible mechanism, and in later work we will examine other kinds of
diagrams and their roles in mechanistic explanation.
We have drawn attention to the fact that scientists are often developing new representational formats to make manifest the specific phenomena in which they are interested. It
is important to note that the researchers who devised the
formats in Figures 1-9 were not seeking the best way of
representing all circadian phenomena in a single diagram;
rather, each sought to elucidate a specific phenomenon, such
as changes in phase or the susceptibility to entrainment by
light. In highlighting one phenomenon, each format either
obscures or leaves out others. Actograms make clear how
the phase of rhythms changes when an animal is switched to
a free-running condition or exposed to a specific perturbation, but they do not show whether the rhythm is dampening
or how the phase would change across the full range of possible times of perturbation. Phase response curves do this

107

