UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do repeated references result in sign reduction?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42v5k7kp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Hoetjes, Marieke
Krahmer, Emiel
Swerts, Marc

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do repeated references result in sign reduction?
Marieke Hoetjes (M.W.Hoetjes@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (M.G.J.Swerts@uvt.nl)
Tilburg centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities, Tilburg University,
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, the Netherlands.

conceptual pacts as more common ground is established
over the course of the conversation (debated in e.g. Horton
& Gerrig, 2005). Secondly, repeated references are often
also reduced acoustically (Aylett & Turk, 2004; Bard, et al.,
2000; Fowler, 1988; Fowler & Housum, 1987; Lam &
Watson, 2010). Repeated references, when taken out of
context and presented to a listener, have been found to be
less recognisable for the addressee because their
pronunciation is less clear in repeated references than in
initial references (Bard, et al., 2000; Galati & Brennan,
2010). Lieberman (1963) found similar acoustic reduction
for redundant words, which were shorter and perceived as
less intelligible when taken out of context.
There are two dominant views on the reason why
referring expressions may be reduced. On the one hand,
reduction in referring expressions may be due to speaker
oriented causes, such as production and planning processes
(Arnold, 2008; Arnold, Kahn, & Pancani, 2012; Bard, et al.,
2000; Bard & Aylett, 2005; Ferreira, 2008). On the other
hand, reduction in referring expressions may be due to
listener oriented causes, such as communicative strategies
(e.g. Aylett & Turk, 2004; Fenk-Oczlon, 2001; Lieberman,
1963; Lindblom, 1990; Zipf, 1949). The use of
communicative strategies, with speakers as efficient
language users, has been shown by a range of studies (for an
overview, see Jaeger & Tily, 2011), including Zipf’s (1949)
Principle of Least Effort, and Shannon’s noisy channel
model (1948). More recently, Lindblom (1990), in his H&H
theory, claims that speakers adapt to the listener’s needs,
meaning that redundant speech is reduced as long as
‘sufficient discriminability’ remains. Jaeger (2010)
proposed the hypothesis of Uniform Information Density
(UID), which states that ‘speakers prefer utterances that
distribute information uniformly across the signal
(information density)’ (Jaeger, 2010:25). What this means is
that the interaction between speaker and addressee is
optimized by the speaker’s lengthening or shortening of an
utterance, such that the utterance becomes more uniform
and optimal for both speaker and addressee.
It can be argued that the reduction in repeated references
that previous studies have found is due to the
abovementioned processes: when speakers produce repeated
references, they fully reproduce those (auditory) aspects of
the referring expression that contain important or new

Abstract
Previous research has shown that repeated references are
often reduced compared to initial references. The present
study looks at the production of repeated references by
signers of Sign Language of the Netherlands (NGT).
Participants had to describe figures to an addressee, who had
to pick the correct figure from a large group of figures.
Several figures had to be described several times. The
question was whether there would be reduction in the signed
repeated references, as has been found previously for speech
and gesture. We found systematic effects of repetition, in that
repeated references are shorter, contain fewer signs, and
shorter signs than initial references. Moreover, a perception
experiment showed that signs produced during repeated
references were also considered to be less precise than the
signs produced during initial references.
Keywords sign language; repeated reference; reduction

Introduction
Variability is ubiquitous in speech production, with words
never pronounced the exact same way more than once. For
example, someone might first pronounce the word ‘of
course’ slowly and precisely, followed by an instance where
it is pronounced quickly, less precise and more like
‘fcourse’. This example of language variability shows that
language can be reduced (in this case by shortening and
merging words). While various studies have looked at
reduction in speech, reduction in signs remains largely
unexplored. The present study addresses this point.

Reduction in spoken repeated references
In conversation, people often produce referring expressions
to describe objects in the world around us. The production
of repeated references occurs when people refer to the same
object more than once in the conversation. Research has
found that in speech, these repeated references are often
reduced in at least two ways (Aylett & Turk, 2004; Bard, et
al., 2000; Brennan & Clark, 1996; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986; Fowler, 1988; Fowler & Housum, 1987; Galati &
Brennan, 2010; Lam & Watson, 2010). Firstly, repeated
references to the same target object usually contain fewer
words than initial references (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986;
Galati & Brennan, 2010). Brennan and Clark (1996) claim
that this is due to the fact that people establish so-called

461

and also found that sign location can vary with signs
produced at lower locations than their citation form.
However, neither of these studies takes repetition into
account as one of the factors influencing sign production.
In the present study we will look at signs of Sign
Language of the Netherlands (NGT), to see whether
reduction in repeated references, as previously found for
speech and gesture, also occurs in sign language.
Considering that NGT is a fully fledged sign language and
presumably behaves in many respects as a spoken language,
we hypothesize that, as in speech, reduction in repeated
references will occur. The question is of course how
reduction in signs can be measured. In the present study we
have decided to measure reduction by combining methods
that have been used previously in studies on speech and on
gesture. We will look at sign characteristics that we consider
comparable with some of the aspects of speech that have
been studied previously when looking at reduction, namely
number of words, utterance duration and word duration. We
will also take precision into account, which has been done in
previous studies on gesture. Therefore, in the present study
on sign language we will look at the number of signs,
utterance and sign duration and at sign precision. We
conducted a production task to analyse the first three
attributes. Following Hoetjes et al. (2011), we conducted a
perception task to analyse the last attribute, sign precision.

information and are necessary for quick target identification.
The less informative aspects of the referring expression may
be reduced or omitted, leading to reduced references.

Reduction in visual repeated references: gesture
and sign language
Taking into account that communication does not only
consist of ‘spoken’ aspects of speech, but can also contain
or consist of visual aspects such as gestures (Kendon, 2004;
McNeill, 1992) or signs (Stokoe, 2005), we may wonder
whether a reduction process such as described above for
spoken repeated references also occurs in the visual domain.
Relevant previous research on gesture has looked at the
effect of common ground (Gerwing & Bavelas, 2004; Holler
& Wilkin, 2009) and repeated references (de Ruiter,
Bangerter, & Dings, 2012; Hoetjes, Koolen, Goudbeek,
Krahmer, & Swerts, 2011) on gesture production, albeit
with inconclusive results. For example, when we look at
repeated references, on the one hand, de Ruiter et al. (2012),
when testing their tradeoff hypothesis, found that repetition
did not affect gesture rate. On the other hand, Hoetjes et al.
(2011) found that both speech and gesture were reduced in
repeated references.
There has been a range of research on phonological and
phonetic aspects of sign language (Crasborn, 2001; Sandler,
1989; Sandler & Lillo-Martin, 2006; Schembri, et al., 2009;
Tyrone & Mauk, 2010), starting with Stokoe (2005) in 1960
proposing that signs in sign languages consist of three main
parameters (handshape, location and movement). However,
hardly any studies have looked at sign language from the
perspective of efficient language use. In this light, it is
interesting to see how signs behave with regard to reduction
in repeated references. We may wonder what the role of
signs is compared to speech and to co-speech gesture. On
the one hand, considering that signs, like words, usually
convey lexical meaning, it might be the case that reduction
in sign is similar to reduction in speech, for example with
regard to the semantics that are expressed. On the other
hand, signs, unlike words but like co-speech gestures, are a
means of communication in the visual domain, and there
may be aspects of reduction that are modality specific and
thus alike between signs and co-speech gestures. Of course,
it could also be the case that signs are not reduced in a way
comparable to speech or to co-speech gestures, but that
signs, if they are reduced, are reduced in a sign-specific
manner.
The only experimental study on sign language we are
aware of that can be related to the idea of efficiency of
language users in the production of repeated references is
the work by Tyrone and Mauk (2010) on phonetic reduction
in American Sign Language. In their study, Tyrone and
Mauk looked at the production of the sign WONDER in two
phonetic contexts and at three signing rates. Their results
show that sign lowering occurs with increasing signing rate
and can, but not necessarily does, occur in specific phonetic
contexts. Another study on variation in sign language, by
Schembri and colleagues (2009), looked at naturalistic data

Production experiment
To study reduction in repeated references in Sign Language
of the Netherlands (NGT), a data set was created consisting
of recordings of participants taking part in a directormatcher task. In this task, the director had to describe an
object in such a way that the matcher could identify the
object from a range of similar looking figures. In the
stimuli, there were several figures that had to be described
more than once, leading to repeated references to the same
item.

Participants
The director-matcher task was done by a total of 14 signers
of NGT. The group of participants consisted of 5 male and 9
female speakers, with an average age of 46 years old (range
26-60 years old). The average length of time that the
participants had been signing NGT was 23.5 years (range 250 years). Participants would take part twice in the
experiment; first they were randomly assigned the role of
either director or matcher and they would switch roles after
doing the experiment once.

Stimuli
Two picture grids, each containing 16 pictures, were used
by each director. Each picture grid showed either pictures of
people, or pictures of furniture items. The two different
domains (people and furniture) were used since previous
studies on referring expressions had shown them to be
efficient domains for making people produce referring
expressions (Koolen, Gatt, Goudbeek, & Krahmer, 2011;

462

the location of the target object on the grid as part of the
description. This was explicitly communicated to the
directors. Once the correct object was found, the director
went on to the next trial. The entire task took the
participants about 20 minutes. After conducting 15 trials
from the people domain and 15 trials from the furniture
domain, the director and matcher would switch roles to
conduct the experiment again, using the other set of picture
grids.

Van Deemter, Gatt, van der Sluis, & Power, in press; Van
der Sluis & Krahmer, 2007) .
Each picture grid was used for 15 trials, adding up to a
total of 30 trials. For the first 15 trials, a people picture grid
was used, for the last 15 trials a furniture picture grid was
used. Since the participants would do the experiment twice,
once in the role of director and once in the role of matcher,
two sets of picture grids were used, with different pictures
on each picture grid, making sure that the same picture
never had to be described across roles. In each trial, there
was one target object (marked by a red square around the
object), surrounded by 15 distractor objects, which had to be
described by the director. The crucial manipulation in the
task was that several pictures had to be described
repeatedly: in each of the picture grids there were two
pictures that had to be described three times. Repeated
references to the same object were never one straight after
the other. This means that descriptions of other objects were
given in between the initial and repeated descriptions of the
critical objects. An example of a trial with object description
can be seen below in figure 1.

Data analysis
For the purpose of the current analyses, the first and third
(hence initial and repeated) descriptions of the four objects
that had to be described three times were annotated and
analysed. These four objects were never described in the
first or last trial. The focus on the initial and repeated
descriptions means that the current analyses are based on a
data set which consists of eight descriptions (two initial and
two repeated descriptions for each of the two picture grids)
for each of the 14 participants, leading to a total of 112
object descriptions. We used the multimodal annotation
programme ELAN (Wittenburg, Brugman, Russel,
Klassmann, & Sloetjes, 2006) to annotate the signs. We
looked at the duration of the complete descriptions, the
number of lexical signs that were produced in the
descriptions and the duration of the signs. A separate
perception experiment was used to measure sign precision,
which will be discussed below under Perception experiment.
The experiment consisted of a 2 x 2 x 2 design with
factors Domain (levels: people, furniture), Repetition
(levels: initial, repeated), and Picture (levels: one, two). We
tested for significance using repeated measures ANOVAs
by participants (F1) and by items (F2).

Results
“CHAIR, RED, NOT LEFT, SIDEWAYS TO THE
RIGHT, LITTLE BIT BIGGER.”

Firstly, it was found that speakers take significantly less
time (in seconds) to describe repeated references (M =
14.46, SD = 1.46) compared to initial references (M = 24.24,
SD = 2.25), F1 (1, 13) = 35.15; p < .001, F2 (1, 4) = 22.30, p
< .01. For the mean number of signs it was found that
speakers produce significantly fewer signs in repeated
references (M = 5.57, SD = .32) compared to initial
references (M = 8.16, SD = .56), F1 (1, 13) = 42.5; p < .001,
F2 (1, 4) = 16.59, p < .05. Moreover, the average duration
(in seconds) of signs is shorter in repeated references (M =
1.2, SD = .054) than in initial references (M = 1.47, SD =
.074), F1 (1, 13) = 15.1; p < .01, F2 (1, 4) = 20.17, p < .05. In
sum: we find systematic effects of repetition, in that
repeated references are shorter, contain fewer signs, and
shorter signs than initial references. These effects were the
same for both domains (furniture and people) and for all
pictures; in particular, we found no significant interaction
between the factors repetition and domain or repetition and
picture. To illustrate, figures 2 and 3 below show a case of
reduction in the description of a target object from the
furniture domain. In the initial description, the participant
takes longer and uses more signs and more precise signs (to

Figure 1. Picture grid showing a trial, followed by gloss
of example initial description of the target object.

Procedure
The director and the matcher were seated at a table opposite
each other. A camera was positioned behind the matcher
filming the upper body and hands of the director. The
director had a laptop screen to her side and the matcher had
a picture card in front of her. The director and matcher
could see each other directly, but could not see each other’s
screen or card. The director was presented with a trial on the
computer screen and was asked to provide a description of
the target object in such a way that the matcher could
distinguish it from the 15 distractor objects. The matcher
had a picture card filled with the same 16 objects in front of
her, which was not visible to the director. The matcher’s
card showed the same objects as on the director’s screen,
but these objects were ordered differently for the director
and the matcher. This means that the director could not use

463

be discussed in the perception experiment below) than in the
repeated description.

task, which sign they considered to be the most precise,
looking at pairs of video clips with signs produced in either
initial or repeated references.

Participants
Twenty-seven first year university students, who had no
knowledge of NGT, took part as partial fulfillment of course
credits. Non-NGT speaking participants were used on
purpose, so that the participants would not know the lexical
meaning of the signs but would only judge the signs on their
perceived precision.

Stimuli
The participants were presented with a PowerPoint
presentation in which they saw 40 pairs of video clips. Each
pair of video clips was presented on one slide. Both video
clips showed the same sign, produced by the same signer of
NGT, about the same object, as described in the directormatcher task, except in one video clip the sign was produced
in an initial reference and in the other video clip the sign
was produced in a repeated reference. The order in which
the participants were presented with initial versus repeated
signs in the video clip pairs was counterbalanced over pairs
of video clips (so it was not the case that for each pair the
first video clip they saw was always the sign produced in an
initial reference).

“SOFA, THREE SEATS, ASKEW, BIG, TO THE RIGHT,
TO THE SIDE”
Figure 2. Still and gloss of initial description of a sofa,
lasting 48 seconds. Sign depicted in still is SOFA, with a
fairly large extension and well defined edges (see arrows).

Procedure
The participants had to watch the pairs of video clips, one
video clip at a time, and were allowed to watch a video clip
more than once if they wanted to. The task was to choose
for each pair of video clips which sign they considered to be
the most precise (the sign in video clip A or B). The task
was a self-paced forced choice task and even though the
participants were allowed to watch the video clips more than
once, they were encouraged to go with their first intuition.
The only instruction they were given was to choose which
sign they considered to be the “most precise”. No details
were given to suggest what the participants should base this
judgment on.

“SOFA, GREEN, TURNED AROUND, THREE SEATS”
Figure 3. Still and gloss of repeated description of the same
sofa as in figure 2, lasting 17 seconds. Sign depicted in still
is SOFA, with smaller extension than in figure 2 and
without well defined edges (see arrows).

Conclusion production experiment
Data analysis

The results show that several aspects of NGT were reduced
in repeated references. Repeated references produced by
signers of NGT were shorter than initial references, and
repeated references in NGT contained fewer and shorter
signs than initial references. This means that, at least for the
aspects taken into account here, repeated references in NGT
behaved as previous studies found for repeated references in
speech. Repeated references by signers of NGT, containing
predictable information, were produced in a more efficient
way than initial references.

For each pair of video clips, each sign that was considered
to be the most precise received a point from each
participant. Statistical analyses consisted of repeated
measures ANOVAs over proportions, by participants (F1)
and by items (F2).

Results
In line with our earlier results, we find that signs produced
during repeated references (M = .33, SD = .04) were
considered to be less precise than the signs produced during
initial references (M = .67, SD = .04), F1 (1, 26) = 121.29, p
< .001, F2 (1, 78) = 41.21, p < .001. The effect was the
same for both domains (furniture and people).

Perception experiment
Since it is difficult to define objective measures with which
to measure sign precision, a perception experiment was set
up in which participants had to judge, in a forced choice

464

Due to the fact that hardly any previous work has been
done on reduction in sign language, the method used in the
current study was inspired by relevant previous work on
speech and gesture. We looked at fairly rough and modality
independent (i.e. applicable to speech, gesture and sign)
measures such as duration of the description and number of
signs and not at more sign-specific aspects such as exact
sign location (as has been done by e.g. Tyrone & Mauk,
2010). Despite the fact that our measures were not based on
sign characteristics per se, we were still able to find that
reduction in sign language occurred. This shows that it is
possible to use such modality independent methods to study
reduction in repeated references.
Naturally, the current study leaves room for some
discussion. In the perception experiment, we used
participants with no knowledge of NGT to judge the
precision of signs produced in the production experiment.
This was done purposefully, so that the participants were
not in any way influenced by the lexical meaning of the
signs and could focus only on the precision judgment task.
There are reasons to assume that the use of non-NGT
signers is indeed a reasonable approach. Research has
shown (Brentari, Gonzalez, Seidl, & Wilbur, 2011) that
non-signers have a high degree of sensitivity to visual
prosodic cues of a sign language. However, future work
could include NGT signing participants in the perception
experiment. Also, if using NGT signing participants in
future work, another possibility would be to set up the task
slightly differently by asking participants to judge a sign’s
intelligibility, as in Bard et al.’s (2000) work on speech,
instead of judging its precision.
In sum, the analyses done presently are the first of its kind
to show us not only that we can use analyses from related
work on speech and gesture and adapt them to analyse signs
in repeated references, but also that signers of NGT reduced
their repeated references. In fact, the ways in which these
repeated references were reduced in NGT are quite similar
to what has been found previously for speech and gesture. It
is well know that speakers of non-signed languages are
communicatively
efficient
by
reducing
repeated
information, both in speech and in co-speech gestures. This
study has shown, for the first time, that signers can design
their utterances to be efficient in the same ways.

Conclusion perception experiment
The results show that signs produced in repeated references
were considered to be less precise than signs produced in
initial references. Therefore, it can be concluded that there
was also reduction in repeated references when it comes to
sign precision.

Discussion and conclusion
Summarizing the results from the production and perception
experiments, we found reduction in repeated references in
sign language. We found that repeated references were
shorter, contained fewer and shorter signs, and that signs
produced in repeated references were considered to be less
precise than signs in initial references.
The present results on sign language can be tied in with
previous findings, both on speech and on gesture, that
language users tend to be efficient by reducing predictable
information (e.g. Jaeger, 2010). Relating the results to
previous work on speech, we showed that repeated
references were shorter and contained fewer signs than
initial references, in line with work by Clark and WilkesGibbs (1986) and Galati and Brennan (2010). The result that
signs in repeated references were shorter can be related to
previous work on speech by Aylett and Turk (2004) and by
Lam and Watson (2010) where it was found that predictable
speech (through redundancy or repetition) had a shorter
duration than unpredictable speech. Our finding that signs in
repeated references were considered to be less precise can
be viewed to be an extension of the work by Bard et al.
(2000), who found that repeated references had a less clear
pronunciation than initial references.
When we compare the results from the present study with
previous work on co-speech gestures, we can also see clear
links. It has been found that gestures with common ground
are less precise (Gerwing & Bavelas, 2004) and contain less
semantic information (Holler & Wilkin, 2009) than gestures
without common ground. This can be related to our findings
that signs in repeated references were considered to be less
precise and that repeated references in NGT contained fewer
signs than initial references. Work on the effect of repeated
references on gestures (Hoetjes, et al., 2011) found that
repeated references may cause reduction in the number of
gestures, as was found in the present study for the number
of signs. Moreover, their finding that gestures in repeated
references were considered to be less precise than gestures
in initial references, can be directly mapped onto the present
results for signs. Importantly, the reduction found in the
current study can be tied in with work on language
efficiency and cannot be explained through a general
reduction of descriptions over time (with participants
becoming more ‘sloppy’ in the course of the experiment). In
short, the present study is the first study on sign language
that shows that signers of NGT behave similarly when
describing repeated references as to what previous studies
have found for speech and gesture by speakers of spoken
languages.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Axelle Schmit and Manon Yassa for
help in collecting and annotating the data, Onno Crasborn
and Karin van Nispen for helpful discussions and comments
and Martijn Goudbeek for help with the statistics. We
received financial support from The Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research, via a Vici grant (NWO
grant 27770007), which is gratefully acknowledged.

465

Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2005). Conversational common
ground and memory processes in language production.
Discourse Processes, 40, 1-35.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers manage
syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology, 61(1), 2362.
Jaeger, T. F., & Tily, H. (2011). Language Processing Complexity
and Communicative Efficiency. WIREs: Cognitive Science,
2(3), 323-335.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture. Visible action as utterance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Koolen, R., Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2011).
Factors causing overspecification in definite descriptions.
Journal of Pragmatics, 43(13), 3231-3250.
Lam, T. Q., & Watson, D. G. (2010). Repetition is easy: Why
repeated referents have reduced prominence. Memory and
Cognition, 38(8), 1137-1146.
Lieberman, P. (1963). Some effects of semantic and grammatical
context on the production and perception of speech. Language
and Speech, 6(3), 172-187.
Lindblom, B. (1990). Explaning variation: a sketch of the H and H
theory. In W. Hardcastle & A. Marchal (Eds.), Speech
production and speech modelling (pp. 403-439). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. What gestures reveal about
thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sandler, W. (1989). Phonological Representation of the Sign:
Linearity and Nonlinearity in American Sign Language.
Dordrecht: Foris.
Sandler, W., & Lillo-Martin, D. (2006). Sign Language and
Linguistic Universals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schembri, A., McKee, D., McKee, R., Pivac, S., Johnston, T., &
Goswell, D. (2009). Phonological variation and change in
Australian and New Zealand Sign languages: The location
variable. Language variation and change, 21, 193-231.
Shannon, C. (1948). A mathematical theory of communications.
Bell systems technical journal, 27(4), 623-656.
Stokoe, W. C. (2005). Sign language structure: An outline of the
visual communication systems of the American Deaf. Journal of
Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 10(1), 3-37.
Tyrone, M. E., & Mauk, C. E. (2010). Sign lowering and phonetic
reduction in American Sign Language. Journal of Phonetics, 38,
317-328.
Van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van der Sluis, I., & Power, R. (in
press). Generation of referring expressions: Assessing the
Incremental Algorithm. Cognitive Science.
Van der Sluis, I., & Krahmer, E. (2007). Generating Multimodal
Referring Expressions. Discourse Processes, 44(3), 145-174.
Wittenburg, P., Brugman, H., Russel, A., Klassmann, A., &
Sloetjes, H. (2006). ELAN: a Professional Framework for
Multimodality Research. Paper presented at the LREC 2006,
Fifth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation.
Zipf, G. K. (1949). Human behavior and the principle of least
effort: An introduction to human ecology: Addison-Wesley.

References
Arnold, J. E. (2008). Reference production: Production-internal
and addressee-oriented processes. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 23(4), 495-527.
Arnold, J. E., Kahn, J., & Pancani, G. (2012). Audience design
affects acoustic reduction via production facilitation.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: a functional explanation for relationships between
redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in spontaneous
speech. Language and Speech, 47(1), 31-56.
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M., DohertySneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000). Controlling the
intelligibility of referring expressions in dialogue. Journal of
Memory and Language, 42, 1-22.
Bard, E. G., & Aylett, M. (2005). Referential form, duration, and
modelling the listener in spoken dialogue. In J. Trueswell & M.
Tanenhaus (Eds.), Approaches to studying world-situated
language use: Bridging the language-as-product and languageas-action traditions (pp. 173-191). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brennan, S., & Clark, H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and lexical
choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
22(6), 1482-1493.
Brentari, D., Gonzalez, C., Seidl, A., & Wilbur, R. B. (2011).
Sensitivity to visual prosodic cues in signers and nonsigners.
Language and Speech, 54(1), 49-72.
Clark, H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative
process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Crasborn, O. (2001). Phonetic implementation of phonological
categories in Sign Language of the Netherlands. PhD
dissertation. Utrecht: LOT.
de Ruiter, J. P., Bangerter, A., & Dings, P. (2012). The interplay
between gesture and speech in the production of referring
expressions: Investigating the trade-off hypothesis. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 4(2), 232–248.
Fenk-Oczlon, G. (2001). Familiarity, information flow, and
linguistic form. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper (Eds.), Frequency and
the emergence of linguistic structure (pp. 431–448).
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Ambiguity, accessibility, and a division of
labor for communicative success. Learning and Motivation, 49,
209–246.
Fowler, C. A. (1988). Differential shortening of repeated content
words produced in various communicative contexts. Language
and Speech, 31(4), 307-319.
Fowler, C. A., & Housum, J. (1987). Talkers' signaling of 'new'
and 'old' words in speech and listeners' perception and use of the
distinction. Journal of Memory and Language, 26(5), 489-504.
Galati, A., & Brennan, S. (2010). Attenuating information in
spoken communication: For the speaker, or for the addressee?
Journal of Memory and Language, 62, 35–51.
Gerwing, J., & Bavelas, J. (2004). Linguistic influences on
gesture's form. Gesture, 4, 157-195.
Hoetjes, M., Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., Krahmer, E., & Swerts,
M. (2011). GREEBLES Greeble greeb. On reduction in speech
and gesture in repeated references. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher
& T. F. Shipley (Eds.), 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 3250-3255). Boston: Cognitive Science
Society.
Holler, J., & Wilkin, K. (2009). Communicating common ground:
how mutually shared knowledge influences speech and gesture
in a narrative task. Language and Cognitive Processes, 24(2),
267-289.

466

