UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does thinking make you biased? The case of the engineers and lawyers problem.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6gt9d86j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Morsanyi, Kinga
Handley, Simon

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does thinking make you biased? The case of the engineers and lawyers problem
Kinga Morsanyi (km574@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge
Downing street, Cambridge, CB2 3EB, UK

Simon J. Handley (S.Handley@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth
Drake Circus, Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK

Abstract
In this study we examined the cognitive processes involved in
engineers and lawyers-type problems, using a novel method
(i.e., asking for liking ratings). We were particularly
interested in how participants process information about
personality descriptions and base rates, which are provided in
the problems. In line with previous research, we found that
people detect the conflict between descriptions and base rates.
Nevertheless, when instructed to reason logically, instead of
relying on base rates, participants resolved the conflict by
showing higher preference for description-based responses.
Keywords: conflict detection; dual-process theories:
engineers and lawyers problem; heuristics and biases;
instruction manipulation; liking ratings.

Dual process theories of reasoning and decision making
(e.g., Evans & Over, 1996; Stanovich, 1999) propose that
higher order cognition is based on two qualitatively
different types of process. Type 1 (i.e., heuristic) processes
are assumed to operate fast and automatically with little
demand of cognitive capacity, whereas Type 2 processes are
slow, conscious, and demanding of computational resources.
The tasks used in the heuristics and biases literature (see
e.g., Kahneman, Slovic & Tversky, 1982) can be answered
by giving a heuristic-based response, or a response which
corresponds to a normative rule of probability (although
some theorists have questioned the assumption that giving
probability-based responses to these problems is more
normative than giving description-based responses – see
e.g., Hertwig & Gigerenzer, 1999). Kahneman and
Frederick (2005) used these tasks as illustrations for Type 1
and 2 processes at work. For example, consider the classic
engineers and lawyers problem (Kahneman & Tversky,
1973; see Table 1.). In the original (conflict) problem, base
rate information, which strongly favors lawyers, is
presented together with a stereotypical description of an
engineer. When participants are asked to decide if the
person is more likely to be an engineer or a lawyer, they
tend to give the response which corresponds to the
description.
An interesting question is whether participants
experience a conflict while they solve these tasks, or if they
just give the first response that comes to mind. Dual-process
theorists (e.g., Evans, 2006) assume that, as Type 1
processes operate quickly and automatically, all participants
are inclined to give a Type 1 response by default.

Nevertheless, some individuals (usually the ones of higher
cognitive ability – see e.g., Stanovich & West, 2000) are
able to inhibit this initial response tendency, and give a
response which is based on Type 2 computations. Thus,
participants who eventually give a normative response are
expected to experience a strong conflict between Type 1 and
2 response tendencies. However, what happens in the case
of the majority of the participants who give a heuristic
response (which is supposed to be delivered by Type 1
processes)? Do they experience any inner struggle, or do
they simply give the first response that comes to mind
without ever considering probabilistic information?
In a number of recent studies De Neys and colleagues
(e.g., De Neys, Cromheeke & Osman, 2011; De Neys &
Glumicic, 2008) used different versions of the engineers and
lawyers problem (see Table 1 for illustrations). Besides the
original version, they also developed a non-conflict task
where base-rates and the description pointed to the same
response, and they also used a neutral task where base rate
information was presented together with a description which
had no relevance to the choice options. Note that neutral
problems typically elicit the response of “both options are
equally likely” (which is considered a heuristic response).
The reason that participants ignore base rates even when
they are not provided with any other useful information is,
presumably, that they try to base their response on the
description (which they automatically assume to be relevant,
although it is not). Thus, providing an irrelevant description
is enough to draw participants’ attention from the base rates.
De Neys and Glumicic (2008) stated that even people
who eventually give a description-based response show
signs of conflict detection, although they are not
consciously aware of this. They demonstrated that whereas
in verbal protocols there was no mention of experiencing a
conflict, less explicit measures showed signs of differential
processing of base rates in conflict and non-conflict
problems.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate
further how people process base rate-information in the
presence of base rate-congruent, incongruent, and neutral
descriptions. In the experiment that we report below we
used the problems developed by De Neys and Glumicic
(2008) which we slightly modified to make them more
appropriate for UK participants. However, instead of asking
participants to generate a response, we provided them with a
response (which we called a statement), and we asked them

2049

Table 1: Different versions of the engineers and lawyers problem (based on De Neys & Glumicic, 2008).
Conflict: Incongruent description and base rates
(Part 1:) In a study 1000 people were tested. Among the participants there were 5 engineers and 995 lawyers. Jack is a randomly
chosen participant of this study.
(Part 2:) Jack is 36 years old. He is not married and is somewhat introverted. He likes to spend his free time reading science fiction
and writing computer programs.
Statement (heuristic): Jack is an engineer.

Statement (non-heuristic): Jack is a lawyer.

Non-conflict: Congruent description and base rates
(Part 1:) In a study 1000 people were tested. Among the participants there were 995 sixteen-year olds and 5 fifty-year olds. Ellen
is a randomly chosen participant of this study.
(Part 2:) Ellen likes to listen to hip hop and rap music. She enjoys wearing tight shirts and jeans. She’s fond of dancing and has a
small nose piercing.
Statement (heuristic): Ellen is sixteen.

Statement (non-heuristic): It is equally likely that Ellen is
sixteen or that she is fifty.
Neutral: Base rates plus neutral description

(Part 1:) In a study 1000 people were tested. Among the participants there were 4 who live in Manchester and 996 who live in
Liverpool. Chris is a randomly chosen participant of this study.
(Part 2:) Chris is 28 years old. He has a girlfriend and shares an apartment with a friend. He likes watching basketball.
Statement (heuristic): It is equally likely that Chris
lives in Liverpool or that he lives in Manchester.

Statement (non-heuristic): Chris lives in Liverpool.

to evaluate the statement, using a 5-point rating scale of
smiley faces, ranging from “don’t like it at all”=1 to “like it
very much”=5 (see Table 1). This procedure was modelled
on Topolinski and Strack (2009a). Liking ratings are
sensitive to both conscious and unconscious influences (e.g.,
explicit preferences, affective priming, etc.), and they are
ideal for detecting subtle changes in participants’ judgments
(cf., Morsanyi & Handley, 2012). Thus, even if participants
are unaware of being influenced by base rates / descriptions,
these influences should be reflected in their liking ratings.
Moreover, liking ratings convey more information than
response choices. For example, it is possible that although a
participant shows a strong preference for a certain response
option, they also evaluate other options positively.
In order to explore the role of Type 1 and 2 processes in
people’s judgments and in utilizing base rates and
descriptions, we implemented an instruction manipulation
(see e.g., Klaczynski, 2001). Half of the participants were
asked to rely on their intuitions, whereas the rest of the
participants were instructed to think logically. From a dualprocess perspective, intuitive instructions should encourage
Type 1 processing, whereas logical instructions should
increase the influence of Type 2 processes. Indeed, previous
research (e.g., Chiesi, Primi & Morsanyi 2011; Ferreira,

Garcia- Marques, Sherman & Sherman, 2006) showed that
instructions affected participants’ susceptibility to reasoning
biases. Thus, we expected that whereas in the intuitive
condition participants would be strongly affected by
descriptions, logical instructions should increase the
tendency to rely on base rate information. Nevertheless, this
should only happen if participants are consciously aware of
the conflict, and if they judge that base rates are more
relevant to making sound judgments than descriptions.
Another question that we wanted to investigate was
whether heuristic responses are associated with higher
liking ratings than non-heuristic responses. In a recent paper
(Thompson & Morsanyi, 2012) we proposed that heuristic
responses might be hard to resist, because of the positive
affective valence that they carry. Specifically, we suggested
that as heuristic responses are generated fluently and
effortlessly, and fluent processing is associated with positive
affect (see Topolinski & Reber, 2010 for a review),
participants will prefer a heuristic mode of processing,
because heuristic responses “feel right”. In order to test the
assumption that liking ratings are closely related to
participants’ actual choices, we presented the problems with
an option, and they were asked to rate it according to how
much they liked it. After performing a different task,

2050

participants were (unexpectedly) presented with the
problems once more, but this time they had to select a
response from three options. Given the associations between
heuristic (i.e., Type 1) processing, positive affect and
confidence, we expected that initial liking ratings would be
good predictors of subsequent choices.
In summary, the aim of the present study was to better
understand the processes underlying performance on
engineers and lawyers-type problems. Given the high rate of
heuristic responses, we were particularly interested in
whether participants experienced a conflict while solving
the tasks. We employed a novel paradigm (i.e., asking for
liking ratings) to investigate the effect of base rates and
descriptions, and we combined it with an instruction
manipulation, in order to explore the role of Type 1 and 2
processes in participants’ judgments. Additionally, we
wanted to test the assumption that heuristic responses are
associated with positive affect. Finally, we also predicted
that the affective valence of choice options would be closely
related to how likely individuals will be to opt for a
response when they are offered a choice between different
responses.

Methods
Participants
The participants were 62 students (54 females, mean age 21
years 2 months) from the University of Plymouth, UK who
participated in the study for ungraded course credit.
Participants were randomly allocated either to the intuitive
(n=32) or to the logical (n=30) instruction condition.

Materials
The participants were presented with 12 problems: 4 conflict
problems (i.e., where the description of the person was
incongruent with base rates), 4 non-conflict problems
(where descriptions and base rates were congruent), and 4
neutral problems (with irrelevant descriptions). The
problems were presented in two parts (using a “moving
window” procedure – see de Neys & Glumicic, 2008,
Experiment 2). The base rates were presented first (together
with the information that the person was randomly selected
from a large sample – marked as Part 1 in Table 1), then
participants had to press the space bar, and this information
disappeared, and the description of the person (Part 2)
appeared together with the statement about the person and
the rating scale for liking ratings. Participants could review
base rate information by pressing a radio button on the
computer screen. The problems were presented in a random
order, which was different for each participant. The
statement that participants had to rate either corresponded to
the base rates or to the description (or both), or it simply
said that the person was equally likely to belong to either
category (see Table 1 for examples). In order to reduce
content effects, we created two task sets, where for the same
problem participants were either offered a heuristic (i.e.,
description-based), or a non-heuristic response (see Table 1

for illustrations). Finally, in the second part of the
experiment, participants were presented with the same
problems again, using the same presentation format as in the
first part. However, instead of providing liking ratings for
one response option, participants had to choose from three
responses (i.e., 1. the person belonged to one category –
e.g., engineers; 2. the person belonged to the other category
– e.g., lawyers; or 3. it was equally likely that the person
belonged to either one or to the other category).

Procedure
Participants solved the problems on the computer. First they
were presented with instructions, and they were informed
that they could review the first part of the problem.
Additionally, in the intuitive condition participants were
told: “When you make your liking ratings, rely on your
intuition and feelings. Give the first rating that comes to
mind, without any conscious reflection, and do this as
quickly as you can.” In the logical condition the instructions
ended like this: “When you make your liking ratings, take
the point of view of a perfectly logical person. Think about
your answer very carefully. Don’t rush. You can take as
much time as you want.” Subsequently, the participants
were presented with a practice problem, and then they had
to work through the 12 experimental problems. After this,
they had to perform a different (unrelated) task for about 5
minutes. Finally, they were presented with the problems
again. This time they had to choose from three options,
rather than evaluating a response which was offered to
them. In the second part of the experiment participants were
instructed to consider the problems carefully, but they were
not explicitly asked to reason intuitively or logically. This
part also started with a practice problem.

Results
First, as a manipulation check, we compared the average
time that participants spent solving each problem across the
intuitive and logical conditions (collapsed across all tasks).
As expected, participants in the intuitive condition
responded more quickly (M=17820 ms, SD=4235 ms) than
participants in the logical condition (M=23872 ms,
SD=7223 ms; t(60)=4.06, p<.001).
We also wanted to see whether we could replicate the
pattern reported by De Neys and Glumicic (2008) regarding
participants’ inspection of base rates. Specifically, these
authors reported that participants were more likely to opt for
reviewing base rate information if the base rates were in
conflict with the description of the person, as opposed to
when there was no such conflict. In our analyses we
included not only conflict and non-conflict problems, but
also problems with neutral descriptions, in order to see
whether problems with base rate-incongruent and neutral
descriptions are processed differently. Finally, we were also
interested in whether the tendency to review base rates
differed across the two instruction conditions.
Participants in the intuitive condition reviewed on
average 11% (SD=.22) of the base rates in the case of

2051

Table 2: Participants’ liking ratings across the different types of task, and different statements.
Incongruent
Heuristic

Base rate

Congruent
Heuristic/

Neutral

Equally likely

base rate

Heuristic/

Base rate

equally likely

intuitive

3.19 (.74)

2.66 (.76)

3.63 (.61)

3.14 (.95)

3.16 (.83)

3.27 (.84)

logical

3.47 (.82)

2.42 (.97)

3.60 (.93)

3.32 (.92)

3.68 (1.03)

3.22 (.85)

conflict, 8% (SD=.21) in the case of non-conflict, and 9%
(SD=.21) in the case of neutral problems. The corresponding
numbers in the logical group were 23% (SD=.24), 14%
(SD=.18), and 28% (SD=.29), respectively. A 3x2 mixed
ANOVA with problem type (conflict/non-conflict/neutral)
as a within-subjects factor and condition (intuitive/logical)
as a between-subjects factor indicated a significant effect of
problem type (F(2, 120)= 4.04, p=.020, ηp2=.06), and a
significant effect of condition (F(1, 60)= 6.77, p=.012,
ηp2=.10). The problem type by condition interaction was not
significant (p=.114). That is, in general participants in the
logical condition were more inclined to review base rates.
Follow-up analyses also showed that participants were more
likely to review base rate information if descriptions were
not in line with base rates, regardless of whether
descriptions were conflicting or neutral. Indeed, the
tendency to review base rates did not differ between conflict
and neutral problems.
Next we analyzed participants’ liking ratings (see Table
2). In order to gather further support for the claim that
participants were sensitive to the conflict between the
descriptions and base rates, we compared their liking ratings
for description-based (i.e., heuristic) responses across
problems where base rates and descriptions were congruent
(non-conflict), and where these were incongruent (conflict).
A 2x2 mixed ANOVA with condition (intuitive/logical) as a
between-subjects, and problem type (congruent /
incongruent) as a within-subjects factor indicated a
significant effect of problem type (F(1, 60)= 5.95, p=.018,
ηp2=.09). The effect of condition, and the condition by
problem type interaction were not significant. That is,
participants, regardless of condition, liked description-based
responses more if these were not in conflict with base rates.
Another issue that we were interested in was whether
participants’ liking ratings were higher for heuristic
responses than for non-heuristic responses. To investigate
this question, we first collapsed ratings across conflict and
neutral problems. As we described in the introduction, in
the case of both types of task there is a general tendency for
participants to disregard base rates. This is assumed to be
the consequence of an automatic (i.e., heuristic) tendency to
generate responses that correspond to (or take into account)
the descriptions (cf. Kahneman & Frederick, 2005).
The average ratings for heuristic and base rate responses
in the intuitive condition were M=3.17 (SD=.51) and
M=2.96 (SD=.63), respectively. The corresponding ratings
in the logical condition were M=3.58 (SD=.60) for heuristic,

and M=2.82 (SD=.78) for base rate responses. In line with
our predictions, a 2x2 mixed ANOVA with response type
(heuristic/base rate) as a within-subjects and condition
(intuitive/logical) as a between-subjects factor indicated that
participants liked heuristic responses more than base rate
responses (F(1, 60)= 19.80, p<.001, ηp2=.25). Additionally,
there was a significant interaction between response type
and condition (F(1, 60)= 6.32, p=.015, ηp2=.10).
Interestingly, this interaction showed that there was a
greater difference between ratings for heuristic and base rate
responses in the case of participants in the logical as
compared to the intuitive condition. That is, participants
who invested more time and effort into providing their
liking ratings were more biased by the descriptions.
Nevertheless, participants in both conditions provided
higher liking ratings for responses which are supposed to be
based on heuristic (i.e., Type 1) processing than for nonheuristic (i.e., Type 2) responses.
Finally, we wanted to investigate how closely the liking
ratings were related to participants’ actual response choices
in the second part of the experiment (this analysis was
conducted at the level of tasks; see Figure 1). The
correlation between liking ratings and the probability that a
participant selected a given response was significant both in
the intuitive (r(384)=.20, p<.001) and in the logical
condition (r(360)=.38, p<.001), and the association was
significantly stronger in the logical condition, as indicated
by a Fisher r-to-z transformation (z=2.67, p=.008).

Figure 1: The probability of selecting a response as a
function of liking ratings in the two conditions (broken line:
intuitive condition).

2052

Discussion
In the present study we employed a new method (asking for
liking ratings) to investigate the cognitive underpinnings of
performance on engineers and lawyers-type problems.
Liking ratings can be used to investigate both conscious and
unconscious preferences, and they are very sensitive to
subtle changes in participants’ judgments.
Arguably, the most interesting finding is that although
participants’ probability judgments were biased by the
person’s description both in the intuitive and in the logical
condition, this bias was stronger in the logical group. This is
in contrast with earlier studies which generally reported a
decrease in biases as a result of logical instructions (e.g.,
Chiesi et al., 2011; Ferreira et al, 2006). This finding is also
in contrast with the assumption that in heuristics and biases
tasks people automatically generate an initial heuristic
response, which is either accepted without modification, or
it is suppressed by conscious and effortful reasoning (e.g.,
Evans, 2006). Instead, it seems that, at least in the case of
the engineers and lawyers problem, although most people
show an initial (weak) preference for heuristic responses,
this preference becomes significantly stronger when they
invest more time and effort in the evaluation of the response
options.
Indeed, a similar pattern has been observed in the case of
the Wason selection task, using eye tracking methods (Ball,
Lucas, Miles & Gale, 2003). In the selection task people
tend to focus on a response (usually the one, which is
considered the intuitive response) almost immediately after
they are presented with the options, but then they spend a
longer period considering this response before making their
eventual choice. This pattern has been cited as evidence that
although Type 2 processes are employed in the selection
task, they are merely used to rationalize an initial, Type 1
response (Evans, 2006). Nevertheless, there is evidence that
people do engage in a conscious reasoning process when
they make their choices in the selection task, although this
does not necessarily result in finding the normative solution
(cf., Handley, Newstead & Neilens, 2011). Indeed, spending
more time on evaluating a compelling response option
might increase reasoners’ confidence in the correctness of
the response (see e.g., Thompson & Morsanyi, 2012).
The increased bias in the logical condition suggests that
conscious reasoning processes play an active role in the
engineers and lawyers problem. Instead of just approving
intuitive response tendencies, they magnify the initial bias.
Indeed, this process might involve the active rejection of
base rates as a potential basis of judgment. In fact,
participants not only rated the responses which
corresponded to base rates lower than the responses which
were in line with the descriptions, but their ratings for base
rate responses were also slightly negative.
With regard to conflict detection, our results support
earlier findings (e.g., de Neys & Glumicic, 2008) which
suggested that participants experience a conflict when base
rates and the description of the person cue different
responses. However, we should note that providing a neutral

description resulted in similar levels of base rate-inspection
as providing base rate-incongruent descriptions. Thus, base
rate inspection could be taken as a sign of uncertainty or
decreased processing fluency, rather than of “conflict
detection”. As we found no evidence for a difference
between the intuitive and logical groups in “conflict
detection” (as indexed by reviewing base rates, and the
difference between liking ratings for description-based
responses in conflict and non-conflict problems), it remains
unclear if participants are conscious of the conflict. We
could expect that offering a response which corresponds to
the base rates in a conflict task makes base rate information
more salient. Nevertheless, participants’ evaluations of these
options were slightly negative, which indicates that even if
they were aware of the potential significance of base rates
(and the conflict between base rates and descriptions), they
still preferred to base their judgments on the descriptions.
Thus, it is unlikely that the reason that only a small minority
of participants give normative responses to the engineers
and lawyers problem is that participants only detect the
conflict unconsciously, and, as a result, their conscious
responses remain unaffected by this.
As expected (cf., Thompson & Morsanyi, 2012),
heuristic responses were liked more than probability-based
responses. This corresponds to the general pattern that most
participants select or generate a heuristic response when
they are presented with the engineers and lawyers problem
(see e.g., De Neys & Glumicic, 2008; Kahneman &
Tversky, 1973). This pattern is also in line with the idea that
heuristic processing is associated with positive affect, and
this affective component might contribute to participants’
tendency to accept these responses. Indeed, initial liking
ratings were significantly related to participants’ response
choices. The finding that this relationship was stronger in
the logical group suggests that these participants indeed
considered the options more carefully than participants in
the intuitive condition (given that response choices in the
second part of the study were based on careful
consideration).
Although affective reactions might contribute to both
liking ratings and response choices, it is also possible that
the liking ratings were unrelated to participants’ affective
states, and participants simply indicated with their liking
ratings the extent to which they found a particular response
correct or appropriate. Other studies (e.g., Topolinski &
Strack, 2009b: Morsanyi & Handley, 2012) demonstrated
through effective priming and emotion-misattribution
manipulations that liking ratings are sensitive to
participants’ affective states. Nevertheless, future studies
should seek to provide more direct evidence for the link
between affect, liking ratings, and heuristic responses. One
method which seems particularly suitable would be to
measure the activation of facial muscles which are
associated
with
smiling
and
frowning,
using
electromyography (see Topolinski, Likowski, Weyers, &
Strack, 2009), while participants evaluate heuristic and nonheuristic response options.

2053

In summary, our findings provide new insight into the
cognitive processes involved in the engineers and lawyers
problem. Most importantly, these results indicate that
conscious thinking might contribute to the biases often
observed in judgment and reasoning. Indeed, there is a
growing body of evidence to indicate that responses which
are assumed to be based on heuristic or automatic (i.e., Type
1) processing often require cognitive effort. Generating
these responses might even be more effortful than producing
other responses, which traditional dual-process approaches
associated with effortful, Type 2 processing (see e.g.,
Handley, Newstead & Trippas, 2011; Morsanyi & Handley,
2008). These findings, together with criticism which is
based on more theoretical considerations (e.g., Keren &
Schul, 2009; Osman & Stavy, 2006), pose a challenge to
dual-process theories of reasoning.

Acknowledgments
The writing of this paper was supported by an ESRC PostDoctoral Fellowship (ES/1038071/1) to K.M.

References
Ball, L. J., Lucas, E. J., Miles, J. N. V., & Gale, A. G. (2003).
Inspection times and the selection task: What do eyemovements reveal about relevance effects? Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A, 1053-1077.
Chiesi, F., Primi, C. & Morsanyi, K. (2011). Developmental
changes in probabilistic reasoning: The role of cognitive
capacity, instructions, thinking styles and relevant
knowledge. Thinking & Reasoning, 17, 315-350.
De Neys, W., Cromheeke, S., & Osman, M. (2011). Biased
but in doubt: Conflict and decision confidence. PLoS
ONE, e15954. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0015954.
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual process theories of reasoning. Cognition, 106, 12481299.
Evans, J.ST. B.T. (2006). The heuristic-analytic theory of
reasoning: Extension and evaluation, Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 13, 378–395.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Ferreira, M. B., Garcia-Marques, L., Sherman, S. J., &
Sherman, J. W. (2006). Automatic and controlled
components of judgment and decision making. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 797–813.
Handley, S.J., Newstead, S.E. & Neilens, H. (2011). Matching
bias requires analytic reasoning. In: Manktelow, D. Over
& S. Elqayam (Eds.) The Science of Reason: A Festschrift
for Jonathan St.B.T. Evans. (pp. 167-189). Psychology
Press.
Handley, S. J., Newstead, S. E., & Trippas, D. (2011). Logic,
beliefs, and instruction: A test of the default
interventionist account of belief bias. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 28–43.
Hertwig, R., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The ‘conjunction
fallacy’ revisited: How intelligent inferences look like

reasoning errors. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
12, 275–305.
Kahneman, D. & Frederick, S. (2005). A model of heuristic
judgment. in K.J. Holyoak & R.G. Morrison [eds.] The
Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. (pp.
267-293). Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237-251.
Keren, G., & Schul, Y. (2009) Two is not always better than
one: A critical evaluation of two-system theories.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 533-550.
Klaczynski, P. A. (2001). Framing effects on adolescent task
representations, analytic and heuristic processing, and
decision making: Implications for the normativedescriptive gap. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 22, 289-309.
Morsanyi, K., & Handley, S. J. (2008). How smart do you
need to be to get it wrong? The role of cognitive capacity
in the development of heuristic-based judgment. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 99, 18–36.
Morsanyi, K., & Handley, S. J. (2012). Logic feels so good -I
like it! Evidence for intuitive detection of logicality in
syllogistic
reasoning.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition. (in press)
Osman, M, Stavy, R (2006). Development of intuitive rules:
evaluating the application of the dual-system framework
to understanding children's intuitive reasoning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,13, 935-953.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of
individual differences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences
in reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–726.
Thompson, V.A. & Morsanyi, K. (2012). Analytic thinking:
Do you feel like it? Mind & Society. (in press)
Topolinski, S., Likowski, K. U., Weyers, P., & Strack, F.
(2009). The face of fluency: Semantic coherence
automatically elicits a specific pattern of facial muscle
reactions. Cognition & Emotion, 23, 260-271.
Topolinski, S., & Strack, F. (2009a). Scanning the “fringe” of
consciousness: What is felt and what is not felt in
intuitions about semantic coherence. Consciousness &
Cognition, 18, 608-618.
Topolinski, S., & Strack, F. (2009b). The architecture of
intuition: Fluency and affect determine intuitive
judgments of semantic and visual coherence and
judgments of grammaticality in artificial grammar
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
138, 39-63.
Topolinski, S., & Reber, R. (2010). Gaining insight into the
"aha" experience. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 19, 402-405.

2054

