UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Doppel Teleoperation System: Isolation of physical traits and intelligence for personality
study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xn8242m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sumioka, Hidenobu
Nishio, Shuichi
Okamoto, Erina
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Doppel Teleoperation System:
Isolation of physical traits and intelligence for personality study
Hidenobu SUMIOKA1 (sumioka@atr.jp)
Shuichi NISHIO1 (nishio@ieee.org)
Erina OKAMOTO2 (okamoto.erina@irl.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp)
Hiroshi ISHIGURO1,2 (ishiguro@is.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp)
1

2

Hiroshi Ishiguro Laboratory, ATR 2-2-2 Hikaridai, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto 619-0288, Japan
Graduate School of Eng. Science, Osaka Univ., Machikaneyamacho 1–3, Toyonaka-shi, Osaka, 560–0043 Japan
Abstract

We introduce the “Doppel teleoperation system”, which isolates several physical traits from a speaker, to investigate how
personal information is conveyed to other people during conversation. With the Doppel system, one can choose for each
of the communication channels to be transferred whether in its
original form or in the one generated by the system. For example, the voice and body motion can be replaced by the Doppel
system while the speech content is preserved. This will allow
us to analyze individual effects of physical traits of the speaker
and content in the speaker’s speech on identification of personality. This selectivity of personal traits provides us with
useful approach to investigate which information conveys our
personality through conversation. To show a potential of this
proposed system, we conduct an experiment to test how much
the content of conversation conveys the personality of speakers to interlocutors, without any physical traits of the speakers.
Preliminary results show that although interlocutors have difficulty identifying their speakers only by using conversational
contents, they can recognize their acquaintances when their
acquaintances are the speakers. We point out some potential
physical traits to convey our personality.
Keywords: social cognition, android science, human-robot interaction, personality psychology, personal presence

Introduction
Where does personality come from? Do we characterize
other people from what they are saying or from how they behave? These issues about personality have been long studied in cognitive psychology. Recent progress has provided us
with dimensions of personality to measure human personality (McCrae, Zonderman, Costa, Bond, & Paunonen, 1996)
and cognitive models (Brunswik, 1956). Thanks to the establishment of such methodologies, personality studies have
been gaining attention not only in cognitive science but also
from the viewpoint of design of human-computer/-robot interaction (Fong, Nourbakhsh, & Dautenhahn, 2003; Nass,
Moon, Fogg, & Reeves, 1995).
Many studies on personality have been devoted to clarifying what information conveys personality traits of an individual. They have revealed that there exists a strong relationship between physical traits and personality. For example, some studies reported, using criterion measures based on
self and peer reports, that a person’s appearance, including
facial expression (Berry, 1990, 1991; Little & Perrett, 2006)
and clothing style (Naumann, 2009), enables other persons to
judge the person’s personality accurately. While these studies were based on photographs of the face or full-body, other
studies have shown that body movement (Kenny, Horner,

Kashy, & Chu, 1992) and voice (Scherer & Scherer, 1981;
Borkenau & Liebler, 1992) also provide useful information
for judging personality traits, especially extraversion.
Although these studies showed several communication
channels in which personal traits are presented, the experimental setting was limited to the case where a judge observes
a person: there was no conversation between them, although
the contents of a conversation would likely be the most informative. A crucial difficulty in examining the relationship
between physical traits and personality during a conversation
is to isolate physical traits of an individual person from the
conversation and to control their effects. Such isolation and
control would allow us to investigate not only independent
effects of physical traits and personal thought but also mutual
interaction among them on identification of personality.
Interactive artificial agents might help us overcome this difficulty since they have been utilized as controllable ”humans”
to understand the cognitive mechanism of human adults or
infants (Itakura, 2008; Yoshikawa, Shinozawa, & Ishiguro,
2007). In this context, some studies have addressed the
problems of the behavior and appearance of the agents as
contribution to both cognitive science and robotics, using a
robot that has a very human-like appearance, called an android (Ishiguro, 2007). While typical androids are controlled
as stand-alone agents, a teleoperated android, called a “geminoid”, which has a very similar appearance to a living individual (Sakamoto, Kanda, Ono, Ishiguro, & Hagita, 2007;
Nishio, Ishiguro, & Hagita, 2007) has been developed as
a telecommunication medium to address several issues on
telepresence and self-representation (Straub, Nishio, & Ishiguro, 2010). This system enables an operator to have nonverbal and physical interaction, including body touch, gesture
and facial expression, as well as verbal one with other people, by operating an android that might have a different appearance from the operator, remotely.
Although the geminoid system provides us with a way
to isolate physical appearance from personality traits, it still
transfers not only conversational content but also many other
physical traits of its operator such as body movement, facial
expression, and speech features. We solve this problem by
assuming a speaker who gives content and an operator who
acts as a “mediator”, which might distort speech features of
the speaker as well as control the geminoid’s movement. The
assumption of the mediator enables us to eliminate physical

2375

Teleoperation room for content
Music

(a)

Geminoid room
(Appearance)

(b)

Player

Monitor
Camera
Content from a speaker

Interlocutor
Speaker

Monitor

Headphone

Mixer

Mixer
MIC

MIC

Geminoid

Teleoperation room for voice & motion
Motor
command

Delay

Speaker

Headphone

Delay

Operator
MIC

Monitor

Figure 2: Geminoids. (a) Geminoid HI-1 (right) and the
model (left). (b) Geminoid F (left) and the model (right).

Content from a speaker
Voice from an operator
Motion from an operator

Figure 1: Overview of Doppel teleoperation system. Arrows
with yellow show communication channels to be conveyed to
the operator or the interlocutor and their sources.

traits of the speaker in speech features such as voice sound
and accent from the conversation: interlocutors receive the
content from speakers and the others from the mediator and
the geminoid. As a result, personal information in conversation is separated into physical traits (appearance, body movement, and speech features) and content of speech (personal
thought). Such a system to isolate physical traits will allow
us to convey some of personal information of the speakers
and to replace the others with ones belonging to a geminoid
and its operator selectively.
In this paper, we propose a teleoperation system called
“Doppel”, which isolates several physical traits from conversation. This system allows us to analyze individual effects of
physical traits of a speaker and content in the speaker’s speech
on identification of personality by controlling the physical
traits to be conveyed to an interlocutor. To show a potential
of the system for investigating how personalities of speakers
are conveyed to interlocutors, we report an experiment where
identification of the speakers during conversation are tested.
In the rest of the paper, we first describe the proposed system. Next, we report an experiment that we conducted to verify how much content of conversation provides personalities
of speakers for their interlocutors. Preliminary results show
that although interlocutors have difficulty identifying speakers only using conversational content, they can recognize that
they are talking with strangers or their acquaintance. Finally,
we discuss what information might provide personalities of
speakers for their interlocutors during conversation.

Doppel Teleoperation System
Figure 1 shows an overview of the proposed system, called
the “Doppel Teleoperation System”. The system is based
on the telecommunication system for a teleoperated android and uses a ”geminoid” that resembles a living individual (Sakamoto et al., 2007; Nishio et al., 2007). The existing
system is used for an operator to communicate with remote
people. Unlike a video conference system where we only

provide visual and voice information, it is expected to convey the presence of the operator. We extend this system to
isolate individual communication channels by separating the
teleoperation system into two subsystems: one for a speaker
to have a conversation with an interlocutor and the other for
an operator to control voice and motion of the geminoid. In
the proposed system, the speaker communicates with the interlocutor through the geminoid, hearing what the interlocutor says and talking into a microphone in another room. The
operator hears what the speaker says and then repeats the
speaker’s words in her/his way of speaking in another teleoperation room. Therefore, the system allows us to eliminate
physical traits of a speaker during conversation: appearance
from a geminoid, vocal information and motion one from the
operator, and the content of conversation from the speaker. In
the following section, we provide more detailed information
about the system.

Appearance:Geminoid
Appearance of a speaker is replaced with the interface between the speaker and an interlocutor. The interface should
have human-like appearance to investigate the influence of
physical traits on personality identification in human-human
interaction. This is achieved by using a geminoid (Figure 2),
which resembles an existing individual. Geminoid HI-1 is
designed so that its appearance resembles a living male (Figure 2(a)). It has 50 degrees of freedom (DoFs) including 13
DoFs for facial expression. Geminoid F has a similar appearance to a living female (Figure 2(b)). Most of 12 DoFs are
used for facial expression.
Both geminoids have two different controllers: a conscious
behavior controller and an unconscious one (Sakamoto et al.,
2007). While the conscious behavior controller is driven by
command from an operator to change behavior of a geminoid
based on a set of preprogrammed body motions, subtle expressed motions such as breathing, blinking, and trembling
are added by the unconscious behavior controller to maintain the naturalness of the geminoid’s behavior. In addition to
such semi-automatic control, lip movements of the geminoid
are synchronized with those of its operator. This is realized by
a facial feature tracking software though the camera in front
of the operator.

2376

Content of conversation: Speaker
A speaker decides what a geminoid says, monitoring the conversation between the geminoid and an interlocutor. The
words of the speaker to the interlocutor is conveyed not to the
interlocutor but to the operator, who hears it in an operation
room, through a microphone.

Table 1: Sources of communication channels during conversation in the experiments
Channel
Appearance
lip motion
Voice sound
Speaking speed
Accent
Conversational content

Voice and motion: Operator
The operator controls a geminoid to convey verbal and
non-verbal information about a speaker and the operator
him/herself to an interlocutor. The operator repeats what the
speaker says in the operator’s way of speaking in front of a
microphone, which is connected to the sound system located
behind the geminoid. One might argue for using a system
for speech information processing instead of a human operator. Due to the limitations of current technology for speech
recognition, we decided to use a human operator.
In addition to conveying the words of the speaker, the operator controls how much s/he provides the interlocutor with
physical traits of the speaker such as speed of speaking and
accent, and movement. For example, if the operator repeats
the speaker’s words, mimicking the speaker’s way of speaking, speech features of the speaker will help the interlocutor
identify the speaker. As a result, the geminoid’s voice and
movement are presented to an interlocutor as a mixture of
verbal information and non-verbal one from a speaker and an
operator.

Experiment: personal identification based on
conversational content
The proposed system allows us to isolate communication
channels from a speaker and design a new experimental setting that is difficult for existing methodologies. As a first step
to verifying how we identify personality traits of other persons during conversation, we investigated whether people can
identify a person using only conversational content and how
much physical traits affect the identification of the person.
In the following experiments, we used geminoid F. To
avoid the speaker being identified due to not conversational
content but personal information, an operator was asked to
replace the speaker’s dialect and specific words to identify
the speaker (e.g., the speaker’s nickname) with standard dialect and general words (e.g., you), respectively though the
content of what a speaker said was preserved.
Since it is difficult for ordinary people to make such replacement, we assigned a female actor as the operator. The
lip and head movements of the geminoid F were synchronized with ones of the operator, while other body movements
and facial expressions were ignored except for eye blinking,
which was realized by the unconscious controller. The communication channels and their sources are summarized in Table 1.

Working hypothesis and prediction
Although physical appearance, motion, and voice include
personality traits, content of conversation should also provide

Source
Geminoid F
Operator
Operator
Operator
Operator
Speaker

much information to identify personality traits because it includes person’s thoughts, opinions, and feelings. It will convey more personal information if speakers are acquaintances.
Therefore, we verify whether the following hypotheses are
established or not.
Hypothesis 1 (H1): people can identify a speaker by using
only content of conversation.
Hypothesis 2 (H2): people can correctly identify more
speaker by using only content of conversation in case
where the speaker is an acquaintance than in case where
the speaker is a stranger.
We conducted experiments with two different conditions to
verify these hypotheses: stranger condition where a speaker
and an interlocutor do not know each other and acquaintance
condition where a speaker and an interlocutor know each
other well. We will verify the H1 by evaluating accuracy of a
guess of a speaker from among four possible candidates. H2
will be tested through comparison between the accuracy of
the guess in the stranger condition and one in the acquaintance condition.

Participants
Since the geminoid F has a female physical appearance, only
female participants were recruited to eliminate the possibility that gender difference makes it easier for an interlocutor
to guess actual speaker. Seventy-six Japanese females participated in the experiment. We made nineteen pairs of two
persons who do not know each other for the stranger condition while there were nineteen pairs of close friends for the
acquaintance condition. We assigned one of each pair as a
speaker and the other as an interlocutor. The average age of
all participants was 25.3 (SD = 6.7).

Procedure
A subject as an interlocutor was asked to chat about a given
topic with a speaker and to guess the speaker from among
four possible speakers: the parted subject as a speaker (Ss ),
the model of the geminoid F (Sg ), the operator of the geminoid F (So ), and the assistant of an experimenter (Sa ). The
last three persons were fixed through all experiments and we
confirmed that the interlocutor did not know them. The model
and operator of the geminoid F have never been selected as

2377

Each experiment consisted of six three-minute sessions.
An experimenter selected a topic to be discussed and actual
speaker from between Ss and Sa before each session. The
topic was chosen from two different kinds of topics: common topics and delicate ones. The common topics were the
topics which people have more chance to talk about (e.g.,
“how do you want to enjoy your life after your retirement?”).
Some topics were related to personal histories such as Christmas gift that speakers got as a child or personal preference
such as favorite type of man. The delicate topics were about
what people have less chance to discuss (e.g., “should we
revoke elder persons’ driving licences to obviate car accidents?”). The selected speaker was told to discuss the given
topic through the geminoid with the interlocutor while the
person who was not selected was told to listen to music with
headphones so as not to hear the conversation between the
actual speaker and the interlocutor. Three consecutive selections of the same speaker were avoided not to make the interlocutor recognize the speaker because of long conversation.
Before each experiment starts, each possible speaker was
asked to talk about two different topics provided by an experimenter. The talk was videotaped for two minutes per
topic. An interlocutor watched the videos of all talks to discern personalities of all speakers. After that, she was asked to
rate their personalities with the Japanese Property-Based Adjective Measurement questionnaire (Hayashi, 1978), which
has high correlation between its three components and the
extraversion, openness and agreeableness components of the
Big Five Model (McCrae et al., 1996).
After rating the personalities of all speakers, the interlocutor was led to the experimental room where the geminoid F
was located. The operator and speakers (Ss and Sa ) were separated into different rooms, respectively. After a brief explanation about the specifications of geminoid F, the number of sessions and the duration of each session, the experimenter informed the interlocutor that actual speaker could
change for each session. It was also noted that the geminoid
was controlled by the operator whom the interlocutor saw in
the video and she would talk based on her own thought or
what one of the other speakers was saying. During a session, the actual speaker and the interlocutor asked each other
questions about a given topic and responded to each other.
After each session concluded, the interlocutor was asked to
guess who the speaker was and to provide the reason for her
guess. She also rated personality of the speaker with the questionnaire (Hayashi, 1978). After the experiment finished, the
interlocutor was debriefed about the experiment.

Table 2: Average of accuracy rate of guessing in stranger
condition and acquaintance condition
condition
stranger
acquaintance
total average

accuracy rate
0.28
0.31
0.29

*** (p<.001)
Rate of guesses of speaker

actual speaker in the experiment. Therefore, the selection
of Sg or So by the interlocutor is assumed to be caused not
by conversational content but by other physical traits of the
geminoid F and the operator. It is implied that, while her/his
guess was based on the appearance of geminoid F if the interlocutor selected Sg , s/he guessed from the movement and
voice of the operator if the interlocutor selected So .

Other speakers

(Chance level)

Figure 3: Rate of guesses on each actual speaker in acquaintance condition.

Evaluation
The performance of an interlocutor was evaluated with how
often an interlocutor guessed right on actual speaker. Due to
limited space, the analysis of personalities rated by interlocutors with the Japanese Property-Based Adjective Measurement questionnaire is not reported here.

Result
Table 2 shows average accuracy rates of guessing actual
speaker for two conditions and total average across subjects. Although the total average rate is slightly higher than
the rate expected by chance (0.25), no significant difference
was found between them (p = 0.13 > .05 by binomial test).
This result indicates that it is hard to guess who is talking
from conventional content, rejecting our first hypothesis. We
also tested the second hypothesis by comparing average accuracy rates between two conditions. However, there was
no significant difference between them (p = 0.85 > .05 by
Wilcoxon test) although the rate in the acquaintance condition is slightly higher than one in the stranger condition.
This result suggests that the difference between two conditions does not support the our second hypothesis.
In the acquaintance condition, an interlocutor talks with
not only an acquaintance but also a stranger (i.e. the assistant). If she identifies their acquaintances more correctly than
the stranger, the second hypothesis is supported within the acquaintance condition. Therefore, we compared performance
of guessing the actual speaker when the acquaintance is the
speaker with one when the stranger is the speaker in the acquaintance condition.

2378

*** (p<.001)

Table 3: Selection probability of possible speakers
speakers
the model of geminoid F
the operator
the assistant
the subject as a speaker

Figure 4: Accuracy rates of guessing on different actual
speakers in the acquaintance condition.
Figure 3 shows the rate of guesses of speakers on each actual speaker in the acquaintance condition. The left bar in
the figure shows the rate for acquaintances as actual speaker
while the middle bar represents the one for the stranger (Sa )
as actual speaker. The bar on the right shows the rate in case
where the guesses occurred by chance. The black part in each
bar stands for the rate of guesses of acquaintances. As we
can see, the guessing performance for acquaintances as actual
speakers is slightly higher than the rate expected by chance.
However, there was no significant difference between them
(p = 0.17 > .05 by binomial test). Interestingly, the guessing
performance is significantly different when the stranger was
the actual speaker (p = 0.00 < .001 by binomial test). These
results indicate that, while it is hard for the interlocutors to
identify acquaintances as the actual speakers, they can recognize that the actual speakers are not their acquaintances.
The results shown in Figure 3 suggest that our second hypothesis is not supported. However, the low accuracy rate of
the acquaintances might be caused by the strong conservative bias of the interlocutors when making judgment of actual
speaker as their acquaintances. To distinguish accuracy from
bias effects, we computed A′ and B′′ scores (Grier, 1971) from
hit rate (i.e., the rate of the guess of the acquaintance given
acquaintances as actual speakers) and false-alarm rate (i.e.,
the rate of guess of acquaintance given the stranger as actual
speaker). The scores showed that the interlocutors are sensitive to their acquaintance (A′ = 0.80) though they have strong
conservative bias against guessing their acquaintances (B′′ =
0.70). Both scores were higher than ones in case of guessing
the stranger (Sa ) as actual speaker (A′ = 0.54,B′′ = 0.036). In
fact, it was revealed that the interlocutors identify their acquaintances significantly when we calculate the accuracy rate
given that the interlocutors answered that speakers were their
acquaintances. Figure 4 shows the accuracy rates of guessing
the actual speakers in acquaintance condition. As can been
seen, the guessing performance for their acquaintances as actual speaker is much higher than the performance expected
by chance. Actually, there was significant difference between
them (p = 0.00 < 0.001 by binomial test). We cannot find
such difference for the guessing performance for the assistant
as actual speaker (see the middle bar in Figure 4). These re-

selection probability
0.285
0.241
0.263
0.206

sults imply that the interlocutors identify their acquaintances
as the actual speaker, supporting the second hypothesis.
We also calculated probabilities of guessing each possible
speaker as the actual speaker to test how much physical traits
can affect the identification of speakers (Table 3). Although
the probabilities of selecting the geminoid model or the operator are slightly higher than that of selecting subjects as
speakers, we were able to see no significant difference among
them. This might imply that no physical trait is much stronger
than others when several traits are presented.

Discussion
The results revealed that it is difficult for people to identify
a person without her/his physical traits: physical appearance,
body movement, and speech features. In fact, after the experiments, some interlocutors reported that they felt as if the
geminoid had another new personality, not one of possible
speakers. Even though some results did not support our hypotheses, the results gave us fruitful insights. Especially, it is
interesting why it was easy for the interlocutors to recognize
that actual speaker is not their acquaintances. Exclusion of
some physical traits presented in the experiment will reveal
what information provides interlocutors with enough information to make the judgment.
The accuracy and response bias scores suggested that the
low accuracy rate of guessing acquaintances might be caused
by the conservative bias of the interlocutor for the guess. This
finding was supported by the high accuracy rate of guessing
when the interlocutors guessed their acquaintances as the actual speaker as shown in Figure 4. Since our second hypothesis was partially supported not between conditions but in the
acquaintance condition, further verification is needed.
The accuracy rates shown in Table 3 tell us that there is
no significant effect of physical traits on personal identification. This might implies that the identification of personality
during conversation results from mutual interaction among
physical traits and conversational content. The investigation
of such interaction seems difficult for existing approaches because they needs to extract single modality from all modalities and exclude the others. Our system is useful for such
investigation because it allows us to examine not only single effect of the physical traits and conversational content but
also the mutual interaction among them by controlling the
presented information selectively. We will conduct experiments with different combinations of physical traits to investigate how physical traits and conversational content interact

2379

with other traits as a future work.
One concern in this system is the influence of the geminoid on interlocutors’ judgment. Previous studies have reported that people respond to an android as they respond to
a human if it shows human-like behavior (Shimada & Ishiguro, 2008). Since we designed the geminoid so as to resemble human in appearance and movement, it is expected that
the subjects consider the geminoid as a “human”. However,
it is well-known as uncanny valley (Mori, 1970) that even
small lacks of human likeness affect human perception of androids. Therefore, how human likeness of androids affect human judgmental process should be addressed in the future.
We should point out that the interlocutors still extracted
some physical traits of their speakers through conversation
even though we tried to eliminate this possibility in the conversation. More precisely, they used some speech features to
guess actual speakers: timing of speech, duration of speech,
and expression of feedback to the interlocutors’ comments
like “Really?”, “Exactly”, and “No way!”. In addition, it
turns out that interlocutors might use speed of speech and accent to guess actual speakers in preparatory experiments. A
detailed investigation of physical traits including such speech
features is also valuable as future work.

Conclusion
We introduced the “Doppel teleoperation system”, which isolates several physical traits from conversation, to investigate
how personal information is conveyed to other people during conversation. With the Doppel system, one can choose
for each of the communication modalities to be transferred
whether in its original form or the one generated by the system. This will allow us to analyze individual effects of physical traits of the speaker and content in the speaker’s speech
on identification of personality. We tested how much content
of conversation conveys the personality of speakers for interlocutors, without any physical traits of the speakers. Preliminary results showed that although interlocutors have difficulty
identifying their speakers only by using conversational content, they could recognize that they were talking with their
acquaintances. We hope that this system helps us understand
our cognitive mechanism of our personality.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant-in Aid for Scientific
Research (S), KAKEN (20220002) and JST, CREST. HS
thanks M. Shimada for valuable comments.

References
Berry, D. (1990). Taking people at face value: Evidence for
the kernel of truth hypothesis. Social Cog., 8, 343–361.
Berry, D. (1991). Accuracy in social perception: Contributions of facial and vocal information. Journal of Personality and Social Psyco., 61, 298–307.
Borkenau, P., & Liebler, A. (1992). Trait inferences: Sources
of validity at zero-acquaintance. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62, 645-657.

Brunswik, E. (1956). Perception and the representative design of psychological experiments (2d ed.).
Fong, T., Nourbakhsh, I., & Dautenhahn, K. (2003). A survey
of socially interactive robots. Robotics and autonomous
systems, 42(3), 143–166.
Grier, J. (1971). Nonparametric indexes for sensitivity and
bias: computing formulas. Psycho. Bulletin, 75(6), 424.
Hayashi, F. (1978). The fundamental dimensions of interpersonal cognitive structure. Bulletin of the Faculty of Education of Nagoya University, 25, 233–247. (in Japanese)
Ishiguro, H. (2007). Android science–toward a new crossinterdisciplinary framework. Robo. Res., 28, 118–127.
Itakura, S. (2008). Development of mentalizing and communication: From viewpoint of developmental cybernetics
and developmental cognitive neuroscience. IEICE TRANSACTION COMMUNICATIONS E SERIES B, 91(7), 2109.
Kenny, D. A., Horner, C., Kashy, D. A., & Chu, L. (1992).
Consensus at zero-acquaintance: Replication, behavioral
cues, and stability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 88–97.
Little, A. C., & Perrett, D. I. (2006). Using composite images
to assess accuracy in personality attribution to faces. British
Journal of Psychology, 98, 111–126.
McCrae, R., Zonderman, A., Costa, P., Bond, M., &
Paunonen, S. (1996). Evaluating replicability of factors in
the revised neo personality inventory: Confirmatory factor
analysis versus procrustes rotation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 70(3), 552.
Mori, M. (1970). Bukimi no tani (the uncanny valley). Energy, 7(4), 33–35.
Nass, C., Moon, Y., Fogg, B., & Reeves, B. (1995). Can computer personalities be human personalities?. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies.
Naumann, L. (2009). Personality judgments based on physical appearance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35(12), 1661–1671.
Nishio, S., Ishiguro, H., & Hagita, N. (2007). Geminoid:
Teleoperated android of an existing person. Humanoid
robots-new developments. I-Tech.
Sakamoto, D., Kanda, T., Ono, T., Ishiguro, H., & Hagita, N.
(2007). Android as a telecommunication medium with a
human-like presence. In Proc. of the acm/ieee int. conf. on
human-robot interaction (pp. 193–200).
Scherer, K., & Scherer, U. (1981). Speech behavior and personality. Speech evaluation in psychiatry, 115–135.
Shimada, M., & Ishiguro, H. (2008). Motion behavior and its
influence on human-likeness in an android robot. In Proc
of the annual conf. of the cog. sci. society (pp. 2468–2473).
Straub, I., Nishio, S., & Ishiguro, H. (2010). Incorporated
identity in interaction with a teleoperated android robot: A
case study. In Proc. of int. sympo. on robot and human
interactive commu. (pp. 119–124).
Yoshikawa, Y., Shinozawa, K., & Ishiguro, H. (2007). Social
reflex hypothesis on blinking interaction. In Proc. of the
annual conf. of the cog. sci. society (pp. 725–730).

2380

