UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamic estimation of emphasizing points for user satisfaction evaluations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1g37k99v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ohmoto, Yoshimasa
Miyake, Takashi
Nishida, Toyoaki

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dynamic estimation of emphasizing points for user satisfaction evaluations
Yoshimasa Ohmoto(ohmoto@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan

Takashi Miyake (miyake@ii.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan

Toyoaki Nishida (nishida@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan
Abstract
When many factors must be considered for decision-making,
people dynamically change their emphasizing points, along
with their understanding of these factors and the relationships
between them. In previous work, we proposed a method to
dynamically estimate emphasizing points (DEEP) based on utterances, physiological indices, and proposal selections. To
evaluate this method in actual interactions, we conducted controlled WoZ (Wizard of Oz) experiments using Embodied Conversational Agents (ECAs), which interactively provide controlled information for decision-making. Using ECAs, we
compare our method to an existing method, which estimates
emphasizing factors through the gradual method . We confirm that our method can accurately estimate dynamic changes
of emphasizing points, and that participants were more satisfied with the final proposal from the ECA that used DEEP.
Keywords: verbal and nonverbal behavior; physiological indices; preferential structure estimation.

Introduction
When many factors must be considered for decision-making,
we dynamically and interactively change the factors that we
emphasize (which we call ”emphasizing points”). We also
change our understanding of these factors and relationships
between them. For example, in travel planning, we have to
synthetically consider factors, such as place, budget, members, and schedule. We often make such plans interactively
with our friends and travel agency staff.
The interaction between conversational partners influences
how we understand the factors and the relationships between them during the decision-making process. Therefore,
their emphasizing points are often dynamically changed when
faced with new information. However, the important factors may not only be the most recent points emphasized, but
the process of interaction may also change the emphasizing
points. People have to re-estimate the changes in their emphasizing points throughout the interaction.
In interactive decision-making with dynamic changes to
emphasizing points, humans provide active demands and passive responses through verbal expressions, nonverbal reactions, proposal selection, and physiological state (Ohmoto,

Kataoka, Miyake, & Nishida, 2011). In the previous work,
we analyzed the interaction process, and verbal and nonverbal behavior during the interaction to propose an estimation
method of interaction using utterances, nonverbal behavior,
physiological indices, and proposal selections.
The purpose of this study is to evaluate whether our proposed method based on dynamic estimation of emphasizing
points (DEEP) is useful to participants in interactive decisionmaking and whether the proposed method can provide satisfactory proposals for participants. To test this method,
we used Embodied Conversational Agents (ECAs), because
it is difficult for human agents to achieve rigorously controlled interaction with participants based on our proposed
method. Specifically, we conducted an experiment that compares the results of interactive decision-making with two
types of ECAs; one provided proposals based on our method
and another based on an existing method that gradually estimates emphasizing points based on verbal expressions and
proposal selections.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses
work on interactive systems. Section 3 briefly explains DEEP,
which dynamically estimates emphasizing points. Section
4 describes the experiment for comparing two types of estimation methods and then presents the results. Section 5
discusses the achievements and limitations of the proposed
method. Section 6 concludes and discusses future work.

Related work
Some researchers have developed systems that can provide
proposals to satisfy user’s demands. These systems gradually
estimate user’s demands throughout the interaction.
Kitamura et al. (Kitamura et al., 2008) developed the ”Laddering” Search Service System that matches users queries
with search targets by communicating with users throughout
the interview. They assume that user’s emphasizing points do
not change during the interaction.
Aydogan et al. (Aydogan & Yolum, 2007) proposed an
architecture in which both consumers and producers use a

2115

shared ontology to negotiate services. Through repetitive interactions, the provider accurately learns consumers’ needs to
provide better-targeted offers. The system learns consumers’
needs over long-term interactions.
Kurata (Kurata, 2010) proposed a computer-aided tour
planning system. The system provides several tour plans and
asks the user to provide feedback. The feedback is utilized
by the system for inferring the user’s preferences and then for
revising tour plans. This cycle is repeated until the user is
satisfied with the final plan, with the hopes that this method
gradually leads to a more satisfying experience of computeraided tour planning. The system can then estimate user’s emphasizing points. However, the user has to manually change
emphasizing points when the user wants to change her/his
emphasizing points during the interaction. Moreover, the user
cannot modify their emphasizing points when he/she does not
have knowledge about the planning.
Previous work revealed that user demands and needs could
gradually be estimated through repetitive interactions. However, most of the research did not consider that user’s demands and needs could change throughout the interaction. In
contrast, we assume that emphasizing points can change over
the interaction and we dynamically estimate these changes.
We focus not only on active demands verbally expressed and
proposal selections, but also on passive responses expressed
by backchanneling, and nonverbal reactions.
It is, however, difficult to estimate human internal states
through nonverbal information, especially when passively interacting with others. Therefore, we use physiological indices
for estimating human internal states during interaction. There
are various studies on estimating human internal states by
measuring physiological indices (e.g. (Iwaki, Arakawa, &
Kiryu, 2008)). There are also several studies that use these
measured physiological indices for effective human-agent interaction.
Bosma et al. (Bosma & Andre, 2004) proposed a method
that takes into account users’ emotional state to disambiguate
dialogue acts. They restrict to pedagogical agents that offer
a text-based natural language interface for assisting the user
in text communication. They estimated levels of arousal and
valence by using physiological indices: skin conductivity response (SCR), heart rate, muscle activity, and respiration rate.
Prendinger and Ishizuka (Prendinger & Ishizuka, 2005) developed an interview agent which takes physiological data
(skin conductance and electromyography) of users in realtime, interprets the data into emotions, and addresses the
user’s affective states in the form of emphatic feedback. In
addition, they evaluated the agent by using SCR and heart
rate. The empathic feedback has a positive effect on the interviewee’s stress level while hearing the question.
As mentioned above, physiological indices are useful for
estimating human internal states in interaction even when
users passively interact with others. The proposed method
uses physiological indices, SCR, electrocardiograms (LF/HF
values), and skin temperature of fingers, to detect mental

stress, such as pleasure, excitement, and tension. The method
estimates emphasizing points by using these physiological indices, as well as verbal expressions, and nonverbal responses.
We have discussed the achievements and limitations of previous work related to our objective of estimating emphasizing points for interactive decision-making. Because of the
difficulty in detecting passive responses during interactions,
most prior work estimated user demands and needs gradually
through repetitive interactions that required active demands
from users. Therefore, we propose a method that dynamically estimates emphasizing points by using physiological responses, which could detect human internal states even during a passive interaction, in addition to verbal expressions,
and nonverbal responses. In this study, we apply the proposed method to actual interactions and experimentally evaluate whether proposals that use physiological responses are
useful for participants’ decision-making and for achieving
satisfactory results in the interaction.

Dynamically estimating emphasizing points
For our purpose, we conducted preliminary analyses to elicit
useful information for dynamically estimating emphasizing
points (DEEP) in human-human interaction (Ohmoto et al.
2011). As a result of the analyses of videos and physiological indices, we could suggest a method to DEEP which is
explained next subsection. We proposed a method to DEEP
based on the observation of human-human interaction in preliminary analyses, so, we think that the proposed method is
one of methods realizing DEEP. In this section, we briefly
explain the proposed method to DEEP based on verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices, when
participants are given two proposals and asked for his/her selection and demands.
DEEP, in this paper, is applied to the situation in which
many factors, including unknowns, for must be considered
for decision-making. In this situation, a user interacts with a
system based on DEEP and the system advises some useful
proposals for user’s decision-making. A proposition process
in an interaction is as follows: First, the two most appropriate
proposals at that point are explained from a DEEP system.
After the proposition, the system asks the user what his/her
demands were and which proposal is better. The DEEP system pays attention to the user’s reactions and answers during
the explanation and questions. The system then estimates the
emphasizing points. The user repeats this process until one
of the propositions satisfies the user’s end goal.

Overview of DEEP
The degree of emphasis for an emphasizing point is rated on
a scale from zero to five. The rating is changed based on the
following three factors during the explanation.
• Verbal reactions
Either of the two following reactions occurs.

2116

– Listed words appear in answers or demands.

– The participant provides backchanneling phrases, which
express acknowledgement, surprise, or understanding,
such as ”ah,” ”oh,” ”aha,” ” I see,” and ”I understand.”
• Body movements
The participant repeatedly nods three times or more.
• Physiological indices
Either of the two following responses occur (refer to
(Miyata, 1998), (Lin, Omata, Hu, & Imamiya, 2005),
(Iwaki et al., 2008) and (Nakazono, Hada, Ataka, Tanaka,
& Nagashima, 2008)).
– SCR increases more than 10% compared to resting level.
– LF/HF value (electrocardiograph measurement) is more
than 6.0.
Verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices, are used as criteria for determining when a new factor
is discovered and should be emphasized, and for determining when a user’s degree of emphasis of a particular factor
increases or decreases.
Rules for changing estimated emphasizing points during explanation The estimated emphasizing points are
changed by the participant’s responses when a DEEP system
explains the proposals.
• Discovery of a new factor to be emphasized
When any one of the three criteria appears during an explanation, the system decides that the factor should be slightly
emphasized, and increases the degree of emphasis from
zero to two. When any two or three criteria are present,
the system increases the emphasis from zero to three.
• Increasing or decreasing degree of emphasis
When any one of the three criteria appears, the system decides that the factor should be emphasized, and increases
the emphasis of the factor by one. When there are physiological reactions, but no verbal reactions, or body movements, the system decides that the factor should be emphasized less, and decreases the emphasis of the factor by one.
Rules for changing estimated emphasizing points from active demands The system asks whether a user has any demands. From the user s response, the system determines what
the user s demands are and what changes there are to emphasizing points. The system uses assumed keywords in the
user s response to determine demands and changes to demands. Assumed keywords are words that express assumed
emphasizing points, demands, and basic words necessary to
capture demands. Words that are not expected to be included
in answers are ignored.
• Discovery of new factors to be emphasized
When the emphasis degree of the discovered factor is zero,
the system increases the degree of emphasis from zero to
three.

• Increasing or decreasing degree of emphasis
When the emphasis of the discovered factor is greater than
zero and the system decides that the factor should be increased, the system increases the degree by one. When the
system decides that the emphasis of the factor should be
decreased and the degree is greater than zero, the system
decreases the degree by one.
Deciding a better proposal by the user’s choice between
the two proposals Given two proposals, the system asks
the user which is better. If the proposal satisfied the user’s end
goal, that is the final proposal. If not, based on the answer,
the system determines which proposal more satisfies the user
or decides either that both proposals equally satisfy or that
neither proposal is satisfactory. When the system determines
that both proposals equally satisfy the user, the proposal in
which the lowest skin temperature was recorded is regarded
as better. When the system determines that neither proposal
satisfieds the user, the system does nothing.

Selecting the next step based on DEEP results
According to the criteria mentioned above, changes to user
s emphasizing points are estimated after the proposals are
given and data is collected from the user s reactions and
response. After the estimation, the next two proposals are
selected based on the estimation results.
The next proposals are selected using a table of orthogonal arrays in advance. Orthogonal arrays are a special set of
Latin squares, which can be used to estimate main effects using only a few experimental runs. From the table, the two proposals that most satisfy user’s emphasizing points are picked.
When many proposals in the table can satisfy a user s emphasizing points, the two proposals nearest to the best proposal for a user’s choice are selected. When neither proposal
will satisfy the emphasizing points, the two proposals furthest
from the previous proposition are selected. The distances of
proposals are calculated by cosine similarity.

Experiment
The purpose of this experiment was to investigate whether the
DEEP method could accurately estimate emphasizing points
in which many factors, including unknown factors, must be
considered for decision-making. In the experiment, we used
human-like virtual agents (ECAs) to strictly control the verbal and nonverbal expressions of the agent, which could affect
user s impressions of the proposals presented. The ECAs
were operated by a WoZ (Wizard of Oz) interface because
accurate voice recognition can be difficult. The proposed
method was compared with the gradual method, which was
discussed above, and is described in more detail below.

Task
Participants were asked to design a mobile robot using a robot
parts catalogue. Each participant interacted with an experimenter for two sessions, in which they designed a different
robot that achieved different tasks. The participant could

2117

change the design concept of the robot during the session
without informing the change to the experimenter. The task
had 23 criteria that the robot must meet and there were various ways to design robots that realize the same purpose. Examples purposes in Situation A were ”taking photos of beautiful scenery” and ”introducing old temples and shrines,” while
in Situation B, examples purposes were ” a mountain climbing race” and ”a city obstacle race.”

The gradual method compared with DEEP
We compared the DEEP method with gradual method. In the
gradual method, the ECA provides the two proposals nearest
to the best proposal of the user. When the user decides that
neither proposal will suffice, the two proposals furthest from
the last two proposals. This method only uses user’s selection between the two proposals and gradually approaches a
satisfactory proposal. The method does not pay attention to
the dynamic changes of user’s emphasizing points during the
interaction. Therefore, only the user’s actual choice is taken
into account. This method can provide a better proposal than
previous one in most cases. This is a better point than the
DEEP method. This method was regarded as a modified version of work by Kurata (Kurata, 2010).

Figure 1: Experimental settings
Table 1: T-test results for accuracy in estimating emphasizing
points
average
standard deviation
t
p

proposed
2.1
0.69
2.49
0.029*

gradual
1.0
1.0

Outline of WoZ
The experimenter entered into the system data that contained
verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices,
because we could not robustly capture this data in real-time.
Each ECA generated verbal and nonverbal behavior that had
been previously designed by the experimenter based on the
expected reactions.
Both ECAs accepted the results of user’s choice. In addition, the ECA with DEEP accepts data as was described
in previous section. Verbal reactions and body movements
are determined via visual observation. Physiological indices
were automatically measured and the experimenter annotated
which words or explanations may have triggered the physiological responses. Each ECA used the entered data to decide
the proposals presented in the next proposition.

Experimental settings
The experimental setting is shown in Figure 1. The participant sat in front of a 100-inch screen displaying the ECA.
The experimenter sat out of view of the participant and entered the stimuli via a WoZ interface. Two video cameras
recorded the participant’s behavior; one was placed on the
screen for recording the participant’s behavior, and another
was placed behind the participants for recording the screen.
The participant’s voice was recorded by microphones. Polymate was used to measure SCR, the electrocardiogram, and
skin temperature of fingers. The experimenter instructed the
participant to keep their left arm on an armrest.

Participants
26 students (20 males and 6 females) participated in the experiment. They were undergraduate students from 18 to 25

years old (an average of 20.6 years old). They did not know
about robots but they were in science course. All of them
interacted with both of ECA with DEEP and without DEEP.

Procedure
After a brief explanation of the experiment, the experimenter
began the experiment. Two sessions were conducted during
the experiment. The experimenter randomly decided which
ECA, DEEP or the gradual method, was used for the first
session, and the other ECA was used for the second session.
The participant repeatedly selected proposals provided by the
ECA until he/she was satisfied his/her end goal for the robot.
At the conclusion of each session, the participant completed
a questionnaire regarding the ECA s evaluations.

Results of accuracy in DEEP
We randomly picked seven participants before the experiment. These seven participants chose their top three emphasizing points out of 23 factors at the end of both session. The
reason why we picked up a limited number of participants
is that the choice of emphasizing points was very time consuming process because they had to understand the meanings
of 23 factors and reflect on their decision-making. Therefore, we could gather a limited number of participants for
the research. We then calculated concordance rates between
the factors chosen by the user and the factors estimated by
each ECA. We conducted a t-test to compare the concordance
rates of DEEP with that of the gradual method. Results are
shown in Table 1. Average values show the average number
of matched factors.

2118

Table 2: Chi-squared for the effect of method on dynamic
changes
proposed
gradual
p

changed
25
22
0.158

Table 4: Wilcoxon signed-rank test results on user satisfaction of ECA’s final proposal

not changed
1
4

average
standard deviation
z
p

proposed
1.8
2.3
2.11
0.035*

gradual
0.81
1.6

Table 3: Sign-test for comparison of ECA method
average
standard deviation
p

score (proposed > gradual)
1.0
1.9
0.013*

Table 5: Sign-test results on which ECA provided the best
proposal
average
standard deviation
p

The results of a t-test confirmed that DEEP more accurately
estimates emphasizing points than does the gradual method.
We suggest that DEEP has sufficient performance for estimating emphasizing points because the average is high and the
standard deviation is low. Therefore, by using verbal reactions, body movements and physiological indices, DEEP can
correctly estimate the emphasizing points of each participant.

Questionnaire results
The participants answered three rating questions on the
ECA’s behavior using a seven-point scale. The scale was presented as seven ticks on a black line without numbers, which
we scored from -3 to +3.
Each of the three questionnaires contained two kinds of
questions; one was on how much the ECA affected participant’s thought (”how much” question), another was regarding which method had more affected participant’s thought
(”which” question).
Changing emphasizing points and purpose of robot Participants answered whether they dynamically changed their
emphasizing points and purpose of the robot throughout the
interaction (”how much” questions). We performed Chisquared test to confirm that there was a significant difference between DEEP and the gradual method, and the results
are presented in Table 2. Participants also answered which
method caused more dynamic changes (”which” question);
we performed sign-test to calculate the difference between
the two methods, which is shown in Table 3 (when the gradual method caused most changes: -3 - when DEEP caused
most changes: +3).
There is no significant difference between the how much
scores, because both methods could cause dynamic changes
during the interaction. This means that humans easily change
their emphasizing points even when simple algorithms provide the proposal and explanation. Meanwhile, DEEP caused
significantly more changes than did the gradual method. It
is possible that participants pay attention to broader factors
than contained in the mobile robot task because the proposed

score (proposed > gradual)
1.1
2.3
0.038*

method was sensitive to changes in emphasizing points and
modified subsequent proposals accordingly.
Participant satisfaction of ECA’s final proposal Participants answered how satisfied they were with the ECA’s final
proposal (”how much” questions). The results of a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test are shown in Table 4 (not at all: -3 - very
much: +3). Participants also answered which method provided a more satisfactory proposal (”which” question). We
performed a sign-test, and the results are shown in Table 5
(satisfy the final proposal of the ECA with gradual method:
-3 - satisfy the final proposal of the ECA with DEEP: +3).
Both of Table 4 and Table 5 show that the ECA with DEEP
provided a significantly more satisfactory proposal than the
ECA with the gradual method. However, it is important to
note that the standard deviation for the results of the ECA
with DEEP in Table 4 and Table 5 are fairly large. We return
to the implications of this result in the discussion.
Naturalness of ECA s proposals Participants answered
how natural the sequence of proposals was (”how much”
questions). We performed a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, and
the results are shown in Table 6 (not at all: -3 - very much:
+3). Participants also answered which method provided more
natural proposals (”which” question). The results of a signtest are shown in Table 7 (the ECA with gradual method provided most natural proposal: -3 - the ECA with DEEP provided most natural proposal: +3).
Both Table 6 and Table 7 show that the ECA with DEEP
provided significantly more natural proposals than the ECA
with gradual method. The each content of proposals were
the same between the proposed method and gradual method.
Therefore, naturalness must be attributed to presentation order and whether the proposals reflected their emphasizing
points. The proposed method most likely provided more natural proposals because DEEP could quickly reflect changes
in their emphasizing points.

2119

Table 6: Wilcoxon signed-rank test results on naturalness of
ECA proposals
average
standard deviation
z
p

proposed
1.2
1.8
2.4
0.015*

gradual
0.27
1.6

Table 7: Sign-test results on which ECA provided more natural proposals
average
standard deviation
p

score (proposed > gradual)
0.89
1.7
0.027*

methods: our method and an existing method that gradually
estimates emphasizing points based on participants proposal
choice. As a result, we confirmed that DEEP improved estimation accuracy, user satisfaction, and naturalness of proposals. We propose that interactive decision-making be based on
estimation of emphasizing points.
One important issue that should be explored in future work
is more clearly define the criteria for noting verbal and nonverbal behavior. Physiological indices are very useful for estimating internal states of human but measuring these indices
may not be natural in many cases. In future work, we will try
to replace physiological indices with synthetic use of some
verbal and nonverbal behaviors.

References

Discussion
In this study, we evaluated one method for estimating emphasizing points based on verbal and nonverbal information
and physiological indices. As a result, we confirmed that our
proposed method improved the accuracy of estimating emphasizing points, has more latitude in changing emphasizin
points, is natural, and participants are more satisfied with the
final proposal. In addition, we find evidence that people often change their emphasizing points and purpose of the task
during the interactive decision-making process.
The proposed method considers changes of emphasizing
points. Therefore, the proposed method often provided proposals that included new combinations of factors which the
participant did not specially emphasize. One participant reported ”I was often surprised at the dynamic changes of
the proposals.” The surprise sometimes causes uncomfortable
feelings so we will have to consider proposal history and provide additional explanations for the change.
The standard deviations in proposed method are relatively
large. This means that the effectiveness of the proposed
method is different across individuals. One of the reasons
was that some participants’ demands could not be satisfied
by the ECA. In those cases, the ECA did not provide any notification of impossibility or alternatives. In many posssible
cases, the ECA with DEEP quickly responded to participants’
demands, so, in some impossible cases, the participants who
had impossible demands felt disappointed, as would be expected. Future work should include notification capabilities.

Conclusion
In this study, we evaluated whether our proposed method,
which estimates dynamic changes of emphasizing points
based on verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices, is useful for interactive decision-making and for
selecting a proposal that satisfies the user’s end goal. For
this purpose, we conducted an experiment that compared two

Aydogan, R., & Yolum, P. (2007). Learning consumer preferences using semanticsimilarity. In Aamas ’07: Proceedings
of the 6th international joint conference on autonomous
agents and multiagent systems (pp. 1–8). New York, NY,
USA: ACM.
Bosma, W., & Andre, E. (2004). Exploiting emotions to
disambiguate dialogue acts. In Proceedings of the 9th international conference on intelligent user interfaces (pp.
85–92).
Iwaki, M., Arakawa, S., & Kiryu, T. (2008). Influence on
biosignal and working efficiency of sound environment in
typewriting (Tech. Rep.). IEICE technical report. ME and
bio cybernetics.
Kitamura, M., Shimohata, S., Sukehiro, T., Ikeno, A.,
Sakamoto, M., Orihara, I., et al. (2008). Design and development of dialogue system for laddering search service
(Vol. 108; Tech. Rep.). IEICE technical report. Natural language understanding and models of communication.
Kurata, Y. (2010). Interactive assistance for tour planning.
Spatial Cognition 2010 Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, 6222, 289–302.
Lin, T., Omata, M., Hu, W., & Imamiya, A. (2005). Do
physiological data relate to traditional usability indexes? In
Proceedings of the 17th australia conference on computerhuman interaction (pp. 1–10).
Miyata, H. (Ed.). (1998). The new physiological psychology
(japanese) (Vol. 3). Kitaohji-shobo.
Nakazono, K., Hada, T., Ataka, E., Tanaka, H., & Nagashima,
Y. (2008). Workload evaluation of gaming task by physiological indices and psychological indices (Vol. 107 - 553;
Tech. Rep.). Technical report of IEICE. HIP.
Ohmoto, Y., Kataoka, M., Miyake, T., & Nishida, T. (2011).
A method to dynamically estimate emphasizing points and
degree by using verbal and nonverbal information and
physiological indices. In The 2011 ieee international conference on granular computing 2011 (pp. 508–514).
Prendinger, H., & Ishizuka, M. (2005). The empathic
companion: A character-based interface that addresses
users’affective states. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 19(34), 267–285.

2120

