UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Early-Talker and Late-Talker Toddlers and Networks Show Different Word Learning Biases

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7pq7r2zs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Colunga, Eliana
Sims, Clare

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Early-Talker and Late-Talker Toddlers and Networks
Show Different Word Learning Biases
Eliana Colunga (eliana.colunga@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA

Clare E. Sims (clare.holtpatrick@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA
Abstract

for non-solid substances by material (e.g., Soja, Carey, &
Spelke, 1991).
The evidence also suggests that children learn how to
learn nouns – and learn how different kinds of properties are
relevant for different kinds of things – as a consequence of
learning names for things. Each noun the child learns
appears to teach the child something general about how to
learn new nouns that name things of that same kind, and
critically, at the same time, this learned general knowledge
constrains and facilitates the types of nouns the child will
learn next. Through computational models and a study with
toddlers, we show that even before they turn 2, late- and
early-talker toddlers show different word learning biases.

In typical development, word learning goes from slow and
laborious to fast and seemingly effortless. Typically
developing 2-year-olds are so skilled at learning noun
categories that they seem to intuit the whole range of things in
the category from hearing a single instance named – they are
biased learners. This is not the case for children below the
20th percentile on productive vocabulary (late talkers). This
paper looks at the individual vocabularies and word-learning
biases of late- and early-talking toddlers. Experiment 1 shows
that neural networks trained on the vocabularies of individual
late talkers learn qualitatively different biases than those
trained on early talker vocabularies. Experiment 2 confirms
the novel predictions made by the simulations about word
learning biases in late- vs. early-talking children. The
implications for diagnosis and intervention are discussed.

Vocabulary composition and word learning biases
The relationship between vocabulary composition and
word learning biases has been typically characterized in one
of two ways: abstract knowledge guides, facilitates and
indeed allows word learning (e.g., Soja et al, 1991; Gelman
& Bloom, 2000) or the words that have been learned give
rise to, create, and in fact constitute generalized knowledge
about word learning (e.g., Colunga & Smith, 2005,
Samuelson, 2008). We would like to bypass the debate on
whether word-learning biases are the egg to the vocabulary
chicken or the other way around and focus instead on the
interrelationship between these two factors.
In the domain of names for objects and substances, and in
typical development, vocabulary structure and abstract
knowledge in the form of kind-specific generalizations
appear to be tightly coupled. First, the tendency to attend to
shape in the specific context of naming artifacts emerges as
children learn nouns, becoming particularly robust around
the time children have between 50 to 150 nouns in their
productive vocabulary (Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 2004).
Second, the order of development of these word learning
biases reflects the statistical structure of early noun
vocabularies, (Samuelson & Smith, 1999; Colunga & Smith,
2005). Third, changing 17-month-olds’ vocabulary
composition by intensively teaching them names for
artifacts yields an early bias to generalize names for artifacts
by shape and accelerates learning of object names outside
of the lab, causing a dramatic increase in vocabulary size for
children in the experimental training group but not for those
in the control groups (Smith, Jones, Landau, GershkoffStowe & Samuelson, 2002). Fourth, computational models

Keywords: Late talkers; early talkers; computational models;
neural networks, word learning.

Introduction
There is extraordinary variability in the vocabularies of
very young children. A two-year-old in the lower 10th
percentile may produce around 10 words whereas a twoyear-old in the top 10th percentile will produce well over
300 (Fenson, Dale, Reznick, Thal, Bates, Hartung, Pethick,
& Reilly, 1993). In general, the course of word learning
proceeds from slow, effortful learning of nouns and of the
range of things that belong in a category, to very rapid
learning of object names. Indeed, typically developing 2year-olds are so skilled at learning new nouns that they
seem to intuit the whole range of things in a named category
from a single naming experience. This is not necessarily the
case for children below the 15th-20th percentile on
productive vocabulary, or late talkers. Why do some
children learn words quickly and early and others learn
words slowly, maybe even showing effects that persist into
adolescence? This paper looks at two possible contributing,
and interrelated, factors: noun vocabulary composition and
word learning biases
The evidence suggests that children are skilled noun
learners because they know about the different kinds of
properties that are relevant for categorizing different kinds
of things. Typically-developing children show word
learning biases that are specific to different kinds of things:
they generalize names for solid objects by shape and names

246

trained on the structure of the average 30-month-old
vocabulary, show word learning biases like those of young
children when processing new objects (Colunga & Smith,
2005), and further the structure of the training set affects
subsequent training, facilitating the learning of some sorts
of categories but hindering others (Colunga, in prep).
Altogether, these results suggest a developmental feedback
loop between learning object names, developing biases to
attend to the relevant properties for artifacts, and the
learning of more object names.

learning biases than early talker vocabularies. More
specifically, we would expect early talker vocabularies to
yield word learning biases that would facilitate the learning
of a vocabulary structured like the MCDI – highlighting
shape similarities for solids and material similarities for
non-solids. In contrast, we would expect networks trained
on late talkers’ vocabularies to generalize more variable
word learning biases, and perhaps even biases that would be
unhelpful in learning early vocabularies.

Experiment 1

Late Talkers
Method

Children below the 15th-20th percentile on normative
measures of productive vocabulary size, so-called late
talkers, are not a homogenous group in terms of their
developmental outcomes: some catch up, and some show
persistent delays (Rescorla, 2002, Rescorla, Roberts, &
Dahlsgaard, 1997). However, Rescorla and colleagues argue
against considering late talkers and typically developing
children as distinct groups, and argue instead for
conceptualizing them in terms of a “language endowment
spectrum.” Importantly, although there is continuity in
vocabulary measures at the group level, the outcome for
individual children cannot be accurately predicted on the
basis of vocabulary production or comprehension (e.g.,
Desmarais, Meyer, Bairati & Rouleau, 2008).
The literature briefly reviewed above suggests that, in
typical development, the words a child knows and what the
child knows about learning words in general go hand in
hand, and that learning names for categories of things
organized by shape speeds up learning nouns. However, this
may not be the case for all children. Unlike typically
developing children, late talkers do not systematically
extend the name of a novel solid object to other objects that
match it in shape, and in fact, in one study, almost half of
the late talkers systematically extended the novel name of a
solid object to others matching in texture rather than shape
(Jones, 2003). Recent evidence suggests that the
vocabularies of children of different language abilities may
be structured differently (Colunga & Sims, 2011; Beckage,
Smith & Hills, 2011). These findings suggest that late
talkers may not just limited in their production of object
names (the measure that defines them as late talkers) but
also deficient in the processes that subserve the acquisition
of new words and in their knowledge about those categories.
The crucial question, then, is whether these differences in
vocabulary composition are differences that matter. Do the
different nouns late- and early-talkers know yield different
word learning biases? In two experiments we test the
relationship between vocabulary composition and word
learning biases, first in neural networks (Experiment 1) and
then with 1-year-old toddlers in the lab (Experiment 2). For
the purposes of this paper we will focus on contrasting the
vocabularies of children on the two opposite ends of the
spectrum, late talkers and early talkers.
If the differences in vocabulary structure can, to some
extent, explain the differences in language ability, we would
expect late talker vocabularies to yield different word

Materials. The vocabulary measure used was the BatesMacArthur Communicative Developmental Inventory
toddler version (MCDI) both to select children and to
measure vocabulary composition. This is a parent checklist
that asks parents to indicate the words that their child
produces and although it is imperfect as a measurement
instrument (Fenson, et al, 1994) it appears to be reliable and
to be systematically related to children’s performances in a
variety laboratory measures of word learning, including
especially their word-learning biases in the Novel Noun
Generalization (NNG) task (e.g., Landau, et al, 1988).
Participants. The vocabularies of 15 late talkers and of
15 early talkers were selected out of a pool of 148 parentfilled MCDI forms for children between 18-30 months of
age. The criterion for inclusion was that there existed a
vocabulary form from a child matching in age to within 5
days in both the late talker and the early talker groups. Late
talkers fell under the 25th percentile; early talkers were
above the 75th percentile according to the MDCI norms.
The ages for the two language groups ranged from 18.49
months to 28.26 months (M=23.14 and 23.15 for late and
early talkers respectively. Vocabulary sizes for the late
talker group ranged between 15 and 425 words (M=132.53);
for the early talker group vocabulary size was between 158
and 664 words (M=457).
The noun vocabularies for each individual child were
characterized by looking at the proportion of nouns they
knew for each of the following categories: 1) solid things
alike in shape (e.g., spoon), 2) solid things alike in material
(e.g., chalk), 3) solid things alike in both shape and material
(e.g., penny), 4) non-solid things alike in shape (e.g.,
bubble), 5) non-solid things alike in material (e.g., milk), 6)
non-solid things alike in both (e.g., jeans). Nouns in
children’s vocabularies were classified as falling in each of
these categories according to adult judgments made for each
of the nouns in the MCDI reported in Samuelson & Smith,
1999. The training sets were then constructed to mimic the
vocabulary composition of each child (see below).
Architecture. The computational models are a modified
version of the ones Colunga & Smith, 2005. The main
difference is that these networks were trained using the
Leabra algorithm, an algorithm that combines Hebbian and
error driven learning (O’Reilly, 1996), instead of
Contrastive Hebbian Learning as in the original simulations.

247

The networks are organized as follows: Words are
represented discretely (as single units) and are input on the
Word Layer (Figure 1). Referents are represented as
distributed patterns over several dimensions on the
Perception Layer. For example, the shape and material of an
object (say the roundness of a particular ball and its yellow
rubbery material) are represented by an activation pattern
along the Perception layer. Solidity and Non-solidity are
represented discretely; one unit stands for Solid and another
for Non-Solid. Finally, there is a hidden layer that is
connected to all the other layers and to itself. These
networks have been shown to model performance in an
analog of the NNG Task when trained on vocabularies
structured as those of the average 30-month-old.
Word Layer

ball

Hidden Layer

Shape

Material

Solidity

ball
ball

Shape

Material

Solidity

Perceptual Layer

Figure 1: Architecture of the network and example
input patterns.

Testing. The question is what sort of word learning bias
will the networks learn given different vocabulary
structures. We address this question in a virtual version of
the NNG task. On each test trial of the virtual NNG task,
we presented the network with three novel entities (one at a
time) on the perception layer – an exemplar, and two choice
items, one matching the exemplar in shape only and one
matching in material only. For each of these three inputs,
we recorded the resulting pattern of activation on the hidden
layer. This is a measure of how the network represents
these items. If the network emphasizes the shape of the
item then the similarities of the internal representations for
the exemplar and its shape matching choice should be
greater than the similarity of the internal representations for
the exemplar and the material matching choice. If,
however, the internal representations highlight the
material of the items, then the similarity of the internal
representations for the exemplar and the shape matching
choice should be less than the corresponding similarity of
the exemplar and the material matching choice. We used
these similarities along with Luce’s choice rule to
calculate probability of choice using these similarity
measures in order to predict performance in the novel
noun generalization task.
In previous work these models have been used to
demonstrate the plausibility of the idea that the
correlations in the early noun lexicon are sufficient to
create second order generalizations – knowledge that any
solid thing should be named by shape, and any non-solid
thing should be named by material. The present
simulations extend this work to variable vocabularies of
individual children in the bottom and top ends of the
language endowment spectrum.

Results
The networks’ predictions for each of the fifteen
vocabularies of early talkers and late talkers are shown in
Figure 2. In short, using a cut-off of at least two standard
deviations above or below the 50% chance level mark, all
networks in the early talker group show a shape bias for
solids, and 12/15 early talker networks show a material bias
for non-solids as well. In contrast, 12/15 late talker
networks show a shape bias for solids and only 3/15 show a
material bias for non-solids. Interestingly, 6/15 late-talker
networks show a shape bias for non-solids, a novel
prediction that has not been empirically tested so far. To
further analyze the networks’ performance, networks were
classified according to the observed generalization patterns:
correct if they showed a shape bias for solids and a material
bias for non-solids, half-right if they showed the appropriate
shape bias for solids but no consistent bias for material, or
wrong, if they showed an incorrect overgeneralized shape
biased to non-solids. A chi-square test showed these types
of word learning biases were distributed differently in late
talker and early talker networks, X2(2,15)=14.743, p=.0006
(Yates’ p=0.004).

Training. The networks are trained with categories
presenting the same correlational structure as each
individual child’s noun vocabulary. On each training trial, a
word is paired with a referent. The patterns associated with
each word are determined by adult judgments of the early
noun corpus. For example, adults judged balls to be similar
in shape but different in material. To simulate this, we
randomly selected an input vector to represent ball shape.
Then on individual training trials, we paired that pattern
with the label ball and a randomly selected material pattern
(Figure 1). We do this for each noun in the training set.
Each network was trained in this way for its simulated
vocabulary until they reached asymptotic (and near perfect)
performance. This part of the simulation is intended to put
into the networks the lexical knowledge that the individual
child would bring to the laboratory NNG task.
Because we are interested in the consequences of different
vocabulary structures regardless of their size, all networks
were trained to learn 24 nouns, proportionally structured
like their corresponding child’s vocabulary. Thus, the only
difference between networks were the differences in
vocabulary composition for each individual child.

248

individual vocabularies of these children to replicate the
pattern found in Experiment 1.

Early Talker Networks

proportion shape choices

1

Experiment 2

0.75

Method
Participants. Nine late talkers (5 girls) and 8 early talkers
(4 girls) between the ages of 18 and 22 months (M=19.4)
were selected out of 32 children recruited as part of a larger
study. As in Experiment 1, the criterion for inclusion was
scoring at or below the 25th percentile for late talkers and at
or above the 75th percentile for early talkers. MCDI scores
ranged from 5th to 20th percentile (M=8.9) for the late talkers
and between 75th and 99th percentile for early talkers
(M=91). Vocabulary sizes for the late-talker group ranged
between 9 and 82 words (M=33) and between 151 and 526
words (M=376.3) for the early-talker group.
Stimuli. The stimuli consisted of a warm up set, a solid
set and a non-solid set. The warm up set had an exemplar, a
red plastic ball, two other balls (a tennis ball and a green and
blue rubber ball), a plastic spoon, a toy carrot, and a toy cat.
The solid set consisted of an exemplar, an orange fuzzy
round container, and 5 test items: two items matching the
exemplar in shape alone (iridescent green bumpy round
container and golden glittery round container), two items
matching the exemplar in material (fuzzy blue irregular ring
and fuzzy orange hook-like shape, and one matching in
color (orange mesh polyhedron). The non-solid set was
similarly structured and consisted of an exemplar (purple
craft sand mixed into Noxzema in a rounded elongated xlike shape), two material matches (green sand + Noxzema in
an asymmetric s-like shape and red sand + Noxzema in a
lollypop-like shape), two shape matches (elongated x-like
shapes made out of sawdust or purple shaving cream), and a
color match (purple hair gel in an hourglass shape. All nonsolids were presented on flat, square, plastic foam boards.
Procedure. In the warm-up phase, the experimenter
presented all six toys to the child and allowed him or her to
look at them and handle them for 30 seconds. Then the
objects were removed and immediately placed back on the
table outside of the child’s reach. The child was then shown
the exemplar ball and told, “look at this ball.” Then they
were asked to “get a ball” or get “another ball.” If the child
failed to retrieve a ball, the child was asked one more time,
and finally was told “here’s another ball,” handed the ball,
and allowed to get it one more time on request. If the child
got one of the non-ball distracter items, they were told,
“that’s not a ball, that’s a ____” , then the distracter was
replaced on the table, and the child was asked again for it.
The procedure during the test phase with the solid and
non-solid novel sets was the same, except that no feedback
was offered. Children were shown the exemplar and told,
“Look at this dax” and then asked to “get a dax” or “get
another dax” for the solid set or “get more dax” or “get
some dax” in the non-solid set. Children were asked to get
another (or more) until they indicated that there were no
more. Thus, solids were presented with count syntax
supporting an object construal and non-solids were

Solid

0.5

Non-solid

0.25

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Late Talker Networks

proportion shape choices

1

0.75

Solid

0.5

Non-solid

0.25

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Figure 2. Predicted proportion of shape choices for each
of the early talker and late talker networks

Discussion.
The results of the simulations suggest that the differences
in noun vocabulary composition between late- and earlytalking children may result in differences in word learning
biases. The word learning biases learned by these networks
can be interpreted as predictions at the group level. First, the
networks make a novel prediction about early talkers. A
majority of the early talker networks show material biases
for non-solids. Previous findings have shown that children
at this age (18- to 30-month-olds) show a material bias for
non-solids only when offered extra cues. For example, Soja
(1992) showed older 2-year-olds have a material bias when
offered supporting syntactic and visual cues, and Colunga &
Smith (2005) showed an early material bias for non-solids
that were presented in simple shapes for older 1-year-olds.
However, children in general do not show a robust material
bias for non-solids until around age 3 (Samuelson & Smith,
1999). Thus, this is a novel prediction that warrants testing:
the networks predict that early talkers, unlike the general
population, will show an early material bias for non-solids
even without supporting cues.
The networks also make predictions about the patterns of
novel noun generalizations one should expect to see in late
talkers between 18 and 30 months of age. As a group, late
talkers should show a shape bias for solids, with about half
of them overgeneralizing this shape bias to non-solids as
well. In Experiment 2 we test these predictions with lateand early-talker toddlers in the lab. Additionally, we run
neural network simulations based on the composition of the

249

presented with mass syntax supporting a substance construal
(Soja, 1992). The solid set was always presented before the
non-solid set, and there was a 5-minute break and a change
in testing rooms in between the two test sets.
Coding. To incorporate order information into children’s
choices, and because all children made at least three choices
for each test set, their choices were coded as follows: 3
points for the item that was 1st choice, 2 points for the 2nd
choice, 1 point for the 3rd choice, and 0 points for other.

also a significant interaction between solidity and
dimension, F(1,15) = 15.6, p=.001, η2 = .51. Post-hoc tests
showed that across both language groups, children were
more likely to choose the shape over the material match for
the solid set, t(16) = 4.03, p=.001, but not for the nonsolid
set, t(16) = -.613, n.s. The three-way interaction between
language group, solidity, and dimension was marginally
significant, F(1,15) = 4.33, p=.055, η2 = .22.
The language-group-specific predictions made by the
models were tested by analyzing the two groups separately.
First, the prediction that early talkers would show a robust
shape bias for solids and a robust material bias for nonsolids
was confirmed by a 2 (solidity) x 2 (dimension) ANOVA
revealing a two-way interaction between solidity and
dimension, F(1,7) = 26.15, p = .001, η2 = .78. Furthermore,
planned comparisons (all two-tailed) showed that this
interaction came from early talkers’ shape bias for solids
(t(7)=3.06, p=.018) and material bias for non-solids (t(7)=4.46, p=.003). Second, a similar analysis on late talkers’
scores revealed a main effect of dimension, F(1,8) = 5.5,
p=.047, η2 = .41, and no other main effects or interactions.
Planned comparisons showed that late talkers had a shape
bias for solids, t(8) = 2.57, p=.033, but did not
overgeneralize the shape bias to non-solids as a group, t(8)
= 1.1, n.s. However, 4 out of the 9 late talkers in the study
showed a shape bias for non-solids (a difference score of
more than 3), and none of the early talkers did.

Results
Simulations. The simulations based on individual
children’s vocabularies showed patterns comparable to the
ones in Experiment 1. For the early talker networks, 6/8
showed shape and material biases, and the other two showed
only a shape bias and no robust material bias. None of the
early talker networks showed incorrect biases. For the late
talker networks, all eight networks showed a shape bias for
solids, but only one showed a material bias for non-solids1.
In addition, 4/8 late talker networks showed an
overgeneralized shape bias for non-solids. A chi-square test
showed these types of word learning biases were distributed
differently in late talker and early talker networks,
X2(2,8)=7.77, p=.02 (Yates’ X2= 4.54, p=0.103).
5
4.5
4
3.5

Discussion

3
Shape

2.5

The results of Experiment 2 confirm the predictions of the
simulations in Experiment 1. Early talkers show a shape
bias for solids and a material bias for non-solids; late talkers
show a shape bias for solids that can be over-generalized to
non-solids. It is important to note that these predictions
work at the group level and not at the level of individuals.
For example, although four late takers showed an
overgeneralized shape bias for nonsolids in both the
behavioral tasks and in the network simulations, these were
not the same children; only two children showed this bias in
both the simulations based on their vocabularies and their
performance in the behavioral task. The behavioral task, and
probably the vocabulary measure as well, lack the finesse to
make predictions at the individual level based on a single
data point. We return to this point in the general discussion.
The results of experiment 2 are in line with previous work
noting a relationship between the number of nouns in a
child’s vocabulary and their word learning biases, but they
extend it in important ways. The finding that early talkers
show robust word learning biases for both solids and nonsolids at not even two years of age is new. Although one
might have predicted this pattern of results a priori from
either the empiricist or the rationalist sides of the word
learning debate, or even just from the idea that early talkers
might excel across tasks, the prediction came from the
models. Harder to predict without the networks, however, is
the pattern found for the late talkers. In fact, at first glance it
seems to contradict what we know about late talkers; that 2to 3-year-old late talkers lack a shape bias while their same-

Material

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Solid

Nonsolid
Early (n=8)

Solid

Nonsolid
Late (n=9)

Figure 3. Scores for shape and material matches for
solids and nonsolids for early- and late-talking toddlers.
Word learning biases. The simulations in Experiment 1
predicted that early and late talkers would show different
word learning biases, and predict specific patterns of novel
noun generalizations for solids and non-solids for these two
groups of children. We first look at the data of all children
together and then evaluate the predictions for each language
group. We submitted both groups of children’s scores for
the shape and material test items for the solids and non-solid
sets to a 2 (language group: early, late) x 2 (solidity: solid,
nonsolid) x 2 (dimension: shape, material) mixed ANOVA.
Figure 3 shows the average score for the items that matched
the exemplar in shape or material for the solid and nonsolid
sets for both language groups. There was a main effect of
dimension, F(1,29) = 4.77, p = .045, η2 = .24; overall shape
matches had higher scores than material matches. There was
1

One late talker child had no nouns, so no network was ran for
that child. Thus, only 8 late talker networks were ran.

250

aged peers already have a well-established bias. However,
the prediction from the networks, and our findings on the
patterns of word learning biases in very young late talkers,
before the age of 2, can help us understand the processes
underlying word learning in general.
Gershkoff-Stowe and Smith (2004) followed eight
children as they learned their first 100 nouns, looking at
their word learning biases for solids and their vocabulary
growth every three weeks. Their results show that as
children’s noun vocabulary increases, so does their attention
to shape. They set the emergence of the shape bias at around
the time children acquire 50 nouns. Our results suggest that
this relationship may be different for late talkers. None of
the late talkers in Experiment 2 reached the 50-noun mark
(though a couple were on the cusp), and yet they overall
showed a robust preference for shape for the solid set in our
task. Curiously, although attention to shape increased with
vocabulary size in Gershkoff-Stowe’s study, the lower
vocabulary group did show a preference of shape over
material. This suggests an intriguing possibility: These
models do not make a distinction between naming and nonnaming contexts. It is possible that the shape preference for
solids here is not a true shape bias, but rather an
overgeneralized heightened attention to shape. The fact that
about half of the late talkers showed an overgeneralized
shape bias for non-solids suggests that this may be the case.

composition and word learning biases modeled here – the
words you know determine the way you learn new words,
which constrains and facilitates the words you will know
next, and so on – opens a new way of thinking about
computational models, to capture not only averages and not
only individuals, but individual trajectories. If we can build
computational models that can successfully capture this selfconstructing developmental loop, the implications for early
diagnosis, designing early interventions, and understanding
the mechanisms that underlie word learning in typical and
atypical development are far-reaching.

References
Colunga, E., & Smith, L. B. (2005). From the lexicon to
expectations about kinds: a role for associative
learning. Psychological Review, 112(2), 347–382.
Colunga, E. & Sims, C. (2011). Early Talkers and Late
Talkers Know Nouns that License Different Word
Learning Biases, in Proc. of Cog. Sci Society, 32. pp.
2250-2255.
Desmarais, C. S., Meyer, F., Bairati, I., & Rouleau, N.
(2008) Systematic review of the literature on
characteristics of late-talking toddlers. Intl. J. of Language
and Communication Disorders. 43(4) pp:361-389.
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D., Bates, E.,
Hartung, J., Pethick, S., & Reilly, J. (1993). The
MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories:
User’s guide and technical manual. San Diego, CA:
Gelman, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2000). Young children are
sensitive to how an object was created when deciding
what to name it. Cognition, 76(2), 91-103.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L.B.(2004). Shape and the
first hundred nouns. Child development 75(4),1098-1114.
Jones, S. S. (2003). Late talkers show no shape bias in a
novel name extension task. Dev. Science, 6(5), 477-483.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Rescorla, L. (2002). Language and reading outcomes to age
9 in late-talking toddlers. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 45, 360-371.
Rescorla, L., Roberts, J. & Dahlsgaard, K. (1997). Late
talkers at 2: Outcome at age 3. Journal of Speech &
Hearing Research, 40, 556-566.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category structure and syntax
correspond? Cognition, 73(1), 1-33.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. . (2002). Creating a shape bias creates
rapid word learners. Psychological Science, 13, 13-19.
Soja, N. N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning. Cognition, 38(2), 179-211.
Ziegler, J. , Castel, C., Pech-Georgel, C., George, F., Alario,
F-X., & Perry, C. (2008). Developmental dyslexia and the
dual route model of reading: Simulating individual
diﬀerences and subtypes. Cognition, 107, 151–178.

General Discussion
The work presented here makes two main contributions.
First, the findings of these two studies show that late talkers
and early talkers know different sorts of nouns that lead to
qualitatively different word learning biases. Importantly,
these differences are shown within a computational model
that has been previously shown to capture various aspects of
novel noun learning, suggesting a promising use for
process-level computational models. Efforts to tease apart
the contributions of different factors to outcomes in late
talkers have come up with some characteristics that put
children at higher risk, but the underlying mechanisms are
not well understood. The work of Ziegler and colleagues in
the domain of dyslexia offers a good example of the
potential for using computational models – and specifically
models that operate at the mechanistic level – in simulating
individual differences and further understanding subtypes in
atypical development (Ziegler, Castel, Pech-Georgel,
George, Aario, & Perry, 2008). Thus, the models presented
here are a promising first step in leveraging computational
models to aid in the understanding of why some late talkers
catch up and others do not.
Second, these models represent an important extension
over previous word-learning modeling efforts in that they go
beyond modeling the performance of the mythical average
child to making predictions about the performance of
individual children, and of children who are both at the top
and at the bottom of the vocabulary spectrum. In so doing,
the simulations presented here make novel and testable
predictions. The relationship between vocabulary

251

