UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Emergence of control in artistic expressions and the process of expretise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2bb7m2q3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ishiguro, Chiaki
Okada, Takeshi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Emergence of control in artistic expressions and the process of expertise
Chiaki Ishiguro (qq116201@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies, University of Tokyo
Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan

Takeshi Okada (okadatak@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education &
Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, University of Tokyo
Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan
Abstract
The creation of a work of art has been indicated to result from
'expressive awareness', achieved as the artist matches images
and methods. This study examines how novices, who tend to
express reproductively, acquire such expressive awareness
over several weeks of practice of photography. We conducted
case studies with two conditions: 1) one participant reflected
only her own creative activities, and 2) one participant
imitated eminent works of creative expression in the domain.
As a result, the participants acquired expressive awareness in
both conditions, though the contents of the expressive
awareness were different. The imitation participant started to
practice creative expressions and tried to control her creation
consciously, while the reflection participant started to focus
on precision of methods of expression. The findings of this
study are useful for developing educational practice in art
schools.
Keywords: artistic creativity; expertise; imitation; reflection;
artistic expression

Introduction
Artistic creation has been one of the most significant
activities of human beings. Recent psychological studies
have focused on the process of artistic creation. Such studies
provide useful insights for understanding creative cognition
and have implications for creativity education. Previous
studies on the cognitive processes of artistic creation have
indicated that artistic creation consists of processes for
generating ideas or concepts, and processes for externalizing
them into artwork (e.g., Mace & Ward, 2002; Yokochi &
Okada, 2005). These studies have also suggested that
coordination of these two processes is important. In other
words, when creating artworks, artists pay attention to
whether or not their artwork matches with their art concepts,
and whether or not the strategies that they choose are
effective in actualizing their ideas as a form of art. The
process of coordinating their intentions and actions to
achieve artistic expressions is a type of monitoring process,
i.e. a metacognitive process (Flavell, 1976). Though it is
known that these processes feature in artistic creation by
experts, they have rarely been seen in creation by novices
(Fayena-Tawil, Kozbelt & Sitaras; 2011).
This sense of matching of images (hereafter expression
contents) and methods (hereafter expression methods) to
externalize them, referred to in this paper as expressive
awareness, plays an important role in artists’ creation (c.f.
Gantner, 1979). However, no empirical research has been
done to examine how novices acquire this expressive

awareness in the process of achieving artistic expertise. This
study focuses on such an acquisition process of expressive
awareness as an initial form of monitoring ones’ own
creative process. The findings from this study offer new
insight for the development of education programs for art
schools.
When we examine the process of artistic expertise, we
first need to explain what artistic expression is. Before the
modern era, expression meant giving a plausible impression
of motifs relating to religion or history (Diderot, 1980). In
contrast, after the modern era, the concept of artistic
expression came to mean turning the creators’ experiences,
emotions and subconscious experiences into an entity with
reality and impact (Croce, 1902; 1990). Nowadays both
views of expression exist in society. This diversity of views
of expression may affect the process of artistic expression
itself. Therefore, in this study, we classify artistic
expressions as reproductive expression, the contents of
which are intended to represent real entities such as
landscapes or still lifes, and creative expression, the
contents of which are intended to represent the creators’
ideas or emotions.
Novices who have no knowledge of artistic creation
generally prefer realistic works (Cupchik & Gebotys, 1988;
Kozbelt, 2006). Also, Ishibashi & Okada (2009; 2010)
reported that novice subjects drew realistic drawings when
they were asked to draw original works with natural
materials as motifs. According to these findings, art novices
tend to appreciate and create reproductive expressions.
What are the important factors affecting novices’
acquisition of expressive awareness? One of the candidate
factors is continuing participation in expressive activities.
People use self-explanation (Chi et al., 1989) and reflection
(Schön, 1983) on their own artwork and on their process of
creation during such expressive activities. These processes
can lead to the acquisition of expressive awareness.
Therefore, it is assumed that novices are able to acquire
expressive awareness if they have continuing opportunities
to create artworks and reflect on their own creations.
However, in order to become expert in a domain, such an
action-reflection cycle may not be enough. Csikszentmihalyi
(1999) suggested that creativity is dependent not only on the
creators’ activities, but also relates to domain rules,
representations and methods in the field of expertise. Hence,
it might be assumed that profound encounters with existing
artwork in an artistic domain play an extremely significant
role in the acquisition of expressive awareness in addition to

1733

reflection on the artist's own creations. In fact, it has for a
long time been considered that copying masterpieces (i.e. a
profound type of encounter with masterpieces) is a very
efficient way to learn drawing techniques and the painters’
intentions represented in masterpieces.
Ishibashi & Okada (2009; 2010) empirically examined the
effects of imitation on artistic creation. They conducted
psychological experiments that entailed novices copying
unfamiliar abstract drawings. While copying, they
speculated on the intentions and processes behind the
drawings and acquired new perspectives for drawing. As a
result, using new representations, participants who copied
abstract drawings drew more creative pictures than those
who did not. Though their study produced pioneering work
that empirically examined the effect of a profound
encounter with the artwork of others on creative drawing,
they did not focus on the issue of expressive awareness
described above.
Therefore, we decided to conduct empirical case studies
focusing on the question of how profound experiences (such
as imitation) of existing artworks affect novices’ acquisition
of expressive awareness. To elucidate this question
rigorously, it would have been better for us to conduct
experiments with a greater number of participants, as done
by Ishibashi & Okada (2010). However, conducting
experiments with many participants to observe such a longterm cognitive change would be extremely time-consuming.
Finding at least twenty participants who were willing to
spend seven weeks on this experiment was practically
impossible for us. Since our main goal is to investigate how
expressive awareness is acquired during a fairly long-term
process of the mastery of art, we decided to conduct
exploratory case studies analyzing the data in detail from
various aspects. Such a case study method with a long-term
span has been used to examine the process of acquisition of
knowledge or strategies in cognitive psychology (e.g.,
Siegler & Jenkins, 1989).
We used artistic photography as the target domain for
research to answer our question, because photography is one
of the most familiar genres of artistic expression in our
ordinary lives. Photography also has a very distinctive
feature that people can take photographs in a very short time
span; a photo is usually taken in less than a second. These
features of photography enabled us to study the early
process of artistic expertise easily, because novices have a
low barrier to participation in this artistic activity.
It is important to note that photographs can express the
creator's intentions or ideas even if the photographs
realistically represent the motifs. For example, a famous
photographer, Henri Cartier-Bresson introduced the concept
of ‘The Decisive Moment’ by creating artwork matching
with a theme. Hence, it is possible for us to understand
photographers’ intentions deeply through viewing their
photographs.
Although novices in photography may usually tend to
appreciate or create reproductive expressions, they acquire
expressive awareness through the process of repeated

practice of photography. Specifically, novices gradually
acquire creative expressive awareness and try to control
relationships between expression contents and methods
consciously if they imitate photographs with creative
expression. In contrast, they acquire reproductive expressive
awareness if they only repeat photo taking and reflection.
They pay more attention to expression methods to express
precisely the reproductive contents, because they have less
necessity to develop expression contents than in the case of
the creative expression style. These considerations lead to
the following two hypotheses. The first hypothesis: Novices
in the domain of artistic photography acquire expressive
awareness, through just repeating photo taking and
reflection or by imitating eminent artistic photographs of
creative expression. However, the former acquire
reproductive expressive awareness and the latter acquire
creative expressive awareness. The second hypothesis:
Novices with creative expressive awareness try to control
relationships between expression contents and methods
consciously in the following creations. In contrast, those
with reproductive expressive awareness emphasize the
importance of expression methods.

Method
In this study, we conducted two case studies that examine
the changes in artistic creation over a period of several
weeks. Each case study included four tests [a pre-test and
post-tests 1-3] and three interventions [interventions 1-3].
The tests and interventions were repeated alternately.
Participants and the period of observation Two female
students at the University of Tokyo volunteered for this
study. One participant was 23 years old and an
undergraduate student in science, and was assigned to the
imitation condition. The other participant was 24 years old
and a graduate student in pharmacology, and was assigned
to the reflection condition. The length of the case study
period of the former was 86 days from 28 October 2010 to
21 January 2011, and that of the latter was 46 days from 30
September to 14 November 2011. The reason why the
participant in the imitation condition spent a longer time
than the other one was because the Christmas holidays fell
within the case study period and she stopped her
photography for a while.
Both of the participants showed an interest in artistic
photography before participation in this study, and the
imitation participant visited an exhibition including
photographic works just before participating in the study.
However, they had never had any professional training in
artistic photography. They took photographs mainly when
they travelled or attended special events, and were not in the
habit of visiting photo galleries or exhibitions to see
collections of photographs.
Also they had never used a single-lens reflex camera.
Therefore, the first author taught them the basic method of
use of a digital single-lens reflex camera, such as the
mechanism of the camera and how to use the diaphragm,

1734

Figure 1 Procedure of case studies in each condition
shutter speed and exposure. They then practiced taking
photographs with the first author.
Procedure The participants were required to take at least 40
artistic photographs per week during their own free time in
each of the four test sessions: the pre-test and the post-tests
1-3. The three interventions were different in the two
conditions. In each intervention session of the imitation
condition, the participant first saw a collection of artworks
by a proficient photographer, selected the one photograph
that she liked the most, and then was given the following
instructions, “Think about what the photographer pays
attention to when taking this photograph and try to take the
same style of pictures yourself.” The participant in the
reflection condition continued to create artistic photographs
of her own in the intervention sessions. Both of them took at
least 20 photos in each intervention session (see Figure 1).
All of the photographs were taken with a digital singlelens reflex camera (Canon EOS KissX3 / EF-S18-55mm
F3.5-5.6IS). The participants were directed to use only three
modes of exposure that enable the user to control expression
to a large extent: Manual Mode, Shutter Priority AE and
Aperture Priority AE. They were not allowed to use
Program Mode, since not much room is left for users to
control the photographic expression if they use such an
automated mode. All of the photographs taken were
preserved for analyses.
After each session in the two conditions, the first author
interviewed the participants. The interviews for the
imitation condition took about 1 hour, and for the reflection
condition took about half an hour. They were recorded by
IC recorders and a video camera. In the interviews, the
participants selected the ten best photographs in the session
after each test, and the five best photographs in the session
after each intervention. If there were any other photographs
that the participants selected, they also reported on these. In
addition, we interviewed them about their views on
photography in each session. The participants were directed
to reflect on their photographs in the session by comparing
them with photographs taken in previous sessions.
Imitation tasks The photographs used for the imitation
tasks were of styles different from those about which the

imitation participant had prior knowledge, as indicated in
the interview after the pre-test. This was because it has been
shown by Ishibashi & Okada (2009; 2010) that the copying
of unfamiliar pictures stimulates the production of creative
artwork. In order to identify styles of expression unfamiliar
to the participant, the first author interviewed her about her
favourite photographs, favourite photographers, and her
own photographs taken in the pre-test. Her favourite
photographer was Mika Ninagawa and her favourite
photograph was one from ‘SHADOWS: Works from the
National Museums of Art’. As their characteristics, she
mentioned ‘colours’ and ‘shadows’. In addition, there were
no photographs in which people were the main motif in pretest sessions in either of the conditions. Therefore,
photographs that depicted people as the main motifs and
were not characterized by ‘colours’ or ‘shadows’ were
selected for the imitation sessions.
Data The main data are protocols in interviews.
First, we checked in the interview data whether or not the
imitation participant actually practiced imitation. Second, in
order to examine the first and second hypotheses, we
checked whether expressive awareness was observed and if
so, how this awareness developed in the answers to the
questions about the participants' views of photography and
the interviews about each photograph taken by them.
Expressive awareness and the process of expertise To
examine the first hypothesis, with the interview protocols on
views of photography and of each photograph taken by the
participants, we checked whether expressive awareness was
acquired by the participants.
In the verification of the second hypothesis, we also
checked whether the features of the process of expertise
appear in the interview protocols on the views of
photography and of each of the photographs taken by the
participants. In addition, we also investigated the changes in
expression methods, expression contents, and matching of
them in chronological order in each condition.
The changes in the participants’ views of photography
The interviewer asked the participants, ‘What do you think
is good photography?’ and ‘What should we do to take good
photographs?’, in order to investigate their views on

1735

photography in each session. In this protocol, we checked
whether they mentioned ‘Expression contents’, ‘Expression
methods’ and ‘Matching between the expression contents
and methods’. ‘Expression contents’ are further divided into
‘Reproductive expression’ and ‘Creative expression’.
In this analysis, ‘Matching of expression contents and
methods’ indicates expressive awareness. If the ‘Expression
contents’ were ‘Reproductive expression contents’, we
regarded the expressive awareness as ‘Reproductive
expressive awareness’. Also, if the ‘Expression contents’
were ‘Creative expression contents’, we regarded the
expressive awareness as ‘Creative expressive awareness’.
The changes in expressive awareness in the interview
protocols for each photograph The data are interview
protocols about the 10 best photographs of their choice (in
total 40 photographs) taken by the participant in pre-test and
post-tests 1, 2, 3, in both conditions. We identified the
interview protocols about matching of expression contents
and methods as expressive awareness. Then we examined
how each protocol changed in chronological order in each
condition.

Results
We first checked whether imitation was actually practiced.
The results showed that in the imitation participant’s
reflection on her own photographs taken in the interventions,
characteristics of imitation tasks appeared. We do not
explain this result in detail in this paper due to limitations of
space. (The detailed results are reported in Ishiguro, Okada
& Ishibashi, 2011.)
For testing the first and second hypotheses, we checked
interview protocols about views of photography and about

reflection on each photograph. As a result, statements about
expressive awareness appeared after intervention 1 in both
conditions.
The
reflection
participant
mentioned
reproductive expressive awareness and the imitation
participant mentioned creative expressive awareness
(supporting the first hypothesis). However, the reflection
participant occasionally stopped mentioning this in the
interview on her view of photography, and statements about
the matching of expression contents and methods were less
frequent in her reflection on each photograph than that of
the imitation participant.
The process of expertise of expression differed in the two
conditions. The imitation participant always paid attention
to expression contents, methods and matching of them after
the acquisition of expressive awareness. In contrast, the
reflection participant sometimes reported no matching of
expression contents and methods after the acquisition of
expressive awareness, and emphasized the importance of
expression methods (supporting the second hypothesis). The
specific results are the following.
The views of photography Both the participants mentioned
expressive awareness after intervention 1 (see Table 1, 2).
Additionally, the imitation participant, who experienced
imitation of multiple varying artworks, showed a stronger
interest in creative expression contents and mentioned the
matching of expression contents and methods after
intervention 2. In contrast, the reflection participant, who
repeated only photo taking and reflection, emphasized
reproductive expression contents from the pre-test, and
acquired reproductive expressive awareness in intervention
1. However, she had a tendency to pay attention to precision
of expression methods after post-test 2.

Table 1 The view of photography in the imitation condition

Table 2 The view of photography in the reflection condition

1736

Figure 2 Expression awareness in the
imitation condition

Figure 3 Expression awareness in the reflection condition

Protocols for each photograph We examined the interview
protocols for each photograph from the aspect of ‘matching
of expression contents and methods’ in order to check
whether or not expressive awareness was actually utilized in
each photograph (see Figure 2, 3). The results indicated that
‘matching of expression contents and methods’ was focused
on more strongly in the imitation condition than in the
reflection condition. The imitation participant seemed to be
interested in creative expression because from the pre-test to
post-test 1, she mentioned ‘No artistic concept’, which is
defined as a statement indicating a lack of the concepts
necessary for artistic photographs. However, she
increasingly mentioned ‘Failure to use an appropriate
method for a concept’, which means failure to take photos
using appropriate methods despite having a certain
expression content, and ‘Success in the use of an
appropriate method for a concept’, which means success in
taking photos using appropriate methods for a certain
expression content. These results imply that the imitation
participant had creative expressive awareness when taking
each photograph, and such awareness became higher in the
subsequent sessions. By contrast, in the reflection condition,
statements about ‘Success in the use of an appropriate
method for a concept’ increased in post-test 1, in which
expressive awareness appeared for the first time in interview
protocols about the views of photography. However, the
number of the statements about the matching of expression
contents and methods in this condition was less than in the
imitation condition. Also, it was implied that she had less
interest in creative expression contents, because there were
no statements about ‘No artistic concept’.

Discussion
Through two case studies, we have examined how novices
acquire expressive awareness that controls expression
contents and methods in a creation process when they
continue to participate in artistic expression for a number of
weeks. We have also investigated whether there are
differences in expressive awareness and the process of

expertise between those who employ reproductive
expression, repeating photo taking and reflection, and those
who practice photography based on imitations of eminent
works of creative expression.
Expressive awareness was acquired in both conditions
after interventions. Creative expressive awareness was
acquired in the condition of imitating eminent artworks, and
reproductive expressive awareness was acquired in the
condition of reflection (supporting the first hypothesis).
Additionally, the result that in the reflection condition there
were fewer statements about reproductive expressive
awareness indicates that reproductive expression was not as
consciously achieved as creative expression.
The two conditions differed in the process of expertise.
The imitation participant paid attention to the matching
between expression contents and methods after the
acquisition of expressive awareness. By contrast, the
reflection participant paid attention to expression methods
very precisely (supporting the second hypothesis).
Given these results, it is suggested that novices are able to
acquire reproductive expressive awareness by only
repeating creation and reflection. However, through
imitating eminent works of creative expression, their
expression style changes to creative expressions and they
become conscious of the matching of creative expression
contents and methods.
In this study, we provide new findings in the study of
expertise as follows. Previous studies of expertise have
indicated that experts have structured domain specific
knowledge and utilize their metacognition (Glaser & Chi,
1988), such as self-monitoring skills (Ericsson et al, 1993)
or reflection in action (Schön, 1983) in various expert
practices. Such knowledge and cognitive processes are
acquired in the long-term processes of expertise.
This study defines expressive awareness as indicating the
emergence of control of ones’ own creative process, and
examines how this occurs. The results indicate that
expressive awareness is acquired after continuous
participation in creation. However, it is important not only

1737

to repeat creation and reflection but also to have profound
encounters (like imitation) with eminent creative expression
works in the domain so that creators can utilize these
actively. These findings support the claim that creators have
to learn domain specific knowledge in order to create
original works (Csikszentmihalyi, 1999).
Limitations of this study and future work We were not
able to conduct experiments with a large number of
participants. Therefore, we have to be careful in
generalizing our findings. Also, for various practical reasons,
this study failed to control differences in the academic
backgrounds and photographic experience of the two
participants. Therefore, the possibility that differences in
critical thinking or motivation for photo taking between
them affected the results of this study still remains.
However, each of them was intelligent enough to secure a
place at a highly prestigious university in Japan, and they
both told us that they were highly motivated to take pictures.
Future studies are required to exclude such confounding
variables more carefully, by increasing the sample size of
both the imitation and reflection condition and controlling
variables that might affect differences in the conditions.

References
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-Explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Glaser, R., & Chi, M. T.H.(1988). Overview. In M. T. H.
Chi, R. Glaser, & M. J. Farr, (Eds.) The nature of
expertise.(pp. xv-xxvii). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Croce, B. (1909). Estetica come scienza dell'espressione e
linguistica generale. [The aesthetic as science of
expression and of general linguistic] (D, Ainslie. Trans.).
Milan-Palermo-Naples:
Sandron,
(Original
work
published 1902)
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Implications of a systems
perspective for the study of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg
(Ed.), Handbook of creativity (pp. 313–335). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Cupchik, G. C., & Gebotys, R. J. (1988). The search for
meaning in art: Interpretive styles and judgments of
quality. Visual Arts Research, 14, 38–50.
Diderot, D. (2005). Essais sur la peinture. [The theory of
drawings] (K, Sasaki. Trans.). In D. Diderot, & G. May
(Eds.), Œuvres complètes, vol. 14, Hermann, (Original
work published 1980)
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Romer, C. (1993).
The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert
performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363–406.
Fayena-Tawil, F., Kozbelt, A., & Sitaras, L. (2011). Think
global, Act local: A protocol analysis comparison of
artists’ and nonartists’ cognitions, metacognitions, and
evaluations while drawing. Psychology of Aesthetic
Flavell, J. (1976). Metacognitive aspects of problem solving.
In L. Resnick (Ed.), The nature of intelligence (pp. 231235). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Gantner, J. (1983). Das Bild des Herzens über Vollendung
und Un-Vollendung in der Kunst [Images in minds:
problems about completion and incompletion of artistic
works] (N. Nakamura, Trans.). Gebr. Mann Verlag,
Berlin. (Original work published 1979)
Ishibashi, K., & Okada, T. (2006). Exploring the effect of
copying incomprehensible exemplars on creative
drawings. In R. Sun (Ed.) Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 15451550), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ishibashi, K., & Okada, T. (2009). Tasyasakuhin ha souzou
wo dou insupaia suruka: sakuhin no shinkinsei oyobi
kanyo houhou no kouka [Effects of contact with works of
art by others on artistic creation] Proceedings of the 26th
Annual Meeting of the Japanese Cognitive Science
Society, 48-51.(in Japanese)
Ishibashi, K., & Okada, T. (2010). Tasyasakuhin no mosya
niyoru byogasouzou no sokushin [Copying of other’s
artistic drawing promotes drawing creativity]. Cognitive
Studies, 17(1), 196-223.
Ishiguro, C., Okada, T., & Ishibashi, K. (2011). Influence on
beginners’ photography of imitation of artistic
photographs by others. Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Meeting of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society (pp.
213-222) (in Japanese).
Kozbelt, A. (2006). Dynamic evaluation of Matisse’s 1935
Large Reclining Nude. Empirical Studies of the Arts, 24,
119-137.
Mace, M., & Ward, T. (2002). Modeling the creative
process: A ground theory analysis of creativity in the
domain of art making. Creativity Research Journal, 14,
179-192.
Siegler, R. S., & Jenkins, E. A. (1989). How children
discover new strategies. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner. New York:
Basic Books.
Yokochi, S., & Okada, T. (2005). Creative cognitive process
of art making: A field study of a traditional Chinese ink
painter. Creativity Research Journal, 17, 241-2

1738

