UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
ERP Responses to Violations in Japanese Verb Conjugation Patterns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4b9643pp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kobayashi, Yuki
Sugioka, Yoko
Ito, Takane

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

ERP Responses to Violations in Japanese Verb Conjugation Patterns
Yuki Kobayashi (ykobayashi@ecs.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Center for Evolutionary Cognitive Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, JAPAN

Yoko Sugioka (sugioka@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Faculty of Economics, Keio University
4-1-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, JAPAN

Takane Ito (ito@boz.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, JAPAN
Abstract

same mechanism can deal with both “regular” and
“irregular” inflection.
Few studies have been conducted on Japanese in this
context: a notable exception is Hagiwara et al. (1999), who
argue for the Dual-Mechanism processing in Japanese
derivational morphology. The present study places its focus
on the processing of Japanese inflectional morphology,
which has so far attracted little attention (cf. Vance 1991,
Yu et al. 2011).

ERP (Event Related Potential) measurement using the
violation paradigm of Japanese verb conjugation was
conducted in order to investigate the mental and neural
mechanisms involved in the processing of different
conjugation patterns. A LAN-like component followed by a
P600 was elicited for the anomaly of using a tense-bearing
form with the negative ending, while only P600 was observed
for the anomaly of using an infinitive form in the same
environment. The non-application of morpho-phonological
changes of verb roots (“onbin”) yielded an N400 component
and a P600. The P600 components observed in all types of
errors reflect the cost of processing morphological and/or
syntactic anomalies, while the difference in the negativities
suggest that two different mechanisms of rule-based
computation and lexical memory are involved in the
processing of Japanese verb conjugation.

ERP Components Related to
Language Processing

Keywords: verb conjugation; inflection; N400; LAN; P600;
Dual Mechanism Model; rule; memory

Introduction
The aim of the present study is to elucidate the mental and
neural mechanisms involved in the word-level language
processing, exploiting the technique of ERP (Event Related
Potential) measurement. More specifically, we investigated
the processing of Japanese verb conjugation by recording
ERP responses to different types of errors in the conjugation
patterns. In doing so, we addressed the question of whether
verb inflection involves more than one mechanism of
processing in a language typologically different from
European languages.
There has been heated debate since 1980’s concerning the
mental mechanisms involved in word-level processing, with
the focus on inflectional morphology in European languages.
On the one hand, Dual Mechanism Model (Pinker 1999,
Ullman 2001, among others) argues that two qualitatively
different mechanisms, namely, rule-based computation and
associative memory, are involved; English “regular” -ed
past forms, for instance, are dealt with by the former, while
“irregular” forms like sing/sang are by the latter. On the
other hand, Single Mechanism Model (Joanisse and
Seidenberg 1999, among others) contends that one and the

611

Three components, N400, LAN, and P600 are known to be
related to language processing.
The N400 is a negativity which peaks at around 400 ms
after the onset of stimuli with wide, often posterior-centered
distribution (Kutas and Hillyard 1980). The component is
known to reflect semantic or pragmatic anomaly. It is likely
to be related to the search of lexical memory as well, since
its amplitude is known to reflect the frequency of the
stimulus word (Kutas & Federmeier 2000), and it is
observed in word-specific argument structure violation,
namely, anomaly with respect to lexical information
(Friederici & Frisch 2000, Friederici and Meyer 2004).
The LAN (Left Anterior Negativity) component is also a
negativity observed at around 300-500 ms after the onset of
stimuli: it is distinguished from the N400 in its distribution,
which is limited to the left anterior region. This component
is known to reflect morpho-syntactic anomalies like
agreement errors (Coulson, King and Kutas 1998, among
others).
The P600 is a positive component observed at around 600
ms after the onset of stimuli. Both anterior and posterior
distributions have been reported. This component has been
claimed to reflect the process of reanalysis or repair in face
of morpho-syntactic or syntactic violations of various types
(Osterhout and Holcomb 1992 and Hagoort et al. 1993,
among others).
ERP studies on regular and irregular inflection have
yielded somewhat varied results. The general tendency is
that inappropriately attached or omitted regular inflectional
suffixes (as in bringed instead of brought, or in wip instead

Stimuli and Predictions

of wipped) tend to elicit a LAN, while modifications of
irregular inflection (as in pept instead of peeped) tend to
yield an N400-like component (Newman et al. 2007).

We focused on two aspects of Japanese conjugation. First,
various vowels are added to consonant-ending verb roots as
shown in (2a)-(2c): /a/ in Neg-form selecting a negativeending -nai (2b), and /i/ in an infinitive form (2c), while the
tense-marking morpheme /u/ yields a non-past form (2a),
constituting minimal triplets with the same number of morae.
We constructed our stimuli by adding the negative ending
-nai to such triplets, resulting in one well-formed negative
conjugation (4a) and two different illicit forms (4b,c).
(4) a. shaber-a-nai (Neg-form + -nai)
b. *shaber-i-nai (infinitive form + -nai)
c. *shaber-u-nai (non-past form + -nai)
Insertion of these vowels to yield the forms (2a-c) is
perfectly regular with consonant-ending verb roots, and
hence we can hypothesize that these involve rule-based
computation.
It should also be noted that the two types of illicit forms
have different types of anomaly. (4b) contains a simple
morphological ill-formedness, where a wrong non-tensed
form (i.e., infinitive instead of Neg-form) is chosen. (4c), on
the other hand, involves a phrase-structure violation, where
the tense morpheme (non-past -u) is added before the
negative ending, yielding the ungrammatical phrase
structure where Tense is adjoined to V below the NEG
node: [[[ shaber ] V -u ]T -nai ] NEG (the correct configuration
would be: [[[ ]V ]NEG ] T ).
Consideration of the nature of unacceptability of these
forms, together with the nature of ERP components
surveyed above, leads us to predict that these illicit forms
(4b, c) will elicit computation-related components (LAN
and/or P600) when compared to the well-formed
counterparts. Also, it can be expected that the two different
illicit forms exhibit some difference in ERP responses.
The second aspect we focus on is onbin-forms
exemplified in (2d,e). Although onbin-forms are determined
by each root-final consonant as described in (3), there are
some exceptions: the past form of ik ‘go’ is not ii-ta, but iʔta, and the past form of tow ‘ask’ is not toʔ-ta, but tow-ta. It
is also reported by Vance (1991) that native speakers
experience difficulty in producing the past form of a novel
verb. These facts suggest that onbin forms are lexically
memorized. We constructed illicit forms by replacing onbin
forms with the forms without onbin, namely infinitive forms
(root+/i/), as shown in (5b). These forms can be predicted to
elicit a memory-related ERP component N400 compared to
the well-formed forms (5a).
(5) a. shabeʔ-ta / ka-i-ta / ton-da
b. *shaber-i-ta / *kak-i-ta / *tob-i-ta

Conjugation of Japanese verbs
Japanese verb roots can be divided into two types in terms
of their conjugation patterns. The verb roots ending with
vowels (/e/ or /i/) take various inflectional endings without
any phonological change on the root.
(1) vowel-ending root: tabe ‘eat’
a. non-past
tabe-r-u
b. negative
tabe-nai1
c. infinitive
tabe (-masu ‘polite form’, -owar ‘finish’)
d. past
tabe-ta
e. continuative tabe-te
The infinitive (ren’yoo) form (1c) takes the polite ending
-masu and various aspectual verbs. When the endings start
with a vowel, a consonant /r/ is inserted (1a).
In contrast, with consonant-ending roots, a vowel /a/ is
inserted in the negative form and /i/ in the infinitive form
(2b,c). In addition, the root-final consonants go through
morpho-phonological changes called “onbin” in traditional
Japanese grammar. Past tense ending -ta and continuative
-te takes infinitive forms in both vowel-ending and
consonant-ending verbs, but “onbin” takes place in
consonant-ending verbs, as shown in (2d,e).
(2) consonant-ending root: shaber ‘chat’
a. non-past
shaber-u
b. negative
shaber-a-nai
c. infinitive
shaber-i (-masu ‘polite’, -owar ‘finish’ )
d. past
shabeʔ -ta
e. continuative shabeʔ -te
The onbin forms are conditioned by the final consonants
of the roots, as summarized below.
(3) morpho-phonological changes (onbin)
a. r,t,w→ʔ (glottal stop):
shaber ‘chat’ / shabeʔ -ta; kat ‘win’/ kaʔ -ta
b. k,g→i: kak ‘write’ / kai-ta; kag ‘smell’ / kai-da
c. b,m,n→n: tob ‘fly’ / ton-da; yom ‘read’ / yon-da
As illustrated in (3b,c), the initial consonant /t/ of the ending
is voiced after /b, m, n, g/. The roots ending with /s/ do not
undergo “onbin” (tas ‘add’ /tas-i-ta).
It should be noted here that these morpho-phonological
changes occur only with /t/-initial inflectional endings, but
not with /t/-initial derivational suffixes. For instance, an
agent nominal suffix -te does not trigger similar changes on
the root: kaki-te ‘writer’ cf. kai-te ‘write (continuative)’
(Tagawa 2008). This confirms our assumption that these are
not purely phonological changes, but are morphophonologically conditioned.

Method
Participants A total of 21 (15 males and 6 females)
Japanese right-handed undergraduate students at the
University of Tokyo participated in the experiment.

1

The ending -nai in (1b) is the non-past form of the negative
ending, which we will represent as one element for expository
purposes.

612

Stimulus Sentences The target sentences were created on
162 consonant-ending verbs. For 90 verbs, we constructed
illicit forms with violation of negative conjugations, and for
72 verbs, we constructed illicit forms with violation of
onbin forms (See “Stimuli and Predictions”). Three
experimental lists were created according to a Latin square
design, so that each list contained 30 sentences in each of
the three negative conjugation error conditions and 36
sentences in each of onbin error conditions. A total of 252
sentences, 162 target and 90 filler sentences, were presented.
Half of these sentences were well-formed. All sentences
used in this experiment had the structure [NP-adjunct-NPV-X]. An additional element X, nominal + copula or
Auxiliary predicate, was added after the verb where we
manipulated the conjugation, so that the sentences do not
end with the critical word.

participants’ horizontal and vertical eye movements, a
bipolar electroencephalogram (EOG) was also recorded
using four electrodes. All the EEG and EOG channels were
digitized at a 250 Hz sampling rate using a Neuroscan
Synamp2s amplifier with a band-pass between DC and 70
Hz. Recordings were referenced to the electrode located
between Cz and CPz and then re-referenced offline to the
average of the left and right mastoids. Electrode impedance
was kept below 10 kOhm. ERP averages were computed
with a 100 ms baseline and an 800 ms ERP time window. In
the ERP analysis, 9.19% of the trials were rejected because
of eye blinks or movement artifacts (the EOG rejection
criterion was 70 µV).

Results
Data analysis

(6) Negative conjugation error
Zyuumin-wa danti-de
otiba-o
residents-TOP housing.complex-in fallen.leaves-ACC
(a) moyas-a-nai
(Neg-form+ nai)
burn-NEG
(b) *moyas-i-nai
(infinitive form+nai)
(c) *moyas-u-nai (non-past form+nai)
kisoku-da.
rule-COP
‘Residents are not allowed to burn fallen leaves in the site of
the housing complex’

Participants showing high rates of artifacts or error
responses to yes/no questions (greater than 20% in the two
types of trials combined) were excluded from the analysis.
Six participants were excluded and the data from the
remaining 15 participants (11 males and 4 females) were
analyzed.
Since the visual inspection revealed a negativity with the
focus in the left temporal area for (6c) compared with (6a),
the following two regions of interest (ROIs) were used in
the ANOVAS for the left-lateralized negativity: lefttemporal (T7, C5, CP5, and P7) and right-temporal (TP8,
C6, CP6, and P8). For statistical analyses of the N400 effect,
four regions of interest (ROIs) are derived by crossing two
factors; hemisphere (HEMI: left vs. right) and region
(REGION: anterior vs. posterior). The ROIs are defined as
follows: left-anterior (F5, F3, F1, FC5, FC1, C5, and C1);
left-posterior (CP5, CP1, P5, P1, PO7, PO5, and PO3);
right-anterior (F2, F4, F6, FC2, FC6, C2, and C6); and
right-posterior (CP6, CP2, P6, P2, PO8, PO6, and PO4).
For statistical analyses of the P600, four regions of
interest (ROIs) are derived by crossing two factors;
hemisphere (HEMI: left vs. right) and region (REGION:
anterior vs. posterior). The ROIs are defined as follows: leftanterior (F5, F3, F1, FC5, FC3, FC1, C5, C3, and C1); leftposterior (CP5, CP3, CP1, P5, P3, P1, PO7, PO5, and PO3);
right-anterior (F2, F4, F6, FC2, FC4, FC6, C2, C4, and C6);
and right-posterior (CP6, CP4, CP2, P6, P4, P2, PO8, PO6,
and PO4).

(7) Onbin error in past form
Kazoku-wa ima-de
syasin-o
family-TOP living.room-in pictures-ACC
(a) toʔ-ta
(onbin form +past)
take-PAST
(b) *tor-i-ta (infinitive form+past)
rasii.
seem
‘It seems that the family took pictures in the living room.’
Procedures Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals were
recorded while the participants read to themselves the
stimulus sentences shown automatically on the PC screen
phrase by phrase. They were asked to refrain from blinking
their eyes or moving their bodies until the end of the
sentences. Each sentence had 5 phrases, and each phrase
appeared on the screen for 600 ms with a 200 ms blank
between each phrase. The critical word, i.e. the verb in all
conditions, is the fourth phrase in the stimulus sentences.
Following the presentation of a sentence, participants were
instructed to make a grammaticality judgment (yes/no
decision) by clicking a computer mouse. The 252 sentences
were divided into 3 blocks, and within the blocks, sentences
were randomized. The participants took a short break
between each block.
EEG signals were recorded from 64 Ag/AgCl electrodes
mounted in an elastic cap (Quikcap, NeuroScan) according
to the International 10–20 system. To control the

Negative conjugation error
Figure 1 shows the grand average ERPs for the critical verb,
in correct, infinitive, and non-past form conditions.
correct vs. illicit (infinitive+nai) As shown in Figure 1, a
positivity around 500-800 ms after the onset was elicited by
the infinitive form, in comparison with the correct form. The
latency and the distribution suggest that it is a P600
component, which is supported by the statistical analysis as
follows: The analyses for the time window 500-800 ms
revealed a significant main effect of condition,

613

Onbin error

F(1,14)=21.98, p<.001. The infinitive form condition was
more positive going than the correct. No other ERP
components besides the P600 were observed in the
comparison of the correct form and the infinitive form
conditions (ps>.05).
correct vs. illicit (non-past+nai) The non-past form
condition, when compared with the correct form condition,
elicited a negativity in the left temporal region at the time
range of 300-400 ms and a positivity around 500-800 ms.
The analyses for the time window 300-400 ms revealed a
significant interaction between HEMI and the correct form
vs. the non-past form, F(1,14)=4.54, p<.05. The non-past
form condition was more negative going than the correct
form condition in the left-temporal sites (F(1,14)=3.76,
p=.066), but not in the right-temporal sites. The latency and
the distribution of the positivity suggest that it is a P600
component, which is supported by the statistical analysis as
follows: The analyses for the time window 500-800 ms
revealed a significant main effect of condition,
F(1,14)=25.80, p<.001. The non-past form condition was
more positive going than the correct form.

Figure 2 shows the grand average ERPs for the critical verb,
in the onbin and the infinitive form conditions. The illicit
infinitive form condition, when compared with the correct
onbin form condition, elicited a negativity at the time range
of 200-500 ms with a focus in posterior sites, and a
positivity around 600-800 ms. The latency and the
distribution suggest that the negativity is an N400
component, which is supported by the statistical analysis as
follows: The analyses for the time window 200-500 ms
revealed a marginally significant interaction between
REGION and the onbin form vs. the infinitive form,
F(1,14)=3.47, p=.08 and a significant main effect of
condition, F(1,14)=5.17, p<.05. The infinitive form
condition was more negative going than the onbin form
condition in the posterior sites (F(1,14)=8.36, p<.01), but
not in the anterior sites. The latency and the distribution of
the positivity suggest that it is a P600 component, which is
supported by the statistical analysis as follows: The analyses
for the time window 600-800 ms revealed a significant main
effect of condition, F(1,14)=35.36, p<.001. The infinitive
form condition was more positive going than the onbin.

Figure 1: Grand average ERPs at selected electrodes at the
position of the target verb (onset at the vertical bar) for the
correct form vs. the infinitive form vs. the non-past form.
Negativity is plotted upwards.

Figure 2 Grand average ERPs at selected electrodes at the
position of the target verb (onset at the vertical bar) for the
onbin-form vs. the infinitive form. Negativity is plotted
upwards.

614

300-400ms

200-500ms

(1) Non-past - Correct

(2) Infinitive - Onbin-form

Figure 3. The topographical potential maps display the
distribution of the negativities, (1) for the illicit non-past
form as compared to the correct form and (2) for the illicit
infinitive form as compared to the correct onbin form in the
time window used for the statistical analysis. Lighter
shading indicates more negative potential differences.

Discussion
The above results are compatible with what our hypotheses
predict: both conditions in negative conjugation errors
elicited a P600, while a negative component was observed
only in the non-past+nai condition, but not in the
infinitive+nai. The onbin errors elicited an N400 component
followed by a P600. We will discuss these results, focusing
on what each component can be interpreted to reflect.

Negative components
First, the negative component observed in negative
conjugation errors (6c) and the one observed in onbin errors
(7b) were clearly different in their distribution, and hence
can be judged to be different components. Secondly, the
negativity in negative conjugation errors was observed only
for the non-past+nai condition, and not for the infintive+nai
condition.
The negativity elicited by the illicit infinitive form
without onbin (7b), although not so robust in its amplitude,
was judged to be an N400, given its distribution with
centro-parietal focus and no hemispheric lateralization
(Figure 3 (2)). This suggests that detecting this anomaly
involved accessing of lexical memory. As has been
discussed in the literature (e.g. Kutas and Federmeier 2000),
difficulty in lexical access is one of the factors reflected in
N400. Thus, this result is in accordance with our hypothesis
that onbin does not involve computation by rule but the
onbin forms for each verb root are memorized in the lexicon,
hence application or non-application of onbin for a specific
verb root with the past tense ending -ta must be checked
against the lexicon.
The negativity elicited by the illicit non-past forms (6c) in
comparison with the well-formed control (6a) has clearly
different distribution from the N400 component, in that it
was limited to the left hemisphere, as supported by the
significant difference between the two hemispheres (Figure3

615

(1)). Even though its distribution is also different from the
classic LAN component in that its focus is in the temporal
sites, it is similar in distribution to a left-lateralized negative
component reported as a LAN by Rodriguez-Fornells et al.
(2001) for Catalan overregularization of stem formation rule.
Thus, it is not implausible to consider the negativity
observed in our non-past condition as a LAN-like
component. This component can be interpreted as reflecting
the parser’s detection of a phrase-structure violation of (6c),
where the tense morpheme is placed below the Neg node.
Thus the illicit non-past forms exhibited the biphasic pattern
of the LAN-like negativity followed by a P600, which is in
accordance with the literature reporting a LAN-P600 pattern
for phrase structure violations (Friederici and Meyer 2004).
It is consistent with our prediction that there was a
difference concerning negative components between the
illicit infinitive forms (6b) and the illicit non-past forms (6c)
in negative conjugation errors. It calls for some explanation,
however, that a LAN-like component was not observed in
(6b). In previous studies on morpho-syntactic anomalies,
anterior negative components (LAN or AN) followed by a
P600 are reported for agreement errors or case violations,
which require syntactic computation of subject-verb or verbobject relation (e.g., Osterhout and Mobley 1995, Coulson
et al. 1998). These errors are similar in nature to our nonpast condition (6c). In contrast, our infinitive condition (6b)
involves a purely morphological error, as mentioned above
in “Stimuli and Predictions”. Thus, even though our
hypothesis holds that (6b) as well as (6c) involves rulebased computation, the violation in (6b) is, in a sense, much
simpler, and hence it is conceivable that the cost of
detecting the ill-formedness is too weak to elicit a
statistically significant LAN-like component. In this vein, it
is significant that the illicit infinitive forms did not elicit an
N400 component, which supports our contention that the
detection of the anomaly in (6b) does not involve lexical
memory.

Positive components
We observed late positive components, which can be judged
to be a P600, in all the three illicit conditions (infinitive+nai
(6b), non-past+nai (6c), and infinitive+ta (7b)) when
compared to the well-formed counterparts. As discussed
above, we contend that different mechanisms are involved
in the processing of the negative conjugation and onbin
forms. And yet, a P600 was observed across all three illicit
conditions, which suggests that this component reflects the
cost of dealing with conjugation errors, irrespective of their
nature, namely, whether purely morphological (6b),
morpho-syntactic (6c), or morpho-phonological (7b), and
whether rule-based (6b,c) or memory-based (7b).

Concluding Remarks
These findings taken together suggest the following points
on the processing of Japanese verb conjugation. First,
conjugation of Japanese roots with a specific vowel for each
ending involves rule-based computation. On the other hand,

the morpho-phonological change (onbin) that takes place on
the final consonant of some subclasses of the verb roots in
the environment of certain ending forms such as past and
continuative requires lexical memory. It can be thus
concluded that Japanese verb conjugation involves two
different mental mechanisms, rule-based computation and
lexical memory, depending on the type of conjugation and
particular set of endings. Hence our findings are consistent
with the Dual Mechanism Model.
As mentioned in “ERP Components Related to Language
Processing”, the ERP responses to regular/irregular
inflection so far reported are rather varied, especially on
negative components. While a LAN is observed for overapplication of regular morphology in studies on English and
German for instance (Morris and Holcomb 2005, Penke et al.
1997), it is also reported in Morris and Holcomb that the
over-regularized irregulars (bringed) elicited an N400 when
presented in a word-list format (in contrast to a LAN
observed in a sentential context). Similarly, Gross et al.
(1998) reports an N400-like negativity for overregularized
Italian irregulars in a word-list format, where difference
between stem-based inflection and affixal inflection is
suggested to be relevant. In other words, a number of factors
including methods of stimuli presentation and differences in
inflectional systems between languages seem relevant, and
hence more investigation is obviously needed. Our study
has shown that different inflectional processes within one
language can involve different mental mechanisms and thus
induce different ERP components in the violation paradigm,
indicating the importance of studying languages
typologically different from European languages.

Acknowledgements
The research reported here is supported in part by Grant-inAid for Scientific Research (B) #20320069 from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science, the Center for
Evolutionary Cognitive Sciences at the University of Tokyo,
and the Japanese Lexicon Project at National Institute for
Japanese Language and Linguistics.

References
Coulson, S., J. W. King, & M. Kutas (1998). Expect the
unexpected:
Event-related
brain
response
to
morphosyntactic violations. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 13, 21-58.
Friederici, A.D., & Frisch, S. (2000). Verb argument
structure processing: The role of verb-specific and
argument-specific information. Journal of Memory and
Language, 43, 476-507.
Friederici, A. D., & Meyer, M. (2004). The brain knows the
difference: Two types of grammatical violations. Brain
Researach, 1000, 72-77.
Gross, M., Say, T., Kleingers, M., Clahsen, H., & Münte, T.
F. (1998). Human brain potentials to violations in
morphologically complex Italian words. Neuroscience
Letters, 241, 83-86.

616

Hagiwara, H., Sugioka, Y., Ito,T., Kawamura, M., & Shiota,
J. (1999). Neurolinguistic evidence for rule-based
nominal suffixation. Language, 75, 739-763.
Hagoort, P., Brown, C. & Groothusen, J. (1993). The
syntactic positive shift as an ERP measure of syntactic
processing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 8, 439484.
Joanisse, M. F. & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Impairments in
verb morphology after brain injury: A connectionist
model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
96: 7592-7597.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2000). Electrophysiology
reveals semantic memory use in language comprehension.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 463-470.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S.A. (1980). Reading senseless
sentences: Brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity.
Science, 207, 203-205.
Morris, J. & Holcomb, P.J. (2005). ERPs to violations of
inflectional verb morphology. Cognitive Brain Research,
25, 963-981.
Newman, A.J., Pancheva, R., Waligura, D.L., & Neville,
H.J., and Ullman, M.T. (2007). An ERP study of regular
and irregular past tense inflection. NeuroImage, 34, 435445
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P.J. (1992). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 785–806.
Osterhout, L., & Mobley, L.A. (1995). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by failure to agree. Journal of Memory
and Language, 34, 739-773.
Penke, M., Weyerts, H., Gross, M., Zander, E., Münte, T. F.,
& Clahsen, H. (1997). How the brain processes complex
words: An event-related potential study of German verb
inflections. Cognitive Brain Research, 6, 37-52.
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and Rules: The ingredients of
language. New York: Harper Perennial.
Rodriguez-Fornells, A., Clahsen, H., Lleó, C., Zaake, W., &
Münte, T. F. (2001). Event-related brain responses to
morphological violations in Catalan. Cognitive Brain
Research, 11, 47-58.
Tagawa, T. (2008). Bunsan-keitairon niyoru doosi no
katuyoo to gokeisei no kenkyuu [A study on verb
conjugation and word formation by Distributed
Morphology]. Doctoral dissertation submitted to Tsukuba
University.
Ullman, M.T. (2001). A neurocognitive perspective on
language: The declarative/procedural model. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 717–726.
Vance, T. (1991). A new experimental study of Japanese
verbal morphology, Journal of Japanese Linguistics, 13,
145–156.
Yu, Q., Deng, Y., & Sakai, H. (2011). Processing Japanese
verb morphology by native Japanese speakers: An ERP
study. IEICE Technical Report TL 2011-14, 37-42.

