UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evaluating the Relationship Between Neuropsychological Function and Cognitive
Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59h7g4ps

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Gunzelman, Glenn
Moore, L. Richard

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evaluating the Relationship Between Neuropsychological
Function and Cognitive Performance
Glenn Gunzelmann (glenn.gunzelmann@us.af.mil)
Cognitive Models and Agents Branch, Air Force Research Laboratory
2620 Q St, Building 852, Wright Patterson AFB, OH 45433 USA

L. Richard Moore, Jr. (Larry.Moore.ctr2@wpafb.af.mil)
L3 Communications
5950 East Sossaman Road, Suite 102, Mesa, AZ 85212 USA
Brown and Braver (2005) used fMRI data from participants
performing this task to support a model of ACC function
they refer to as the error likelihood model.
We conducted an extension of Brown and Braver’s study
using the same task and present the empirical data from
human participants here. A detailed analysis of the change
signal task and the human performance data provides
alternative explanations for most of the human data captured
by the error likelihood model, and raises some cautions for
those attempting to interpret the significance of
neuropsychological data for understanding the underlying
cognitive processes of human cognition.

Abstract
The last 2 decades have produced a vast literature describing
relationships
between
cognitive
performance
and
neuropsychological data. This literature has provided the
foundation for countless theories about the neural correlates
of cognitive processing and specific theories regarding the
role of different cortical areas in human cognition. In this
paper, we examine a particular theory – the error likelihood
model (Brown & Braver, 2005) – that attempts to account for
the function of a particular brain area (the anterior cingulate
cortex). A careful evaluation of behavioral data from humans
raises questions about the error likelihood model and the
implications of neuropsychological data for understanding
cognitive performance.

The Change Signal Task

Keywords: Neural Correlates; Anterior Cingulate; Error
Likelihood; Cognitive Performance; Change Signal.

The change signal task is a modification of the stop signal
task from Logan and Cowan (1984), which Brown and
Braver (2005) used in an fMRI study to examine the
function of the ACC in responding to potential errors. In the
task, participants are presented with an arrow on each trial,
which points either to the left or the right. This is the go
signal. Critically, on 33% of the trials, a second arrow
facing in the opposite direction (the change signal) is
presented at a carefully controlled delay (the change signal
delay) relative to the onset of the first arrow. In trials where
this arrow appears, participants are instructed to withhold
their initial response, and make the response associated with
the change signal instead.
The change signal delay is manipulated throughout the
task to ensure a relatively constant error rate, however, this
characteristic of the task is not revealed to the participants.
In Brown and Braver (2005), two stimulus colors were used,
and the change signal delay was manipulated independently
for each of the color conditions to produce different error
rates (error likelihood conditions). In one, the change signal
delay tended to be longer, leading to a higher error
likelihood, while the other condition tended to have shorter
change signal delays with a correspondingly lower error
likelihood.
The change signal delay was 250ms in both conditions at
the start of the study for all participants. Correct responses
led to an increase in the change signal delay; 2ms for the
low error likelihood condition, and 50 ms for the high error
likelihood condition. In both conditions, errors led to a 50
ms decrease in the change signal delay. These parameters
were intended to produce error rates of 4% and 50% in the

Introduction
The last 2 decades have produced a vast literature describing
relationships between cognitive performance and
neuropsychological data. This literature has provided the
foundation for countless theories about the neurological
correlates of cognitive processing and specific theories
regarding the role of different cortical areas in human
cognition. These theories have had a tremendous impact on
cognitive science, as well as the perceptions of the general
public about the relationship between neural activity and
cognitive processing.
The debate surrounding the role and utility of
neuropsychological data in understanding human cognition
has been ongoing (e.g., Cacioppo, Berntson, Lorig, Norris,
Rickett, & Nusbaum, 2003; Coltheart, 2006; Henson, 2006;
Uttal, 2001). Whereas evidence of neural correlates have
been found in a variety of contexts (e.g., Cabeza & Nyberg,
1997; 2000), direct mappings of information processing
activity to particular brain areas may be too simplistic (c.f.,
Horgan, 1999; Hubbard, 2003; Sohrabi & Brook, 2005).
Instead, we argue that it is necessary to understand in detail
both the cognitive behavior and the neuropsychological
evidence to accurately understand the relationships between
neural activity and cognitive processing.
In this paper, we consider a particular example of this
complex relationship. We begin with a description of a task
– the change signal task – which has been used in research
attempting to understand the function of the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) in humans (Brown & Braver, 2005).

414

low and high error likelihood conditions, respectively.
Finally, the change signal delay was constrained to be
between 20ms and 800ms, and responses taking longer than
1000ms after the go stimulus presentation were identified as
lapses and treated as errors. This last manipulation
prevented people from waiting for arbitrarily long periods
before making their responses.

error likelihood condition than for the low error likelihood
condition. The authors discuss this effect in their model as a
consequence of learned associations between the stimulus
color and the likelihood of an error.
In addition to the predicted differences in cortical
activation for the error likelihood conditions, the model also
predicts differences between change trials (where a change
signal is presented) and go trials (where no change signal is
presented), with higher activation for change trials due to
the signal these trials provide for reinforcement learning
processes in the ACC. The fMRI data from humans show
the same qualitative trends, providing support for the model.
A critical finding in support of the error likelihood model
was that ACC activation was higher for go trials in the high
error likelihood condition than it was for go trials for the
low error likelihood condition. It is argued that sensitivity to
the stimulus color is responsible for this effect, since these
trials are equivalent in all other respects. This is also the
primary finding that differentiates the error likelihood model
from an alternative account, the response conflict model
(Botvinik et al., 2001).

Experiment in Brown and Braver (2005)
Brown and Braver (2005) conducted an empirical study to
assess the role of the ACC in performing the change signal
task. In it, participants completed an average of 535 trials of
the task in a single session. While doing the task, fMRI data
was collected. Brown and Braver (2005) did not consider in
detail the performance data from the study, instead focusing
on the fMRI results and their error likelihood model. They
did, however, provide supplementary materials that include
some additional consideration of the behavioral results.
The change signal task offers interesting challenges for
human cognition, and the results presented in Brown and
Braver (2005) show that the ACC is sensitive to the
differences between go and change trials as well as the error
likelihood conditions. Our analysis of the task and data from
a replication, however, suggest that many of the findings
may reflect artifacts of the task, rather than revealing critical
differences in the underlying cognitive processing across
conditions by the participants in the study. Before
describing this in detail, we provide an overview of Brown
and Braver’s (2005) error likelihood model, and the
relationships between the mechanisms in the model and the
fMRI data they presented.

Empirical Study
To better understand human performance in the change
signal task, we conducted our own empirical study to obtain
detailed data on task performance. In addition to the change
signal task, participants performed a two-alternative forced
choice (2AFC) task that matched the change signal task,
only without any change signals. One motivation for this
design was to investigate the role of within task fatigue on
changes in response time in the change signal task (see
Moore, Gunzelmann, & Brown, 2010).

The Error Likelihood Model

Methodology

The Brown and Braver (2005) error likelihood model
presents a theory of ACC function embodied in a neural
network-based computational model. The model posits that
the ACC functions to detect the likelihood of an error, given
a particular task and stimulus context. As they put it, “[the]
ACC learns to signal, via the magnitude of its activity, the
predicted likelihood of an error occurring in response to a
given task condition” (Brown & Braver, 2005, p 1120).
They also describe how this conceptualization of ACC
function can account for conflict and error detection
phenomena that have been shown in ACC activation
patterns (e.g., Botvinick, Braver, Barch, Carter, & Cohen,
2001; Cohen, Botvinick, & Carter, 2000).
Brown and Braver suggest that detecting the likelihood of
error plays a key role in cognitive control by serving as an
“early warning signal” that can be used to recruit resources
for performing the task. Thus, a central claim in their theory
and model is that ACC activation is used by higher-level
cognitive processes to guide adaptive behavior in the task
and improve cognitive performance.
The details of the model are beyond the scope of this
paper. However, it makes several important predictions in
the context of the change signal task. Most intuitively, it
predicts that ACC activation should be higher for the high

There were 33 participants in the study (18 female and 15
male; ages between 18 and 50). Each participant performed
both tasks in a single session lasting approximately 1 hour
(task order was counterbalanced). The design of the change
signal task replicated the study described in Brown and
Braver (2005), except that our participants performed more
trials. Specifically, participants completed 6 blocks of 107
trials for a total of 642 trials in our study.
In Brown and Braver’s experiment, the association
between stimulus color and error likelihood condition was
swapped after participants had completed approximately
80% of the trials. This occurred in our experiment at the
midway point. Just as in Brown and Braver (2005), this
switch in associations between color and error likelihood
condition was not signaled to participants. Only one
participant in our study reported noticing this manipulation.
In fact, only 9 participants were able to accurately articulate
the significance of the stimulus colors in the experiment at
all.

Results
We collected accuracy and response time data from
participants performing the task. Unless noted otherwise, the

415

results presented here only include data from trials where
correct responses were made. Furthermore, the data from
two participants were excluded from the analyses because
one failed to complete the 2AFC task, and the other
exhibited an unusually long string of incorrect responses
during the change signal task. As in Brown and Braver
(2005), trials where no response was made within 1000ms
of the onset of the go stimulus were aborted and treated as
errors, with change signal delays adjusted accordingly.
Figure 1 shows median participant response times relative
to the presentation of the initial go stimulus across each of
the 6 blocks of trials. Firstly, response times for the 2AFC
task are stable across all blocks, showing no evidence of
within-task fatigue during the course of the experiment,
F(1,19723)=3.144, p=.076.
Beyond the 2AFC, the results for the change signal task
are generally consistent with those obtained in the Brown
and Braver (2005) experiment, and there are several features
that will be relevant for the rest of the analyses and
discussion that follows. First, note that the response times
for the change signal task are consistently much longer than
for the 2AFC, and that there is a wide disparity between the
change high and change low conditions. We will
demonstrate how these phenomena are related to the
dynamics of the task. The closely coupled go low and go
high conditions will also be discussed, and it will be shown
that participant behavior was indistinguishable between the
two.

Figure 1. In fact, if the change signal delay is subtracted
from the response times on change trials, the disparity
between these conditions nearly disappears (Figure 3).

Figure 2: Reaction time as a function of change signal
delay in correct change signal trials. Regression lines
overlay the lighter scatter plots of each condition.

Figure 3: Median reaction times measured from the final
stimulus for the four conditions of the change signal task as
well as the 2AFC (i.e. the change signal delay has been
subtracted from the high error condition reaction times).

Figure 1: Median reaction times measured from the go
signal for the four conditions of the change signal task as
well as the 2AFC.

One clear consequence of factoring out the change signal
delay on change trials is that response times are significantly
faster for change trials than for go trials (t(10836.23)= 17.2995, p < .0001). This effect can be explained in context
as a strategic adaptation to the characteristics of the change
signal task. Specifically, it is our hypothesis that participants

Figure 2 shows a significant (FLow(1,3180)=444.4, p <
.001, FHigh(1,1643)=374, p < .001) correlation (r = .77)
between the change signal delay and the participant reaction
time in the change trials. These data illustrate the impact of
the change signal delay on overall response times shown in

416

are intentionally delaying their responses to go signals in
hopes of correctly responding to the change signals (Moore,
Gunzelmann, & Daigle, 2012).
This perspective accounts for the slower reaction times in
the go trials, because it suggests that participants would
respond to the go signal only after their strategic delay, or
hedge, was complete. It also explains the large difference in
response times for the go trials in the change signal task
versus response times for the 2AFC task (Figures 1 & 3).
Although we hypothesize that participants also hedge
their response in the change conditions, there is no reason
for them to delay making a response once a change signal is
presented. In change trials, therefore, responses can be
initiated as soon as the change signal appears. Moore et al.
(2012) present a computational model demonstrating the
plausibility of this account.
Another interesting feature in Figure 3 is that median
response times for change trials are faster in the high error
likelihood condition than in the low error likelihood
condition. To understand this average difference, it is
necessary to examine the details of human performance in
these cases and the characteristics of the task that give rise
to the observed results. Figure 4 shows the distribution of
response times for the change high and change low
conditions (left side), as well as the proportion of lapses in
each of the conditions (right side).
Figure 4 illustrates that the difference in response times
between the two change conditions in Figure 3 is likely a
function of the 1000 ms lapse threshold. In the high error
likelihood condition, 15 % of the trials resulted in lapses
(see the right half of Figure 4), while only 1% of trials in the
low error likelihood condition resulted in lapses. The right
side of Figure 4 gives clear evidence that the response time
distribution is truncated at the lapse threshold, which has the
effect of reducing the median response time for correct
responses (lapses are treated as errors).
.

Lastly Figure 5 shows the distributions for the two go
conditions. They align extremely well, and KolmogorovSmirnov test shows no statistical difference (p=.36). As
discussed below, this is an important result, as it generates
questions regarding the extent to which people are aware of
the significance of the stimulus colors in the task, or the
degree to which they are able to use the colors in a
meaningful way to adapt to the characteristics and demands
of the task. In the next section we compare and contrast the
results of our study with the fMRI data described in Brown
and Braver (2005).

Figure 5: Distribution of response times for go trials in the
two error likelihood conditions (accumulated into 25ms
bins).

ACC Activation and Error Likelihood
Evidence for the error likelihood model in Brown and
Braver (2005) came from fMRI data. However, to fully
evaluate the validity and significance of the model, careful
analysis of the task and consideration of human
performance data are necessary. Based on the analyses of
the response time data presented above, we discuss the
fMRI findings in this section, showing that nearly all of the
critical phenomena in the fMRI data from the task can be
accounted for by simply assuming that longer trials
(including the change signal delay) lead to more ACC
activation (though this may be too simplistic in general; see
Mulert, Gallinat, Dorn, Herrmann, & Winterer, 2003;
Winterer, Adams, Jones, & Knutson, 2002).

Task Artifacts in Performance and ACC Activation
Brown and Braver (2005) cited several findings in their
fMRI data to support the error likelihood model of ACC
function. Most of these can be related directly to task-driven
differences in response time we found in our study. One

Figure 4: Response distribution for the high and low
change conditions, and the proportion of lapses for each.

417

example of this is the finding in Brown and Braver (2005)
that activation in the ACC was higher for change trials than
for go trials. We did find longer response times for change
trials, but the evidence suggests that this difference is an
artifact of the task-driven change signal delay (Figure 3).
In addition to the main effect of trial type (change versus
go), Brown and Braver (2005) also found greater ACC
activation for change trials in the high error likelihood
condition than in the low error likelihood condition. Once
again, this is associated with a significant difference in
response time (Figure 1). The response time difference, in
turn, is driven by the difference in the change signal delay
between the two conditions. When those delays are factored
out of the response times, the difference between those
conditions disappears (Figure 3).

generally the challenges associated with using
neuropsychological findings to inform our understanding of
cognitive processes.

Conclusions and Implications
Brown and Braver (2005) presented provocative
neuropsychological data from a novel task, which they used
to validate a computational theory of ACC function. As our
results and analyses show, however, questions remain about
whether it is task artifacts or cognitive phenomena that are
responsible for many trends in the fMRI data, and about the
implications of the data and the error likelihood model for
understanding human cognitive performance and behavior.
Importantly, the model accounts for what appears to be a
critical phenomenon in the empirical study – higher ACC
activation for go trials in the high error likelihood condition
than in the low error likelihood condition. This is, in fact,
the only phenomenon predicted by their model that cannot
be explained by the timing of the presentation of stimuli in
the task, which directly impacts response times as well.
Unfortunately, others have failed to replicate that finding
(Nieuwenhuis et al., 2007).
Even if the effect is real, questions remain about what
these results mean with regard to the underlying cognitive
processes. According to Brown and Braver (2005), the ACC
is an “early warning system that recruits cognitive control to
match its predicted demand” (p.1120). In the context of the
change signal task, however, one would expect that
recruiting cognitive control would (1) increase explicit
awareness about features in the environment related to error
likelihood and/or (2) impact human behavior in a manner
consistent with the implications of the likelihood of error.
In support of these expectations, Dehaene et al. (2003)
found evidence for elevated ACC activation only in
circumstances where stimuli creating conflict in a priming
task were “consciously detected” (p. 13726). Based upon
our results, however, the manipulation of error likelihood
was not obvious to participants, and there was no impact on
task performance. This creates some challenges that must be
addressed to better understand the cognitive processing
involved and the significance of ACC activation in the task.
There is evidence in the change signal task that
participants adapt to the change signal delay. As they gain
experience with the task, average response times increase,
reflecting strategic adaptation to the task. However, there is
no evidence that their adaptation is sensitive to the
distinction between error likelihoods signaled by the two
stimulus colors. Instead, reaction times for go trials are
virtually identical, regardless of the error likelihood
condition (Figure 5). This is also true of change trials, when
the change signal delay and truncated response distribution
in the high error likelihood condition are taken into account
(Figures 3 & 4). An interesting follow-up would be to
examine human performance if the role of the colors was
explicitly explained to participants before the study began
(see Nieuwenhuis et al., 2007 for an experiment along these
lines).

The Critical Phenomenon
The only phenomenon that is not captured well by the
timing of the presentation of stimuli in the task is the
difference in ACC activation between go trials in the two
error likelihood conditions that is predicted by the error
likelihood model and supported by the fMRI data in Brown
and Braver (2005). In this case, the behavioral data diverge
from those trends. In fact, our data show essentially
equivalent performance, with no significant difference in
behavior across conditions (Figure 5).
This result creates an interesting circumstance with regard
to assessing the significance of the fMRI data and the
implications of the error likelihood model for understanding
human cognition. On the one hand, the fMRI data show a
significant difference in ACC activation between go trials
from the two error likelihood conditions. Importantly, the
error likelihood model predicts the fMRI data well,
providing a consistent account of neuropsychological data.
This is an interesting capacity of the model, and one that
adds support to the proposed mechanisms.
On the other hand, while the fMRI data and the model
both suggest that the error likelihood conditions are
differentiated at a neuropsychological level, there is no
evidence that they are differentiated at a behavioral level in
our data. Brown and Braver (2005) take the position that the
ACC is critical in the recruitment of cognitive control
during task performance when the likelihood of making
errors is greater. In this case, color provides a cue to
differences in difficulty, albeit a cue that is not explicitly
described to participants. Importantly, others have failed to
replicate the fMRI findings reported by Brown and Braver,
even with more explicit cues regarding the error likelihood
cues and their significance (Nieuwenhuis, Schweizer, Mars,
Botvinick, & Hajcak, 2007).
The critical question is, if the ACC is sensitive to the
color of the stimulus as an indication of the likelihood of
making an error, why is there no evidence in the behavioral
data? The answer to this question is essential to
understanding the relationship between cognitive processing
and neuropsychological data in the change signal task. We
conclude the paper with a discussion of this issue, and more

418

Of course, this leaves the incongruity between ACC
activation and participant performance in these two
conditions begging for a theoretical explanation, in addition
to questions regarding the replicability of the phenomena
(Nieuwenhuis et al., 2007). Our findings expose the
discrepancy and reveal the importance of understanding this
finding. And, we hasten to add that our empirical findings
do not provide evidence to directly contradict the error
likelihood model of Brown and Braver (2005). Taken with
the failure to replicate the fMRI findings (Nieuwenhuis et
al., 2007), however, there is an indication that further
research is warranted to understand human performance on
the task and the role of the ACC.
Finally, our results suggest in general that fMRI data, like
the results presented in support of the error likelihood
model, must be interpreted with caution and considered in
the context of the performance of participants as well as the
context of the task environment that is the focus of study.
We have shown that these factors can add important
information to inform theories regarding the relationship of
neuropsychological data to cognitive processes. It is only by
considering multiple sources of evidence that we will be
able to arrive at comprehensive theories of human
information processing and cognition and how those
functions are realized in the brain.

Coltheart, M. (2006). What has functional neuroimaging
told us about the mind (so far)? Cortex, 42, 323-331.
Dehaene, S., Artiges, E., Naccache, L., Martelli, C., Viard,
A., Schürhoff, F., Recasens, C., Martinot, M. L. P.,
Leboyer, M., & Martinot, J-L. (2003). Conscious and
subliminal conflicts in normal subjects and patients with
schizophrenia: The role of the anterior cingulate.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
100(23), 13722-13727.
Henson, R. (2005). What can functional neuroimaging tell
the experimental psychologist? Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58A(2), 193-233.
Henson, R. (2006). What has (neuro)psychology told us
about the mind (so far)? A reply to Coltheart (2006).
Cortex, 42, 387-392.
Horgan, J. (1999). The undiscovered mind: How the human
brain defies replication, medication, and explanation.
Psychological Science, 10(6), 470-474.
Hubbard, E. M. (2003). A discussion and review of Uttal
(2001) The new phrenology. Cognitive Science Online, 1,
22-33.
Logan, G. D. & Cowan, W. B. (1984). On the ability to
inhibit thought and action: A theory of an act of control.
Psychological Review, 91, 295-327.
Moore, L. R., Jr., Gunzelmann, G., & Brown, J. W. (2010).
Modeling statistical learning and response inhibition with
the change signal task. In D.D. Salvucci & G.
Gunzelmann (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference
on
Cognitive
Modeling.
doi:10.1126/science.1105783
Moore, L. R., Jr., Gunzelmann, G., & Daigle, M. (2012).
One Model, Two Tasks: Decomposing the Change Signal
Task. In N. Rußwinkel, U. Drewitz & H. van Rijn (eds.),
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Cognitive
Modeling
(pp.
224-229),
Berlin:
Universitaetsverlag der TU Berlin.
Mulert, C., Gallinat, J., Dorn, H., Herrmann, W. M., &
Winterer, G. (2003). The relationship between reaction
time, error rate and anterior cingulated cortex activity.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 47, 175-183.
Nieuwenhuis, S., Schweizer, T. S., Mars, R. B., Botvinick,
M. M., & Hajcak, G. (2007). Error likelihood prediction
in the medial frontal cortex: A critical evaluation.
Cerebral Cortex, 17(7), 1570-1581.
Sohrabi, A., & Brook, A. (2005). Functional neuroimaging
and its implications for cognitive science: Beyond
phrenology and localization. In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou,
and M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the TwentySeventh Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2044-2049). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Uttal, W. R. (2001). The new phrenology: The limits of
localizing cognitive processes in the brain. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Winterer, G., Adams, C. M., Jones, D. W., & Knutson, B.
(2002). Volition to action – An event-related fMRI study.
Neuroimage, 17, 851-858.

Acknowledgments
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not reflect the official policy or position of the
Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. This
research was sponsored by the Air Force Research
Laboratory’s Warfighter Readiness Research Division and
by grants 09RH06COR and 10RH04COR from the Air
Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR). We thank
Marissa Daigle for data collection.

References
Botvinick, M., Braver, T., Barch, D. Carter, C. & Cohen, J.
(2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control.
Psychological Review, 108(3), 624-652.
Brown, J. W., & Braver, T. S. (2005). Learned predictions
of error likelihood in the anterior cingulate cortex.
Science, 307(5712), 1118. doi:10.1126/science.1106642
Cabeza, R., & Nyberg, L. (1997). Imaging cognition: An
empirical review of PET studies with normal subjects.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 1-26.
Cabeza, R., & Nyberg, L.(2000).Imaging cognition II: An
empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 1-47.
Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Lorig, T. S., Norris, C. J.,
Rickett, E., & Nusbaum, H. (2003). Just because you’re
imaging the brain doesn’t mean you can stop using your
head: A primer and set of first principles. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84(4), 650-661.
Cohen, J. D., Botvinick, M. & Carter, C. S. (2000). Anterior
cingulated and prefrontal cortex: Who’s in control?
Nature Neuroscience, 3, 421–423.

419

