UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence that Threatening Situations Enhance Creativity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2cb04429

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Riley, Sean
Gabora, Liane

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidence that Threatening Situations Enhance Creativity
Sean N. Riley (research@seanriley.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
3333 University Way, Kelowna B.C V1V 1V7

Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
3333 University Way, Kelowna B.C V1V 1V7
Abstract
We tested the hypothesis that threatening situations enhance
creativity. 60 participants viewed a series of photographs and
rated them on level of threat. They then wrote two short
stories: one based on the photograph they rated as most
threatening, and the other based on the photograph they rated
as least threatening. The stories were rated for level of
creativity. Paired samples t-testså revealed that stories based
on threatening pictures produced a higher degree of creativity
than those based on non-threatening pictures. Theoretical
frameworks consistent with these findings are discussed.
Keywords: Cognitive tuning, creativity, existential anxiety,
inspiration, mood, narrative, story telling, threat.

Introduction
Creativity can be defined as the ability to generate ideas,
interpretations, or solutions that are both novel, and
meaningful or appropriate (Sternberg et al., 2010).
Creativity is widely associated with personal fulfillment
(May, 1975; Rogers, 1959), self-actualization (Maslow,
1959), and with maintaining a competitive edge in the
marketplace. Creative therapies are useful in clinical
contexts, including the assessment and resolution of conflict
(Goldblatt et al., 2011), dementia (Hannermann, 2006), selfesteem (Anzules, Haennl & Golay, 2007), and stress
reduction (Curl, 2008). In addition, creative individuals tend
to have higher levels of life satisfaction (Tan, Ho, Ho, &
Ow, 2008), emotional intelligence (Noferesti & Alghorabaie, 2011), and intelligence in general (Batey &
Furnham, 2009). These findings suggest that creativity is,
generally speaking, a positive attribute with numerous
constructive byproducts.
However, there are significant drawbacks to creativity
(Cropley, Cropley, Kaufman, & Runco, 2010; Ludwig,
1995). Generating creative ideas is time consuming, and a
creative solution to one problem often generates other
problems, or has unexpected negative side effects that may
only become apparent after much effort has been invested.
Creative people often reinvent the wheel, and may be more
likely to bend rules, break laws, and provoke social unrest
(Cropley, Kaufman, & Cropley, 2003; Sternberg & Lubart,
1995; Sulloway, 1996). They tend to be more emotionally
unstable and prone to affective disorders such as depression
and bipolar disorder, and have a higher incidence of
schizophrenic tendencies than other segments of the
population (Andreason, 1987; Flaherty, 2005; F. Goodwin

& Jamison, 1990). Computational models suggest that there
is a detrimental impact on society if either the ratio of
creative to relatively uncreative individuals is too high, or if
the creative individuals are too creative (Gabora & Firouzi,
2012; Gabora & Leijnen, 2009; Leijnen & Gabora, 2009).
There is also preliminary evidence that situations that are
demanding, threatening, or involve conflict, put one in a
more creative state of mind. For example, it has been shown
that individuals who are in the midst of conflict set broader
and more inclusive cognitive categories (De Dru, Carsten &
Nijstad, 2008). Creativity is positively correlated with
aggression (Tacher & Readdick, 2006), group conflict
(Troyer & Youngreen, 2009) anxiety (Carlsson, 2002), and
dishonesty (Gino & Ariely, 2011). Finally it has been found
that negative affect leads to greater creative output (Akinola,
Mendes, 2008).
This study further investigates the hypothesis that
threatening situations put one in a more creative state of
mind. Specifically, it assesses whether stories written in
response to threatening stimuli are more creative than
stories written in response to non-threatening stimuli.

The Study
Participants
Participants (n = 60; 19 M, 41 F) were recruited for this
study through the University of British Columbia
(Okanagan campus) course credit for research participation
program used in introductory psychology classes.
Participants received 1% added to their overall course grade.

Stimuli
Participants were shown 15 photographs depicting situations
that had been independently classified as either threatening
or nonthreatening by both experimenters. Classification was
determined by assessing whether a normal individual would
feel significantly at risk of harm or death if they were in the
scenario depicted by the photograph. The photographs
classified as ‘threatening’ were deemed to be threatening
not directly, but indirectly, in the same sense that one feels
threatened by a war movie or horror film.
Examples of the threatening and non-threatening
photographs used to generate stories in this study are given
in Figures 1 and 2.

2234

equally threatening, the photograph that was presented first
in the sequence was used. To guard against order effects,
both story order and picture order were counterbalanced.

Raters
Four raters were University of British Columbia
undergraduates who were enrolled in an advanced
psychology research methods and statistics course. They are
referred to as student raters. They consisted of three females
and one male.
The fifth rater was a well-known and extensively
published fiction author who was not reimbursed for his
participation. He is referred to as the expert rater. He was
male.
Figure 1. Example of non-threatening photograph.

Rating
Raters were trained to evaluate participant responses using a
previously developed rubric for assessing story creativity,
the ‘Creativity’ portion of the Wisdom Intelligence
Creativity Synthesized (WICS) rubric (Sternberg, 2005;
Sternberg et al., 2010, 2012), and a set of stories that had
previously established creativity ratings. The WICS rubric
assesses story creativity on the basis of evidence of the
respondent`s ability to provide novel yet meaningful ideas,
narratives or interpretations of situations, or solutions to
problems, or to view situations and events in a new and
meaningful way.
Raters practiced on the sample stories until their ratings on
these sample stories correlated significantly with these
stories’ previously established creativity ratings.

Results
The creativity ratings provided by the expert rater were
significantly positively correlated with the creativity ratings
provided by the student raters, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Bivariate correlation between expert rater and each
of the four student raters.
Rater
Rater
Rater
Rater
One
Two
Three
Four
Non.289*
.454** .286*
.313*
threatening
Threatening
.376** .156
.368**
.477**
*Significant at < .05; **Significant at < .01.

Intraclass correlation was used to assess the level of
agreement amongst all five raters. They were significantly
in agreement, as shown in Table 2.

Figure 2. Two examples of threatening photographs.

Procedure
The participants were asked to rate each photograph
according to how threatening they believed it to be on a 7point Likert scale. Each participant was then given 30
minutes to write two short stories: one about the photograph
that was rated by that participant as most threatening, and
one about the photograph that was rated by that participant
as least threatening. If two photographs were rated as

Table 2. Inter-class correlation between all raters.
ICC
Value
Single Measures
.430
8.542
Average Measures
.883
8.542

Sig.
.001
.001

We created two rater groups: the average of all the raters’
scores, as well as the average of the two most central raters,

2235

for each of the stories. The central raters were selected by
dropping the raters with the highest and lowest means, and
then selecting from the remaining three raters the two whose
mean ratings were closest to one another. We conducted a
paired samples t-test between stories based on threatening
pictures, and stories based on non-threatening pictures, for
both rater groups. The mean creativity scores for stories
generated in response to non-threatening and threatening
stimuli are shown in Figure 4.
Creativity Rating

3.27
3.03

3.04
2.88

All Raters

Central Raters

Non-threatening

Threatening

Figure 4. Mean creativity scores for stories generated in
response to non-threatening and threatening stimuli.
The results indicate a high level of agreement between raters
(p = .001) and support for our hypothesis. As shown in
Table 3, using both the average of all raters, as well as the
two central raters, paired sample t-tests revealed that stories
based on threatening pictures were rated as significantly
more creative than those based on non-threatening pictures
(p < .05).
Table 3. Paired samples t-tests.
All Raters
Central Raters

t-value
2.08
2.29

SE
.077
.101

Cohen’s d
.269
.296

Sig.
.041
.026

Discussion
These results support our hypothesis that stories written in
response to threatening photographs elicit a higher degree of
creativity than those written in response to non-threatening
photographs. Several theoretical frameworks are consistent
with and could help explain these findings.
One kind of explanatory framework comes from
creativity research. It is widely assumed that the creative
process involves searching through memory and/or
selecting amongst a set of predefined candidate ideas. For
example, computer scientists have modeled the creative
process as a heuristic search (e.g., Simon, 1973, 1986). In
psychology, there is much evidence for, and discussion of,
the role of divergent thinking in creativity (Guilford, 1968;
for a review see Runco, 2010). Divergent thinking is
presumed to involve the generation of multiple, often
unconventional, possibilities. When construed from this
perspective, the creative process often goes hand-in-hand
with the notion of selection, since if you come up with

multiple alternatives you eventually weed some of them out.
Indeed, many well-known theories of creativity, such as the
Geneplore model (Finke, Ward, & Smith, 1992), and the
Darwinian theory of creativity (Simonton, 1999) involve
two stages: the generation of possibilities, followed by the
exploration and ultimately selective retention of the most
promising of them.
However, there are strong neurobiological (Gabora,
2010a), experimental (Gabora, 2010b; Gabora, O’Connor &
Ranjan, in press), and theoretical (Gabora, 2005, 2007),
reasons to believe that the generation stage of creative
thinking may be divergent not in that it moves in multiple
directions or generates multiple possibilities, but in the
sense that it produces a raw idea that is vague or unfocused,
and that requires further processing to become viable.
Similarly, the exploration stage of creative thinking may be
convergent, not in ordinary sense that it entails selecting
from amongst alternatives, but in the sense that it entails
considering a vague idea from different perspectives until it
comes into newly defined focus. In other words, the terms
‘divergent’ and ‘convergent’ may be applicable to creative
thought in the sense of going from well-defined to illdefined, and vice versa. Although a particular creative
thinking process may involve search or selection amongst
multiple well-defined possibilities, it need not, and
moreover, that selection need not figure prominently in a
general theory of creativity.
According to this alternative view of creativity, creative
individuals wrestle with those issues or ideas that are, for
them, in a state of potentiality. An artist might wrestle with
how to capture the feeling of a particular landscape, and a
writer might wrestle with depicting how events in an
imaginary world would unfold. Over time, creative ideas
come to assume a form that is more fully actualized, or
well-defined, as they are considered from different
perspectives in accordance with the constraints of the
domain in which they are expressed. By giving form to that
which exists in a state of potentiality, the individual gains a
richer understanding and appreciation of it, as well as a
sense of control or mastery over it.
Central to this view of creativity is the notion of a
worldview. The term worldview is used to refer to one’s
internal model of the world, as well as one’s values,
predispositions, and habitual patterns of response (Gabora,
2000, 2008; Gabora & Aerts, 2009). Each idea the creator
comes up with is construed as a different expression of the
same underlying core network of understandings, beliefs,
and attitudes. Thus an individual’s outputs are inter-related,
and potentially pave the way for one another. By adopting
the notion of a worldview, our account places equal
emphasis on external creative outcomes and the internal
cognitive and emotional restructuring brought about by the
creative process. The cognitive reorganization and
personality dynamics (e.g., involving wellbeing, selfdiscipline, or self-discovery) are viewed as the internal, less
readily measurable, but equally important, counterpart to
external manifestations of the creative process. The

2236

transformation that occurs on canvas or on the written page
is mirrored by a sense of personal, cognitive transformation
and self-discovery from within.
In the case of our study, this alternative theory suggests
that the threatening stimuli created a dichotomy in terms of
one’s understanding of the world. On the one hand, we
believe that the world is a just and fair world, and that we,
as individuals, are deserving of just and fair treatment.
However, the threatening stimulus confronts this conception
by imposing upon us a negative reality that threatens our
internal model of how the world operates. In response to
this, we tap into our creative potential and hone in on a
suitable explanation for the threat’s existence. This is done
in an attempt to reconcile the worldview dichotomy, and
impose a sense of meaning and understanding as to why this
negative reality exists, ultimately forging a new and
cohesive worldview structure.
These findings are consistent with the previously
mentioned literature on the dark side of creativity. The
positive correlation between negative affect and creativity
(Akinola & Mendes, 2008) gives credence to the notion that
creativity can arise from worldview disequilibrium, that is,
from a schism between one’s reality and one’s internal
conception of reality. In the case of negative affect, one’s
reality is that one is experiencing unpleasant and unsettling
emotions; however, the internal conception of reality is
predicated on the notion that one should be happy. In
response to this dichotomy, the creative process helps to
create a new, cohesive worldview structure that reduces
negative affect (e.g., Curl, 2008).
These findings can also be interpreted in terms of the
cognitive-tuning hypothesis (Schwarz, 2002). This theory
posits that our mood mirrors our surroundings, and moodstates in turn, affect how information from the environment
gets processed. In the case of a negative mood-state, one
narrows attention and focuses on the negative environment.
One then becomes more motivated to appropriately cope
with the negative mood, and engage in bottom-up
processing of the environment to understand the factors
underpinning the negative environment. Conversely, a
positive-mood state does not require an in-depth assessment
of the underpinning factors; thus, one engages in top-down
processing, and uses heuristics to understand the
environment. In terms of creative output, the bottom-up
processing used in negative mood-states allows for a more
in-depth analysis of the environment, which can lead to
more novel interpretations of its underpinning factors. The
positive-mood state does not necessitate this in-depth
analysis; thus a common, less novel narrative is developed.
In the study reported here, the threatening photographs may
have induced a negative mood-state, and the nonthreatening photographs may have induced a neutral or
positive mood-state, with the ensuing impact on information
processing and creative output.
To best of our knowledge, this paper is the first study to
directly assess the role of threatening stimuli on creative
output. However, the study has some weaknesses and

limitations. First, the photographs used were not drawn from
the International Affective Picture System. Although the
photographs used in the study did, on a qualitative level,
hold a high degree of consistency in terms of arousal and
valence, future studies should consider using standardized
photographs. Furthermore, due to time constraints,
participants were limited to 15 minutes of writing time per
story. It is possible that, given adequate time, we could see a
convergence of creative output. Despite these limitations,
we believe the study yielded some highly intriguing
preliminary findings concerning the role of threat on
creative output, which pave the way for further research into
this phenomenon.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge grants to the second author
from the National Science and Engineering Research
Council of Canada, and the Fund for Scientific Research of
Flanders, Belgium.

References
Akinola, M., & Mendes, W. B. (2008). The dark side of
creativity: Biological vulnerability and negative emotions
lead to greater artistic creativity. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 34(12), 1677–1686.
Andreason, N. C. (1987). Creativity and mental illness;
prevalence rates in writers and their first degree relatives.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 1288–1292.
Anzules, C., Haennl, C., & Golay, A. (2007). An experience
of art therapy for patients suffering from obesity.
European Diabetes Nursing, 4(2), 72-76.
Batey, M., & Furnham, A. (2009). The relationship between
creativity, schizotypy and intelligence. Individual
Differences Research, 7(4). 272–284.
Cropley, D. H., Cropley, A. J., Kaufman, J. C., & Runco, M.
(2010). Creativity in schools: Tensions and dilemmas.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cropley, D. H., Kaufman, J. C., & Cropley, A. J. (2003).
Malevolent creativity: A functional model of creativity in
terrorism and crime. Creativity Research Journal, 20,
105–115.
Curl, K. (2008). Assessing stress reduction as a function of
artistic creation and cognitive focus. Art Therapy, 25(4),
164–169.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
cognition: Theory, research, and applications.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flaherty, A. W. (2005). Frontotemporal and dopaminergic
control of idea generation and creative drive. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 493, 147–153.
Furnha,, A., Batey, M., Booth, T. W., Pater, V., &
Lozinskaya, D. (2011). Individual difference predictors of
creativity in Art and Science students. Thinking skills and
creativity, 6(2), 114–121.
Gabora, L. (2000). Conceptual closure: Weaving memories
into an interconnected worldview,” in G. Van de Vijver &
J. Chandler (Eds.), Closure: Emergent organizations and

2237

their dynamics. New York: Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences.
Gabora, L. (2002). Cognitive mechanisms underlying the
creative process. In T. Hewett & T. Kavanagh (Eds.),
Proceedings of the fourth international conference on
creativity and cognition (pp. 126−133). Loughborough,
UK: Loughborough University Press.
Gabora, L. (2005). Creative thought as a non-Darwinian
evolutionary process. Journal of Creative Behavior,
39(4), 65–87.
Gabora, L. (2007). Cultural evolution enatins (creativity
entails (conceot combination entails quantum structure)).
Proceedings of the Association for the Advancement of
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Spring Symposium 8:
Quantum Interaction, March 26-28, Stanford University,
pp. 106–113.
Gabora, L. (2008). The cultural evolution of socially
situated cognition. Cognitive Systems Research, 9(1-2),
104–113.
Gabora, L. (2010a). Revenge of the ‘nerds’: Characterizing
creative thought in terms of the structure and dynamics of
memory. Creativity Research Journal, 22(1), 1–13.
Gabora, L. (2010b). Recognizability of creative style within
and across domains: Preliminary studies. Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2350–2355). August 11-14, 2010, Portland, Oregon.
Gabora, L., & Firouzi, H. (2012). Society functions best
with an intermediate level of creativity. Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
August 1-4, 2011, Sapporo Japan.
Gabora, L. & Leijnen, S. (2009). How creative should
creators be to optimize the evolution of ideas? A
computational model. Electronic Proceedings in
Theoretical Computer Science, 9, 108-119.
Gabora, L. & Aerts, D. (2009). A mathematical model of the
emergence of an integrated worldview. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 53, 434–451.
Gabora, L., O’Connor, B. & Ranjan, A. (in press). The
recognizability of individual creative styles within and
across domains. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and
the Arts
Gino, F. & Ariely, D. (2011). The dark side of creativity:
Original thinkers can be more dishonest. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology. Advanced online
publication. doi: 10.1037/a0026406
Goldblatt, R., Elkis-Abuhoff, D., Gaydos, M., Rose, S. &
Casey, S. (2011). Unlocking conflict through creative
expression. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 38 (2), 104-108.
Goodwin, F. K. & Jamison, R. (1990). Alcohol and drug
abuse in manic-depressive illness. In: Goodwin, F. and
Jamison, K., Eds. Manic-depressive illness, pp. 210–226.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Guilford, J. P. (1968). Intelligence, creativity and their
educational implications. San Diego: Knapp.
Hannermann, T. B. (2006). Creativity with dementia
patients: Can creativity and art stimulate dementia
patients positively? Gerontology, 52(1), 59–65.

Leijnen, S. & Gabora, L. (2009). The tradeoff between
degree of creativity and number of creators in a
computational model of society. In B. Cooper & V. Danos
(Eds.) Proceedings of Developments in Computational
Models: Computational Models from Nature (DCM 09) -A workshop in association with the 36th International
Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
(ICALP). July 11, Rhodes, Greece.
Ludwig, A. M. (1995). The price of greatness. New York:
Guilford Press.
Maslow, A. H. (1959). Creativity in self-actualizing people.
In H. Brothers (Ed.), Creativity and its cultivation. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
May, R. (1975). The courage to create. New York: Bantam.
Noferesti, A. & al-ghorabaie, F. M. (2011). Emotional
intelligence and creativity in university students. Journal
of Iranian Psychologists, 7(26), 175–186.
Rogers, C. (1959). Toward a theory of creativity. In H.
Anderson (Ed.), Creativity and its cultivation. New York:
Harper & Row.
Runco, M. (2010). Divergent thinking, creativity, and
ideation. In (J. Kaufman & R. Sternberg, Eds.)
Cambridge handbook of creativity. (pp. 413–446).
Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schwarz, N. (2002). Situated cognition and the wisdom in
feelings: Cognitive tuning. In L. F. Barret & P. Salovey
(Eds.), The wisdom in feeling: Psychological processes in
emotional intelligence. New York: Guilford Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1999). Creativity as blind variation and
selective retention: Is the creative process Darwinian?
Psychological Inquiry, 10, 309–328.
Simon, H. A. (1973). Does scientific discovery have a
logic? Philosophy of Science, 40, 471–480.
Simon, H. A. (1986). Understanding the processes of
science: The psychology of scientific discovery. In T.
Gamelius (Ed.), Progress in science and its social
conditions (pp. 159–170). Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Sternberg, R. (2005). WICS: A model of positive
educational leadership comprising wisdom, intelligence,
and creativity synthesized. Educational Psychology
Review. 17, 191–262.
Sternberg, R., Bonney, C. R., Gabora, L., Jarvin, L., Karlitz,
T. M. & Coffin, L. (2010). Broadening the spectrum of
undergraduate admissions. College & University, 86(1),
2–17.
Sternberg, R., Bonney, C. R., Gabora, L., & Merrifield, M.
(2012). WICS: A model for college and university
admissions. Educational Psychologist, 47(1), 30-41.
Sternberg, R. J., & Lubart, T. I. (1995). Defying the crowd:
Cultivating creativity in a culture of conformity. New
York: Free Press.
Sulloway, F. (1996). Born to rebel. New York: Pantheon.
Tan, A., Ho, V., Ho, E. & Ow, S. (2008). High school
students’ perceived creativity self-efficacy and emotions
in a service learning context. The International Journal of
Creativity and Problem Solving, 18(2), 115–126.

2238

Appendices

emotion was impossible, an endless waterfall of emotions falling over
her was all she could feel. “I said, where is he!” The unknown man
yelling once again, for the first time in days she felt something, the
clasp of his hand over her face. Only days earlier someone she loved
had placed his hands in the same place, but this time there was no
tenderness, no caress to show they cared. “I will put your body under
the tire and back over you slowly, crushing one bone at a time ‘till
you tell me where the man I am looking for is!” She looked down
still focusing on the hand on her face, how she missed him! A few
days ago, her lover had left. Where, she had no idea, “Business to
take care of” he had said, but what business would leave her alone so
this man, the one with the strangling hold on her face, could find her.
She had tried to run, but with everyone here who only cared for
themselves (all they could care for really with so much sickness and
death around), no one answered her screams, her frantic running and
trying to escape this man. She riped her shirt on one of the branches
she hit and had the sensation of a bruise forming. She paid no heed to
it, only a small discomfort when she compared it to the gaping hole
she felt in her chest. Suddenly the man’s coat began vibrating, he
answered the phone with his hand still around her neck. “Mmmm ok,
yes, dead? Good.” Without warning he dropped her to the ground and
stood looking over her. “Turns out we don’t need you” he said
leering, “but I do know some of the boys may want you”. He picked
her up by the hair and began dragging her to the truck “And who
knows? Maybe we will let you see your man’s body before we lay
you down for us” Cheryl tried to force herself once more, with less
gusto than before as a part of her heart was crying out what the bald
man said to be true was not! She would believe he was alive until she
laid her head on his still, dead chest and felt him one last time.

Appendices A, B, C, and D provide examples of stories that
scored high or low with respect to creativity, generated in
response to non-threatening or threatening photographs.
(The stories may end abruptly because they were asked to
stop at the end of the allotted writing time.)

Appendix A
The following is an example of a high scoring story
produced in response to the non-threatening stimulus shown
in Figure 1.
In Jaredsville, Fourth of July parade was something everyone in town
looked forward to. The sleepy town in Missouri came together once a
year to provide food, movies, festivities, and friendship to their
fellow townsman. The streets are filled with people, some searing
food on the grill while others paint children’s faces into tigers and
clowns.
But everyone came, of course, to see the Jaredsville professional
dance exhibition. A few of the ladies in town had once been
professional dancers, traveling across the world displaying their
beauty and raw skills. They all began to slowly get in position with
the start of the drums. The seguins on their clothes danced in the
sunlight to the movement of their bodies. The drums began beating
faster and faster and the women expertly kept with the beat, dancing
faster and more radically until their bodies looked like surges of light,
The effect was almost hypnotizing as the crowd had quieted down;
became fixated by the dancing flashes of light.
And just as quickly as they had started, they finished. As they left
the middle of the street, the crowd applauded them fiercely. Yet,
something had changed; the crowd was no longer the large bustling
rabble it once was. It had now been neutralized, as if soother by the
dancers.

Appendix D
The following is an example of a low scoring story
produced in response to the threatening stimulus shown in
Figure 3.

Appendix B
The following is an example of a low scoring story
produced in response to the non-threatening stimulus shown
in Figure 1.
The town had a celebration today, an annual celebration that
celebrated the culture and music of the country. The women were the
center of the attention, they dressed in black or white like the men
did, but they were skirts. The women danced to the music and
paraded around the whole town. Some knew exactly what was going
on and the moves to perform such a dance. Others had their eyes
towards the ‘leader’, who perhaps was the one who made the routine.
The bright sunny day made it all the more amazing to watch the
show, as old men were wearing matching hats and marching around
with drums. There were people everywhere along the sides of the
road, up in the balcony, just to get a glimpse of the festivities that
were happening. Some cheered and waved around, and some took
pictures. All of the stores in that main road seemed to be closed,
probably because of how hectic and wild the place was getting!
It probably was a great success; the warm weather, the loud music,
and cheering of people made the day so great! This celebration will
most likely continue with similar events every year. After all, it is a
celebration of culture and music to the country!

Appendix C
The following is an example of a high scoring story
produced in response to the threatening stimulus shown in
Figure 3.
The man pushed Cheryl under the truck, “Where is he?” he was
screaming at her. Cheryl could only sob more, trying to control the

2239

His hands were cold and gritty upon my face they began to turn white
as he squeezed harder and threatened me for the money. All I wanted
to do was run away, run away from this life in general. He looked at
me with such distain. I wonder how I even got to this point in my life.
My heart raced while tears poured down my face, he was a vile man
with the intent to kill. “Please” I repeated over and over, “give me
one more chance. I’ll get you your money.” He spat on the ground
under the bridge at my feet like I was a piece of scum. I wanted a
different life but this grease bag was what I had to deal with every
day. Constantly abusing every inch of me. The only thing that scared
me more than staying with him was leaving him. He’d find me, he
always did. I didn’t just need to break away physically, but
emotionally and for my own safety. The numbness of the drug he
provided was my only gateway out of this hell hole. This could have
been the last time I ever saw daylight. Daylight and his eyes, burning
with power over every meek creature that would obey him.

