UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Examining the Representation and Understanding of Large Magnitudes Using the
Hierarchical Alignment model of Analogical Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7k83n8mt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Resnick, Ilyse
Shipley, Thomas
Newcombe, Nora
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Examining the Representation and Understanding of Large Magnitudes Using the
Hierarchical Alignment model of Analogical Reasoning
Ilyse Resnick (ilyse.resnick@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 North 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Thomas F. Shipley (thomas.shipley@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 North 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Nora Newcombe (nora.newcombe@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 North 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Christine Massey (massey@seas.upenn.edu)
Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, 3401 Walnut St
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Theodore Wills (twills@temple.edu)
College of Education, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

many disciplines require understanding scales outside those
familiar to human experience. For example, research on
geologic time, the atom, the size of the universe, and
nanotechnology is all based on phenomena occurring at
scales that cannot be directly perceived. Being able to
understand important current social issues, such as the U.S.
deficit, population growth, and global warming also require
an understanding of magnitudes outside of direct human
experience. Given the importance of understanding scale, it
should be no surprise that the new NRC Framework for K12 Science Education (NRC, 2011) and the Benchmarks for
Science Literacy (AAAS, 1993) have both identified “size
and scale” as fundamental and a unifying theme in science
education. “Size and scale” was also identified as one of the
“big ideas” at recent nanoscience and education national
workshops (Swarat, et al., 2010).
Unfortunately, people consistently have trouble
understanding and comparing values of very small or large
magnitudes (e.g. Jones, et al., 2008; Libarkin, et al., 2005;
Tretter, et al., 2006; Swarat, et al., 2010). Undergraduate
students, even those in STEM majors, have difficulty
mastering concepts of size and scale (Drane et al., 2008).
Size and scale has been described as a critical barrier to
learning and higher-level understanding (Hawkins, 1978).
While people are more accurate at ranking relative sizes,
they struggle assigning, comprehending, and comparing
absolute sizes, especially at extreme scales (Jones, et al.,
2008; Tretter, et al., 2006). For example, while most
students are able to place major geologic events in the
correct order, they fail to demonstrate an understanding of
the magnitude of time between these events (Libarkin,
Kurdziel, & Anderson, 2007).

Abstract
Understanding scale is fundamental in science education, but
scale comprehension is difficult. One reason difficulties may
arise is a disconnect between the linear scale of magnitude
and how scale information is cognitively represented. An
intervention was designed to foster a linear representation of
magnitude, based on the theory that people represent
magnitude information in a hierarchically organized structure.
The intervention extends principles from the progressive
alignment model of analogical reasoning to include
hierarchical alignment. Half the students in an undergraduate
introductory-level geology class were given multiple
opportunities to progressively align time to a constant spatial
scale in a linear representation, and locate all previous scales
relative to the current scale. The other half of the class
received the same content and practice aligning time to space.
The intervention group demonstrated a more accurate sense of
the relative durations of geological events and a reduction in
the magnitude of temporal location errors relative to the
control group. These findings suggest that the hierarchical
and progressive alignment of geologic time is an effective
way to reduce magnitude-based errors in understanding
geologic time. These findings are consistent with the
category adjustment model, and suggest commonalities
between number and time magnitude representation
Educational implications are discussed.

Keywords: Scale; Hierarchical alignment; Progressive
alignment; analogy

Introduction
Having a strong conceptual understanding of scale and the
relationships between scales is essential for scientific
literacy (Tretter, et al., 2006). Fundamental concepts in

917

Difficulties processing extreme sizes and scales may stem
from how magnitude information is cognitively represented.
Magnitudes at extreme scales are unfamiliar. Activation of
representations of unfamiliar magnitudes is less automatic
than of familiar values (Kadosh & Walsh, 2009). For
example, people possess a weaker association between
magnitude and number words for larger quantities than for
smaller more familiar quantities (Sullivan & Barner, 2010).
Unfamiliarity with the magnitude and content information
associated with extreme scales may lead to the large
conceptual categories held by novices (Trend, 2000; Tretter,
et al., 2006). While experts working with extreme scales are
characterized as having a “detailed, secure, sophisticated,
and well developed” mental framework, novices’ mental
frameworks are found to be “scant, insecure, and nebulous”
(Trend, 2000). For example, even in-service science
teachers who teach geologic time represent the roughly 14
billion years of geologic events as only three conceptual
categories: extremely ancient, moderately ancient, and less
ancient (Trend, 2000). Conceptual boundaries are defined
by consistent estimations of events near each other, creating
the boundary, and increased variation of estimations of
events within each conceptual category across participants.
Huttenlocher and colleagues’ (1988) category adjustment
model offers an account for this pattern of estimations. The
category adjustment model applies to both objects and
events. It suggests that 1D, 2D, and 3D magnitudes, such as
location, distance, and duration, are stored as a hierarchical
combination of metric and categorical information. A
person retrieves needed information at the level required by
a question, as well as the boundaries of any associated
higher-level units (Huttenlocher, et al., 1988). For example,
remembering that dinosaurs first appeared in the Triassic
Period implicitly contains information that dinosaurs also
first appeared during the Mesozoic Era, which is a larger
division that includes the Triassic period.
However, in the absence of exact information, people use
boundaries of other objects/events to help make estimations.
Variation in estimation, therefore, occurs because of
imprecision of boundaries (Shipley & Zacks, 2008; Zacks &
Tversky, 2001). As people use object/event boundaries to
help make estimations, the more imprecise or the larger the
boundaries, the more variation one could expect to find
(Huttenlocher, et al., 1988; Shipley & Zacks, 2008). With
no information at a lower level, estimations must default to
a higher level. Thus, if a student cannot recall which period
dinosaurs first appeared, but can recall it happened in the
Mesozoic Era, their estimation will range 180 million years,
spanning all of the periods that comprise the Mesozoic Era.
The placement of object/event boundaries will
systematically distort estimations in predictable ways.
Subjective experience of magnitude is influenced by the
number of boundaries the person can recall; the more
boundaries a person can recall the greater the subjective
magnitude, and the converse for recollection of a smaller
number of boundaries (Block, 1990). In line with the
category adjustment model, when people hold relatively few

conceptual categories, such as at extreme scales, they should
underestimate magnitudes. For example, elementary to
graduate-level students estimated objects as too small at
large scales and as too large at small scales (Tretter, Jones,
& Minogue, 2006).
Additionally, because change is usually perceptually
salient, and thus plays a role in object/event comprehension
and memory, at points of unpredictability humans are more
likely to attend to information to permit more accurate
future predictions (Shipley & Zacks, 2008). Subsequently,
people tend to remember objects/event boundaries by
attending to them (Speer, Zacks, & Reynolds, 2007), and
recall those objects/events at boundaries more clearly than
those in between (Zacks & Tversky, 2001). Therefore,
regions sparsely populated with objects/events will tend to
elicit more variation in estimation of location and an
underestimation of magnitude.
The more organizational structure a person has for the
material in memory, the better their recall (Mandler, 1967).
Where people have more conceptual categories, perhaps
arising from personal experience with the scale, they are
more accurate when making judgments. For example, most
adults (e.g. Dehaene & Marques, 2002; Dehaene, et al.,
2008) and children (Booth & Seigler, 2008) are able to use a
proportional linear number line to make estimations for
smaller, more familiar numbers, but they fail to do so with
larger or unfamiliar numbers. While there currently is a
debate about the nature of people’s mental representation of
size and scale (e.g. logarithmic, power, scalar variability, or
segmented linear model), it is clear that there are
compressive effects on people’s estimation of size and scale
as magnitude increases to unfamiliar scales. The variation of
people’s estimations of quantity increases as a function of
the magnitude of the judgment (Dehaene, 2003). A
consequence of a compressed number line is that, as
magnitudes become less familiar, values will become less
discriminable (the distance effect). The distance effect can
be seen in slower response times when people make
judgments about larger numbers compared to making
judgments about smaller numbers (Dehaene, et al., 2008).
If the representation of scale information drives student
difficulties in learning about size and scale, then learning
interventions designed to address scale representation more
directly should improve learning. Effectively teaching
reasoning about unfamiliar scale magnitudes should require
an intervention that fosters a linear representation of
magnitude, populated with boundary information at that
scale. An intervention was designed based on the theory that
people represent magnitude information in a hierarchically
organized structure.
The intervention tested in this study is based on the
progressive alignment model of analogical reasoning
(Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). The progressive alignment
model has been shown to foster a linear representation of
number magnitude (Thompson & Opfer, 2010). The
progressive alignment model advocates the comparison of
two similar items. The more commonalities that exist

918

between these items, and the more these commonalities are
highlighted, the more salient corresponding relations will
be. Comparing two similar items then helps extend the
analogy to unfamiliar items (Gentner & Namy, 2006).
Furthermore, the act of performing comparisons may
change the original mental representations, increasing
uniformity between the two representations. Thus, the
process of alignment may make higher-order relational
similarities more salient. Recognition of higher-order
relational commonalities may promote making similar
higher-order connections with subsequent unfamiliar items
(Kotovsky and Gentner, 1996). The progressive alignment
of scales may alleviate the conceptual dissimilarity between
human scales and extreme scales by providing greater
structural alignment across changes of scale.
The current study uses the Geologic Time Scale,
extending from present day back 4.6 billion years. Novices
have trouble understanding geologic time, demonstrating a
pattern of errors consistent with a hierarchically organized
representation of temporal magnitude (e.g. Libarkin, et al.,
2005; Trend, 2000). Novices’ estimations of when geologic
events occurred may differ from the correct magnitude by as
much as five orders of magnitude (Catley & Novick, 2008).
A commonly employed classroom exercise to teach
students about the magnitude of geological time is to have
them align time to a spatial representation. The current
study builds on the use of space as an analogy for time. We
note that using space to represent time is particularly
important in geoscience education because geologically
relevant temporal information is often stored in spatial
arrays (e.g., as sequences of layers in a sedimentary
deposit). In line with the progressive alignment model, the
current intervention gives students multiple opportunities to
align time to space in a linear representation, progressing
from small familiar scales to geological scales. While the
amount of time varies, the amount of space remains
constant: students align increasing amounts of time to one
meter.
Importantly, the current intervention extends the
principles of the progressive alignment model to include the
hierarchical organization of all previous scales. Every time
students align a new temporal scale to space, they locate all
previous scales relative to the current scale. This
hierarchical organization highlights how each temporal
scale is related to the others, helping to populate each scale
with boundary information by providing internal structure
of magnitude relations within event boundaries.

The geoscience course consisted of twice weekly lectures
and a laboratory period. All lectures were given by the same
faculty member; the students were divided into different
sections for the laboratory period. One TA covered four
sections and two TAs covered two sections each. The
intervention was conducted by the first author (as a guest
lecturer) in the laboratory sections as part of the standard
stratigraphy lab. Experimental (intervention) and control
conditions were evenly distributed across the TAs to control
for instructor-based differences.
Intervention Design In the hierarchical alignment
intervention, students aligned time to space beginning with
a familiar personal time scale, then worked through different
historic and geologic timelines, up to the full Geologic Time
Scale. For each timeline, students were required to indicate
the timeline’s length, locate specific events, and locate
where all previous timelines would begin on the current
timeline (see Fig. 1).

Examples of timelines
Recorded History:

Ancient History

Copper Age

Bronze Age

Human Evolution:
Split from chimps

Cenozoic:

Paleocene

Fall of Dark
Rome Ages

Iron Age

Australopithecines
Homo habilis

Tertiary

Eocene

Personal

Middle Ages

Oligocene

Human lifespan

American history

Recorded history
Homo sapiens
Homo erectus

Human evolution

Miocene

Pilocene
Holocene

Figure 1: Example of three time lines in the hierarchical
alignment intervention. Note that for each time line,
all previous time lines are located.
Procedure In a two-hour laboratory session, the
experimental group participated in the hierarchical
alignment intervention (1.5 hr) after a shortened stratigraphy
lab (30 min). The control group completed the full
stratigraphy lab (2 hr). During the stratigraphy lab, students
learned about the age and distribution of rock types and the
types of environments in which those rocks are formed by
making and examining stratigraphy columns. Importantly,
stratigraphy columns involve aligning geologic temporal
information to space. Thus, the intervention and control
groups both received practice aligning geologic time to
space and exposure to magnitude information. The only
difference between the intervention and control groups is
the way in which the magnitude information was presented
(hierarchically or conventionally). Both the intervention and
control groups received further instruction on the Geologic
Time Scale and concepts explicitly related to geologic time

Methods
Participants
Participants consisted of 58 (control group) and 49
(experimental group) students enrolled in an undergraduate
introductory-level geoscience course at a major university
located in an urban setting. The demographics of
participants were consistent with those of a large urban
American university.

919

(2(1) = 3.99, p = .05). The groups did not differ
significantly on the knowledge-based test item, which did
not require an understanding of magnitude (p>.05).

(i.e. two fossil labs) prior to completing the outcome
measures. The fossil labs include identifying fossils from
different divisions in time.
Measures All students completed outcome measures one
month after the stratigraphy lab as part of a laboratory exam.
There were two items that assessed understanding of
geologic time magnitude. One item came from the
Geoscience Concept Inventory, which is a valid and reliable
instrument measuring a range of geoscience concept
knowledge (Libarkin, et al., 2005). For this item, students
were presented with five time lines that had the same
geologic events in different locations. Four of the time lines
represented common misconceptions students have
(response option A. life occurred when Earth formed, B.
humans and dinosaurs coexisted, C. dinosaurs appeared
much earlier than they did, E. all life formed at the
beginning of Earth’s history), and one time line showed the
events in the correct relative locations (D). Students were
asked to choose the most correct time line. Two of the
incorrect response options (A/B) reflected relatively small
magnitude errors (i.e. they are wrong on the scale of
millions of years) and the other two incorrect response
options (C/E) reflected relatively large magnitude errors (i.e.
they are wrong on the scale of billions of years).
The second item is a new measure of geologic time
developed for use with middle school students (Barghaus &
Porter, 2010). This item is a multiple-choice item that
required students to identify which duration-based statement
was true using a conventional diagram of the Geologic Time
Scale. The correct choice is the statement: The Proterozoic
Eon lasted much longer than the Phanerozoic Eon. While
numerical information is provided in the diagram, the
correct choice may not be obvious to novices in the standard
diagram because the spatial intervals of the eons do not
proportionally correspond to their temporal lengths. This
type of compressed representation is how the Geologic
Time Scale is typically depicted. In past work the most
commonly chosen incorrect response was a statement that is
consistent with the visible spatial intervals (The
Phanerozoic lasted much longer than the Proterozoic).
A third test item served as a control for other potential
group differences (e.g. motivation). This item is a
knowledge-based question, asking when mammals were the
dominant land animal. This item did not require an
understanding of magnitude.

Figure 2: Distribution of student responses to Geoscience
Concept Inventory item on geologic time. Response option
“D” is the correct answer. Incorrect response options reflect
common misconceptions: (A) life occurred when Earth
formed, (B) humans and dinosaurs coexisted, (C) dinosaurs
appeared much earlier than they did, (E) all life formed at
the beginning of Earth’s history).

Figure 3: Percentage of students making large-magnitude
errors. The incorrect response options from the Geoscience
Concept Inventory item on geologic time were broken up
into small-magnitude errors and large-magnitude errors

Discussion
The current study found that the hierarchical and
progressive alignment of geologic time is an effective way
to reduce magnitude-based errors in understanding geologic
time. The intervention group demonstrated a more accurate
sense of the relative durations of geological events and a
reduction in the magnitude of temporal location errors
relative to the control group. Importantly, the intervention
and control groups did not differ significantly on the
knowledge-based item, indicating that the intervention
affected understanding the magnitude of geologic time, and
did not provide additional content or increase effort or
motivation in the intervention group. These findings were
attained one month later, suggesting a durable effect.

Results
On the Geoscience Concept Inventory item the intervention
group was significantly less likely to make large-magnitude
errors than the control group (2(1) = 6.08, p = .01),
although both groups were just as likely to choose D, the
correct option (p>.05). The intervention group was
significantly less likely than the control group to choose C,
the most common error (2(1) = 7.35, p = .01).
The intervention group was more accurate than the
control group on the Geologic Time Scale Diagram item

920

That the intervention, aimed at fostering a linear
representation of geologic time, was successful at reducing
magnitude errors suggests that mental representation of
magnitude influences understanding of the Geologic Time
Scale. Specifically, the increased accuracy on the Geologic
Time Scale diagram item and the pattern of errors on the
Geoscience Concept Inventory item are consistent with
developing a more linear scale of time at large magnitudes.
One limitation of the current study is the limited number of
measurements assessing geologic time understanding. We
are developing new assessments of scale representation that
evaluate magnitude understanding in abstract numerical
domains as well as spatial and temporal content domains.
Such assessments will be important for further development
of our understanding the nature of the role of analogical
mapping in representing magnitude and scale.
The category adjustment model can be applied to any type
of magnitude (e.g. space and time). Currently, there are
competing accounts of the nature of the representation of
magnitude information. Some researchers advocate a
generalized mapping of more/less relations across
dimensions (Walsh, 2003), while other researchers maintain
separate or asymmetrical representations (e.g., Agrillo,
Ranpura, & Butterworth, 2010). Our finding that
progressive alignment helps foster a linear representation of
magnitude for time, and Thompson & Opfer’s (2010) work
on numbers indicates that there may be commonalities
between number and time magnitude representation.
Hierarchical alignment could serve as a valuable technique
in future research on the nature of representations of
different types of magnitude information.
There are other factors besides those studied here that
may contribute to the representation and comprehension of
size and scale. Measurement, estimation, perspective, and
proportional reasoning may all play some role in
understanding size and scale (Jones & Taylor, 2009). For
example, proportional reasoning is correlated with students’
ability to order objects and assign correct sizes to objects
(Jones, et al., 2007). Being able to conceptualize a new unit
from existing units (unitizing), and then use that new unit to
make comparisons or calculations, are particularly
important aspects of proportional reasoning related to
understanding size and scale (Lamon, 1994). Further
research is needed to examine how these other factors
contribute to the understanding of size and scale.
The finding from the current study has clear educational
implications. While analogy is one of the most commonly
used pedagogical practices (Libarkin, et al., 2007), students
still continue to demonstrate difficulties in understanding
size and scale information (e.g. Jones, et al., 2008; Libarkin,
et al., 2005; Tretter, et al., 2006; Swarat, et al., 2010). It is
possible for analogies to fail to bring about conceptual
change (Brown & Salter, 2010; Duit, 1991), and even
mislead students’ understanding of a concept, making
misconceptions hard to identify and resolve (Brown &
Salter, 2010; Duit, 1991). Two obstacles faced when using
analogy in representing scale information include failure of

alignment and unrelated salient features (Gentner, 1983).
The hierarchical alignment intervention is specifically
designed to control for these issues by keeping everything
aligned except for magnitude information. Thus, the
hierarchical alignment intervention may be a more effective
teaching tool than current practices employing single
analogical mapping exercises.
Thus far the research discussed has described
representations of large unfamiliar whole numbers
compared with relatively smaller more familiar whole
numbers. While there has been little research examining
scaling and ordering of numbers less than the integer one, it
is hypothesized that as magnitudes become unfamiliar at
both large and small scales, the representation of those
magnitudes will become “fuzzy and indistinct” (Tretter, et
al., 2006). For example, people also hold a limited number
of conceptual categories of extremely small scales (e.g.
things we can see versus things we cannot) (Jones, et al.,
2008; Tretter, et al., 2006). The increased variation within
categories and little to no variation across categories should
result in difficulty discriminating among objects/events that
are very small. However, in the case of small scales, there is
an added complication with the hierarchical alignment
intervention: familiar scales are not able to be hierarchically
organized within the unfamiliar scales as one progresses
towards smaller and smaller scales, as was the case when
progressing towards larger and larger scales. A solution may
be cycling back up to larger level (or levels) for each
smaller scale. In any event, the implications of this
complication in cognitive representations and pedagogical
practices should be examined in future research.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part from National Science
Foundation Grant SBE-0541957 and National Science
Foundation Grant SBE-1041707 that both support the
Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC).

References
Agrillo, C., Ranpura, A., & Butterworth, B. (2010) 'Time
and numerosity estimation are independent: Behavioral
evidence for two different systems using a conflict
paradigm', Cognitive Neuroscience
American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS). (1993). Benchmarks for science literacy.
NewYork: Oxford University Press.
Barghaus, K. & Porter, A. C. (2010, April). Building
aligned assessments for middle school science teachers
and students. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
American Educational Research Association., Denver,
CO.
Block, R. A. (1990). Models of psychological time. In R. A.
Block (Ed.), Cognitive models of psychological time.
Lawrence Erlbaum: Hillsdale, NJ.
Booth, J. & Siegler, R. (2008). Numerical magnitude
representations influence arithmetic learning. Child
Development, 79(4)

921

Brown, S. & Salter, S. (2010). Analogies in science and
science teaching. Advanced Physiological Education, 34
Dehaene, S. (2003). The neural basis of the Weber–Fechner
law: a logarithmic mental number line. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7(4)
Dehaene, S., Izard, V., Spelke, E., & Pica P. (2008). Log or
linear? Distinct intuitions of the number scale in Western
and Amazonian indigene cultures. Science, 320
Dehaene, S., & Marques, J. F. (2002). Cognitive
Neuroscience: Scalar variability in price estimation and
the cognitive consequences of switching to the euro. The
Quaterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55(3)
Drane, D., Swarat, S., Hersam, M., Light, G., & Mason, T.
(2008). An evaluation of the efficacy and transferability
of a nanoscience module. Journal of Nano Education.
Duit, R. (1991). On the role of analogies and metaphors in
learning science. Science Education, 30
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science,7
Gentner, D. & Namy, L. L. (2006). Analogical processes in
language learning. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 15(6)
Hawkins, D. (1978), Critical barriers to science learning,
Outlook, 29
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L., & Prohaska, V. (1988).
Hierarchical organization in ordered domains: Estimating
the dates of events. Psychological Review, 95: 471–484.
Jones, M. G. & Taylor, A. R. (2009). Developing a sense of
scale: Looking backward. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 46(4)
Jones, M. G., Taylor, A. R., & Broadwell, B. (2009).
Concepts of scale held by students with visual
impairment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
46(5)
Jones, M. G., Taylor, A., Minogue, J., Broadwell, B.,Wiebe,
E. & Carter, G. (2007). Understanding scale: Powers of
ten. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(2)
Jones, M. G., Tretter,T., Taylor, A.,& Oppewal, T. (2008).
Experienced and novice teachers’ concepts of spatial
scale. International Journal of Science Education, 30(3)
Kadosh, R.C. & Walsh, V. (2009). Numerical representation
in the parietal lobes: Abstract or not abstract? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 32
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67
Lamon, S. (1994). Ratio and proportion: Cognitive
foundations in unitizing and norming. In G. J. Harel
Confrey (Ed.), The development of multiplicative
reasoning in the learning of mathematics. Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press.
Libarkin, J.C., Anderson, S.W., Dahl, J., Beilfuss, M., &
Boone, W. (2005). Qualitative analysis of college
students’ ideas about the Earth: Interviews and openended questionnaires. Journal of Geoscience Education,
53(1)

Libarkin, J.C., Kurdziel, J.P. & Anderson, S.W. (2007).
College student conceptions of geological time and the
disconnect between ordering and scale. Journal of
Geoscience Education, 55
Mandler, G. (1967). Organization and memory. In K. W.
Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory, 1: 328372. New York: Academic Press.
National Research Council. (2011). A Framework for K-12
Science Education. Committee on a Conceptual
Framework for New K-12 Science Education Standards.
Board on Science Education, DBASSE. Washington,DC:
The National Academies Press.
Resnick, I., Shipley, T.F., Newcombe, N., Massey, C.,
Wills, T. (2011, October). Progressive Alignment of
Geologic Time. Talk presented at 2011 Geological
Society of America Annual Meeting, Minneapolis, MN.
Shipley, T. F. & Zacks, J., 2008, Understanding events:
From perception to action. New York, NY, Oxford
University Press.
Speer, N. K., Zacks, J. M., & Reynolds, J. R., 2007, Human
brain activity time-locked to narrative event boundaries:
Psychological Science, 18
Sullivan, J. & Barner, D (2010). Mapping number words to
approximate magnitudes: associative learning or structure
mapping? 32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Swarat, S., Light, G., Park, E.-J., & Drane, D. (2010). A
typology of undergraduate students’ conceptions of size
and scale: Identifying and characterizing conceptual
variation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching.
Thompson, C., & Opfer, J. (2010). How 15 hundred is like
15 cherries: Effect of progressive alignment on
representational changes in numerical cognition. Child
Development, 81(6)
Trend, R.D. (2009). The power of deep time in geoscience
education: linking ‘interest’, ‘threshold concepts’ and
‘self-determination theory’. Studia Universitatis BabeşBolyai, Geologia, 54(1)
Trend, R.D. (2001). Deep Time Framework: a preliminary
study of UK primary teachers' conceptions of geological
time and perceptions of geoscience. Journal of Research
in Science Teaching, 38 (2)
Tretter, T. R., Jones, M. G., Andre, T., Negishi, A., &
Minogue, J. (2006). Conceptual boundaries and distances:
Students’ and experts’ concepts of the scale of scientific
phenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
43(3)
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity, TRENDS in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(11)
Wheeling Jesuit University. (2004). Geologic time activity.
Wheeling Jesuit University/NASA-supported Classroom
of the Future.
Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin, 127

922

