UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Expectations About the Temporal Structure of the World Result in the Attentional Blink and
Repetition Blindnsess

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/99s393tk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Rieth, Cory
Vul, Edward

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Expectations About the Temporal Structure of the World Result in the Attentional
Blink and Repetition Blindness
Cory A. Rieth & Edward Vul (crieth, evul@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Dr. # 109
La Jolla, CA 92093-109 USA
Abstract

and memory (Bowman & Wyble, 2007; Olivers & Meeter,
2008).
Here we do not aim to supplant these models, but only to
provide a rational account of these dynamics, to explain why
the visual system may exhibit AB and RB. We remain agnostic to the particular processes and implementations, and instead seek an understanding of the computational principles
that may be in play. We develop a probabilistic model of target identification by co-occurrence detection, which aims to
infer which item occurred simultaneously with the cue, given
temporal uncertainty and expectations about world dynamics. First we describe the derivation of the model based on
assumed temporal statistics, then illustrate its application to
the basic RB and AB paradigms. Finally, we will apply this
model to AB response distributions.

We consider how repetition blindness and the attentional blink
might arise from prior assumptions about the occurrence of
task-relevant states of the world. Repetition blindness and the
attentional blink are behavioral deficits in the identification of
items during rapid serial visual presentation at varying delays
after identifying the first “target.” Here we propose that both
of these effects are explained by rational inference given prior
expectations about the timing of task-relevant world transitions. While such expectations would be helpful in the natural
world, they may result in unanticipated biases in laboratory
settings. We show that a rational model using prior expectations of the timing of task-relevant information captures the
basic repetition blindness and the attentional blink effects, and
also the specific distributions of errors made during the attentional blink.
Keywords: Attentional blink; Repetition blindness; Attention;
Computational Modeling; Bayesian Models

Introduction

Attentional Blink!

Repetition blindness and the attentional blink refer to common failures in identifying stimuli shortly after an important
event. Both phenomena are typically studied in rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP) tasks, in which many stimuli (often letters or digits) are displayed in quick succession. In the
task people are asked to pick out some specific “targets” from
the RSVP stream (for instance, letters among digits, or letters
cued by a ring). After the first target (T1 ), a second target
(T2 ) appearing within a few stimuli of the first tends to be
misreported – this is called the “attentional blink” (AB; Figure 1, top; Raymond, Shapiro, & Arnell, 1992; Weichselgartner, 1987). If an identical target is presented twice without
much time intervening, people tend to not notice the repetition, yielding “repetition blindness” (RB; e.g., the ‘E’ in the
bottom section of Figure 1; Kanwisher, 1987).
Although both RB and AB have many surface similarities,
they follow a qualitatively different time-course as a function
of the “stimulus onset asynchrony” (or lag) – the time between the onset of T1 and the onset of T2 . The attentional
blink exhibits lag-one sparing – if T2 appears immediately
after T1 , detection is often not impaired; in contrast, the RB
deficit is most pronounced at such short delays. Moreover,
when manipulated within one experiment, these effects have
independent, dissociable effects (Chun, 1997). Several accounts of RB and AB postulate resource limitations (Shapiro,
Raymond, & Arnell, 1997) in individuating items into unique
tokens and binding them to type identities (Kanwisher, 1987;
Bowman & Wyble, 2007). Moreover, the time-course of these
effects has been the target of several computational process
models that utilize specific mechanistic dynamics of attention

I!E!C!F!K!O!G!M!D!J!B!L!H!N!A!P!✔!
I!E!C!F!K!O!G!M!D!J!B!L!H!N!A!P!✗!
I!E!C!F!K!O!G!M!D!J!B!L!H!N!A!P!✗!
I!E!C!F!K!O!G!M!D!J!B!L!H!N!A!P!✔!

Repetition Blindness!
I!E!E!F!K!O!G!M!D!J!B!L!H!N!A!P!✗!
I!E!F!E!K!O!G!M!D!J!B!L!H!N!A!P!✗!
I!E!F!K!O!E!G!M!D!J!B!L!H!N!A!P!✔!
time!
Figure 1: Repetition blindness and attentional blink paradigms.
Each row of letters represents a particular type of trial where the
letters appear in rapid succession. Repetition blindness arises when
a target repeats, and participants indicate whether it appeared once
or twice: performance is worse at short inter-target intervals when
the two targets are identical compared to when they are different.
The attentional blink occurs when the task requires identifying two
designated targets: Participants are can report items in quick succession, as in the top attentional blink row (“lag-one sparing”); however, when the second target appears a few items later, participants
are less accurate.

RSVP Identification Model
We assume that people identify targets in an RSVP task via
the probability that a given item co-occurred with the cue.
Under this assumption, the observer’s task is to infer the letter identity (L ) of the second target (T2 ), by marginalizing
over all possible stimuli used in the experiment (xi ) that may
have coincided with the cue. The probability that the cue

929

co-occurred with item i at time t is the product of the probability that the item (Xi (t)) and cue (C(t)) were present at that
time. This quantity is integrated over time to obtain an unnormalized probability of item i co-occurring with the cue. The
core of our model is an assumption that participants use prior
expectations about the times when salient or task-relevant
events are likely to occur (P(any|t)). The probability of cooccurrence at a given time is thus weighted by the probability
the stimulus at time t will be relevant for the task. Thus, the
participant’s subjective probability distribution over possible
identities of the second target is given by:

where (⊗) is the convolution operator, the boxcar function is
1 between the onset and offset of the cue, and 0 otherwise,
and Student(t|σc , νc ) is a scaled Student’s t-distribution with
mean 0, νx degrees of freedom, and standard deviation σc .
This convolution operation effectively captures uncertainty
about the exact onset and offset of the cue. Similarly, the
item function can be written as:
Xi (t) = P(xi |t) =
boxcar(t|onset, offset) ⊗ Student(t|σx , νx ).
In the simulations presented later νx = νc = 2, σx = 30, and
σc = 75. The larger uncertainty for the cue reflects the fact
that the cue in a RSVP stream is a rare and unpredictable
occurrence relative to the steady stream of items.

P(ϒ(T2 ) = L |S, Ω) ∝

∑ P(xi = L )
i

Z ∞
t=0

C(t)Xi (t)P(any|t), (1)

where P(xi = L ) is 1 when xi is L , and 0 otherwise. To distinguish between the letter identity, or type, and a particular
instance of a letter, or the token, we use T2 to denote the
token of the second target, and ϒ(T2 ) to denote it’s type.1
S refers to the stimulus sequence of the trial, including the
particulars of which items occurred at which points in time,
and when the cue occurred. Ω includes the set of parameters
which our model uses to describe subjective uncertainty and
expectations about the task. The following sections describe
the parameters used to calculate C(t), Xi (t), and P(any|t).

Prior for Task-Relevant Events
Both RB and AB are conditioned on correct detection/identification of the first target (T1 ) in an RSVP stream.
Therefore, we consider expectations about whether any taskrelevant stimulus is likely to be visible at time t after the onset
of the T1 . We write this as P(any|t). Since T1 is, by definition, task-relevant, P(any|t) decomposes into the mutually
exclusive probabilities that old task-relevant information is
still visible (P(old|t)) and that new task-relevant information
has appeared (P(new|t)):

Perceptual Likelihood
In RSVP tasks, participants often misreport item identities
(Vul & Rich, 2010; Vul, Hanus, & Kanwisher, 2009) and their
presentation order (Wyble, Potter, Bowman, & Nieuwenstein,
2011), indicating that even without RB and AB, there is considerable uncertainty about the relative timing of cues and
items. The cue-function (C(t)) and the item-function (Xi (t)),
account for this temporal uncertainty: they represent the subjective probability that these stimuli were presented at a given
point in time. Both of these functions are obtained by convolving some temporal uncertainty kernel with the physical
time series of stimulus presentation. We use the Student’s
t-distribution as the uncertainty kernel.2
Thus, the cue-function (C(t)) and the item-function
(Xi (t)), are defined as a boxcar function – representing the
physical presence of the stimulus – convolved with a tdistribution – representing perceptual uncertainty about the
precise time of stimulus onset and offset:

P(any|t) = P(old ∪ new|t) = P(old|t) + P(new|t).

(2)

To obtain these time-varying probability functions, we
must assume a transition distribution for the world, that is:
what is the probability distribution of the interval between
changes in the world? We write this distribution as P(R1 = t),
the probability that the first transition (R1 ) occurred at time t.
This distribution reflects implicit beliefs about the temporal
structure of the world (we will later discuss different choices
of this transition distribution). Figure 2 illustrates the derivation of the different elements of P(any|t), from P(R1 = t).
Based on this transition distribution, the probability that an
old task-relevant stimulus is still visible at time t is given by
the probability that the first transition has not yet happened –
that is, the probability that the first transition will happen at a
time later than t:

C(t) = P(cue on|t) =

P(old|t) = P(R1 > t) = 1 −

boxcar(t|onset), offset) ⊗ Student(t|σc , νc ),

Z t
t 0 =0

P(R1 = t 0 )

(3)

To find the probability that a new task-relevant stimulus has
appeared by a given point, we must take into account that not
every transition in the world produces a task-relevant stimulus. We define the parameter θ as the probability that a transition yields a task-relevant stimulus, and define P(new|t) as
the sum of a convolution series of transitions. The probability that the nth transition will occur at time t (P(Rn = t)) is
computed as the nth convolution power of the transition dis-

1 In general, P(ϒ(x ) = L ) could capture perceptual uncertainty
i
about stimulus identity (to reflect that some letters are more confusable than others), but here we ignore this complication, and assume
no pairwise letter confusion, by assigning probability 1 to the actual
identity of xi , and 0 to all other alternatives.
2 Our qualitative results do not much depend on the specific functional form of the temporal uncertainty kernel – simple Gaussian
distributions are sufficient – but our numerical results are more consistent with human behavior when using a heavy-tailed distribution,
like the t-distribution.

930

0

1000

0

p(R* = t)

1

Probability

p(Rn = t)

Any
Relevant

New
Relevant
1000

P(Rn = t) = P(R1 = t)⊗n =
P(R1 = t) ⊗ P(R1 = t) ⊗ ... ⊗ P(R1 = t) .
{z
}
|

(4)

n

Since each transition yields a task-relevant stimulus with
probability θ, the probability that the first task-relevant stimulus (R∗ ) appears at time t is given by the probability of any
number of non-task-relevant transitions occurring followed
by a relevant observation (in other words, the sum of the geometrically weighted convolution series of transitions):3
∞

∑ θ(1 − θ)n−1 P(Rn = t)

(5)

n=1

The probability that a new item has appeared at some point
before time t – that is, P(new|t) – can be calculated by evaluating the cumulative distribution of P(R∗ = t):
t 0 =0

0.4
0.2
1000

0

1000

0

1000

show, in green, P(any|t) from each of these options. These
resulting priors on a task-relevant stimulus being visible (in
green) are similar for all three possible transition distribution
functions. At short delays from the first target, the probability
of a task-relevant object is initially high, since the first transition is unlikely to have yet occurred. However, after the first
transition, with θ < 1, a new object is not certain to be taskrelevant; thus the probability that a new task-relevant item
has appeared remains low. With more time, the probability of
observing a novel task-relevant item increases. This combination results in the initial dip and later recovery of the prior
on task-relevance – this shape of p(any|t) is the backbone of
our model.
Throughout the results sections, we use the log10 -normal
distribution with µ = 100 and σ = .15, and θ = .1. A higher
θ results in a smaller dip in the resulting prior, and a smaller
RB or AB effect; decreasing µ results in a faster time-course,
while increasing µ results in a slower time-course.4

tribution (where ⊗ is the convolution operator):

P(new|t) = P(R∗ ≤ t) =

p( old | t )
p( new | t )
p( any | t )

0.6

Figure 3: The resulting P(old|t), P(new|t), and P(any|t) from several theoretically-motivated possible transition distributions. The
probability density of each assumed transition distribution is illustrated in the insets.

Figure 2: Construction of the prior probability of any task-relevant
information at time t from an assumed transition distribution between world states (see text).

Z t

µ = 100, σ = 40

λ=1/50

Time (ms)

t (ms)

P(R∗ = t) =

µ = 2, σ = 0.15

0.8

0
0

0

1000

Assumed Transition Distribtion
Normal
Log10-Normal
Exponential

Relevant
Transition

p( new | t )

Old
Object

nth Transition

p( any | t )

p(R1 = t)
p( old | t )

Transition
Distribution

P(R∗ = t 0 )

Modeling Repetition Blindness
In an RB paradigm, participants must decide whether a given
stimulus was presented once or twice. In other words, they
must decide if there were two tokens of the same type, or just
one token (e.g., one or two “E”s in Figure 1). In our notation,
the participants challenge is to determine if the two identified
targets correspond to only one token (T1 = T2 ). This posterior belief is given by:

(6)

Choice of Transition Distribution
What might be a reasonable form of P(R1 = t)? If we consider world changes to be the result of saccades, P(R1 = t)
would be a distribution of inter-saccadic intervals, which is
well-approximated by a log-normal distribution (Wang, Freeman, Merriam, Hasson, & Heeger, 2012). Alternatively, assuming transitions in the world follow a Poisson process will
yield an exponential distribution of transition times. Another
approach is to consider transition times to be normally distributed around the rate of the RSVP task itself. This would
be the case if subjects were noisily calibrated to the RSVP
stream used, which has a regular structure. The insets of Figure 3 illustrate these three possibilities. The larger graphs

P(T1 = T2 |S, Ω) ∝
(
R∞
P(old|t)
ϒ(T1 ) = ϒ(T2 ) t=0
C(t) P(old|t)+P(new|t)
ϒ(T1 ) 6= ϒ(T2 ) 0.

(7)

In words: if the types of T1 and T2 are different, then they
must be different tokens; if their types are the same, then the
4 To the best of our knowledge, any transition distribution defined

on the support of (0, ∞) will produce qualitative results similar to RB
and AB. This is because P(new|t) is defined as the cumulative distribution of a series of convolutions of P(R1 = t), making the prior
robust to the specific choice. The time-course of the RB/AB effects
will be determined by the median of the transition distribution. In
our case, anything with a median of about 100 seems to yield a qualitatively appropriate time course.

3 In practice, we evaluate this infinite sum numerically by truncating higher order elements of the series (dropping ns for which
the probability of having not yet transitioned to a task-relevant state
((1 − θ)n−1 ) is less than .001).

931

probability of them being the same token is given by the probability that the participant perceived the cue before a transition from T1 was expected.
We assume that participants adopt a soft-max response
strategy (effectively sampling from this distribution); thus
the expected frequency of correct detections of a repetition
is P(T1 6= T2 |S, Ω) = 1 − P(T1 = T2 |S, Ω). The left graph
of Figure 4 shows simulation results for a generic RB task
with 40 ms targets and 40 ms gaps between items. Overall
the qualitative pattern of data is correct. There is no “lag-one
sparing”, and the probability of a correct response increases
with greater delays.
Proporiton Correct

Repetition Blindness

Both

annulus around the stream (as illustrated in Fig 1). Participants were asked to report the identities of the letters that
appeared simultaneously with the cues, in order. Since each
english letter appeared only once in the RSVP stream, the
authors could identify the exact serial position where the reported letter occurred on each trial; thus they could determine
exactly which items, relative to T2 , tended to be reported in
its place (Figure 5). The attentional blink can be decomposed
into three changes in error distributions that follow different
time-courses (Figure 6): (1) At T1 − T2 lags of 100 to 500
ms, participants tend to make more random guesses: their responses are less likely to come from a window around T2 ; (2)
At lags between 50 and 400 ms, responses tend to be more
highly dispersed around T2 : participants are more likely to
report letters several items away from T2 ; (3) At lags shorter
than 300 ms, items preceding T2 tend to be misreported in its
place, but after 400 ms (and lasting to lags as long as several
seconds) errors instead come from items following T2 . We
now test whether these three effects and their unique timecourses can also be accounted for by our model based on expectations about temporal structure of the environment.

Attentional Blink

1
0.8
0.6

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.4
0.2
0
0

200

400

600

800

0
0

200

400

600

800

0
0

200

400

600

800

Target 2 −Target 1 SOA

Figure 4: Model results for the RB, AB, and combination tasks.
RB accuracy corresponds to the probability that the target item is a
new token. AB accuracy is the probability that the cue is inferred
to coincide with the second target item. The middle plot shows the
combination of both effects, as in Chun, (1997).

Distribution of Reported Letters
0.5

Model

0.4

Proportion Reported

Modeling the Attentional Blink
In the attentional blink task, the participant needs to determine the identity of the stimulus co-occurring with the cue.
Therefore the posterior distribution that the correct L was
P(ϒ(T2 )) is given directly by Equation 1. Responses from the
posterior are again considered to follow a soft-max rule. That
is, the relative frequency of reporting the item L as the second target is P(ϒ(T2 ) = L |S, Ω). The right panel in Figure 4
shows that the time-course of T2 accuracy matches the typical AB effect: Accuracy for target detection just after T1 is
high (lag-one sparing), and then drops off, recovering after a
few hundred milliseconds. The center panel illustrates simultaneous AB and RB effects using the same task and model
structure, as has been observed behaviorally (Chun, 1997).
Here we can account for both effects as a natural consequence
of temporal uncertainty and expectations. While capturing of
the qualitative patterns of the AB and RB results is interesting, there are many models that can fit this data (Bowman
& Wyble, 2007; Olivers & Meeter, 2008). We now turn to
the specific error distributions in the attentional blink to test
finer-grained predictions of our model.

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−4
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

−2

0

2

T2 - T1
Delay
1
2
3
4
5

4

6

8

10

12

14

8

10

12

14

Data

6
7
8
9
10

0.1
0
−4

−2

0

2

4

6

Item Position
Normalized to T1 Onset (0 = T1)

Figure 5: Response distributions for cues appearing at various positions. Behavioral data are replotted from (Vul et al., 2008). Each
curve is the distribution of responses from a second cue appearing
at a particular SOA relative to the first target. The dark curves show
the correct responses that make up the basic AB effect.

Error Distributions in the Model

Error Distributions in the Attentional Blink

To model error responses, we calculate the model’s prediction about the probability of each possible letter identity L
being reported (following Equation 1). These error distributions are presented in Figure 5. Each colored curve plots the
distribution of responses for a particular delay between T1
and T2 as a function of the reported item position relative to
T1 . During the attentional blink, the distribution of responses
is distorted by the prior about when task-relevant items occur.

Our model has the fidelity required to make not only predictions of changes in accuracy as a function of inter-stimulus
interval in the attentional blink, but also the error distributions
– when T2 is misreported, which items are reported instead?
Vul, Nieuwenstein, and Kanwisher (2008) presented subjects
with an RSVP stream containing all 26 English letters at 12
items/sec. Two letters were cued as targets by flashes of an

932

Mean Probability
of Reporting

The most notable effect is the reduction in accuracy itself: the
items corresponding to T2 itself are less likely to be reported
at T1 − T2 lags between 150 to 500 ms. Critically, not only
does the model match the accuracy time-course of human
data, but it also captures the changes in error distributions.
At short delays between T1 and T2 , T2 errors tend to come
from items preceding T2 , and this pattern reverses at longer
delays such that items following the second target are more
common intrusions instead. Finally, our model also demonstrates increased variability in which items are reported during the attentional blink. These changes in error distributions
are quantified identically to the behavioral data (Vul et al.,
2008), and presented in Figure 6.

0.14

0.12

0.12

0.1

0.1

0.08

0.08

200

400

600

0

0

−1
0
4

−1
0

200

400

600

400

600

800

Report
Center

1

Variance of
Item Position

Suppression

0

200

Our account captures a number of other RSVP phenomena.
First, because the prior is defined with respect to time, not
serial position, the dynamics of lag-one sparing and the detriment to T2 reports should be constant in time, as has been
experimentally shown (Wyble & Bowman, 2005; Vul et al.,
2008). Second, because the relative delay of T2 reports modulates T2 accuracy, pre-cueing should improve T2 accuracy,
as is the case (Nieuwenstein, Chun, van der Lubbe, Hooge,
2005; Vul et al, 2008). Third, because we assume that perception of particular targets are driven by a sampling process
(Vul, Hanus, & Kanwisher, 2009), perception of T2 accuracy
will be all-or-none, which appears to be the case (Sergent
& Dehaene, 2004). Finally, since we explicitly consider the
transition probability from one event to another, our account
is consistent with results that the attentional blink facilitates
item individuation (Wyble, Bowman, & Nieuwenstein, 2009).

Model

Data
0.14

0

poral properties of the environment (Rieth, 2012).

800

A number of other findings that are not adequately captured by our account provide future challenges. Because we
only consider perception of T2 contingent on T1 identification, we cannot account for “spreading the sparing” – the finding that multiple cues presented during the “lag-one sparing”
interval extend the sparing window to later items (Olivers,
van der Stigchel, & Hulleman, 2007) – or whole report errors and order confusion more generally (Wyble, et al., 2009;
Nieuwenstein & Potter, 2006). Another challenge is the independence of the types of items and the assumed dynamics of
the world; because of this independence, our account cannot
capture the fact that sometimes words, and sometimes letters,
may be treated as the relevant items of interest (Kanwisher
& Potter, 1990). Furthermore, additional assumptions would
be needed for our account to be consistent with findings that
missed second targets in the attentional blink produce semantic priming (Shapiro, Driver, Ward, & Sorensen, 1997). Additionally, there are some aspects of human performance for
which the model is quantitatively off. Overall, suppression is
smaller in the model (compare the graphs in the top row of
Figure 6). For longer SOAs there is less delay in the model,
slightly more dispersion, and a less extreme peak in dispersion. Furthermore, in the data – but not the model – the modal
response for T2 at SOAs of four to six items is actually an incorrect answer. Finally, in the AB effect, accuracy for the
item just after the first cue is too high relative to other positions.

1

200

400

600

800

Delay
800

4

Dispersion
2
0
0

2

200

400

600

800

0
0

T2-T1 SOA (msec)

200

400

600

800

T2-T1 SOA (msec)

Figure 6: Summary statistics of T2 response distributions during the
attentional blink, as a function of T1 -T2 delay (stimulus onset asynchrony; SOA). Each statistic is computed within a seven item window centered on the position of the second target. Top row: “Suppression” refers to a decrease in the average probability of reports
(y-axis) of items within the seven item window around T2 . Middle
row: “Delay” refers to the tendency to report items preceding T2 at
short SOAs, and items following T2 at long SOAs; the y-axis is the
mean position (relative to T2 ) of reported items within the window.
Bottom row: “Dispersion” refers to the increased variance of reported positions within the window around T2 at SOAs around 150
to 300 msec.

Discussion
We proposed an account of perception in RSVP paradigms
based on probabilistic inference about the co-occurrence of
cues and items under expectations about the transitions of interesting items in the world. Our model captures patterns of
accuracy in RB and AB, as well as the specific error distributions in AB. The core of this account is the premise that
not every world transition brings an important item into view,
and a prior constructed based on this premise produces qualitatively similar results regardless of the specific choice of
transition distribution.
Why would participants use this prior, since it seems to result in performance deficits? We can only speculate that performance deficits in laboratory RSVP paradigms do not reflect the benefits that such a prior could confer to people in a
more natural environment. Recent work has suggested a similar account of inhibition of return (Posner & Cohen, 1984)
and immediate priming (Huber, 2008), by demonstrating that
the time-courses of these effects are sensitive to learned tem-

Despite these challenges, we are encouraged that our rational inference account is consistent with classic type-token
theories (Kanwisher, 1987; Chun, 1997): the discrepancy
between identifying, and individuating, items in an RSVP
stream seems to be of central importance to combining and
distinguishing between repetition blindness and the attentional blink, and our account formalizes this intuition in probabilistic inference. Furthermore, the mechanistic dynamics
of attention postulated in process models of these phenomena
match our prior about task transitions (Bowman & Wyble,
2007; Olivers & Meeter, 2008). We hope that future work

933

might provide a synthesis of these accounts.
One promising direction for future work is to extend our
model to include the perception of T1 . Because our objective
was to demonstrate that RB and AB effects can result from rational use of expectations about world transitions, our current
account is conditioned on the identification of the first target;
however, a complete model of RSVP perception must include
T1 . This extension might be achieved via an online inference process to account for changing beliefs over the time
course of a trial, capitalizing on particle filter approximate
inference algorithms (Doucet, Freitas, & Murphy, 2000) and
expected duration hidden Markov models (Rabiner, 1989).
With an online inference process the model could capture
whole report paradigms (Nieuwenstein & Potter, 2006) and
might explain the effect of “spreading the sparing” (Olivers,
et al., 2007). Moreover, such an extension might help connect
our computational level (Marr, 1982) account to to previous
models of the attentional blink (Bowman & Wyble, 2007;
Olivers & Meeter, 2008) by postulating approximate inference algorithms, and their possible neural implementations
(Fiser, Berkes, Orbn, & Lengyel, 2010; Vul & Pashler, 2008;
Moreno-Bote, Knill, & Pouget, 2011).

Huber, D. E. (2008). Immediate priming and cognitive aftereffects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137(2), 324-347.
Kanwisher, N. (1987). Repetition Blindness: Type recognition without token individuation. Cognition, 27(2), 117-143.
Kanwisher, N. G., & Potter, M. C. (1990). Repetition blindness:
levels of processing. Journal of experimental psychology. Human
Perception and Performance, 16(1), 30-47.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information. New
York: Freeman.
Moreno-Bote, R., Knill, D. C., & Pouget, A. (2011). Bayesian sampling in visual perception. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 108(30), 12491-12496.
Nieuwenstein, M. R., Chun, M. M., van der Lubbe, R. H. J., &
Hooge, I. T. C. (2005). Delayed Attentional Engagement in the
Attentional Blink. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 31(6), 1463-1475.
Nieuwenstein, M. R., & Potter, M. C. (2006). Temporal Limits of
Selection and Memory Encoding A Comparison of Whole Versus
Partial Report in Rapid Serial Visual Presentation. Psychological
Science, 17(6), 471-475.
Olivers, C. N. L., & Meeter, M. (2008). A boost and bounce theory
of temporal attention. Psychological Review, 115(4), 836-863.
Olivers, C. N. L., van der Stigchel, S., & Hulleman, J. (2007).
Spreading the sparing: Against a limited-capacity account of the
attentional blink. Psychological Research, 71(2), 126-139.
Posner, M. I., & Cohen, Y. (1984). Components of visual orienting.
Attention and performance X: Control of language processes, 32,
531-556.
Rabiner, L. R. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov models and
selected applications in speech recognition. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 77(2), 257-286.
Raymond, J., Shapiro, K. L., & Arnell, K. (1992). Temporary suppression of visual processing in an RSVP task: an attentional
blink?. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception
and Performance, 18(3), 849-860.
Rieth, C. A. (2012). Adaptations of temporal dynamics: Faces,
places, and words. Doctoral dissertation, UCSD
Shapiro, K. L., Raymond, J., & Arnell, K. (1997). The attentional
blink. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1(8), 291-296.
Sergent, C., & Dehaene, S. (2004). Is Consciousness a Gradual Phenomenon? Evidence for an All-or-None Bifurcation During the
Attentional Blink. Psychological Science, 15(11), 720-728.
Shapiro, K., Driver, J., Ward, R., & Sorensen, R. E. (1997). Priming
from the Attentional Blink: A Failure to Extract Visual Tokens
but Not Visual Types. Psychological Science, 8(2), 95-100.
Vul, E., & Pashler, H. (2008). Measuring the Crowd Within. Psychological Science, 19(7), 645-647.
Vul, E., & Rich, A. N. (2010). Independent sampling of features enables conscious perception of bound objects. Psychological Science, 21(8), 1168-1175.
Vul, E., Hanus, D., & Kanwisher, N. (2009). Attention as inference: Selection is probabilistic; responses are all-or-none samples. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 138(4), 546560.
Vul, E., Nieuwenstein, M., & Kanwisher, N. (2008). Temporal selection is suppressed, delayed, and diffused during the attentional
blink. Psychological Science, 19(1), 55-61.
Wang, H., Freeman, J., Merriam, E., Hasson, U., & Heeger, D. J.
(2012). Temporal eye movement strategies during naturalistic
viewing. Journal of Vision, 12, 1-27.
Weichselgartner, E. (1987). Dynamics of automatic and controlled
visual attention. Science, 238(4828), 778-780.
Wyble, B., & Bowman, H. (2005). Computational and experimental
evaluation of the attentional blink: Testing the simultaneous type
serial token model. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, 2371-2376.
Wyble, B., Bowman, H., & Nieuwenstein, M. R. (2009). The attentional blink provides episodic distinctiveness: Sparing at a cost.
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and Performance, 35(3), 787-807.
Wyble, B., Potter, M. C., Bowman, H., & Nieuwenstein, M. (2011).
Attentional episodes in visual perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General, 140(3), 488-505.

Conclusions
Our results suggest that the attentional blink and repetition
blindness are both consequences of rational inference about
cue-item co-occurrence given a prior about the rate of transitions to task-relevant items. This framework accounts for
the attentional blink and repetition blindness effects as well
as the error distributions of in the attentional blink paradigm.
The difference between these tasks under our framework supports the intuition that repetition blindness and the attentional
blink are two sides of the same coin: both are consequence of
rational inference under identical assumptions, but with the
observer asked to identify types, or distinguish tokens.
Acknowledgments: EV and CR were supported by the Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of
the Interior (DOI) contract D10PC20023. The U.S. Government
is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA, DOI,
or the U.S. Government.

References
Bowman, H., & Wyble, B. (2007). The simultaneous type, serial
token model of temporal attention and working memory. Psychological Review, 114(1), 38-70.
Chun, M. M. (1997). Types and tokens in visual processing: A
double dissociation between the attentional blink and repetition
blindness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23(3), 738-755.
Doucet, A., Freitas, N. D., & Murphy, K. (2000). Rao-Blackwellised
particle filtering for dynamic Bayesian networks. Proceedings of
the 16th Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 176-183.
Fiser, J., Berkes, P., Orbn, G., & Lengyel, M. (2010). Statistically
optimal perception and learning: from behavior to neural representations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(3), 119-130.

934

