UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explaining children’s failure in analogy making tasks: A problem of focus of attention?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9c20z8cr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Glady, Yannick
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre
French, Bob
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explaining children’s failure in analogy making tasks: A problem of focus of
attention?
Yannick Glady, Jean-Pierre Thibaut, Robert French
{yannick.glady, jean-pierre.thibaut, robert.french}@u-bourgogne.fr
LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, University of Burgundy, Pôle AAFE – Esplanade Erasme
21065 DIJON. FRANCE

Agnès Blaye
agnes.blaye@univ-amu.fr
Aix-Marseille Université, LPC, 13621 Aix en Provence cedex1
Richland et al. (2006) and Thibaut and colleagues
(Thibaut, French, & Vezneva, 2009, 2010a, 2010b; Thibaut,
French, Vezneva, Gérard, & Glady, 2011) posited that while
knowledge of relations is necessary to do analogy making,
executive functions are also involved in solving analogical
problems. Thibaut et al. interpreted their results as showing
that younger children’s difficulties with analogy making
arose because of insufficiently developed executive
functions, specifically inhibition. In one experiment
involving semantic A:B::C: ? analogies with four possible
responses Thibaut, French, and Vezneva, (2010b) compared
weak and strong analogies (i.e., analogies in which the items
of the A:B and C:D pairs were weakly, or strongly,
associated). Results revealed poorer results in weak (e.g.,
shirt:suitcase::toy:box) analogies than in strong ones,
especially when the number of distractor items was high
(i.e., three vs. one). Importantly, the authors controlled to
ensure that the children knew the semantic relations within
the pair (i.e., the semantic relations between A and B, and
between C and D). Thus, children’s failure to map the A:B
pair on the potential C:D target pair could not be explained
by a lack of knowledge. They showed that a greater number
of distractors led to poorer performance in the case of weak
analogies. They suggested that for strongly associated A:B
and C:D item pairs, children were not interfered with by the
semantic distractors. In contrast, when the problem involved
weakly associated items, mapping the A:B pair onto the C:D
pair requires more than simply accessing the obvious
semantic dimensions of the items.
The authors characterized analogy-making as a search
through a space of features and potential relations. The
number of relations holding between any A:B pair is
potentially large because, depending on the context, any
number of different relations might be relevant (Chalmers,
French, & Hofstadter, 1992; French, 1995; Hofstadter,
1995; Mitchell, 1993; Murphy & Medin, 1985; Thibaut,
1997). As mentioned above, the structure of the search
space and the presence or absence of competing nonanalogical solutions have an effect on the search, especially
for young children, who have greater difficulty handling the
cognitive load associated with a more elaborate search of
the space of possible solutions.
The notion of “searching in a semantic space” was
directly investigated in an eye-tracking study by Thibaut,

Abstract
Analogical reasoning is commonly recognized as essential to
human cognition, but young children often perform poorly in the
classical A:B::C:? analogical reasoning task. Previous eyetracking results have shown that children did not visually
explore the A:B pair as much as adults in this task. We
hypothesized that this lack of exploration could help account for
the low scores of children in comparison to adults. The present
study shows that children’ performance improves significantly if
they are required to look at and process the A:B pair before they
are shown the full A:B::C:? problem. This confirms our
hypothesis that the A:B pair is insufficiently processed by
children during the resolution of such problems.
Keywords: Analogical reasoning; development; executive
functions; cognition.

Introduction
Analogical reasoning is a central feature of human
cognition (Gentner & Holyoak, 1997; Hofstadter, 2001). It
is defined as the transfer of a structured set of relations from
a source domain to a target domain from which it is more or
less distant. A most classical example is the A:B::C:D
analogy (e.g., dog:doghouse::bird: ? solution “Nest”, in
which the “lives in” relation must be abstracted). In other
analogy problems, a solution to a source problem can be
used to solve a target problem (e.g. Holyoak et al. 1984).
Many experiments have been devoted to the study of
ontogenetic changes in the ability of analogical reasoning
(Chen, Sanchez, & Campbell, 1997; Gentner, 1988;
Goswami & Brown, 1990; Holyoak, Junn, & Billman, 1984;
Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006; Thibaut, French, &
Vezneva, 2010a). Data suggest that analogical reasoning can
be found present as early as 10 months in very simple
experimental settings (e.g., Chen et al, 1997). Children’s
analogical reasoning capacities improve as their knowledge
of the involved relations, or their abilities to resist irrelevant
information increase. Several models have been proposed in
order to explain these changes. They fall roughly into two
subclasses: models that try to explain development of
analogical reasoning by the increase of structured
knowledge about the world (Goswami, 1992) and models
that suggest that the key lies with the maturation of control
processes, such as working memory or executive functions
(Halford, Wilson, & Phillips, 1998; Richland et al., 2006).

384

French, Missault, Gérard, and Glady (2011; Thibaut &
French, submitted). The authors started with the idea that
the search space in an analogy task is dynamically created
as the result of comparisons between the items that compose
the analogy problem and this requires the integration of the
various sources of information that are available during the
task. They used an eye-tracker because cognitive monitoring
is difficult to assess with the sole performance measures
(i.e., error measures and reaction times) that are usually
used in the literature (e.g., Rattermann & Gentner, 1998;
Richland et al., 2006; Thibaut et al., 2010b). Eye-tracking
allowed them to study precisely how the space of potential
solutions was explored by both children and adults. The idea
was to study what parts of the space were explored and
exactly when that exploration took place. By manipulating
various aspects of analogical problems of the A:B::C:D
type, eye-tracking allowed them to probe the factors
affecting the search of solution space.
Compared with adults, children obtained poorer results.
There were also key differences between adults and children
in the temporal organization of their respective search
profiles. First, adults focused on the A and B pair at the
beginning of the trial, paying less or no attention to C and to
stimuli in the solution set. Later they focused on C and the
Target, which they compared with the semantically related
distractor. At the end of the trial, the Target was their sole
focus of attention. By contrast, children organized their
search around C on which they actively focused during the
entire trial. At the very beginning of the trial they paid more
attention to C and B. They began looking at the Target and
the semantic distractor earlier than in the adults’ case. Thus
the main differences between children and adults were that
children focused on B and C at the beginning of a trial,
compared to A and B for adults, and that the Target and the
semantic distractor were focused on earlier by children than
by adults. The comparison between error trials and correct
trials in the case of children revealed that errors were
characterized by longer looking times on C and shorter
looking times on A. Overall, the results showed that
children organized their search around C and paid less
attention to A and B when necessary.
This pattern of results suggests that one reason children
might fail in analogy-making tasks is that they do not pay
sufficient attention to A and B or do not include them in
their search. Recall that the task explicitly requires “finding
the item that goes with C”. Thus, in order to successfully
comply with the task, children have to focus on stimuli
other than the ones which are highlighted by the
instructions, i.e. the C item and the set of distractors.
Specifically, they have to study A and B and integrate
information from these items in their search for the “one
that goes with C”. The executive function framework
predicts that children might find it hard to inhibit the searchfor-the-one-that-goes-with-C goal in order, first, to study A
and B, and, second to compare what they have discovered
for this pair and to integrate it in their search for the Target
item that goes with C.

This analysis led us to the central prediction of the present
paper. We started with the general hypothesis that young
children find it hard to follow the instructions, that is, to
integrate A and B in their exploration of C and the solution
set. In this context, if the way the analogy task is
implemented forces them to study and interpret the A:B
pair, then they should obtain better results than in the
classical situation in which all the stimuli are introduced
simultaneously.
Thus, in the present experiment, we compared two
conditions, i.e., the Standard condition and an A:B-first
condition. In the latter condition, children first saw the A:B
pair alone and were asked to describe the relation holding
between A and B before they were shown C and the solution
set. We hypothesized that the A:B-first condition would
force children to focus on this pair which would help them
to integrate it in their search for the correct C:Target pair.

Experiment
The present study more directly tested the influence of A:B
in children’s analogy making. The reasoning was as follows.
If children do not pay enough attention to A:B while making
analogies, they should obtain better results with procedures
requiring a preliminary treatment and interpretation of the
A:B pair. Children were, first, presented the A:B pair alone.
Then, they had to study it and explain the semantic relation
holding between A and B, before they were presented with
the other pictures. We predicted that, in this condition,
children would have higher scores than children that would
see all the stimuli composing a problem simultaneously.
Indeed, as suggested by Thibaut, et al., (2011), young
children have difficulties not looking at C and the solution
set rather than at A and B. In a similar vein, Thibaut and
French (submitted) showed that a distinctive feature of
errors, compared to correct trials, is an imbalance between
A and C in favor of C.

Methods
Participants
Subjects were 42 5-year-old preschool children (M = 67.1
months; range, 57 to 77 months). Their participation to the
experiment was submitted to informed consent of their
parents.
The subjects were equally divided into two groups:
Standard Analogies group (N = 21; M = 67.4 months; range,
56-75 months) and A:B-first group (N = 21; M = 66.8
months; range, 59-77 months).
Materials
The experiment consisted of 14 trials, with 2 training
trials and 12 experimental trials (See Table 1 for the list of
trials). Analogies were of the A:B::C:? format composed of
7 items (black and white drawings; see Figure 1). The
problem consisted of the A:B pair (the source), the C item
(the target), and an empty square. The solution set was

385

composed of four stimuli: the analogical answer, a distractor
that was semantically related to the C item, and 2 items that
were not semantically related to C. Positions of the different
alternatives were counterbalanced.
The trials were presented to the children on a touch screen
controlled by an E-Prime® program used to run the
experiment.

[B]? OK! You see this one [showing C]? It is alone. What
you have to do is to find one picture in these four images
[showing the four answer options] that goes well with this
one [C] in the same way as this one [B] goes with [A] so the
two pairs of pictures go together for the same reason. Which
picture goes up there [showing the empty slot] with [C] like
[B] with [A]? The child gave an answer and justified her
choice. Then, the experimenter rephrased the entire trial,
explaining and emphasizing why “A and B” and “C and D”
go together for the same reason. During the second practice
trial, they were asked to do the same. When children did not
attend to the A:B pair while explaining their choice, they
were asked to do so, and care was taken to ensure that they
understood the instructions during the training trials. In the
experimental phase, they were asked to do the same thing
that was explained to them during the experiment trials and
to justify their answer afterward. No feedback was given for
the experimental trials.
The A:B-first group was first shown the A:B pair alone
and was asked to describe the semantic relation holding
between the two drawings: “Why do these two things go
together”. Once they had given the relation, the

Procedure
Children were individually tested in their school, in a
quiet room.
First, participants’ knowledge of the stimuli used in the
experiment was assessed. Each stimulus was introduced
alone and participants were asked to name it or, when they
did not know its name, to describe its function or a context
in which it could be found. Children recognized 98% of the
items correctly. The analogy task followed.
The Standard Analogies group was shown all 7 items
defining a problem simultaneously. In the first practice trial,
the task was explained to children belonging to the Standard
Analogies group as follows: “Let me explain how it works.
At first, you have to find why these two pictures [showing A
and B] go well together. So, why do you think [A] goes with

A

B

C

D (Target)

Semantic
Distractor

Relation

Practice trials
Wolf

Meat

Goat

Grass

Horns

Eat

Child

Foot

Elephant

Paw

Giraffe

Part of

Experiment trials
Shirt

Suitcase

Toy car

Box

Gas pump

Put in

Child

Bed

Cat

Pillow

Whiskers

Sleep on

Pig

Dish

Man

Plate

Watch

Eat in

Man

Nose

Stag

Muzzle

Owl

Breathe with

Glass

Sideboard

Ring

Case

Watch

Put in

Pineapple

Bottle

Orange

Carafe

Strawberry

Put juice in

Train

Rails

Boat

Sea

Crab

Move on

Glove

Hand

Shoe

Foot

Footprints

Put on

Lamp

Socket

Remote control

Battery

Radio

Work with

Bird

Nest

Dog

Doghouse

Bone

Live in

Spider

Cobweb

Bee

Beehive

Flower

Live in

Lock

Key

Bottle

Corkscrew

Glass

Open

Table 1: List of stimuli and relations used to build the analogies of the experiment

386

experimenter displayed the full set of 7 stimuli defining the
problem and asked them to complete the second pair as for
the other group. Apart from this preliminary question for the
A:B pair, the two practice trials were framed in the same
way as in the Standard Analogies group. In other words,
after they had mentioned the relationship holding between A
and B they were shown the set of stimuli defining a trial and
the same instructions as in the Standard Analogies group
were given.

Results
We first removed all the trials in which children could not
identify one of the semantic relations, either A:B or C:D. As
a result, 3% of the trials were removed from subsequent
analysis. Note also that in most trials (90% of the cases),
children found the target relation that was intended by the
experimenter.
We ran a one-way ANOVA on the scores defined as the
proportion of correct answers with Condition (Standard
Analogies vs. A:B-first) as a between-subject factor.
There was a main effect of condition, F (1, 40) = 6.02, p <
.05, η² = .13, with better scores in the A:B-first condition
(mean score = .68; see Figure 2) than in the Standard
Analogies condition (mean score = .58). These results
confirmed our hypothesis that processing the A:B pair first
could help children in their search for the analogical answer.

0,8
0,7
0,6
Score

0,5
0,4
0,3
0,2
0,1
0
A:B-first

Standard Analogies

Figure 2: Scores of the 5-year-olds in the analogical
reasoning test in the two conditions; p < .05.

When children did not select the analogical match, in
84.5% of the cases, they selected the distractor that was
semantically related to C. This result differs significantly
from chance (25% of selection, one-sample t test; t (41) =
21.31, p < .001).

Figure 1: Two examples of analogies used in the
experiment. Analogical: Analogical answer; Semantic:
Distractor related to the C item; Neutral: unrelated picture

General discussion

Afterwards, children’s understanding of the semantic
relation between A and B and between C and D was
assessed. They were shown the A:B pairs and were asked
why the two items of each pair went together. The same was
true for the C:D pairs (see Thibaut et al., 2011, for more
details).

The main purpose of the experiment presented in this paper
was to test whether young children’s difficulties in analogymaking might result from their difficulties to integrate the
A:B pair in the analogy problem. In this study, we
conjectured that one source of children’s difficulty lies in
their search strategy for the task. We suggest that this
strategy is, at least in part, induced by the instructions which

387

require them to find “the item that goes with C.” In the
experiment, we directly tested our hypothesis in a condition
that required children to first interpret the A:B pair. It was
compared with the classical analogy problems. The results
confirmed our hypothesis, since children were better in the
A:B-first condition.
The experiment is consistent with the idea that children
spend less time than adults studying the A:B pair. These
data are consistent with Thibaut et al. (2011) eye-tracking
data (see also Thibaut & French, submitted) showing that
children spend less time on A and B, compared to C, had
fewer A:B transitions than adults. The experiment forced
them to do what adults do spontaneously and, i.e., inducing
the sequential A:B then C:D strategy, which gave rise to
higher scores than in the “classical” simultaneous
presentation.
Lovett et al. (2009) proposed a two-stage computational
model of geometrical A:B::C:? task solving. The program’s
performances fitted well with adults performances on
Evans’ geometrical problems (Evans, 1968), predicting the
different patterns of human answers on each item of the
task. This program may also well model children’s pattern
of answer observed in this study by modifying some of its
processes, like allowing only a shallow first-stage A:B
relational description that may result from the lack of
treatment of this pair observed in children and/or not
allowing the executive to induce another description of the
A:B pair.
The increased performance in the A:B-first condition
(Thibaut, French, Missault, et al., 2011) are entirely
compatible with the executive function view. Given that the
instructions prompt them to find a partner for C in the set of
solutions, they might find it hard to inhibit the set of stimuli
which were explicitly mentioned in the instructions.
Another, related interpretation, could involve the
representation and maintenance of the sub-goals of the task.
This has been suggested for other tasks assessing executive
functions (Blaye & Chevalier, 2011; Gruber & Goschke,
2004). Children may represent the main goal of the task,
which is to find a picture that is related to the C item, but
may have difficulty departing from this goal to achieve a
crucial sub-goal – namely, finding which relation has to be
used to find the correct answer between the different options
related to the C item (analogical answer and distractor).
Studying and verbalizing the relation linking the A:B pair
may contribute to enhance this sub-goal. In this format, they
should not have to generate this sub-goal by themselves.
Another interpretation would be that children lack the
correct strategy which is to look at the A-B pair first. In this
context, our “A:B first” condition provided them with the
correct strategy for performing the task. In other words,
children would not know how to perform the task or to
organize it in order to perform it correctly. This is a
plausible hypothesis. However, it is difficult to disentangle
what is due to inhibition and/or flexibility mechanisms from
what results from an explicit strategy.

The studies in the literature have pointed out two main
explanations of children’s failures to do analogies correctly.
The first is the role of knowledge (e.g., Gentner, 1988;
Goswami & Brown, 1990). The second is related to
executive functions. It has been shown that children might
have difficulties handling all the information available in the
task, such as distractors related to C (see Richland et al.,
2006; Thibaut et al., 2010a, b for discussions). The present
research demonstrates that the task itself has cognitive
constraints which generate a cognitive load that must be
coped with by young children. In other words, for adults and
most likely children older than 9, the comparison between
A:B and C and the potential candidates for a solution is
automatically driven by the task instructions (the so-called
mapping process). By contrast, for children, temporally
leaving aside the instructions “looking for the one that goes
with C” in order to compare A with B, generates cognitive
load. One might conceive of this as a necessity to
temporarily inhibit C and the solution set, or as a necessity
to be cognitively flexible, that is to be able to conceive the
task under different perspectives (i.e., from an A-B
perspective or from a C-solution set perspective and
integrate these two perspectives). In sum, the present
research has made it clear that the analogy task generates its
own demands that cannot be taken for granted, in the case of
children.

Acknowledgement
This research has been supported by a French ANR Grant
for the “ANAFONEX” project ANR-10-BLAN-1908-01.

References
Blaye, A., & Chevalier, N. (2011). The role of goal
representation in preschoolers’ flexibility and inhibition.
Journal of experimental child psychology, 108(3), 469-83.
Chalmers, D. J., French, R. M., & Hofstadter, D. R. (1992).
High-level perception, representation, and analogy: A
critique of artificial intelligence methodology. Journal of
Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 4(3),
185-211.
Chen, Z., Sanchez, R. P., & Campbell, T. (1997). From
beyond to within their grasp: The rudiments of analogical
problem solving in 10- and 13-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 33(5), 790-801.
Evans, T. (1968). A program for the solution of geometricanalogy intelligence test questions. In M. Minsky (Ed.),
Semantic information processing (pp. 271-353).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Forbus, K. D., Usher, J., & Lovett, A. (2008). CogSketch:
Open-domain sketch understanding for cognitive science
research and for education. Proceedings of the fifth
eurographics workshop on sketch-based interfaces and
modeling.
French, R. M. (1995). The Subtlety of Sameness: A Theory
and Computer Model of Analogy-Making. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.

388

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155–170.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59(1), 47-59.
Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and
learning by analogy. American Psychologist, 52(1), 32-4.
Goswami, U. (1992). Analogical Reasoning in Children.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A. L. (1990). Melting chocolate
and melting snowmen: Analogical reasoning and causal
relations. Cognition, 35(1), 69–95.
Gruber, O., & Goschke, T. (2004). Executive control
emerging from dynamic interactions between brain
systems mediating language, working memory and
attentional processes. Acta Psychologica, 115(2-3), 10521.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. The Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 21(6), 803-64.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1995). Fluid Concepts & Creative
Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamental
Mechanisms of Thought. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Hofstadter, D. R. (2001). Epilogue: Analogy as the core of
cognition. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. Kokinov
(Eds.), The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive
Science. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Holyoak, K. J., Junn, E. N., & Billman, D. O. (1984).
Development of analogical problem-solving skill. Child
Development, 55(6), 2042–2055.
Lovett, A., Tomai, E., Forbus, K. D., & Usher, J. (2009).
Solving geometric analogy problems through two-stage
analogical mapping. Cognitive science, 33(7), 1192-231.
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-Making as Perception.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92(3),
289-316.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s Development of Analogical Reasoning:
Insights from Scene Analogy Problems. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 94(3), 249-273.
Thibaut, J.-P. (1997). Similarité et catégorisation. L’Année
Psychologique, 97, 701-736.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., Missault, A., Gérard, Y., &
Glady, Y. (2011). In the Eyes of the Beholder: What EyeTracking Reveals About Analogy-Making Strategies in
Children and Adults. Proceedings of the Thirty-third
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
453–458).
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2009).
Cognitive Load and Analogy-making in Children :
Explaining an Unexpected Interaction. In N. Taatgen &
H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-first Annual
Cognitive Science Society Conference (pp. 1048-1053).
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2010a). The
development of analogy making in children: cognitive
load and executive functions. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 106(1), 1-19.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2010b).
Cognitive load and semantic analogies: Searching
semantic space. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(4),
569-74.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., Vezneva, M., Gérard, Y., &
Glady, Y. (2011). Semantic analogies by young children:
testing the role of inhibition. In B. Kokinov, A.
Karmiloff-Smith, & N. J. Nersessian (Eds.), European
Perspectives on Cognitive Science. New Bulgarian
University Press.

389

