UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
External Working Memory and the Amount of Distributed Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19b2655r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Maeda, Naoki

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

External Working Memory and the Amount of Distributed Cognition
Naoki Maeda

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Abstract
While processing of a large number of (visuo-spatial) items are
oftentimes necessary for ongoing cognitive activities, the
biological working memory can process only about four items of
information. Then it is a mystery how we cope with complex world
situations. This is the paradox of working memory. This paradox is
solved once we view the external features of the world as
constituting part of working memory. Part of working memory is
externally distributed if the external features of the world
constitute part of material supervenience base of working memory.
Tversky’s Spractions (2010), or actions onto the world, are the key
to offload of cognition, because they redirect the attention at the
working memory level only to relevant aspects of the world. To
see how people use spractions to offload working memory load,
subjects were asked to build a Lego block in front of a camera.
Using cognitive ethnography, it was observed that they all relied
on spractions to cognize. From the fact that the biological working
memory can process only about four items of information, the
amount of working memory based distributed cognition can be
calculated.
Keywords: paradox of working memory; external working
memory; spractions

Introduction
Working memory (hereafter WM) is a limited capacity
system to temporarily maintain, access, and update
information necessary for ongoing cognitive activities
(Baddeley, 2000, 2003; Awh et al., 2006; Jonides et al,
2008). Traditionally it is conceived of as short-term memory
(STM) buffer, characterized by the firing of neurons; it can
hold information for a couple of seconds. Since STM does
not involve structural change of neural networks,
information stored in STM is transient. STM, and hence
WM, is one of the core components of cognition. Hardly
any cognitive task can be completed without the
involvement of STM. For example, when you add some
numbers, you have to create a temporal mental
representation for those numbers. Biological WM is a
limited capacity system; it can maintain, access, and update
only limited amount of information simultaneously. In his
seminal paper “The magical number seven, plus or minus
two,” George Miller (1956) argued that the capacity of WM
is limited to about seven items of information. However, as
later pointed out, Miller’s magical number seven was
inflated due to the confound effect of linguistic chunking, a
strategy to group small items of information into an
integrated representation (discussed more below).
According to a more accurate estimate (Sperling, 1960;
Landman et al., 2003; Cowan, 2001; Jonides et al., 2008;
Hauser et al., 2000; Block, 2007), the capacity of biological

(visuo-spatial) WM of human adults is limited to about four
items of information. That is, WM can selectively attend to
only about four items of information simultaneously.
While the capacity of biological WM is limited to
about four items of information, the world around us is full
of complexity, rich in detail, and oftentimes cluttered (i.e.
there are usually more than four items of information in the
world, and they are oftentimes relevant to ongoing cognitive
activities). Thus, there is an overflow of information at the
WM level (Kessell and Tversky, 2010; c.f. Rowlands, 1999;
Block, 2007, 2011). Although we have to cognize quickly in
response to stimuli in the world to survive (c.f. Cruse, 2003;
Kirsh and Maglio, 1994), given the complexity of the world
and the limited WM capacity, it is not at all clear how we
can do so. Nevertheless, we are almost entirely unaware of
the limitation of biological WM in daily life except for some
minor occasions such as remembering a telephone number
for the first time, and cope with high cognitive tasks day by
day. It is a mystery how a severely constrained WM can
cope with the complexity of the world. I call this the
paradox of working memory.
A traditional strategy to overcome this paradox is
the aforementioned chunking. Chunking is a way to enlarge
a representational unit of attention so that more items of
information can be processed with the same WM capacity.
For example, although a random sequence of alphanumerical letters are difficult to remember and process due
to the limited capacity of biological WM, once they are
chunked into a meaningful sequence, they can be
remembered easily. Thus, a seemingly meaningless
sequence of “CIAUCLAKGB” can be remembered easily
by means of chunking; they are chunked into “CIA,”
“UCLA,” and “KGB”. Chunking thus enlarges the
conceptual unit of attention by means of LTM. Although
linguistic chunking is well known, it is not the only
chunking. Information can be visually chunked if visual
information is stable over time (Magnuson et al., 1998).
Such expanded STM capacity with the assistance of nonSTM, such as LTM, is called compound STM capacity
(Cowan, 2001). Visuo-spatial information can be chunked
both verbally and visually. Chunking itself is a partial
solution to the paradox of working memory.
The question is “is chunking sufficient to overcome
the limitation of WM?” It does not seem so, first because
the world contains a lot of visual complexity that cannot be
verbally chunked and second because the world is not stable
enough to enable visual chunks to be formed. This can be
seen in change blindness (Simons et al., 2005). Change
blindness refers to the surprising difficulty observers have in
detecting a significant change to their visual field. In the

	  
1954

experimental setting, usually two different pictures flicker
quickly. Although there is a significant difference between
them, a large portion of subjects, to their surprise, does not
detect the change. In the change blindness cases, the reason
why participants cannot detect the change is precisely due to
the instability of the scene. And they do not seem to
linguistically chunk the visual stimuli. If they could chunk
visual information perfectly in order to account for every
visual stimulus into four items of information, they would
detect every single change. Although whether this is a case
of “blindness” characterized by lack of experience is a
controversial issue (Block, 2007, 2011), it is relatively clear
that there is no cognitive access to the change (because we
are not “aware” of the change). Thus, it seems that chunking
alone does not solve the paradox of working memory. We
are then brought back to the paradox.

External Working Memory and Spractions
How can we solve the paradox, then? I argue that the
solution to the alleged paradox is to view the external world
– space, gesture, body, action, and so on – as constitutive
part of material supervenience base of WM. Once we view
the human agent and its immediate surrounding
environment as a coupled cognitive system (Clark and
Chalmers, 1998), the external features of the world in the
coupled system can be regarded as constituting part of
material supervenience base of WM (Rowlands, 1999). The
external features of the world can temporarily maintain,
allow for access, and update information necessary for
ongoing cognitive activities. As a consequence, the external
features of the world can functionally augment the limited
capacity of biological WM. Because of the external features
of the world, I argue, we can cope with complex real world
situations, even if our biological WM capacity is severely
limited. To cognize efficiently, in other words, we are
naturally exploiting the external features of the world as a
material supervenience base of WM function. There is no
problem with chunking per se; I am proposing that it is only
a partial solution to the problem. Once theoretically
conjoined with the external WM, they together solve the
paradox of working memory.
	 
Biological WM has been believed to be augmented
by LTM, the external features of the world, and such; this
functional whole has been called compound WM (Cowan,
2001). Under the concept of compound WM, however,
components other than biological WM, such as LTM and
the external features of the world, are considered mere
causal part of WM. That is, while the external features of
the world, in which we are embedded, are important aids to
WM, according to this view, they are not themselves
constituents of WM (c.f. Rupert, 2004). I argue that
components other than biological WM, especially the
external features of the world, are indeed constitutive part of
WM. The coupled system of biological WM and the
external features of the world together constitutes functional
WM; WM is actually extended into the external world (c.f.
Hutchins, 1995).

Although it might seem trivial, the difference
between ‘causal’ and ‘constitutive’ is important. Roughly
stated, constitutive part of something is part of what it is to
be that something, while causal part of something is not.
Block (2007) illustrates this point as follows; “cerebral
blood flow is causally necessary for consciousness, but
activation of the upper brainstem is much more plausibly a
constitutive condition, part of what it is to be conscious”
(p.482;
emphasis
mine).
The
distinction
of
causal/constitutive in cognitive science is captured by the
debate between extended cognition and embedded cognition
(Rupert, 2004; also discussed in Clark, 2008). The
hypothesis of extended cognition (dubbed as HEC in the
literature) asserts that the external features of the world
constitute part of material supervenience base of cognition;
the hypothesis of embedded cognition (dubbed as HEMC in
the literature) holds that the external features of the world
are causally relevant to cognition but do not themselves
constitute part of cognition.
External
World is …
Hypothesis
of …

External WM
Constitutive part of
WM
Extended cognition
(HEC)

Compound WM
Causal part of WM
Embedded
(HEMC)

cognition

Table 1. The conceptual difference between external WM
and compound WM.
The original idea of external WM comes from
Rowlands (1999). Using George Miller, Rowlands argues
that biological WM is enormously limited, unstable, and
unreliable so the main locus of WM should actually be
external information-bearing structures. Challenging
Rowlands, Rupert (2004) claims that external WM is not
plausible, while compound WM is, based on the fact that the
nature of the contributions of the biological WM and
external features of the world are profoundly different. As
Clark (2008; also Clark and Chalmers, 1998) argues,
however, externalism does not demand fine-grained
functional similarities of the inner and outer contributions.
While precisely how WM is offloaded is debated (Gray et
al., 2004; Gray et al., 2006), the general upshot, then, is that
WM is externally distributed if the external features of the
world constitute part of material supervenience base of WM,
even if functional similarities are not fine-grained.
According to computational cognitive science, the
basic function of cognition is largely accounted for by two
main factors; computation and representation (c.f. Horst,
2011). The concept of computation and representation
naturally applies to WM as well. By means of representation
and computation, WM can store, update, and access
information necessary for ongoing cognitive activities.
Then, there are two ways how we externalize WM; by
externalizing
computation
and
by
externalizing
representation. Having said so, it is important to note that
computational function and representational function do
overlap (McClelland et al., 1986; Clark, 1989, 1993) so that
the distinction is merely ideal-typical.

	  
1955

We seem to be naturally offloading complex
computation onto the external world if it is an available
option (Gray et al., 2004; Gray et al., 2006; Wilson, 1994).
For example, although we can rotate objects mentally
(Shepard et al., 1971), it is more efficient (faster and more
accurate) to do so physically. The ubiquity of physical
rotation as computational action is found by Kirsh and
Maglio (1994). It seems that we use external computation
when WM load is heavy (Kirsh et al., 1994). Also, we
offload WM representational function by exploiting the
stability of the world. That is, by leaving information in the
external world, we reduce the WM load the biological WM
has to process, as the external world is too complex to
process in the biological WM. In a way, we use the world as
its best model, as roboticist Rodney Brooks once put (1991).
In a block-copying-task (Ballard et al., 1992), subjects are
asked to replicate a model shown in the model box in the
workspace, using blocks in the resource box. Eye-movement
tracking reveals that subjects look at each box many times,
the same pattern found in the eye-movement tracking of the
change blindness experiment. A natural interpretation is that
we do not construct detailed internal representations of the
external world, because the world is reliably there and
representing the external world accurately exceeds the WM
capacity.
From the ‘load theory of attention’, it is known that
appropriately directing attention requires the active
maintenance of stimulus priority in WM (De Fockert et al.,
2001). Under high WM load conditions, then, it is difficult
to maintain stimulus priority. As a result, more distracters
are processed in WM. In other words, as WM load
increases, we get more confused. This is a dilemma, since at
the perceptual level (i.e. early selection), heavier (visual)
load, or more visual information processing, reduces
distracters (Lavie, 1995). When the world is visually
complex, however, there is likely a heavy WM load and
overflow of information at the cognitive level (i.e. late
selection). Tversky (2010) argues that gestures, use of tools,
and reconfiguration of the space will help us cognize,
because they abstract, schematize representations, and
facilitate our attention. That is, by means of abstracting and
schematizing, attention is directed only to important aspects
of the world. Tversky calls such abstracting/schematizing
actions spractions (space-abstraction-action). Actions onto
the external world, such as gestures, use of tools, and
manipulations of the world, facilitate directing WM level
attention only to relevant aspects of the world to the task at
hand. That is, via spractions, WM load is offloaded onto the
world (c.f. epistemic actions of Kirsh and Maglio; 1995).
The hypothesis entailed is that, as WM load increases (as
the world gets visually complex), people offload it onto the
world rather than process it internally, although it is in
principle possible to process it internally. Consequently
more spractions (or epistemic actions) are likely to be
observed.

Experiment
To test whether/how we are offloading WM onto the world,
subjects were asked to build Lego blocks and the way they
used the space – use of spractions – was analyzed. Lego was
chosen because Lego block assembly consists of pattern
matching, planning, decision-making, and problem solving,
all of which rely on WM. As the model used in the
experiment targets young children, WM load is assumed
relatively light. If offload of WM load is observed in this
experiment, it can be generalized to many of daily
situations, which have higher WM load.

Method
The basic methodology used here is generally called
cognitive ethnography (c.f. Ball et al., 2000; Hollan et al.,
2000; Kirsh, 1999; Kessell and Tverksy, 2010). It differs
from the traditional ethnography in that it emphasizes
specificity, purposiveness, and confirmation (Ball et al.,
2000). Rather than observing a field without prior
knowledge or theory, cognitive ethnography relies on smallscale data collection based on representative time slices of
the domain of interests that is confirmable. Instead of thick
description (Geertz, 1973), participants’ activities were
videotaped to be analyzed. To guarantee the objectivity of
analysis (and consequently confirmation), codes were
devised, and Cohen’s Kappa (0≤K≤1) was calculated. Codes
were devised so as to pick up spractions. Cohen’s Kappa is
an indicator of inter-coder agreement; as Kappa is higher,
coders interpret the same data more similarly, and thus
analysis is considered more objective. It turned out that
Cohen’s Kappa was 1.

Participants
Total 6 female students from the same graduate school
participated in the experiment on a voluntary basis. All
participants agreed on being videotaped. They were all in
their twenties when the experiment was conducted. They
were all naïve as to the purpose of the study. They all signed
an informed consent approved by the University
Institutional Review Board (IRB).

Material
Lego Technic 8065 (target age 7-14) was used for the
experiment. It was selected for a pragmatic reason. It can be
easily completed within one hour. Subjects were asked to
build Lego Technic 8065 based on the instruction manual
while being videotaped. Two different models can be built
out of Lego Technic 8065. All were given the instructions
for one of the models. Although some instructions instruct
to sort blocks in advance, this one does not.

Results
Although it is possible to process information internally, it
was observed that participants constantly engaged in one or
more of spractions over the videotaped session. That is, they

	  
1956

constantly used the external space as external WM. Out of
six participants, five did sorting regardless that the
instructions did not say to do so (some Lego instructions
instruct to sort blocks in advance). Two did sorting in
advance only; one did sorting on demand only; two did
both. One did not do sorting at all; she made a significant
number of mistakes. Although the sample size is too small
to make a generalization, sorting seemed to help participants
to think. As sorting is time-consuming, if viewed purely
from the pragmatic perspective, it is disadvantageous (c.f.
Kirsh and Maglio, 1994). Also, in principle it can be done in
the head. Regardless, the participants did sorting. All the
participants separated assembled blocks from the resource
pool. This pattern was consistent. When there was more
than one assembled block, they were grouped together and
placed separated from not-yet-assembled blocks.
All of them looked at the instruction and/or model
after picking up a piece. Although it was difficult to follow
participants’ eye movements, it was a consistent pattern that
all the participants looked at the instruction and the model
many times after picking up a desired piece. In most cases,
they first looked at the instruction to pick a piece. Once they
picked up a desired piece, they again looked at the
instruction to see where it fit. Although it is possible to
process both types of information simultaneously (i.e. which
piece and where it goes), looking at the instruction once, it
does not seem cost-effective given the stable world is out
there and given that making detailed mental representation
seems time consuming. It seems that use of external
representation was commonplace. This finding is consistent
with the theory of the limited WM capacity and previous
experiments, such as block-copying task.
All of them did physical rotation and alignment
following the instruction. When the model in the instruction
was flipped, participants flipped their model as well.
Although the instruction instructs to rotate, it does not
instruct to align the model to the instruction. All the
participants consistently aligned the instruction and the
model under assembly. Such actions (alignment and
rotation) are disadvantageous if they are taken purely as
physical actions (c.f. Kirsh, 1995), but clearly have
epistemic advantage. Although the Lego Technic 8065 is
relatively simple (target age is 7-14), it still is too complex
to mentally manipulate accurately. Physical rotation and
alignment are clear cases of spraction.
One participant counted the number of holes by
using another piece as a counting tool. She had to connect
two parts by putting two bars into holes; there were thirteen
holes, and bars had to be connected to the fourth and sixth
holes respectively. She counted the number of holes on the
instruction booklet with the piece. All the participants
compared a piece with the booklet by placing the piece on
the instruction, at least once during the assembly. Length is
oftentimes overestimated or underestimated (Jones et al.,
2006). It is thus difficult to accurately represent length
mentally (WM load is heavy). The accurate length is printed
on the instruction (obviously for measuring purpose).

Consequently, all the participants compared the length of a
piece with the instruction by placing it on the instruction.

Discussion
The world is full of complexity and we have to survive in
such a complex world. The complexity of the world easily
overwhelms the capacity of biological WM (Kessell and
Tversky, 2010). Biological WM alone, then, does not seem
to suffice for us to live a normal, smooth daily life. People
exploit the external world as the material superveniece base
of WM by means of spractions. People gesture, arrange the
world, and make symbols and artifacts. Spractions and their
consequences, such as reconfigured space, augment the
limited biological WM capacity. WM then is not an
equivalent concept to biological WM but it consists of
biological WM and the external features of the world (and
perhaps more, such as LTM). Both the brain and the world
can serve as the material superveniece base of WM (c.f.
Rowlands 1999). There is no qualitative difference between
the external features of the world and the biological WM.
To observe how external WM plays out in reality,
participants of the experiment were asked to assemble Lego
blocks in front of a video camera. The analysis of the
videotaped session revealed how they used the external
world as external WM. They externally did what they in
principle could do mentally. For example, they looked at the
instruction after they picked up a desired piece to see where
it is assembled. In principle, one gaze suffices to construct a
mental representation of the external world. However, they
referred back and forth between the piece and the instruction
diagram. Similarly, they sorted blocks before assembly. In
principle, sorting of pieces can be done purely mentally (if
you have a photographic memory, you can in principle
memorize all the patterns and locations of pieces on the
table and classify them according to some manner).
However, as the capacity of biological WM is limited to
about four items of information, and Lego block assembly
requires processing of more than four items of information,
it seems participants externalized (offloaded) their cognition
onto the world. Overall, spractions were observed constantly
over the videotaped session. As the model used in the
experiment target children between 7 and 14 years old, WM
load is assumed relatively light. As many of daily situations
are assumed to have higher WM load, it is inferred that
offload of WM functions is ubiquitous in daily life.
The idea of externalization of WM function might
be challenged on the ground that some people can do
tremendous amount of information processing in the head
alone without externalizing WM function. For example,
some expert abacus users can multiple large numbers within
a minute. Rumelhart et al. (McClelland et al., 1986, chap.
14) speculate that the ability to do information processing
that seems too difficult to do in the head derives from the
ability to do so externally; they are merely visually
imagining what we do externally. Frank et al. (2011)
confirmed this. That is, mental calculation by abacus users
involves visual manipulation of imagined abacus.

	  
1957

Furthermore, they demonstrated that the amount of visual
information abacus users process in the head cannot exceed
the capacity limit of the biological visuo-spatial WM (in
their case, 3). Thus, the fact that some people can do
tremendous amount of information processing in the head
without relying on the external world does not seem to
constitute a counterexample.
We can calculate the amount of distributed WMbased cognition. The amount of externalized WM-based
cognition is equal to the relevant amount of information for
a given cognition minus four chunked items, the items of
information the biological WM can process, or

where y is the amount of distributed cognition (measured in
the number of items), z is the number of items (cognitive
load) demanded for a task at hand, and xi is chunked items
of information processed in the biological WM.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank professor Barbara Tversky of Stanford
University and Teachers College, Columbia University,
professor Hope Jensen Leichter of Teachers College,
Columbia University, and Will Geluk for comments on
earlier drafts.

References
Awh, E., Vogel, E., and Oh, S. (2006). Interactions
between attention and working memory. Neuroscience,
139(1), 201-208.
Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: A new
component of working memory? Trends in cognitive
sciences, 4(11), 417-423.
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory: Looking back
and looking forward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4(10),
829-839.
Ball, L., and Ormerod, T. (2000). Putting ethnography to
work: The case for a cognitive ethnography of design.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 53(1),
147-168.
Ballard, D., Hayhoe, M., Li, F., Whitehead, S., Frisby, J.,
Taylor, J., et al. (1992). Hand-eye coordination during
sequential
tasks
[and
discussion].
Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B:
Biological Sciences, 337(1281), 331-339.
Behrmann, M., and Tipper, S. (1999). Attention accesses
multiple reference frames: Evidence from visual neglect.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 25(1), 83-101.
Block, N. (1978). Troubles with functionalism. Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 9:261-325.
Block, N., et al. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and
the mesh between psychology and neuroscience. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 30(5), 481-498.

Block, N. (2011). Perceptual consciousness overflows
cognitive access. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(12), 567575.
Brooks, R. (1991). Intelligence without representation.
Artificial intelligence, 47, 139-159.
Chalmers, D. (1996). Does a rock implement every finitestate automaton? Synthese, 108(3), 309-333.
Chalmers, D. (1997). The conscious mind: In search of a
fundamental theory. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Chase, W. and Simon, H. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Clark, A. (1989). Microcognition: philosophy, cognitive
science, and parallel distributed cognition. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1993). Associative engines: Connectionism,
concepts, and representational change. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1998). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: Minds,
technologies, and the future of human intelligence. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment,
action, and cognitive extension. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Clark, A., and Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58(1), 7-19.
Clark, A. and Toribio, J. (1994). Doing without
representing? Systhesis 101, 401-431.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term
memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(1), 87-114.
Cruse, H. (2003). The evolution of cognition–a
hypothesis. Cognitive Science, 27(1), 135-155.
De Fockert, J. W., Rees, G., Frith, C. D., & Lavie, N.
(2001). The role of working memory in visual selective
attention. Science, 291, 1803-1806.
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R., and
Tsivkin, S. (1999). Sources of mathematical thinking:
Behavioral and brain-imaging evidence. Science, 284(5416),
970 –974.
Frank, M. C. and Barner, D. (2011). Representing exact
number visually using mental abacus. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 141(1), Feb 2012, 134149.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Goldman, A. (2006). Simulating minds: The philosophy,
psychology, and neuroscience of mindreading. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Gray, W., and Fu, W. (2004). Soft constraints in
interactive behavior: The case of ignoring perfect
knowledge in-the-world for imperfect knowledge in-thehead. Cognitive Science, 28(3), 359-382.
Gray, W., Sims, C., Fu, W., and Schoelles, M. (2006).
The soft constraints hypothesis: A rational analysis

	  
1958

approach to resource allocation for interactive behavior.
Psychological Review, 113(3), 461-482.
Hauser, M., Carey, S., and Hauser, L. (2000).
Spontaneous number representation in semi-free-ranging
rhesus monkeys. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 267(1445), 829-833.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., and Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed
cognition: Toward a new foundation for human-computer
interaction research. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction (TOCHI), 7(2), 174-196.
Horst, S. (2011). The Computational Theory of Mind.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Jones, L and Lederman, S. (2006). Human Hand
Function. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Jonides, J., Lewis, R., Nee, D., Lustig, C., Berman, M.,
and Moore, K. (2008). The mind and brain of short-term
memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 193-224.
Kessell, A. and Tversky, B. (2010). Thinking with hands
and papers. Submitted.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence. 73(1-2), 31– 68.
Kirsh, D. (1999). Distributed cognition, coordination and
environment design. Proceedings of the European
conference on Cognitive Science, 1–11.
Kirsh, D. (2005). Multi-tasking and Cost Structure:
Implications for Design. In, Bruno G. Bara, L. Barsalou,
and M. Bucciarelli Mahwah (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27st
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. 11431148.
Kirsh, D. (2006). Distributed cognition: A methodological
note. Pragmatics and Cognition, 14, 249–262.
Kirsh, D. (2010). Thinking with External Representations.
AI and Society. 25: 441–454.
Kirsh, D. and Maglio, P. (1994). On Distinguishing
Epistemic from Pragmatic Actions. Cognitive Science, 18:
513-549.
Landman, R., Spekreijse, H., and Lamme, V. (2003).
Large capacity storage of integrated objects before change
blindness. Vision Research, 43(2), 149-164.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition
for selective attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 21, 451-468.
Lavie, N. (2006). The role of perceptual load in visual
awareness. Brain Research, 1080(1), 91-100.
Lavie N., and De Fockert J. W. (2005). The role of
working memory in attentional capture. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 12, 669–674.
Levin, J. (2010). Functionalism. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Luck, S. J. and Vogel, E. K. (1997). The capacity of
visual working memory for features and conjunctions.
Nature 390: 279 –281.
Magnuson, J. S., Bensinger, D. G, Hayhoe, M., and
Ballard, D. (1998). Learning to form visual chunks: On the
structure of visuo-spatial working memory. Proceedings of

the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 645-650.
McClelland, J.L., Rumelhart, D.E., and the PDP Research
Group
(1986).
Parallel
Distributed
Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Volume 2:
Psychological and Biological Models, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Miller, G. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psychological Review, 63(2), 81-97.
Noë, A. (2004) Action in perception. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Rowlands, M. (1999). The body in mind: Understanding
cognitive processes. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Rupert, R. (2004). Challenges to the hypothesis of
extended cognition. The Journal of Philosophy, 101(8), 389428.
Shepard, R.N. and Metzler, J. (1971). Mental Rotation of
Three-Dimensional Objects. Science (171), 701–703.
Simons, D., and Rensink, R. (2005). Change blindness:
Past, present, and future. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(1),
16-20.
Smart, P., Engelbrecht, P., Braines, D., Strub, M., and
Giammanco, C. (2010). The network-extended mind.
Network Science for Military Coalition Operations:
Information Extraction and Interaction, 191-236.
Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief
visual presentations. Psychological Monographs: General
and Applied, 74(11), 1-29.
Tversky, B. (1981). Distortions in memory for maps.
Cognitive Psychology, 13(3),407-433.
Tversky, B. (2010). Visualizing thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3(3), 499-535.
Wilson, R. (1994). Wide computationalism. Mind,
103(411), 351-372.

	  
1959

