UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Face recognition and brain potentials: Disruption of configural information reduces the face
inversion effect.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/07r1d1pv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Civile, Ciro
Elchlepp, Heike
McLaren, Rossy
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Face recognition and brain potentials: Disruption of configural information
reduces the face inversion effect.
CiroCivile (cc413@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Heike Elchlepp (H.Elchlepp@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

R. McLaren (R.P.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

AureliuLavric (A.Lavric@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

I.P.L. McLaren (I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Abstract
The face inversion effect (FIE) refers to the decline in performance
in recognizing faces that are inverted compared to the recognition
of faces in their normal upright orientation (Yin, 1969). Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were recorded while subjects performed
an Old/New recognition study on normal and Thatcherised faces
presented in upright and inverted orientation. A large difference in
processing between normal upright faces and normal inverted faces
was observed at occipital-temporal sites about 165 ms following
stimulus onset, mainly in the right hemisphere. Thus
electrophysiological activity, which corresponds to the previously
described N170, had larger amplitude and was delayed for normal
inverted faces as compared to normal upright ones. By contrast,
the activity for Thatcherised inverted faces was not significantly
changed or delayed as compared to Thatcherised upright stimuli.
These results combine to show how the effect of face inversion on
the N170 is reliably greater when the faces are normal rather than
Thatcherised. Finally, these finding complement, at a neural level,
our behavioral studies which suggest that the loss of some
configural information affects the FIE.
Keywords:Face inversion effect; N170; configural information.

Introduction
The face inversion effect (FIE) is a reduction in
recognition performance for inverted faces compared to
upright faces that is greater than that typically observed with
other stimulus types (e.g. pictures of houses; Yin, 1969).
Nevertheless, the demonstration that the inversion effect in
recognition memory can be as strong with images of dogs as
with faces when the subjects are experts in specific dog
breeds (Diamond & Carey, 1986), suggests that there may
be other factors,such as expertise, which give rise to the
FIE. Diamond and Carey (1986) proposed that there is a
special type of information, “second order relational
information” that we depend on with increasing expertise.

Their analysis was that human faces all have the same group
of features (eyebrows, eyes, nose, mouth, etc.). All these
faces tend to have in common the same basic disposition of
components, such that the eyes are always above the nose
and so on. Thus, “first order relational information”
corresponds to the spatial relationship between the features
of a face, and “second order relational information”
corresponds to the small variations in the spatial
relationships between these features that individuate the
faces. This information can also be considered to be a type
of configural information. Diamond and Carey (1986)
suggested that a large inversion effect will be obtained only
if three conditions are met. Firstly, the members of the class
of stimuli must share a basic configuration. Secondly, it
must be possible to individuate the members of the class
through second-order information. Finally, individuals must
have the expertise to exploit such second-order information.
Thus, recognition of exemplars of such a class differs from
other types of recognition in its reliance on second-order
relational features and requires a certain expertise to use
these features. This interpretation of the effect of expertise
is supported by the role of a prototype in face recognition.In
one of their papers Valentine and Bruce (1986a) suggested
that a face prototype was a result of overlaying many
examples of faces in a distributed memory network (e.g. as
in McClelland & Rumelhart, 1985). Therefore, the
emergence of a face prototype is not something special for
faces, but occurs simply because facial stimuli constitute a
homogeneous category of which many exemplars are
experienced. Thus, prototype extraction would be expected
to arise for any set of stimuli that satisfies the three
conditions previously described for a large inversion effect.
Conversely then, evidence of prototype extraction can be
used to determine whether or not an observer possesses
expertise in discriminating within a stimulus category. The

1422

suggestion from some theories of perceptual learning (e.g.
McLaren, 1997) is that expertise for faces acts directly on
the representation of the information in a face, and confers
the ability to make better use of it by effectively reducing
the salience of first order relational information, leaving
second order relational information relatively salient which
aids discrimination. Thus, if the configural information in
upright faces is disrupted, or our ability to extract it is (e.g.
by inversion), the benefits conferred by our expertise with
those faces would tend to decrease, making them less easy
to discriminate from one another. This explanation for the
effect of expertise in face processing has some empirical
support. The key finding is that it has been shown that
experience with exemplars of a category that can be
represented by a prototype (and so have second order
relational structure as a result of their variation about that
prototype) leads to an increased ability to discriminate
between members of that category (McLaren, Leevers and
Mackintosh, 1994). This improvement is lost when the
stimuli are presented in an inverted orientation (McLaren,
1997). Thus,the results from these studies taken together
support the view that experience with stimuli may have a
role in driving the specialization of processes subserving
learning and memory.
This view receives support from event-related potentials
(ERPs) studies such as Rossion, Gauthier, Goffaux, Tarr
and Crommelinck (2002) who have shown that it is possible
to obtain an electrophysiological inversion effect for an
experimental non-face stimulus class called ‘Greebles’ once
participants are trained in recognizing them. Rossion et al.
(2002) trained participants with a three-phase experiment in
which there was first, a baseline phase, where ERPs were
recorded from responses to face and Greeble presentations
in both upright and inverted orientations. Following this,
there was a training phase using only upright Greebles.
Finally, during the last phase of the experiment ERPs were
measured using new faces and new Greebles presented in
both upright and inverted orientations. ERPs prior to the
training phase revealed the inversion effect to be larger for
faces than for Greebles. Following training with upright
Greebles, the N170 (negative deflection occurring between
150-200 ms) latencies for the upright faces and Greebles
were similar. The ERPs for inverted faces remained roughly
constant before and after the training phase with Greebles,
but ERPs to Greebles showed a significant training effect, in
that there was an increased delay and increased amplitude
for inverted Greebles as compared with Greebles presented
in an upright orientation. In conclusion, although the
inversion effect for faces was larger in both experimental
sessions, the inversion effect for Greebles increased with
increasing expertise with that category of stimuli.
Furthermore, Tanaka and Curran (2001) investigated the
neural basis of object expertise while recording the brain
activity of experts when categorizing images of common
dogs and birds. Results showed that the magnitude of the
N170 was larger when the participants categorized objects
in the domain in which they were expert than when they

categorized objects in the domain in which they were
novices. Finally, de Haan, Pascalis & Johnson (2002)
investigated the inversion effect and the link to expertise
using human and monkey faces, as the latter have a similar
configuration of features to human faces. These two
categories of stimuli were presented to participants in both
upright and inverted orientations. Results revealed thatthe
N170 amplitude evoked by upright faces was smaller than
for other stimuli, and the amplitudes for monkey faces both
upright and inverted, and inverted human faces did not
differ significantly from one another. Thus, inversion
increased the amplitude and latency for human faces but not
for monkey faces. The same experiment conducted on 6month-old infants produced a component with similar
morphology to the N170. However, this infant component
differed from the N170, both because it peaked 100 ms later
and it was not affected by inversion. Thus, for adults the
orientation of faces played a role in determining the N170
(Eimer, 2000), but for infants the influence of orientation
appeared only at later processing stages. This absence of an
inversion effect in the infant ERPs is consistent with the
idea that adults develop expertise for face processing,
including both species and orientation, as a consequence of
experience with that stimulus category (de Haan et al.,
2002). These results also suggest that ERP inversion effects
are tied to expertise with a suitable category, rather than to
the category of faces per se.

EXPERIMENT
In this study we investigated the link between secondorder relational structure and the face inversion effect
suggested by Diamond and Carey (1986).The argument is
that the improvement brought about by our expertise with
faces is lost on inversion because this disrupts the ability to
exploit second order relational information, leading to a
strong inversion effect.In the behavioral part of this study,
we aimed to demonstrate the typical strong inversion effect
for normal face stimuli (for which we have expertise), and
for comparison purposes ran a condition using what are
known as Thatcherised face stimuli (see Fig. 1 for
examples). These latter stimuli serve as our experimental
manipulation in the sense that they suffer from somewhat
disrupted second order-relational information (even when
upright) caused by the 180º rotation of the eyes and the
mouth, which should reduce at least some of the effect of
expertise in the upright orientation. Another useful
characteristic of these stimuli is that they are still faces, and
are well matched for complexity with the normal faces. We
also investigated the electrophysiological responses to
normal faces in comparison with the responses obtained to
Thatcherised faces and predicted that the N170 would
correlate with our behavioral results. That is, the N170 for
upright normal faces was expected to be different from that
obtained in our other conditions. We expected to observe
larger and delayed N170 amplitudes for inverted normal
faces, as well as for upright and inverted Thatcherised faces,
by analogy with the results of de Haan et al. (2002). This

1423

follows from the assumption that the disrupted second order
relational information in Thatcherised faces in part reduces
the effect of expertise in the same way that inversion also
reduces its impact, and that the N170 depends, at leastin
part, on the effect of expertise. Hence we expect the effect
of expertise to only be evident for normal upright faces, and
to manifest as a smaller amplitude and latency, leading to a
large inversion effect (in the ERPs) for normal faces but not
for Thatcherised faces.

Materials
The study used 320 images in total, half female and half
male. These were photographs of faces of former students at
the University of Cambridge. The faces were standardized
in grey scale format using Adobe Photoshop. A program
called Gimp 2.6 was used to manipulate the 320 stimuli.
Any given face stimulus was prepared in four different
versions i.e. normal upright, normal inverted, Thatcherised
upright and Thatcherised inverted, which were used in a
counterbalanced fashion across participants so that each face
was equally often used in each condition of the experiment.
For the Thatcherised faces, each of the eyes and the mouth
were flipped about the horizontal axis. Examples of the
stimuli used are given in Figure 1. The experiment was run
using E-prime software Version 1.1 installed on a PC
computer.

in the centre of the screen that was presented for 500 ms.
This was followed by a black screen for 500 ms and then by
a facial stimulus that was presented for 3000ms. Then the
fixation cross and the black screen were repeated, and
another face presented, until all stimuli had been seen.These
faces will be termed “familiar”(designated as type 1) faces
for that participant because they will be presented again
later on in the old/new recognition task. The face types
during the study phase were: Normal Inverted faces (1NI);
Normal Upright faces (1NU); Thatcherised Inverted faces
(1TI) and Thatcherised Upright faces (1TU). Following the
study phase, after further instructions, there was an old/new
recognition task in which participants were shown (in
random order) the 80 male faces they had already seen (i.e.
the familiar faces) intermixed with a further 80 unseen male
faces which were designated as type 2 (novel) and split into
the same four face sub-types as the familiar set.During this
old/new recognition task participants indicated whether or
not they had seen the male face onscreen during the study
phase by pressing the ‘.’ key If they recognized the face or
by pressing ‘x’ if they did not. Each facial stimulus had a
unique identifying number, to make sure that individual
faces never appeared in more than one face type at a time
during the experiment. To simplify their use in the
experiment, the facial stimuli available were divided into
sets of 20giving 8 sets of stimuli, and each participant group
was shown a different combination of the 160 facial stimuli
rotated over the 8 sets as shown in Table 1. Because there
were 160 male faces to consider (80 in the study phase and
80 in the recognition task), four participant breaks were
incorporated. These allowed participants to rest their eyes
after they had viewed 40 faces. The second part of the
experimentfollowed the same procedure as that used in the
first part of the experiment. The only difference this time
was that participants saw female faces.

Figure 1; Examples of stimuli used in the experiment
showing the four different conditions for male and female
faces. The dimensions of the stimuli were 5.63cm x 7.84cm.
The stimuli were presented at a resolution of 1280 x 960 .
Participants sat 1m away from the screen on which the
images were presented.

Participants

Table.1.Combinations of facial stimuli presented to each
participant group. The same face set combinations were
used in the first and second half of the experiment for the
maleand female faces.

32 undergraduates and postgraduates at the University of
Exeter took part in the experiment.

Procedure
The experiment consisted of a ‘study phase’ and an
‘old/new recognition phase’ using only male faces, followed
by another ‘study phase’ and ‘old/new recognition phase’,
but this time using only female facial stimuli. After the
instructions, the first part of the experiment involved
participants looking at 80 male faces (presented one at a
time in random order).The participants saw a fixation cross

EEG Apparatus
The EEG was sampled continuously during both the study
and test phases at 500 Hz with a bandpass of 0.016-100 Hz,
the reference at Cz and the ground at AFz using 64
Ag/AgClactive electrodes and BrainAmp amplifiers. There
were 61 electrodes on the scalp in an extended 10-20
configuration and one on each earlobe. Their impedances

1424

were kept below 10 kΩ. The EEG was filtered offline with a
20 Hz low-pass filter (24 dB/oct) and re-referenced to the
linked ears.

Thatcherisation has on the upright faces rather than on the
inverted ones.

EEG Analysis
Peak amplitudes of the N170 in study and recognition
phases were examined for differences between the
experimental conditions. To improve the estimates of N170
amplitude and latency given the relatively small number of
ERP segments in each condition (leading to a low signal-tonoise ratio), N170 extraction was aided by linear
decomposition of the EEG by means of Independent
Component Analysis (ICA, Bell &Sejnowski, 1995). ICA
was run separately for each subject using all scalp channels
and the entire dataset. For analyses of the recognition phase,
segments associated with incorrect responses were
discarded (there were no responses in the study phase). The
remaining EEG segments were averaged for every
participant and experimental condition. In each subject, we
identified ICA components that: (1) showed a deflection
(peak) in the N170 time-range (at 150-200 ms following
stimulus onset), and (2) had a scalp distribution containing
an occipital-temporal negativity characteristic of N170 (the
scalp distributions of components are the columns of the
inverted unmixing matrix). This resulted in 1-4 ICA
components corresponding to the N170 identified in most
subjects (mean 2.6; SD 1) - these were back-transformed
into the EEG electrode space (by multiplying the
components with the inverted unmixing matrix that had the
columns corresponding to other components set to zero) and
submitted to statistical analysis of N170 peak amplitude and
latency.
Results
Behavioral Results
The data from all 32 participants contributed to the signal
detection d’ analysis. Responses for male and female faces
were collapsed and transformed into d’measures. There was
a significant interaction between face type and orientation,
F(1,31) = 8.30, p<.01. This reflected the fact that the inversion
effect in the normal faces was significantly greater than that in
the Thatcherised faces. Figure 2 shows the results for the
mean d’ obtained for each face type. A planned comparison
gave a highly significant advantage F(1,31) = 29.99, p<.001 ,
for normal upright faces vs. normal inverted faces, and another
planned comparison showed a similar (although smaller)
inversion effect for Thatcherised upright vs. Thatcherised
inverted faces, F(1,31) =6.24, p<.025. To further investigate
this result, the effect of face type on the recognition of upright
faces was also analyzed. Normal upright faces were recognized
significantly better than Thatcherised upright faces F(1,31)
=13.71, p<.01, but there was no significant difference in the
recognition of normal inverted faces and Thatcherised inverted
faces. Thus, it would seem that the reduction in the inversion
effect for Thatcherised faces is more due to the impact that

Figure 2;Resultsfor the old/new recognition task. The X
axis shows the four different stimulus’ conditions, the Y
axis shows the mean d’ for each condition.
N170 analysis
Three participants had to be excluded because ICA did
not find any components containing the N170 (nor was there
an N170 visible in the original ERP). N170 latency and
amplitude analyses were run in electrode PO8 which was
the one showing most of the activity during our experiment.
We attempted to run the same analyses on the N170 data as
on the d’ behavioral data considered earlier to facilitate
comparison.
Study phase (see Figure 3)
Latency analysis:The Orientation x Face Type interaction,
i.e. the effect of inversion on N170 latencies,was reliably
larger when faces were Normal compared to Thatcherised,
F(1,28) = 4.73, p< .05. In particular, the effect was highly
reliable for Normal faces, F(1,28) =21.19, p<.01, with N170
latencies peaking 9 ms earlier for upright faces (at 165 ms)
compared to inverted faces (174 ms). For Thatcherised
faces, peaks for inverted faces were delayed compared to
upright faces by 3 ms. This delay did not reach significance,
F(1,28) = 1.54, p=ns. Latencies of upright faces peaked
earlier (by 4 ms) when faces were Normal compared to
Thatcherised. This difference was only marginally reliable,
F(1,28) =3.24, p =.082.
Peak amplitude analysis: The difference in peak
amplitudes between upright and inverted faces was
significantly larger when faces were Normal (-0.46V) than
when they were Thatcherised (0.002V), F(1,28) =4.18,

1425

p=.05.The effect of inversion was reliable for Normal faces,
F(1,28) =7.06, p<.025, with more negative amplitudes for
inverted (-0.513V) compared to upright (-0.046V) faces.
For Thatcherised faces the inversion effect did not approach
significance F(1,28) =.0001 p=ns. The effect of Face Type
was marginally reliable for upright faces, F(1,28) =3.82,
p=.06, with more negative amplitudes for Thatcherised (0.451V) compared to Normal (-0.046V) faces.
Old/new recognition task (see Figure 4)
Latency analysis:No significant Orientation by Face Type
interaction was found. A significant inversion effect was
obtained for normal faces F(1,28) =16.36, p<.01with N170
latencies peaking 5 ms earlier for upright faces (at 163 ms)
compared to inverted faces (168 ms). A reduced but still
significant inversion effect was found for Thatcherised
faces F(1,28) =6.62, p<.025with N170 latencies peaking at
nearly 5 ms earlier for upright Thatcherised faces ( at 165.31
ms) compared to inverted (169.72 ms). A planned
comparison revealed a trend towards significance for
upright normal stimuli compared to Thatcherised upright
ones F(1,28) = 2.27, p=.15.
Peak amplitude analysis: As for latencies, no reliable
Orientation by Face Type interaction was found. Means
show a trend towards significance for Normal faces, with
more negative amplitudes for inverted (-0.73V) vs. upright
(-0.39V), F(1,28)=2.50, p=.13. For Thatcherised faces
amplitudes arereliably more negative when they are inverted
(-0.91V) vs. upright (-0.54V), F(1,28) = 4.59, p<.05.

Figure.4.The X axis shows the elapsed time after a
stimulus was presented. The Y axis shows the amplitudes
(V) of the electrophysiological reactions in the old/new
recognition phase of the experiment.
Discussion
This study has, in essence, confirmed our predictions. On
the behavioral side we have obtained a strong inversion
effect for normal faces and a reduced one for Thatcherised
faces. The ERP results provide the sought after correlates of
our behavioral findings in the study phase where
participants were only asked to look at the faces and try to
memorize them. Analyses on both the amplitude and latency
show a larger inversion effect onthe N170 for normal faces
than for Thatcherised faces. Running the same planned
comparisons on the ERP data as for thebehavioral data
produces a very similar pattern of results, i.e. a strong
inversion effect for the normal faces, a greatly reduced
effect for the Thatcherised faces, and a difference in N170
amplitude between the upright normal and Thatcherised
faces but not between the two face types when inverted.

General Discussion

Figure.3. The X axis shows the elapsed time after a
stimuluswas presented, whereas the Y axis shows the
amplitudes (V) of the electrophysiological reactions in the
study phase of the experiment. The insert in this figure is the
ERP time-locked to the N170 peak, as identified in
individual subjects. The time-scale of the inserts is stretched
relative to the main stimulus-locked ERPs, the amplitude
scale is the same in the insert as in the mainfigure.

The behavioral results of this study show that we have
obtained a significant inversion effect with normal faces,
and have demonstrated that it is significantly larger than the
inversion effect obtained with Thatcherised faces. To some
extent, then, we have confirmed the basic face inversion
finding. We have some evidence here that second order
relational information plays a role in driving the inversion
effect for faces. The most straightforward explanation of the
difference in performance to the two face types when
upright is that the Thatcherised faces have lost some (but
not all) of the benefit of our expertise in dealing with second
order structure.Because the Thatcherised faces are still
essentially faces, then the application of our expertise with
normal faces may lead to positively unhelpful results for
upright Thatcherised faces, in that the changed features

1426

stand out and command processing. Because these features
are not those best suited to individuate faces, i.e. our
processing is being dominated to a greater extent by what is
common to Thatcherised faces (because they are surprising)
rather than what would aid us in discriminating between
them, performance for upright Thatcherised faces would be
expected to be worse than for normal upright faces. The lack
of any difference in recognition performance between
normal and Thatcherised faces when inverted can be
explained by arguing that in these circumstances second
order relational information is not in play, and the two types
of face are otherwise equated in terms of features and other
factors (e.g. overall shape of the face).
The results from the ERPs bolster our interpretation of the
effects we obtained in the behavioral results. As we
predicted, the N170 to upright normal faces was different to
that of our other stimuli, an effect that we can now argue
reflects in part the high degree of expertise participants had
for them. One of our findings is that this difference was a
great deal clearer in the study phase of our experiment than
in the test phase. This is not an entirely unexpected result.
Firstly, if the modulation of the N170 reflects an effect of
expertise, then this should occur when simply perceiving the
stimulus – the effect is not tied to having to do anything in
particular, except perhaps attend to the stimulus. Secondly,
as a result of the study phase, the Thatcherised stimuli will
start to become familiar, in particular the Thatcherised
upright faces will tend to become progressively more
equivalent to normal upright faces. Thus, any effect in the
study phase will be a relatively pure comparison of the two
stimulus types, one highly familiar, the other novel (at least
in part); but in the test phase this distinction, and the effects
that flow from it, will be attenuated by participants’
increasing familiarity with the Thatcherised stimuli.If we
study the waveforms that are time-locked to stimulus onset
then the pattern at the N170 exactly corresponds to that
observed in the behavioral data. As we predicted, upright
normal faces occur earlier and with smaller amplitude in the
N170, upright Thatcherised faces are somewhat later and
have greater amplitude, and both the inverted face types are
slightly later still and have slightly greater amplitude than
upright Thatcherised faces. We suggest that the N170
isindexing, at least in part, the effect of expertise with the
stimulus category. Inversion of the faces increases the
amplitude of the N170 and delays its onset in agreement
with a number of other studies which have found a greater
delay and larger amplitude for the inverted stimulus
(Rossionet al, 2002; Tanaka and Curran, 2001; de Haan
etal, 2002). We notethat the FIE for our Thatcherised
stimuli is still significant, suggesting that simply disrupting
second order information does not completely eliminate the
FIE. A possible explanation for this is that by rotating the
eyes and the mouth we have not disrupted all the second
order information in a face. Thus, our baseline stimuli still
have some second order information which participants may
have expertise for. Another explanation could be that not
only second order information is involved in the FIE but

there may be an important role for other types of
information. Perhaps by disrupting both first and second
order configural information we would be able to eliminate
the FIE entirely. Our claims about the magnitude of the
inversion effect are secure, but we cannot tell if
performance in all our conditions is still benefiting from the
effects of expertise (all the stimuli are, after all,
recognizable as faces). One obvious way in which this
might happen is by virtue of all the face types containing
standard facial features that have not been themselves
changed apart from a rotation or reflection. Another would
be to appeal to the basic envelope of the stimuli remaining
unchanged under Thatcherisation and inversion. Clearly it
would be unwise to assume that all effects of expertise
disappear under inversion, Thatcherisation or a combination
of the two manipulations. What we can conclude, however,
is that Thatcherisation interacts with stimulus inversion in a
way that strongly suggests that experience with these stimuli
helps us to better exploit that information.

References
Bell, A. J, &Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). An information–
maximization approach to blind separation and blind
deconvolution. Neural Computation, 7, 1129-59.
de Haan, M., Pascalis, O., & Johnson, M.H. (2002).
Specialization of neural mechanisms underlying face
recognition in human infants. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14, 199-209
Diamond, R. & Carey, S. (1986). Why faces are and are
not special: An effect of expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 115, 107-117.
Eimer, M. (2000). The face-specific N170 component
reflects late stages in the structural encoding of faces.
NeuroReport, 11, 2319-2324.
McClelland, J. L. &Rumelhart, D. E. (1985). Distributed
memory and the representation of general and specific
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
114, 159-197.
McLaren, I.P.L(1997). Categorization and perceptual
learning: An analogue of the face inversion effect. The
Quarterly Journal of ExperimentalPsychology 50A (2),.
257-273.
McLaren, I.P.L., Leevers, H.L. & Mackintosh, N.J.
(1994). Recognition, categorisation and perceptual
learning.Attention &Performance XV. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Rossion, B., Gauthier, I., Goffaux, V., Tarr, M.-J.,
Crommelinck, M. (2002). Expertise training with novel
objects leads to face-like electrophysiological responses.
Psychological Science, 13, 250-257
Tanaka JW, Curran T. (2001) A neural basis for expert
object recognition Psychol Sci. 2001 Jan 12(1):43-7.
Valentine, T., & Bruce, V. (1986a). Recognizingfamiliar
faces : The role of distinctiveness and familiarity. Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 40, 300-305.
Yin, R. K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145.

1427

