UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Force Dynamics as a Basis for Moral Intuitions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1r88v2x0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Nagel, Jonas
Waldman, Michael

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Force Dynamics as a Basis for Moral Intuitions
Jonas Nagel (jnagel1@uni-goettingen.de)
Michael R. Waldmann (michael.waldmann@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen, Gosslerstr. 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany

manifests its intrinsic tendency (to burn) in spite of the
opposing force exerted by A.
If A’s force is stronger than P’s, then P’s resultant force is
opposed to its intrinsic tendency. There are many words in
natural language describing variants of this basic
constellation (e.g., make, cause, or prevent). In the sentence
“The wind [A] made the flame [P] go out,” P does not
manifest its intrinsic tendency (to burn) but the opposite (to
go out). Note that both example sentences “are about” P,
while A is mainly relevant in terms of the effect it has on P.
Talmy (1988) argues that force dynamics is a fundamental
semantic category, profoundly structuring our cognitions in
a variety of domains. Whether we deal with the physical, the
(intra-)psychic, or the social world, the same basic forcedynamic concepts pervade our language and thought. Thus,
force dynamics is conceived as a domain-independent
representation underlying intuitions in various domains, not
only in the physical domain. Actually it is interesting to see
that when force dynamics is applied to physical tasks, the
resulting intuitions about forces and intrinsic tendencies
seem to be more compatible with our understanding of
actions than with Newtonian physics. For example, the
intuition that causes have stronger forces than effects is
inconsistent with Newtonian physics but seems to be
grounded in sensory-motor representations of our actions
(White, 2009). Analyzing social interactions in terms of
force dynamics is thus not a reduction of the social to the
physical domain. Force dynamics is better viewed as a
domain-independent abstract conceptual framework.

Abstract
People seamlessly generate moral intuitions about a wide
range of events they observe, but to date the cognitive
processes underlying this competency are poorly understood.
We propose that our moral intuitions are grounded in forcedynamic intuitions. We show how the evaluation of entities
engaged in schematized interactions can be predicted from
specific force-dynamic properties of those interactions, and
we point out how these evaluative tendencies relate to our
moral norm of not interfering with others’ interests.
Keywords: moral judgment; intuition; force dynamics

A New Theory of Moral Intuitions
Recent moral psychology views intuitions as important
determinants of our moral judgments. Haidt (2001) defined
moral intuitions as “the sudden appearance in consciousness
of a moral judgment, including an affective valence (goodbad, like-dislike), without any conscious awareness of
having gone through steps of searching, weighing evidence,
or inferring a conclusion” (p. 818). Intuitions are thus
mainly defined in contrast to deliberative reasoning.
However, to date there is no worked-out theory of the
automatic processes by which our moral intuitions are
formed. How do we solve this computational task? Which
observed events elicit which specific moral intuitions? In
what format are these events represented, and how is this
representation automatically integrated with pre-existing
evaluative standards? We propose that the semantic
category of force dynamics (Talmy, 1988) provides a
cognitive structure that might serve as a representational
basis in this task.

Force Dynamics as a Basis for Moral Intuitions
The category of force dynamics combines causal and
teleological aspects and is abstract enough to be naturally
applicable across physical and social domains. These
properties make it a promising candidate to serve in the
process of enriching representations of observed events with
a basic evaluative aspect.
Imagine observing the following event: Jack shoves
Jones. In a first step, the observer could abstract the forcedynamic pattern instantiated by this event. This would
include assigning A- and P-roles to the entities involved in
the interaction, determining P’s intrinsic tendency and
resultant force, and comparing the latter two. In this
example, this would yield a representation of A (Jack)
forcing P (Jones) to deviate from his intrinsic tendency
(toward rest) into a different resultant force (motion). This is
an instance of onset causing of motion (Talmy, 1988).
In a second step, this abstract representation could be
automatically subjected to default normative principles
formulated on the same level of abstraction. We stipulate

The Semantic Category of Force Dynamics
Talmy (1988) described force dynamics as a semantic
category of how entities interact with respect to force. When
two entities interact in the world, our language assigns to
them the two thematic roles of patient (P) and agent (A).
(Talmy uses the terms agonist and antagonist.) P, the focal
entity, is perceived to have an intrinsic force tendency either
towards rest or towards motion. In force-dynamic
interactions, P finds itself in opposition to A, another entity
with the opposed force tendency. A is mainly thought of in
terms of the effects it has on the resultant force manifested
by P as outcome of the interaction.
P’s resultant force depends on the relative strength of the
two opposing forces. If P’s force is stronger than A’s, then
P’s resultant force equals its intrinsic tendency. This
constellation is expressed in familiar words in our natural
language, such as despite or although. In “The flame [P]
kept burning despite the wind [A] blowing at it,” P

785

the existence of a noninterference principle (NIP): By
default, patients should be allowed to manifest their
intrinsic tendencies. This substantive assumption (which has
itself a force-dynamic structure) can be motivated with
reference to the negative prima facie duty not to interfere
with others’ interests, which seems to be a fundamental
moral norm at least in Western cultures. In onset causing of
motion, this abstract principle is violated. P changes its
tendency because of A’s impingement.
Finally, the fact that A is identified as causing a violation
of the principle leads people to evaluate A negatively
relative to P. This negative evaluation is then applied to the
concrete observed instance of A (in this case, to Jack).
In the current research we focus on basic scenarios with
only two protagonists (A, P). Obviously, there are many
more complex instances of onset causing patterns in which
A might eventually be evaluated positively. Imagine you
receive the additional information that Jack shoved Jones
out of harm’s way. Such more complex constellations will
not be treated here, but it seems that our theory can in
principle be extended to handle them as well (e.g., Jack
could be evaluated positively for preventing another agent
[the harm] to violate the NIP by means of intervening on P).
In what follows, we will provide initial evidence that such
default evaluations are in fact assigned on the abstract level
of decontextualized force-dynamic representations. To this
end, we had experimental subjects evaluate the movements
of two abstract shapes engaged in simple interactions.

to an entity if it embodies more of these three cues than the
alternative entity. In the launching event, Object X’s
behavior is consistent with all three cues (a+, b+, c+), while
Object Y only causes Object X to stop (b+), but does not
move initially (a-) and is first on the screen (c-). Object X is
therefore assigned the agent role, while Object Y is the
patient. There is ample evidence that this analysis is in line
with people’s qualitative experience of launching events.
For example, X is seen as exerting force on Y, whereas Y is
perceived to merely exhibit resistance against X (White,
2009).
Next, subjects need to infer P’s intrinsic tendency and
resultant force. We assume that in the absence of further
contextual cues indicating the presence of external forces,
P’s pre-collision movement will be regarded as its intrinsic
tendency. The identification of P’s resultant force with its
post-collision movement seems unproblematic.
Finally, P’s intrinsic tendency and resultant force need to
be compared in order to determine the force-dynamic
pattern and to decide whether the NIP was violated, as
would be indicated by a change of P’s movement as a result
of the collision event.

Hypothesis
With all force-dynamic concepts operationalized, we now
turn to the specifics of the hypothesis we tested in the
present experiment. We predict that in the Launch case
described above, which instantiates onset causing of motion,
subjects asked to evaluate the movements of both entities on
a negative/positive dimension will evaluate Object X more
negatively than Object Y. We contrast this case with a
Blocked case which is identical to Launch except that Object
Y does not start moving on X’s trajectory after the collision,
so that the interaction ends with both entities at rest in the
center of the screen. In this case, X has two agentic cues
(a+, b-, c+) while Y has only one (a-, b+, c-). Object Y is
thus still the patient, and its intrinsic tendency (rest) is
identical to its resultant force (rest). This corresponds to a
despite pattern in Talmy’s (1988) terminology. The NIP is
not violated here, so we do not expect A (Object X) to be
rated negatively relative to P (Object Y) in this case. Across
the cases, we expect A to be rated more negatively in
Launch than in Blocked.

Force Dynamics in Abstract Animated Displays
Displays of moving objects allow for a non-verbal
presentation of decontextualized force-dynamic interactions.
In the absence of linguistic cues, we first need to explicate
the criteria according to which we assume our subjects to
abstract force-dynamic patterns from our visual displays
(i.e., the first step in the process outlined above).
We instantiated the onset causing of motion pattern with a
version of the well-known launching event (Michotte, 1963;
see Fig. 1). A stationary Object Y is situated in the center of
the stage. After a moment, another Object X enters the
scene from the side and approaches Object Y on a straight
line and at constant speed. At the moment of contact, Object
X stops and Object Y immediately starts moving as if it was
continuing on X’s trajectory.
According to our theory, subjects first need to assign
agent and patient roles to these interacting entities. We
argue that the extremely impoverished nature of this display
leaves but three cues to make this assignment: (a) precollision movement relative to the position of the other
entity; (b) causing change of state in the other entity; and (c)
appearing on the scene after the other entity. According to
Dowty (1991), the first two cues increase the likelihood that
a given entity is assigned the agent role in an interaction.
Concerning the third cue, the entity appearing first will
likely be seen as the focal entity the display “is about” (i.e.,
the patient); the second entity should therefore be regarded
as agent affecting this focal entity. We assign the agent role

initial
state
precollision

collision
postcollision
end state

Figure 1: Animation of the launching event. Dark
sphere = A; light sphere = P. See text for details.

786

manipulation yielded six conditions which are displayed in
Table 1. Conditions 1 and 3 are of main theoretical interest
because they manifest the Blocked and Launch cases to
which our main hypothesis refers.
Table 1 also lists several resulting properties of the
interactions displayed in each condition. A_change and
P_change indicate whether A and P change their overt
tendency in the course of the interaction. P_change is the
most important variable for our purpose. Given the precollision constellation (i.e., A in motion, P at rest), as soon
as P changes its tendency, the case is an instance of onset
causing of motion, and the NIP is violated. Only if P stays
stationary, the case becomes an instance of despite where
the principle is not violated. The remaining properties are
further implications of the entities’ post-collision
movements. Concordance indicates whether A and P have a
concordant tendency (either of rest or of movement in the
same direction) after the collision. Contact indicates
whether A and P remain in direct physical contact after the
collision. Finally, Resistance indicates whether P displays
resistance by not overtaking the pre-collision tendency of A
in a one-to-one manner. As can be seen in Table 1, this
property is not identical to P_change.
Concordance, Contact, and Resistance are listed because
they are perfectly confounded with P_change across the two
cases of main interest, 1 and 3. Any change in ratings
between 1 and 3 could thus just as well be caused by these
properties. The remaining four conditions serve to isolate
P_change from these confounds.

Experiment
We divide the presentation of the experiment into two parts.
In the first part, we test the hypothesis just explicated. The
second part will deal with an additional aspect. However,
the data for both parts were gathered within one and the
same experiment and from the same subjects. Therefore, we
begin by describing the general procedure for the whole
experiment before we discuss the specific materials and the
results for both parts separately.

Participants and Procedure
31 undergraduates of the University of Göttingen (23
female, mean age 22 years) participated in a computer-based
experiment containing 27 trials in random order.1 Each trial
consisted of three consecutive screens. The first screen
displayed the trial number and a button with which the
subjects could start the animation. The second screen
contained a looped display of one of 27 animations. Each
animation started with a fixation cross displayed for one
second in the center of the stage. Then the initial state was
presented for one second, before the force dynamic
interaction began to unfold. The interaction always
consisted of a blue sphere and a green sphere moving in
specific ways on the same straight horizontal trajectory.
After the interaction was finished, the stationary end state
remained on the screen for one second. As an example,
Figure 1 illustrates how we implemented the Launch case
described above. Each condition was instantiated in two
animations, counterbalanced for color assignment and
direction of movement. Subjects watched each animation as
often as they wished before they proceeded to the third
screen, where two identical 7-point rating scales ranging
from “-3 (negative)” to “+3 (positive)” were presented
above one another. Each referred to one of the two entities
from the animation. The question wording was “How do
you evaluate the movement of the blue/green figure?”

Table 1: Design of Part 1

Cond
1
2
3
4
5
6

Part 1: Interference with Intrinsic Tendency
Design and Material In this part we tested whether
people’s intuitive evaluations of the entities in Launch and
Blocked can be predicted from the underlying force
dynamics in combination with the noninterference principle
(NIP). In the initial state of all animations, P was displayed
at rest in the center of the stage. The force-dynamic
interaction always began with A entering from one side and
reaching P within one second on a straight horizontal
trajectory at constant speed. We then manipulated A’s and
P’s post-collision movement which could either be
stationary (0), movement continuing A’s initial trajectory at
half of A’s initial speed (1), or movement on the same
trajectory at A’s full initial speed (2). Both A and P could
display all three movements, with the constraint that A could
not be faster than P after collision because this would imply
the objects going through each other. Thus, the

Speed
A
P
0
0
0
1
0
2
1
1
1
2
2
2

A_ch
1
1
1
1
1
0

Resulting properties
Cont
P_ch Conc
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1

Res
1
1
0
1
0
0

Note. Cond = condition, Speed = post-collision speed, A/P_ch =
A/P_change, Conc = Concordance, Cont = Contact, Res =
Resistance. See text for further explanations.

Specific predictions Three specific predictions follow
directly from our hypothesis. (i) A will be rated more
negatively than P in condition 3 (Launch). (ii) A will not be
rated more negatively than P in condition 1 (Blocked). (iii)
A will be rated more negatively in 3 than in 1.
The remaining conditions serve to separate the
manipulation of the force-dynamic pattern from the
properties of Concordance, Contact, and Resistance. If a
concordant post-collision tendency is responsible for more
positive ratings for A in 1 compared to 3, A-ratings should
also be more positive in 4, 5, and 6. If sustained physical
contact is to be made responsible, A-ratings should be more
positive in 4 and 6. Finally, if the display of resistance by P
(in not adopting A’s pre-collision tendency) is to be made

1
Three of these 27 trials tested a third hypothesis which is not
reported here due to space constraints.

787

responsible, A-ratings should be more positive in 2 and 4.
We predict that none of these alternatives will be the case.
Instead, we expect (iv) all control cases to be treated like 3
since they all conform to the onset causing of motion
pattern. This result would support our hypothesis that the
evaluative ratings in 1 (Blocked) and 3 (Launch) are in fact a
function of the underlying force-dynamic pattern as
indicated by the variable P_change.

(iv): The significant increase in A-ratings only occurred in
1, while, as predicted, the four control conditions generally
behaved like 3 (Launch). The only exception is condition 4,
where the A-ratings were not significantly lower than the Pratings (although the descriptive trend still holds, t30 = 1.31). Furthermore, across all six conditions, there seems to
be a trend for concordant post-collision movement (i.e., 1, 4,
5, and 6) to yield slightly higher A-ratings than discordant
post-collision movement (t30 = 2.26, p < .05, d = .41). This
might indicate that Concordance is used as an additional cue
for the evaluation of A. However, note that this effect is
driven mainly by the selective increase of A-ratings in 1
(Blocked).
In sum, these findings demonstrate that in clear-cut cases
of onset causing of motion such as 3 (Launch), agents are
evaluated more negatively than patients. This is not the case
in despite cases in which the NIP is not violated. Together,
these findings show that people’s evaluations of movements
are sensitive to underlying force-dynamic patterns. Entities
are by default evaluated negatively if they cause other
entities to deviate from their intrinsic tendency. This result
is consistent with the moral norm in our society to not force
others into states in which they would not enter on their
own.

Mean Evaluative Rating

Results and Discussion The descriptive results are
displayed in Figure 2. A global 6 (Condition: 1 to 6) × 2
(Entity: A vs. P) repeated-measures ANOVA yielded a main
effect for Entity (F1,30 = 9.57; p < .01,
= .24), indicating
that, across conditions, A was rated more negatively than P.
More importantly, the Condition × Entity interaction term
was significant (F5,150 = 9.69; p < .001,
= .24), showing
that A and P were treated differently across conditions. We
now turn to the contrasts testing our specific predictions.
(i): In 3 (Launch), A-ratings were lower than the P-ratings
(t30 = -3.68, p < .001, d = -.66). A is thus rated more
negatively than P in the launching event as paradigmatic
instance of the onset causing of motion pattern violating the
NIP.
(ii): In 1 (Blocked), A-ratings were higher than P-ratings
(t30 = 3.63, p < .01, d = .65). Thus, it seems that A’s negative
evaluation disappears with an underlying despite pattern in
which the NIP is not violated. The significant drop in Pratings was not expected because our predictions only
concerned A-ratings. One post-hoc explanation for this
phenomenon might be that the agent-patient distinction is
not as clear cut in this case as in the Launch case (i.e., the
agentic cues are distributed more evenly across both
entities). Maybe some participants interpreted P as agent
due to its capacity to cause change in A, turning the
interaction into an onset causing of rest pattern (Talmy,
1988) in which P (now the agent) violates the NIP by
forcing A (now the patient) to deviate from its intrinsic
tendency to motion into a resultant state of rest.
(iii): A-ratings in 1 were higher than those in 3 (t30 = 3.27,
p < .01, d = .59). Our hypothesis is thus confirmed by
comparisons between entities within cases and across cases
with different underlying force-dynamic patterns.

1.5

Part 2: Prior Concordance
In this part we will test whether the default evaluations we
have discovered are robust enough to be consistently
applied to cases in which P is initially not at rest but rather
in motion. Imagine a moving P colliding with a fastermoving A, changing the speed and/or direction of its
movement after the collision. According to our criteria, P’s
intrinsic tendency would be to move in exactly the manner
manifested prior to collision (including direction and speed
parameters). A should thus be identified as causing P to
deviate from its intrinsic tendency which constitutes a
violation of the noninterference principle (NIP).
Crucially, this should be the case regardless of whether P
and A exhibit concordant or discordant pre-collision
movement. The direction of forces is not represented in
Talmy’s (1988) framework so that two entities moving on
the same trajectory at different speed are still conceptualized
as being in opposition (contrary to Wolff, 2007; see General
Discussion). Note that without reference to Talmy’s
framework of opposing forces it seems a priori plausible
that the concordant and discordant cases will be
conceptualized differently. Specifically, in the concordant
case it may seem as if the faster A enhances the slower P in
its tendency which could result in A being evaluated
positively for “helping” P. According to our theory,
however, this should not be the case. If people’s default
evaluations correspond to Talmy’s framework and the NIP,
then they should be insensitive to prior concordance: They
should evaluate an A making P go faster into the direction of
its initial movement similarly to an A making P go into the
opposite direction of its initial movement. Both cases
violate the NIP.

Patient
Agent

1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

1

2

3
4
Condition

5

6

Figure 2: Results of Part 1. Error Bars = 95% CI.

788

Design and Material The initial state of all animations was
an empty stage. After one second, P entered the stage from
one side at a constant speed on a straight horizontal
trajectory, reaching the center of the stage after two seconds.
One second after P’s appearance, A entered the stage at
twice the speed of P, either from the same side (concordant
condition, C+) or from the opposite side (discordant
condition, C-). Consequently, in both conditions the
collision of A and P took place in the center of the screen,
one second after A’s appearance. After the collision, both
entities moved in the direction of A’s initial movement in all
conditions. This implies that in C+, P continued in the
direction of its initial movement, while in C- it reversed the
direction of movement. Similar as in Part 1, we manipulated
the post-collision speed of both entities, which could be the
initial speed of P (1) or A (2). Again, P had to be at least as
fast as A after the collision. This yielded three Speed
conditions crossed with the two Concordance conditions,
resulting in the six experimental conditions summarized in
Table 2. Concerning the definition of agentic cues, we
refined the criterion of pre-collision movement (a, see
above) to faster pre-collision movement relative to the other
entity. As in Part 1, A exhibits at least one more cue for
agency than P in all conditions.

Results and Discussion The descriptive results are
displayed in Figure 3. A global 2 (Concordance: C+ vs. C-)
× 3 (Speed: 1 to 3) × 2 (Entity: A vs. P) repeated-measures
ANOVA yielded a main effect for Concordance
(F1,30 = 19.10; p < .001,
= .39), indicating that both
entities were generally rated more negatively in C- than in
C+. Again there was a main effect for Entity (F1,30 = 28.90;
p < .001,
= .49), indicating that A was generally rated
more negatively than P. Finally, the Speed × Entity and the
Speed × Concordance interaction terms were significant
(F1,30 = 7.08; p < .01,
= .19, and F1,30 = 4.07; p < .05,
= .12, respectively), showing that post-collision
movements of A and P affected A- and P-ratings
differentially, and that they also had different effects
depending on the prior concordance of both entities.
(i) A-ratings in the three C- conditions are lower than the
respective P-ratings (t30 = -4.02, p < .001, d = -.72),
replicating the result of Part 1 that A receives negative
evaluations when it clearly violates the NIP.
(ii) A-ratings in C+1 are not different from the P-ratings
in the same condition (t30 = -.97, p = .34). As expected, A is
again not evaluated negatively if it does not interfere with
P’s intrinsic tendency.
(iii) A-ratings in C+2 and C+3 are lower than the
respective P-ratings (t30 = -5.81, p < .001, d = -1.04), while
they do not differ significantly from the A-ratings in the Cconditions (t30 = 1.44, p = .16). Both results indicate that our
subjects evaluated the concordant cases according to the
same principles of opposing force-dynamics that they used
in discordant cases, as predicted by our model. As soon as A
violated the NIP, it was evaluated negatively, regardless of
whether P was forced to reverse direction of movement or
merely to continue faster on its original trajectory.

Table 2: Design of Part 2

Cond
C+1
C+2
C+3
C-1
C-2
C-3

Conc
1
1
1
0
0
0

Speed
A
P
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2

Resulting Properties
A_ch P_ch
Cont Res
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1

General Discussion

Note. Cond = Condition, Conc = pre-collision Concordance,
Speed = post-collision speed, A/P_ch = A/P_change, Cont =
Contact, Res = Resistance.

In this paper, we have argued that the semantic category
of force dynamics (Talmy, 1988) provides a cognitive
structure underlying our moral intuitions. We provided
evidence that various evaluations of content-free interacting
entities can be predicted from force-dynamic properties in
combination with a single normative principle (NIP) that

Specific Predictions (i) Straightforward predictions arise
from our model for the evaluation of A in all three C- cases.
The reversal of P’s direction of movement caused by A is a
clear violation of the NIP which should lead subjects to
evaluate A negatively relative to P.
(ii) Case C+1 is an instantiation of despite in which P
continues manifesting its intrinsic tendency after the
collision. A should not be evaluated negatively relative to P
since the NIP is not violated.
(iii) The crucial new conditions are C+2 and C+3. Here,
subjects encounter a violation of the NIP preceded by
concordant pre-collision movement. P is thus merely caused
to deviate from its intrinsic (slow) speed, but not to deviate
from its intrinsic direction. This could in principle lead
subjects to conceptualize A as helping P to advance faster
on its path. However, our theory predicts that subjects will
still evaluate A negatively for causing a violation of the NIP.
The A-ratings should also not differ from the A-ratings in
the C- conditions.

Mean Evaluative Rating

1.5

Patient
Agent

1.0
0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

C+1

C+2

C+3

C-1

C-2

C-3

Condition

Figure 3: Results of Part 2. Error Bars = 95% CI.

789

expresses our prima facie moral norm not to interfere with
others’ interests. We thus propose that force dynamics might
be part of the missing link between the apprehension of a
situation and the automatic generation of a moral intuition.
Observed events activate an abstract representation of the
force-dynamic pattern which they instantiate. This
representation is subjected to a basic normative principle,
yielding default evaluative tendencies that are automatically
applied to the participants of the observed interaction. We
do not claim that the output of this process already
represents a full-blown moral intuition. The automatically
generated resulting representation could constitute a
building block serving as input for higher-level processes
(e.g., contextual analysis, inferences from other cues,
background knowledge, application of exceptions, etc.) that
eventually lead to rich, conscious moral intuitions.
Of course, the present study is only an encouraging first
step in our research endeavor. So far we have only
demonstrated an association between some force-dynamic
patterns and explicit evaluations under maximally
impoverished context conditions. It needs yet to be shown
that the observed force-dynamic interactions also
spontaneously elicit basic evaluations when no explicit test
questions are given that request moral evaluations.
It may be seen as problematic that our model does not
differentiate between animate and inanimate entities,
contrary to many other theories in the field (e.g., Carey,
2009). Instead, our proposal is that force dynamic intuitions
underlie event representation across domains as an abstract
common code. If we are correct that basic evaluations are
automatically elicited on this level of abstraction, this
implies that observing one billiard ball launching another
should elicit the same evaluative tendencies as observing
Jack pushing Jones. Note, for example, that our displays
contained no cues to animacy (such as self-propelled
motion), and yet evaluations consistent with our model were
observed. The postulation of a common code eliciting basic
intuitions in both physical and social domains does not rule
out that people use additional cues to differentiate between
animate and inanimate entities (see Hamlin & Wynn, 2011,
for evidence with infants). Force dynamics does not
postulate that our representations of physics and psychology
are exhaustively characterized as interplay of interacting
forces. Additional semantic knowledge may of course
enrich the force dynamic representation.
A related concern is that our model does not seem to
capture all moral intuitions. A force-dynamic analysis of
Jack lying to Jones, for example, will probably be less
straightforward. We are aware that the practice of our moral
judgment is very intricate and involves more considerations
than those touched upon here. Our claim is thus not to
provide a comprehensive theory of our moral intuitions.
However, note that the range of intuitions our approach does
potentially capture seems remarkable given its simplicity.
The abstract nature of force dynamics makes it applicable to
heterogeneous morally relevant events (e.g., dictators
oppressing their people, people resisting temptations, etc.).

Another limitation of our approach is that it only predicts
evaluations of agents. Yet, patient ratings also varied across
our experimental conditions, sometimes independently from
agent ratings. This might suggest that additional inferences
are drawn from our stimuli which are not captured by our
model.
Result (iii) of Part 2 suggests that the default
conceptualization of force-related interactions is one of
antagonism. It is likely that this default can quite easily be
overridden if additional contextual cues are available that
activate concepts of cooperation. Wolff (2007), for example,
investigated cases in which P initially approaches a specific
end state and A exerts a concordant force on P, resulting in
P reaching the end state more quickly. Such displays
reliably elicited concepts of enable or help in which A
would presumably receive positive evaluations. We would
predict that if a salient end state was provided in our
displays, the default conceptualization of P’s intrinsic
tendency might be replaced by a higher-level goal-directed
conceptualization in which P’s intrinsic tendency would be
to reach the end state. Once this more abstract intrinsic
tendency would be attributed to P, the NIP would no longer
be violated. Future studies will need to test these and related
predictions for more complex structures with more than two
protagonists.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG WA 621/21-1), and by the
Courant Research Centre ‘Evolution of Social Behaviour’,
University of Göttingen (funded by the German Initiative of
Excellence). We thank Laila Drummond Nauck and Julia
Wiecha for helping with stimulus design and data collection.

References
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Dowty, D. (1991). Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language, 67, 547-619.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment.
Psychological Review, 108, 814–834.
Hamlin, J. K., & Wynn, K. (2011). Young infants prefer
prosocial to antisocial others. Cognitive Development, 26,
30-39.
Michotte, A. E. (1963). The perception of causality. New
York: Basic Books. (Original work published 1946)
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 12, 49-100.
White, P. A. (2009). Perception of forces exerted by objects
in collision events. Psychological Review, 116, 580-601.
Wolff, P. (2007). Representing causation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 82-111.

790

