UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gaze cues in complex, real-world scenes direct the attention of high-functioning adults with
autism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7px9z6r2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Redcay, Elizabeth
O'Young, Daniel R.
Slevc, Lloyd R.
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gaze cues in complex, real-world scenes direct the attention of high-functioning
adults with autism
Elizabeth Redcay (redcay@umd.edu)
Daniel O’Young (droyoung@umd.edu)
L. Robert Slevc (slevc@umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Penelope L. Mavros (lmavros@mit.edu)
John D. Gabrieli (gabrieli@mit.edu)
Pawan Sinha (sinha@mit.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

social development. While joint attention refers to both the
initiation of a bid for joint attention and the response, the
focus of the current paper is on processes that may underlie
atypical responding. Atypical responding to joint attention
could be due to general differences in visual attention (e.g.,
Brenner, Turner, & Müller, 2007), social attention
specifically, for example reduced attention to people, faces,
and eyes (Klin, Jones, Schultz, Volkmar, et al., 2002;
Pelphrey et al., 2002), and/or a failure to direct one’s own
attention based on cues from others, to name a few. These
various aspects of joint attention behavior have been
investigated in a number of different experimental
paradigms, however evidence for difficulties with these
processes in individuals with autism has been mixed - at
least in experimental contexts.
Social attention in autism has been investigated in several
ways including the collection of eye-tracking data during
viewing of videos, scenes, or pictures of faces and the
examination of response patterns during a change blindness
paradigm1. The first eye-tracking studies to examine
whether social attention was atypical in ASD revealed
reduced attention to people, and in particular to their eyes,
during video viewing (Klin et al., 2002; Pelphrey et al.,
2002). While more recent evidence also supports this
atypical focus of attention on people within a scene, and on
eyes within a face (e.g., Jones, Carr, & Klin, 2008; Dalton et
al., 2005; Spezio, Adolphs, Hurley, & Piven, 2007), other
evidence does not (e.g, Bar-Haim, Shulman, Lamy, &
Reuveni, 2006). Recent studies have capitalized on change
blindness methods in order to ask whether attention in a
complex scene is prioritized to social aspects of the scene.
These studies find that visual attention is prioritized for
social agents (New, Schultz, Wolf, Niehaus et al., 2010;
Fletcher-Watson, Leekam, Benson, et al., 2009) and eyes
(Fletcher-Watson, Leekam, Findlay, & Stanton, 2008) in
typical individuals and those with ASD. Thus, among a

Abstract Autism is characterized by atypical use of social
communicative cues, such as another person’s gaze or point.
Despite these real-world difficulties, experimental
manipulations often reveal minimal group differences. One
factor that may contribute to this failure to find differences is
the use of oversimplified and decontextualized social stimuli
to examine these behaviors (e.g., a solo floating face). In the
current study, we examined whether typical individuals and
those with high-functioning autism spectrum disorder would
use subtle gaze cues embedded in a natural, real-world scene
to aid them in a change detection task using flicker
presentation. Each scene contained three changes, and in
some pictures, one of those changes was in the direction of
gaze of the people in the scene. Even though neither group
was aware that gaze cues aided in identification of the change,
both groups showed a robust effect of gaze cues in change
detection, such that changes in the line of gaze were detected
first in a scene more often than those not in the line of gaze.
These data illustrate typical use of gaze cues in highfunctioning adults with ASD even in the context of a
complex, naturalistic scene. Our findings suggest that
attention to gaze cues may not be at the root of difficulties
with joint attention in adults with autism
Keywords: change
spectrum disorder.

blindness;

joint

attention;

autism

Introduction
Imagine we are taking a walk in a park and a bird flies
overhead. I point to it and look at you, then you look at the
bird and you tell me it’s a magpie. These simple instances of
joint attention, or the intentional coordination of one’s own
attention with another on an object or topic, occur often in
everyday social interactions. Joint attention interactions
begin in infancy and provide a robust social learning tool for
those who engage in them (e.g., Baldwin et al., 1996;
Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, et al., 2005). Atypical
joint attention is a hallmark characteristic in individuals
with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) (e.g., Charman,
2003; Mundy & Newell, 2007, but see Gernsbacher,
Stevenson, Khandakar, & Goldsmith, 2008) and early joint
attention abilities are correlated with atypical language and

1

In a change blindness paradigm participants must identify
small change(s) between two images through comparing images
side-by-side or through flicker presentation.

911

high-functioning group of participants with ASD, there is
mixed support for problems with social attention, suggesting
that either this may not be a source of atypical joint attention
(at least by adulthood) or the experimental paradigms used
are failing to capture the difficulties.
In a joint attention context social attention is necessary
but not sufficient to coordinate attention with another. If I
just looked at you pointing to the magpie but didn’t look at
the magpie I would not have engaged in joint attention with
you nor would I have learned the name for that type of bird.
Indeed, individuals must use the other person’s shift in
attention (e.g., through gaze) to redirect their own attention
to achieve joint attention. Thus, one hypothesis is that
atypical use of gaze, rather than social attention alone, may
underlie atypical joint attention. Researchers have examined
the effect of gaze cueing on attention in experimental tasks
and again find mixed to weak support for an atypical
response in autism. However, these studies have been
largely devoid of social context. These studies have mostly
been conducted through the use of a modified Posner cueing
task in which participants are told to push the left or right
button when they detect a target on the left or right side of
the screen, respectively. A face at the center of the screen
shifts gaze just prior to appearance of the target to a location
that is either congruent or incongruent with the target
location. Greater reaction time for the incongruent than
congruent trials suggests reflexive use of the gaze cue
information to redirect attention even though participants
are told the gaze cue is irrelevant to the task. In a review of
12 experiments, 8 revealed no differences between autism
and control groups with this method (review, Nation &
Penny, 2008), suggesting reflexive orienting of attention to
gaze cues in ASD is fairly typical. As mentioned above, this
failure to find a difference could be due to the lack of social
context in the stimuli. A study using eye-tracking methods
examined attention to objects in a person’s line of gaze in a
real-world scene. While individuals with autism reliably
followed the person’s gaze to the objects, they looked less at
the objects of attention than controls (Freeth, Chapman,
Ropar, & Mitchell, 2010). This study illustrates typical gaze
following in ASD individuals, but suggests atypical use of
gaze information (i.e., less looking at the objects). One
limitation of the study, though, is that the gaze cues were so
salient in the scenes that the study may not be tapping into
more subtle, real-world difficulties in attention to and use of
gaze information to orient attention to relevant aspects in
ones environment.
In sum, studies of social attention using eye-tracking or
change blindness methods do not examine the effect of gaze
on attention reorienting, while gaze cueing paradigms that
do examine the effect of gaze have previously used
oversimplified stimuli with minimal social context or realworld validity. To overcome these limitations and examine
whether the object of another person’s attention is
prioritized in a complex visual scene, we used a change
blindness paradigm in which gaze cues were subtly
embedded in a complex, natural scene.

Methods
Participants
Eleven adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (29.6 ±
4.2 years, 8 male) and fifteen typically developing adults
(TD) (24.4 ± 5.2 years, 9 male) participated in this study.
All participants gave written informed consent and received
monetary compensation for their participation. Two TD
subjects were excluded from subsequent analysis, one for
having been previously diagnosed with depression and
another for an ophthalmologic developmental disorder.
Participants entered the study with a diagnosis of autism or
Asperger’s from their community healthcare provider but in
order to confirm a research diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorder, an autism behavioral therapist (P.L.M.) who was
certified on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule
(ADOS) – Module 4 (Lord et al., 2000) administered and
scored the ADOS. A psychiatrist confirmed a diagnosis on
the spectrum by viewing tapes of the ADOS interview. Of
the 11 participants, 8 met criteria for autism (i.e., a
combined social-communication score of 10 or higher), the
other three 3 met criteria for spectrum (i.e., a combined
social-communication score of 7 or greater). Socialcommunication scores ranged from 7-14 with a mean of 10
(stdev 2.24).

Figure 1: Examples of the picture types (Predictive or
Non-Predictive) and change types (gaze-center, gazeperipheral, non-gaze center, non-gaze peripheral).

Stimuli
Twenty-nine color photographs of natural scenes were used
to create the stimuli. Each photograph included between
one and three people with visible faces and several objects.
The photographs were edited using Adobe Photoshop. For
each photograph, three changes were made to each picture.

912

Attempts were made to balance the changes in the center
and periphery across pictures. Center regions were defined
as the area within an oval that is half of the height and width
of the entire picture, while peripheral regions consisted of
any areas outside of the center regions. Twenty of the
photographs had a change that was within the line of direct
gaze of the person(s) in the photograph. These twenty
photos are labeled ‘Predictive’ because one of the changes
can be predicted by the gaze direction. The other nine
photos (‘Nonpredictive’) were included as fillers so that
participants were unlikely to notice the predictive nature of
the gaze changes.

(F(3)=4.19,p<.01) with changes in the center and line of
gaze showing higher saliency values than changes in the
periphery. Pairwise contrasts were examined using Tukey’s
HSD (α<.05), and no differences in saliency were found
between nongaze-center changes, gaze-center changes, and
gaze-periphery changes or between gaze-periphery and nongaze periphery changes. Saliency and change size were both
included as covariates in the model (below).

Task
The experiment was conducted on an iMac computer with
stimuli presented on an auxiliary 19” monitor using Matlab
Version 7.7 (R2008b) with Psychophysics Toolbox Version
3. Participants received written and verbal instructions that
they would be viewing a series of picture pairs and that
these pairs would be presented in rapid alternation and
would be identical except for three changes, such as changes
in the color or the presence of an object. Participants were
asked to identify these changes as quickly as possible and to
respond via a button press. Participants were first given a
practice task consisting of two trials that were identical to
the actual task to ensure that subjects fully understood the
task. Each trial began when the subject indicated that they
were ready by pressing the mouse button. The subject
would then be presented with the original photograph for
1000ms, a blank screen for 200ms, then the altered image
for 1000ms, and another blank screen for 200ms. This
sequence was looped until the subject indicated via a button
press that a change was observed between the photographs.
The button press brought up a blank screen. The subjects
were required to give a verbal description of the change and
to point on the blank screen in the area where the change
was observed. The experimenter would record the change
on the computer. Accuracy was determined online by the
experimenter. When the subject indicated they were ready,
this process would continue with the same photograph
sequence. The subsequent trial would begin with a new
stimulus once all three changes were observed, or until a
time limit of 3 minutes was reached. Stimulus order was
randomized for each subject.

Stimulus ratings
Eight new participants not informed of the purpose of the
current study rated each change within the set of predictive
pictures as ‘center’ or ‘periphery’ based on the definition
given above. Additionally, these participants judged
whether the change occurred in the foreground or
background of the scene. Two changes could not be
categorized as center or periphery (50% ratings for each).
These two changes were within the same picture so that
picture was removed from all further analyses. Thus, out of
19 predictive pictures, 11 changes were rated as in the
center and in the line of gaze (gaze-center), 8 were in the
periphery and in the line of gaze (gaze-periphery), 15 were
in the center and not in the line of gaze (non-gaze center),
23 were in the periphery and not in the line of gaze (nongaze periphery). All gaze changes were rated as in the
foreground of the picture whereas non-gaze changes were a
mix of foreground and background, thus the grounding
(foreground vs. background) of changes was included as a
covariate in the statistical models (below).

Visual controls
Photographs were analyzed for visual saliency using the
saliency toolbox (Walther & Koch, 2006). This toolbox
identifies the most salient ‘objects’ (or locations) in a scene.
Saliency was determined based on a combination of
intensity, orientation, and color maps. When choosing
regions in which to make a change, we attempted to avoid
these most salient regions. In order to compare whether
saliency values from the pixels that contained a change
differed between the change types, a saliency map was
generated which contained a saliency value at each pixel.
Regions of interest were created for each change region in
each picture. Mean saliency value was extracted from within
each change region using Matlab. Another potential lowlevel feature that could have influenced change detection
was size of the change. The size of the change was
determined by counting the number of pixels in the regions
of interest for each change. Two one-way ANOVA’s were
conducted to examine the effect of saliency and size on
change category (gaze center, gaze periphery, non-gaze
center, non-gaze periphery). No significant difference in
size of the change types was found (F(3)=.576,p<.63) but
saliency did show an effect of change category

Figure 2: Timeline of one trial

Statistical analyses
Separate analyses were conducted on total number of
changes detected and on the first change detected in each
picture using logistic mixed-effects models as implemented
in the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler, & Bolker, 2011) in

913

the R software package (version 2.14.1; R Development
Core Team, 2011). Gaze (change in the line of gaze or not),
location (center or peripheral change) and group (ASD or
control) were treated as fixed effects using orthogonal
contrast coding, and participants and items were treated as
crossed random effects, with the maximal random effects
structure supported by the data. In addition, change saliency,
size, and grounding (foreground or background) were
included as centered fixed effect covariates.
Mixed effects models are useful for data such as these
because they do not require aggregation across items nor do
they require fully balanced data (Jaeger, 2008). Logtransformed response times were analyzed with similar
(non-logistic) models. For readability and for purposes of
graphical presentation, values are described as proportions
(calculated as means of participant means) rather than as
log-odds ratios and as raw response times (after excluding
times exceeding two standard deviations from each
participant’s mean response time) rather than log
transformed times.

changes (b = -0.40, SE = 0.17, t = -2.30), and a marginally
significant effect of group (b = -0.33, SE = 0.18, t = -1.82)
showed that control participants detected their first change
an average of 2.4 seconds faster than ASD participants.

No effect of group on identification of gaze changes
No other effects or interactions reached significance (all
ps > .1); in particular, the effect of gaze did not differ for
ASD and control participants (29.0% vs 27.6%,
respectively).

Results
Gaze cues facilitate change detection
Participants first detected 53.5% of the changes in the line
of gaze compared to only 25.3% of the changes not in the
line of gaze; this 28.2% difference was reflected in a
significant main effect of gaze (see Figure 3a; b = 1.46, SE
= 0.47, z = 3.09, p < .01). Unsurprisingly, participants were
(marginally significantly) more likely to first detect changes
that were larger (b = 0.30, SE = 0.02, z = 1.69, p < .10).
Although participants first detected numerically more
changes in the periphery than in the center (37% vs. 32%),
this difference did not reach significance (b = 0.64, SE =
0.39, z = 1.64, n.s.). There was, however, a marginally
significant effect of location when the covariates of size,
saliency, and grounding were not included in the model (b =
0.90 SE = 0.54, z = 1.68, p < .10); this likely reflects the fact
that center changes were nearly always also foreground
changes with higher saliency values than changes in the
periphery. (Note that the model does not show concerning
levels of collinearity; all variance inflation factors < 1.7).
There is evidence that changes in the foreground of
pictures are easier to detect than changes in the background
(Rensink, O’Regan, & Clark, 1997), however grounding did
not explain significant variance in change detection or
response times, suggesting that these differences were
relatively minor.
Analysis of detection times to the first change (Figure 3b)
revealed a similar pattern of results.2 A main effect of gaze
showed that participants detected changes in the line of gaze
an average of 2.3 seconds faster than changes not in the line
of gaze (b = -0.30, SE = 0.13, t = -2.37), a main effect of
saliency showed faster detection of more visually salient

Figure 3: Effect of gaze on first change detected (A) and
reaction time to detect change (B).

Total number of changes detected by group
Overall, ASD participants detected fewer changes than did
controls, however this was largely due to the performance of
one ASD participant who missed 35% of the changes
(compared to an average miss-rate of 5.3% for the rest of
the ASD group and 2.8% for the control group). With this
participant excluded, ASD participants did not detect
significantly fewer changes than did controls (94.7% vs.
97.2% detected; b = -0.71, SE = 0.75, z = -0.95, p > .10),
although a marginally significant gaze by group interaction
(b = -2.08, SE = 1.22, z = -1.71, p = .09) showed that ASD
participants were more likely to miss changes that were not
in the line of gaze (missing 6.6% non-gaze changes vs. 2.6%

2

The lme4 package cannot currently estimate p values for tstatistics in models with random slopes, however common practice
is to assume that t values greater than 2 are statistically significant.

914

of gaze changes) whereas controls showed a smaller
difference, numerically in the other direction (2.4% missed
non-gaze vs. 3.6% missed gaze changes).3 ASD participants
also took longer to detect all three changes (when all
changes were, in fact, detected) then did control participants
(an average of 51.5 vs. 40.1 seconds, respectively; b = -0.16,
SE = 0.05, t = -3.00).

social interactions which are not captured by these offline
tasks. The unpredictability and fast-pace of live interactions
may add sufficient challenges to cause an otherwise capable
system of social attention to break down. This conclusion
remains speculative however without concurrent data from
participants in the context of a real-time face-to-face
interaction.
Finally, other factors may have contributed to this lack of
a group difference. The participants in this study were highfunctioning adults with autism and Asperger’s disorder.
Thus, their level of social impairment is by definition less
severe than the majority of individuals with autism. Second,
they have had years to develop strategies for success in
social interactions, such as directing attention to the face
and eyes. Indeed, atypical gaze processing may be greatest
early in life (e.g., Klin, Jones, Schultz, & Volkmar, 2003;
Leekam, Hunnisett, & Moore, 1998) but through treatment
and compensatory strategies these differences may be
minimized by adulthood.

Discussion
Subtle gaze cues robustly affect visual attention
A robust effect of gaze on change detection was found in
both the typical and ASD groups. This effect cannot be
explained by low-level visual effects like size or saliency or
grounding (foreground vs. background) of the change
because the effect of gaze on first change detected and on
time to detect the change were significant even with these
variables as covariates.
Gaze cueing effects in a change detection paradigm have
been demonstrated in typical adults previously (Langton,
O’Donnell, Riby, & Ballantyne, 2006) but the gaze cues in
those stimuli were highly salient (e.g., one person in the
picture at a desk with body facing forward and some objects
around him). Our findings provide a stronger test for the
role of gaze in object detection through the presentation of
multiple changes within a complex scene with multiple
people and subtle gaze cues. In fact the cues were so subtle
that in a post-test debriefing session, participants reported
that they were unaware that direction of gaze provided any
information about the location of the changes. Thus, these
findings provide strong support that the object of someone’s
attention is prioritized during visual search – even without
explicit awareness of the utility of gaze cues in this context.

Conclusions and Future Directions
These data show that normal use of gaze information in
high-functioning adults with autism is not restricted to
visually simplistic scenes; instead, in complex, real-world
scenes with subtle embedding of gaze cues individuals with
ASD show normal attentional prioritization to objects in the
line of another’s gaze. An important question for future
research will be to determine when and how adults with
autism do show atypical use of gaze information (e.g., see
review by Klin, Jones, Schultz, & Volkmar, 2003). Atypical
use of gaze information may be the most robust in real-time
face-to-face contexts that are unpredictable and quickly
changing. However, limited research has been done to
investigate spontaneous difficulties with joint attention in
adults with autism. This work will be critical to understand
the specific difficulties with social interaction experienced
throughout the lifespan in autism. For example, factors that
underlie atypical social interactions in a toddler may be very
different than those of an adult. Understanding how joint
social attention is atypical will allow for more targeted
inteventions and treatments for adults with autism, an area
of relatively less investigation (e.g., Autism Speaks
Strategic Plan, 2009).

No effect of group on change detection
Surprisingly, no effect of group was found. In fact, there
was a trend for individuals with ASD to show a greater
effect of gaze on change detection, especially for changes in
the periphery. While we predicted an effect of group, this
lack of a difference is consistent with several other change
blindness studies suggesting normal prioritization of
attention to social agents in ASD (Fletcher-Watson et al.,
2008; New et al., 2010). Our findings extend previous work
by showing normal prioritization of attention to the object
of another person’s attention in ASD even when the gaze
cues were subtly embedded into the scene. These findings
suggest that attention to (and use of) gaze information in
high-functioning adults with autism may not be impaired
and thus are not a determinant of atypical social interactions
in adults.
An alternative possibility is that these (and other) findings
of a failure to find group differences in offline, experimental
contexts suggest that difficulties in social attention and gaze
processing are due to inherent difficulties with real-time

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Kang Won Choi for discussions on the
design of the study. We gratefully acknowledge Rashida
Callendar, Joy Ekuta, and Eugenia Luo for assistance with
stimuli creation and editing and Ariana Mann for assistance
with stimuli creation and pilot testing. This work was
supported by funding from the Simons Foundation Autism
Research Initiative (SFARI) awarded to J.G. and P.S and a
postdoctoral fellowship awarded from the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development awarded to E.R.

3

All other analyses are reported over data from all participants,
but note that the pattern of results does not change appreciably if
this participant is excluded.

915

from autism. Philosophical transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences,
358(1430), 345-60.
Klin, A., Jones, W., Schultz, R., Volkmar, F., & Cohen, D.
(2002). Visual fixation patterns during viewing of
naturalistic social situations as predictors of social
competence in individuals with autism. Archives of
general psychiatry, 59(9), 809-16.
Langton, S. R. H., O’Donnell, C., Riby, D. M., &
Ballantyne, C. J. (2006). Gaze cues influence the
allocation of attention in natural scene viewing.
Quarterly journal of experimental psychology (2006),
59(12), 2056-64.
Leekam, S R, Hunnisett, E., & Moore, C. (1998). Targets
and cues: gaze-following in children with autism.
Journal of child psychology and psychiatry, 39(7),
951-962.
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Leventhal, B.
L., DiLavore, P. C., Pickles, a, et al. (2000). The
autism diagnostic observation schedule-generic: a
standard measure of social and communication
deficits associated with the spectrum of autism.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 30(3),
205-23.
Mundy, P., & Newell, L. (2007). Attention, Joint Attention,
and Social Cognition. Current directions in
psychological science  : a journal of the American
Psychological Society, 16(5), 269-274.
Nation, K., & Penny, S. (2008). Sensitivity to eye gaze in
autism: is it normal? Is it automatic? Is it social?
Development and psychopathology, 20(1), 79-97.
New, J. J., Schultz, R. T., Wolf, J., Niehaus, J. L., Klin, A.,
German, T. C., & Scholl, B. J. (2010). The scope of
social attention deficits in autism: prioritized orienting
to people and animals in static natural scenes.
Neuropsychologia, 48(1), 51-9.
Pelphrey, K. a, Sasson, N. J., Reznick, J. S., Paul, G.,
Goldman, B. D., & Piven, J. (2002). Visual scanning
of faces in autism. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 32(4), 249-61.
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To
See or not to See: The Need for Attention to Perceive
Changes in Scenes. Psychological Science, 8(5), 368373. SAGE Publications.
Spezio, M. L., Adolphs, R., Hurley, R. S. E., & Piven, J.
(2007). Abnormal use of facial information in highfunctioning autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 37(5), 929-939. Springer.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll,
H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: the
origins of cultural cognition. The Behavioral and
brain sciences, 28(5), 675-91; discussion 691-735.
Walther, D., & Koch, C. (2006). Modeling attention to
salient proto-objects. Neural networks  : the official
journal of the International Neural Network Society,
19(9), 1395-407.

References
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., Bill, B., Desjardins, R.
N., Irwin, J. M., & Tidball, G. (1996). Infants’
Reliance on a Social Criterion for Establishing WordObject Relations. Child development, 67(6), 3135–
3153. Wiley Online Library.
Bar-Haim, Y., Shulman, C., Lamy, D., & Reuveni, A.
(2006). Attention to eyes and mouth in highfunctioning children with autism. Journal of autism
and developmental disorders, 36(1), 131-7.
Bates, D. M., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2011). Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R A Language
and Environment for Statistical Computing. R
package version 0.9975-0.
Brenner, L. a, Turner, K. C., & Müller, R.-A. (2007). Eye
movement and visual search: are there elementary
abnormalities in autism? Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 37(7), 1289-309.
Charman, T. (2003). Why is joint attention a pivotal skill in
autism? Philosophical transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences,
358(1430), 315-24.
Dalton, K. M., Nacewicz, B. M., Johnstone, T., Schaefer, H.
S., Gernsbacher, M. A., Goldsmith, H H, Alexander,
A. L., et al. (2005). Gaze fixation and the neural
circuitry of face processing in autism. Nature
neuroscience, 8(4), 519-26. doi:10.1038/nn1421
Fletcher-Watson, S, Leekam, S R, Benson, V., Frank, M. C.,
& Findlay, J M. (2009). Eye-movements reveal
attention to social information in autism spectrum
disorder. Neuropsychologia, 47(1), 248-57.
Fletcher-Watson, Sue, Leekam, Susan R, Findlay, John M,
& Stanton, E. C. (2008). Brief report: young adults
with autism spectrum disorder show normal attention
to eye-gaze information-evidence from a new change
blindness paradigm. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 38(9), 1785-90.
Freeth, M., Chapman, P., Ropar, D., & Mitchell, P. (2010).
Do gaze cues in complex scenes capture and direct the
attention of high functioning adolescents with ASD?
Evidence from eye-tracking. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 40(5), 534-47.
Gernsbacher, M. A., Stevenson, J. L., Khandakar, S., &
Goldsmith, H. Hill. (2008). Why Does Joint Attention
Look Atypical in Autism? Child Development
Perspectives, 2(1), 38-45.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical Data Analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards Logit
Mixed Models. Journal of memory and language,
59(4), 434-446. Elsevier Inc. Jones, W., Carr, K., &
Klin, A. (2008). Absence of preferential looking to the
eyes of approaching adults predicts level of social
disability in 2-year-old toddlers with autism spectrum
disorder. Archives of general psychiatry, 65(8), 94654.
Klin, A., Jones, W., Schultz, R., & Volkmar, F. (2003). The
enactive mind, or from actions to cognition: lessons

916

