UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grounding spatial language in non-linguistic cognition: Evidence for universal and relative
spatial semantics in thought

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3xn2q68c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Pacer, Michael
Carstensen, Alexandra
Regier, Terry

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grounding spatial language in non-linguistic cognition:
Evidence for universal and relative spatial semantics in thought
Michael Pacer* (mpacer@berkeley.edu)
Alexandra Carstensen* (abc@berkeley.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Terry Regier (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)

Department of Linguistics and Cognitive Science Program, University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
similar to those expressed by in and on in English. She
demonstrated that these primitives could be conjoined to
form the linguistic spatial categories observed in diverse
languages, accounting for both universal similarities and
variation across languages. Xu and Kemp (2010) have since
expanded on Feist‟s attributes, constructing their own set of
universal primitives and demonstrating that conjunctions of
these primitives can be used to describe a wide range of
variation in the ways that languages partition the semantic
space of spatial relations.
Primitive-based accounts have been demonstrated to
characterize spatial terms across languages, capturing
distinctions in both the intensional meanings and
extensional uses of spatial words. However, the central issue
in this debate is about cognition—not language. It is unclear
whether these primitives accurately characterize the
structure of thought as well.
Despite the assumption in the literature that semantic
primitives are universal components of spatial cognition,
these proposed units of thought have been developed and
tested exclusively on the basis of linguistic data. Primitives
of spatial cognition are typically inferred top-down from
observations of cross-language variation in spatial terms,
and evaluated on their ability to explain that variation.
Importantly, this is generally done without direct reference
to non-linguistic cognition. Consequently, we know little
about how the semantic primitives of spatial language relate
to spatial cognition.
While the primitives derived from language could
plausibly account for variation in spatial cognition, they
clearly suggest a subsequent inquiry: would it be possible to
infer spatial primitives more directly from measures of
nonlinguistic cognition? If so, would these cognitive
primitives similarly account for the varying semantic
systems across languages? Would they reflect languagespecific influences as well?

Abstract
The categories named by spatial terms vary considerably
across languages. It is often proposed that underlying this
variation is a universal set of primitive spatial concepts that
are combined differently in different languages. Despite the
inherently cognitive assumptions of this proposal, such spatial
primitives have generally been inferred in a top-down manner
from linguistic data. Here we show that comparable spatial
primitives can be inferred bottom-up from non-linguistic pilesorting of spatial stimuli by speakers of English, Dutch, and
Chichewa. We demonstrate that primitives obtained in this
fashion explain meaningful cross-linguistic variation in
spatial categories better than primitives designed by hand for
that purpose, and reflect both universal and language-specific
spatial semantics.
Keywords: Language and thought; spatial cognition;
semantic primitives; semantic universals; linguistic relativity.

Spatial language and semantic primitives1
Languages categorize spatial relations differently, and
the significance of this cross-language variation for spatial
cognition is a topic of ongoing debate (e.g. Bowerman &
Pederson, 1992; Feist, 2000; Hespos & Spelke, 2004;
Khetarpal et al., 2010; Levinson & Meira, 2003; Majid et
al., 2004; see also e.g. Boroditsky & Gaby, 2010 on spatial
structuring of non-spatial domains). This debate has
traditionally pitted two views against each other. On the
one hand, some have argued (e.g. Majid et al., 2004) that
language structures spatial cognition, such that crosslanguage differences in spatial categorization cause
underlying cognitive differences in speakers of those
languages. On the other hand, others have suggested (e.g.
Levinson & Meira, 2003) that the cross-language variation
may reflect different partitions of a universal underlying
conceptual representation.
An influential version of the universalist view holds that
a set of semantic primitives (e.g. Wierzbicka, 1996) is
universally available to human cognition, and that spatial
categories in different languages can be obtained by
composing such spatial semantic primitives in different
ways. Feist (2000) proposed a set of spatial attributes
characterizing cross-linguistic uses of spatial relations

Spatial primitives in language and cognition
To determine whether proposals of semantic primitives
are supported by direct evidence from nonlinguistic
cognition, we would ideally want to obtain both cognitive
and linguistic data from speakers of differing languages,
extract primitives from the cognitive data of each group of

*The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

827

speakers, and test the ability of these cognitive primitives to
explain the linguistic spatial systems of their own and—
most importantly—other languages. We could then compare
the descriptive ability of these cognitive primitives to
primitives previously proposed on the basis of crosslanguage data. If cognition-derived primitives from one
group of speakers can account well for the spatial language
of a different group this would provide support for the
universalist account of semantic primitives.
However, it is not transparently obvious how to evaluate
the performance of a set of primitives. One approach would
be to compare their performance to that of previously
attested linguistic primitives. However, comparing multiple
representations raises the problem of accounting for the
flexibility or representational power of differing
representational systems. Correspondingly, primitives that
accurately capture spatial semantics should explain
language well without explaining random noise well. This
gives us a criterion for testing cognitive primitives; if these
primitives perform equally or better than language-derived
primitives on a measure that accounts for representational
power, then the cognitive primitives are doing well at
characterizing meaningful variation in spatial semantic
systems. Thus, if cognitive features derived from one set of
speakers could account for another language‟s spatial
system in such a way, this would support the universalist
account.
In addition to testing support for this universal view, it is
important to note that our examination is sensitive to
linguistic relativity as well. If cognition-derived primitives
from a group of speakers tend to explain the language of
those speakers better than other languages, this would
additionally provide support for linguistic relativity. For this
reason, primitive-based proposals need not presume a
universalist account. However, a fully relative account
would also be difficult to support, as it requires that
linguistic data is always best explained by cognitive data
from speakers of the same language, as similarities in
cognition across languages are theoretically limited to the
extent that those languages overlap.
To examine the ideas described above, we obtain
cognitive and language data through behavioral and
linguistic tasks, respectively, in which speakers of various
languages partition a set of spatial scenes into disjoint
subsets through sorting and naming of the depicted spatial
relations. We then infer primitives from the cognitive data
in a neutral way, using an unsupervised, bottom-up
statistical approach (additive clustering; see Lee, 2002). We
evaluate whether these cognition-derived primitives support
the semantic primitives account of spatial cognition and
language by assessing the ability of cognitive primitives to
explain variation in spatial language across a sample of
diverse languages, in comparison to language-derived
spatial primitives proposed in the literature. Finally, we
address general implications for universal and relative views
of language and thought, as well as suggestions specific to
semantic primitives in spatial cognition.
To preview the results, we find that our spatial primitives

derived from cognitive data (1) explain semantic variation
in language better than proposed primitives designed by
hand for that purpose, (2) support both universal and
relative views on spatial cognition, and (3) express generally
coherent, but variably intuitive, semantic components of
spatial relations.

Methods
In order to compare primitives derived from cognition to
those inferred from language in the literature, we drew on
existing nonlinguistic cognitive data on spatial relations as a
source for our primitives. We also incorporated existing
spatial naming data, which the primitives attempt to explain.
Here we briefly describe the prior collection of the cognitive
and linguistic data by Khetarpal et al. (2009, 2010) and by
Carstensen (2011). We then explain our process for
inferring primitives from these cognitive data, and our
procedures for testing the adequacy of these primitives in
accounting for linguistic data.
Participants. A total of 24 native English speakers
(Khetarpal et al., 2010), 24 native Dutch speakers
(Khetarpal et al., 2009), and 38 native Chichewa speakers
(Carstensen, 2011) took part in both the nonlinguistic and
linguistic tasks, administered in their native languages and
home countries of the United States, the Netherlands, and
Malawi, respectively.
Cognitive spatial task. In each of the three studies from
which we draw data (Khetarpal et al., 2009; 2010;
Carstensen, 2011), participants sorted the 71 scenes in the
Topological Relations Picture Series (TRPS; Bowerman &
Pederson, 1992; see Figure 1 for examples) into piles based
on the spatial relation depicted in each scene. Each scene
showed an orange figure object positioned relative to a
black ground object and participants were instructed to
group the scenes into piles based on this spatial relation,
such that the relation was similar for all cards in a given
pile. Participants were informed that they could make as few
or as many piles as they chose, rearrange their piles as they
felt necessary, and could take as much time as they wanted.
Linguistic spatial task. In these previous studies (Khetarpal
et al., 2009; 2010; Carstensen, 2011), after completing the
sorting task, participants were asked to name the spatial
relation depicted on each card. Labels picking out the target
and ground objects were supplied in the participant‟s native
language and the participant filled in the blank between
these labels to complete a sentence specifying the figure‟s
location in relation to the ground.
Attested linguistic spatial categories. In the linguistic
spatial task, participants supplied terms or short phrases
characterizing each spatial relation. Previous studies
sanitized these data to collapse over responses that differed
only in components without spatial meaning (e.g. variations
in verb tense), leaving 88 unique spatial phrases supplied in
English, 29 in Dutch, and 70 in Chichewa. For each phrase
in every language, we recorded all scenes that the phrase
was applied to at least once. These linguistic categories are

828

used as a target below to evaluate the ability of our
primitives in describing categories in language. The attested
linguistic categories also provide a standard for groupings of
spatial scenes that are coherent and articulable in human
language.

by a features indicator function (e.g., see Figure 1 below).
We apply this algorithm to the co-sorting matrices from
all three languages, producing a set of primitives based on
nonlinguistic cognitive data from speakers of each language.
Because the algorithm is stochastic, running it multiple
times will return different sets of primitives. To sample the
space of potential primitive sets, we create 10 primitive sets
for each language‟s co-sorting matrix, making for 30
primitive sets in all.

Similarity from partitions of spatial scenes. We use
additive clustering (Lee, 2002) to infer cognitive primitives
from nonlinguistic partitions (i.e., pile sorts) of spatial
relations. Because this method operates over similarity
matrices, we first create similarity matrices for each
language based on the frequency with which speakers of
that language co-sorted each pair of scenes.
These matrices reflect how often any two scenes were
placed in the same pile by speakers of a given language. To
create the matrix for language L for every pair of scenes
(i,j), we calculate the similarity value sij at row i and column
j by counting the number of times each speaker of L placed
scenes i and j into the same pile, and dividing this by |L|, the
sampled number of speakers of language L.
Additive clustering to derive primitives. The spatial
primitives proposed to underlie thought and compose
categories in language have traditionally been designed by
hand. In order to infer primitives from different languages in
an unbiased and language-neutral way (e.g. unaffected by
the researcher‟s native language), we create primitives using
an unsupervised clustering algorithm—stochastic-optimized
additive clustering (Lee, 2002). This algorithm does not
require that we assume a particular number of primitives
and it has been used in the past to extract meaningful
primitives from linguistic semantic partitions (Lee, 2002). 1
The algorithm approximates sij with
for all i and j,
minimizing
under certain assumptions on
how
is obtained. Specifically, we assume that objects
possess a set of n underlying features, each of which is
shared by a subset of the objects, and we assume that each
feature has an associated positive weight or salience. The
estimated similarity value for two items, i and j, is thus the
sum of the weights of the features that those two items share
(after scaling the weights to be between 0 and 1). That is, let
1k() be the indicator function for feature k with weight wk
(i.e., it has value 1 if its argument has feature k and 0
otherwise), then
.
Stochastic-optimized additive clustering uses a stochastic
search which grows the set of primitives until the variance
explained by adding further primitives fails to outweigh
complexity afforded by adding those primitives. Through
this process, we generate the features that we treat as
cognitive primitives underlying the spatial scenes in the
TRPS. That is, each primitive is the set of images defined

Figure 1: Additive clustering is used to produce a set of
primitives which are clusters of “similar” images. Portions
of five actual primitives derived from English speakers‟
spatial scene sorting are presented above. The pop-out of
primitive V shows all four of the 71 TRPS scenes that
compose this particular primitive, which appears to
characterize spatial relations that involve figure or ground
piercing.
Conjoined primitive sets. A common assumption is that
spatial primitives can be conjoined (e.g., “x is supported and
in contact with y”) to produce the spatial categories named
by spatial terms in different languages (Feist, 2000; Xu &
Kemp, 2010). Accordingly, we examine how the primitives
we infer from pile-sort data can be conjoined to explain
variation in spatial language across cultures.
We create and denote our conjoined primitive sets as
follows. The base primitive set for a language is designated
F(0). Then, F(1) is the set of primitives formed by the union
of F(0) and all conjunctions of two primitives from F(0).
Similarly, we create F(2) by including all the primitives in
F(1) as well as all conjunctions of three primitives. Finally,
we create F(3) from the union of F(2) and all conjunctions
of four primitives.
Defining distance. In order to assess how well cognitive
primitives account for spatial language, we need to
determine their fit by defining a metric for the distance
between sets of binary vectors with the same number of
dimensions, d. First, we define a distance metric between
pairs of binary vectors (e.g. primitives and linguistic
categories) as being the city-block distance between those
two vectors, f1 and f2, which both have d dimensions (e.g.
the 71 TRPS scenes, presence indicted by 1 and absence 0):

1

Stochastic-optimized additive clustering requires a “precision”
parameter describing how precise our similarity measures are, and
a parameter that describes how much explanatory power is needed
to warrant greater primitive set complexity. Because we used cosorting as a proxy for similarity, we chose to use the least precise
conventionally used value (i.e., 0.15) and the default
complexity/simplicity trade-off value of six (Lee, 2002).

829

our primitives, as these primitives from the literature are
hand-designed and generally considered to characterize
semantic content across languages.
This counts the scenes present in only one of f1 and f2.

Results & Discussion

Best-match analysis. Though we have defined a distance
measure between individual vectors, this does not explain
how we measure the distance between sets of primitives and
categories. Primitives are intended to be composed together
to describe variation in linguistic categories across
languages. Thus, we would want to create a distance metric
that captures good performance on that measure across all
primitives in a set.
Suppose that there is a set of primitives, P, and a set of
linguistic categories, L. While the primitives and linguistic
categories that make up these sets have very different
interpretations and origins, they share a formal structure.
That is, they are both binary vectors over the full set of
images. This means that we can use the vector to vector
distance as a measure of distance between an individual
primitive and a single linguistic category.
Because we are attempting to explain a linguistic
categorization system, one reasonable measure for the
distance between P and L is to take the sum of the distance
between the best matching primitive in P for every category
in L. There are no constraints on how often a primitive may
be used to explain linguistic categories; thus, this criterion
will maximize the explanatory capabilities of P for L.
Furthermore, each of the 10 primitive sets derived from a
language‟s pile-sort data will produce a best-match distance
with a language L. We will consider only the value for the
run with the lowest distance, since, arguably, by this
criterion that run is the best run for explaining L.

The universalist account of semantic primitives holds
that a set of conceptual primitives is universally available to
human cognition, and spatial categories in varying
languages can be created from different compositions of
such spatial semantic primitives. To assess whether this
view is supported directly by evidence from cognition, we
derived sets of cognitive primitives from speakers of a
sample of three diverse languages. We tested the ability of
these cognitive primitives to explain variation in spatial
language against previous proposals designed and tested on
their ability to characterize such cross-linguistic data.
After creating 10 sets of primitives per language from
the nonlinguistic pile-sorting of English, Dutch, and
Chichewa speakers, we identified the best-scoring set of
primitives from each language, making for three base sets of
cognitive primitives. The fourth base set considered was the
best-performing set of spatial primitives (with negations)
from the literature (specifically from Xu and Kemp, 2010).
From each base set, we derived a sequence of increasingly
complex sets of features, by allowing increasing numbers of
primitives to be conjoined together, as described above. We
then recorded the distance of each primitive set in each
sequence to the linguistic spatial systems of English, Dutch,
and Chichewa, as a measure of how closely each primitive
set characterizes variation in these languages.
Figure 2 shows that the distance scores for all four
primitive base sets improve (i.e. provide a closer fit to the
linguistic data) with the addition of conjunctions, affirming
Xu and Kemp‟s (2010) finding that conjunctions of
primitives (linguistic in their case, cognitive in ours) can
indeed provide for closer approximations to the categories
in language. (Note, however, that because each further level
of conjoined primitives contains the previous level,
decrement was impossible and improvement very likely.)
Although our primitives were derived from cognition and
not hand-designed, like the language-derived primitives,
their performance is generally comparable to these
previously proposed primitives, substantially improving
with the inclusion of the first level of conjunctions, but
rapidly tapering off as more features are conjoined.
Notably, our primitives consistently outperform those
from the literature in the base case or with pairs of
intersections, revealing that they themselves are closer to the
attested linguistic categories. At greater depths (i.e. with
more conjunctions, and thus at the cost of representational
complexity), the primitives from the literature are able to
more closely approximate the linguistic categories of one of

Primitives in the literature as a benchmark. Because the
description of linguistic spatial categories in terms of
proposed universal primitives is a well-visited topic,
previous proposed primitives provide a natural benchmark
against which to test our cognitive primitives. Xu and Kemp
(2010) describe a set of 19 primitives (e.g. “contact”) drawn
from the wider literature and define the 71 TRPS images in
terms of these primitives. To obtain definitions of scenes in
terms of their primitives, Xu and Kemp asked three
individuals to state whether each primitive applied to a
given scene and assigned primitives to scenes based on
majority vote. Using the same 19 primitives and 71 TRPS
images, we replicated this procedure with three participants
(= .91) to obtain a set of primitives comparable to those
described in Xu and Kemp (2010).
We considered both this primitive set and an expanded
version consisting of the original 19 primitives together with
negated versions of these primitives (i.e. the opposite,
complementary set of scenes; e.g. the set of things that are
„not in contact‟) when appropriate, as determined by Xu and
Kemp (2010). We found that in all cases the primitives with
negation outperformed the simpler set2, and we therefore
only report the performance of this expanded set. We use
this set as a benchmark for evaluating the performance of

—————————————————
2
Interestingly, while Xu & Kemp (2010) did not find improved
performance due to the inclusion of negative primitives, we found
that in our comparison, including negated primitives offered large
improvements over just the simple set of primitives.

830

Figure 2: Average distance between literature-derived, Dutch, English, and Chichewa pile-sort-derived primitives, and the
Dutch, English, and Chichewa spatial categorization systems.
our target languages (Chichewa) than are primitives derived
from pile-sorting by speakers of any of the languages we
considered. However for the other two target languages
(English and Dutch), at least some of the sets of pile-sort
derived primitives outperform those from the literature even
at greater depths.
However, as previously discussed, representational
power is an important mediating factor in the ability of these
differing representational systems to account for crosslanguage variation. Thus, primitives that accurately capture
spatial semantics should explain language well without
explaining random noise well. To determine the amount of
meaningful variation in spatial semantic systems that each
feature set captures, we must correct for its ability to capture
meaningless variation. We indexed this by creating 10
randomly permuted versions of each test language, where
the size and structure of “linguistic terms” was preserved,
but the specific spatial scenes included in each term were
randomly swapped. We then measured the average fit of
each feature set to these new nonsense “languages,” and
corrected for varying representational power by subtracting
the average distance from the feature set to a real language
from the average distance between that feature set and the
10 permutations generated from that real language.
From this analysis, presented in Figure 3, it‟s evident
that the cognition-derived features explain semantic
variation in language better than proposed primitives
designed by hand for that purpose, in that they characterize
considerably more of the meaningful variation in language,
relative to nonsense variation. It is also apparent that these
data provide support for the universal semantic primitives

account: cognition-derived primitives from all groups of
speakers can account well for the spatial language of the
other groups, relative to the comparison feature set handdesigned from cross-linguistic data. Simultaneously, we find
that cognition-derived primitives from a given group of
speakers tend to explain the language of those speakers
better than other languages, providing support for accounts
of linguistic relativity—although this is not always the case,
suggesting some compromise between relative and universal
forces in shaping these cognitive primitives.
Semantic coherence. Previously proposed spatial
primitives were intended to capture cross-language
variation, but were also intuitively designed to correspond to
meaningful and easily describable semantic components that
might underlie spatial cognition. A possible disadvantage of
inferring primitives in an unsupervised manner (e.g. by
additive clustering) is that this method may propose
primitives that lack obviously meaningful interpretations.
Thus, having established that primitives derived from
non-linguistic cognitive data can indeed be used to explain
cross-cultural variation in linguistic spatial systems, we
wished to also examine whether these primitives represent a
similarly coherent grouping of spatial semantics. Here, we
refer to the distance measures between the primitives
themselves (i.e. at depth 0) and our attested categories in
language, as an index of semantic coherence.
First, we find that 7.97% of categories in language
correspond near perfectly with individual cognitive
primitives, in that they either exactly match or have no more
than one different scene (distance of 0 or 1). In comparison,

Figure 3: Relative proximity of literature-derived, Dutch, English, and Chichewa pile-sort-derived primitives to the Dutch,
English, and Chichewa spatial categorization systems, compared to permuted versions, as a correction for representational
power. All primitive sets are closer to real languages; the degree to which they are is the degree to which they can be taken to
characterize meaningful variation in spatial semantics, rather 831
than flexibly over-fitting noisy data.

the primitives from the literature match language categories
near perfectly 5.82% of the time.
Second, the success of cognitive primitives in picking
out articulable and coherent components of spatial relations
is also apparent from a subjective evaluation of the
primitives themselves. Figure 4 illustrates this point with
two typical examples of actual cognitive primitives derived
from English and Chichewa, which appear to be composed
of spatial relations involving full or partial encirclement.
While the primitives differ somewhat between languages,
both express relatively clear and coherent spatial meanings.
Our analyses suggest the pile-sort-derived primitives
represent semantically coherent, articulable components of
spatial relations. In fact, these primitives match attested
categories in language to a degree comparable with
primitives designed by hand and surpass the hand-designed
primitives in doing so when representational power is
corrected for.

Many questions remain open, suggesting directions for
further research. Xu and Kemp (2010) found that allowing
weighted primitives gave greater expressive capability to
their model, and all distance metrics here were binary.
Adapting our approach to weighted primitives, then, could
result in improved fits overall, and could alter the general
conclusions reached. Additionally, we did have to apply
weak parametric assumptions to obtain our primitives, and
thus an approach relying on Bayesian non-parametric
methods would be beneficial—especially if it could work
directly from the pile-sort partition data rather than over
similarity matrices derived from the partition data. Finally,
we have shown results for only three languages, two of
which are from the same family and are closely related
within that family. It would be informative to assess these
ideas against a broader range of languages.

Acknowledgments
We thank Asifa Majid and Naveen Khetarpal for kindly sharing
their data. We also thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting
the permutation analysis. This work was supported by a Berkeley
Fellowship awarded to MP as well as the NSF grant SBE-0541957,
to TR and the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC).

References
Boroditsky, L. & Gaby, A. (2010). Remembrances of times East:
Psychological Science, 21(11), 1635-1639.
Bowerman, M. & Pederson, E. (1992). Cross-linguistic studies of
spatial semantic organization. In Annual Report of the Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 1992 (pp. 53-56).
Carstensen, A. (2011). Universals and variation in spatial language
and cognition: Evidence from Chichewa. Undergraduate thesis,
University of California, Berkeley.
Feist, M. I. (2000). On in and on: An investigation into the
linguistic encoding of spatial scenes. Doctoral dissertation,
Northwestern University.
Hespos, S. J. & Spelke, E. S. (2004). Conceptual precursors to
language. Nature, 430, 453 - 456.
Khetarpal, N., Majid, A., Malt, B., Sloman, S., and Regier, T.
(2010). Similarity judgments reflect both language and crosslanguage tendencies: Evidence from two semantic domains. In
S. Ohlsson and R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Khetarpal, N., Majid, A., & Regier, T. (2009). Spatial terms reflect
near-optimal spatial categories. In N. Taatgen et al. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Lee, M.D. (2002). Generating additive clustering models with
limited stochastic complexity. Journal of Classification, 19, 6985.
Levinson, S. C. & Meira, S. (2003). Natural concepts in the spatial
topological domain—adpositional meanings in crosslinguistic
perspective. Language, 79, 485-516.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., & Levinson, S.
(2004). Can language restructure cognition? The case for space.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 108-114.
Wierzbicka, A. (1996) Semantics: Primes and universals. Oxford
University Press.
Xu, Y., & Kemp, C. (2010). Constructing spatial concepts from
universal primitives. In S. Ohlsson and R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.

Figure 4: Example primitives derived from English and
Chichewa speakers‟ cognitive data using additive clustering.

Conclusions & Future Directions
We have shown that spatial primitives derived from nonlinguistic pile-sort data account well for spatial terms across
three languages. These primitives perform similarly to or
better than hand-designed primitives from the literature.
Furthermore, despite the unsupervised procedure used to
derive them, these primitives reflect relatively coherent,
articulable components of spatial cognition.
The present analyses suggest bottom-up inference may
be a suitable method for generating spatial primitives.
Further, the success of nonlinguistic cognitive data in
explaining linguistic variation in spatial semantics supports
the argument that universal primitives not only can be used
to compose linguistic categories (as demonstrated
previously), but may also be able to accurately characterize
non-linguistic cognition. As an index of non-linguistic
cognition, these primitives provide support for both
universal and relative views on spatial cognition in showing
that the cognitive primitives derived from one group of
speakers can well account for the spatial language in another
group, although nevertheless, these cognitive primitives do
tend to more closely reflect the language of the speakers
from whom they were derived, suggesting a simultaneous
role of linguistically relative forces on spatial cognition.

832

