UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inference and culture : The distinction between low context culture and high context
culture as a possible explanation for cultural differences in cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vn8f7pz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Yama, Hiroshi
Zakaria, Norhayati

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inference and culture : The distinction between low context culture and high
context culture as a possible explanation for cultural differences in cognition
Hiroshi Yama (yama.hiroshi1204@gmail.com)
School of Literature and Human Sciences, Osaka City University
Sumiyoshi, Osaka 558-8585, JAPAN

Norhayati Zakaria (norhayatizakaria@uowdubai.ac.ae)
Faculty of Business and Management, University of Wollongong, Dubai
1-02, Block 15, Knowledge Village, Dubai, U.A.E.

Abstract
Nisbett et al. (2001) claim that Easterners are more likely to use
holistic thinking to solve problems, whereas Westerners are more
likely to use analytic thinking. This distinction in cognitive
behaviors has often been explained by using a framework based on
the fact that Western culture favors independent self-construal
(individualist culture) and Eastern culture favors interdependent
self-construal (collectivist culture). However, we propose another
possible cultural explanation in the distinction between Western
low context culture and Eastern high context culture (Hall, 1976).
We particularly focus on the difference between the rule-based
inference more common in low-context Western cultures and the
dialectical inference more common in high-context Eastern cultures,
and we argue that rule-based inference using global rules is more
adaptive in low context cultures.
Keywords:

Culture;

Psychology;

Reasoning;

Cross-cultural

analysis.

1. Cultural Differences in Cognition
Nisbett (2003; Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001)
reviewed previous studies on cultural differences in
cognition and described the differences in terms of a

object and the field, and a preference for explaining and
predicting events on the basis of such relationships.
The distinction between analytic and holistic can be
described in terms of four dimensions: context-dependent/
independent, dispositional/situational attribution, rule-based/
dialectical, and stable/changeable views. In terms of the
third dimension (rule-based vs. dialectical), people from
Western cultures are more inclined to employ rule-based
thinking, whereas people from Eastern cultures are more apt
to employ dialectical thinking (Buchtel & Norenzayan,
2008; Peng & Nisbett, 1999; Spencer-Rogers, Boucher,
Mori, Wang, & Peng, 2009). For example, Norenzayan,
Smith, Kim, and Nisbett (2002) reported that, when being
asked which group an object should belong to
(categorization task), Americans tended to focus on a single
property (rule-based inference), whereas Koreans tended to
respond based on family resemblance (intuitive inference).
Peng and Nisbett (1999) proposed that the cognitive style of
Chinese was dialectical, whereas the cognitive style of
Americans was rule-based.

2. Nisbett’s Explanations for the Cultural
Differences in Cognition

distinction between analytic and holistic cognition. He
argued that individuals from Western cultures are more
likely to engage in analytic cognition, whereas individuals
from Eastern cultures are more likely to engage in holistic
cognition. According to his definition, analytic cognition
involves detachment of the object from its context, a

Nisbett et al. (2001) explained the distinction between
Western analytic and Eastern holistic cognition by using the
cultural value dimensions that underlines the individualist
and collectivist cultures (Triandis, 1995). They discussed
how each style is adaptive within its own cultural type. We

tendency to focus on attributes of the object to assign it to a
category, and a preference for using rules about the
categories to explain and predict the object’s behavior. In
contrast, holistic cognition is oriented towards context or the
field as a whole, attention to relationships between a focal

regard culture as a hypothetical construct to explain people’s
behavior as well as to describe social patterns. In the long
history of cultural studies, it has been claimed that Western
societies have established individualist cultures, whereas
Eastern societies have developed collectivist cultures

2552

(Triandis, 1995). The distinction between individualist and
collectivist culture is a hypothetical concept proposed to
explain the observed differences in behavior, such as that
people from Eastern cultures have a stronger preference for

Aristotle’s logic was accepted by many Western cultures as
it is abstract and universal, whereas Eastern cultures
preferred ideas that encouraged and reinforced the harmony
of their society. For example, the dual concept of yin

sociability and interdependence than do people from
Western cultures. Markus and Kitayama (1991) connected
this distinction to two kinds of selves. They postulated that,
in general, Western cultures foster and favor an independent
self, whereas Eastern cultures foster and favor an
interdependent self. This distinction refers to differences in

(negative aspects of the world) and yang (positive aspects of
the world) form the central essential of Taoism, describing
how polar opposites or seemingly contrary forces are in
reality interconnected and interdependent. It reflects the
tradition of Chinese ontology that the world is constantly
changing and shifting, like the balance between yin and yang,

how people view themselves: people from Western cultures
are likely to view themselves as individualistic, ego-centric,
and discrete from society, whereas people from Eastern
cultures are more inclined to view themselves as
collectivistic, socio-centric, and related to others and to their
society.

and is full of contradictions. Nisbett concludes that the
Chinese view the world as easy to change (e.g., Ji, Nisbett,
& Su, 2001), hence abstract rules are not useful for
predicting future events or guiding behavior. Nisbett
postulates that this is why the Chinese (and thus Easterners)
are less likely to use rule-based inference.

Nisbett (2003, Nisbett et al., 2001) argued that in a
collectivist culture it is adaptive to attend not only to an
object itself but also to its context in order to keep the
harmony, hence Eastern cultures’ holistic cognition is
practiced and facilitated. More recently, Nisbett has said he
prefers an explanation based on the personal level, in other

In short, these results support the view of cultural
psychologists who assume that mind and culture are
inseparable. In Western societies, people live in an
individualist culture, develop independent self-construal,
and thus are more likely to demonstrate analytic cognition,
whereas people in Eastern societies live in a collectivist

words on the concept of self-construal (e.g., Varnum,
Grossman, Kitayama, & Nisbett, 2010).
The both explanations of Nisbett’s are compatible
with the results of something called "cultural priming." As
already mentioned, it is assumed that Western cultures foster
development of an independent self, whereas Eastern

culture, develop interdependent self-construal, and are more
apt to demonstrate holistic cognition. This view is
summarized as the social orientation hypothesis (Varnum et
al., 2010).
However, we see some problems with Nisbett’s
(2003) explanation. The first is the alleged adaptive nature

cultures promote development of an interdependent self
(Markus & Kitayama, 1991). Cultural priming is the
mechanism that makes either independent or interdependent
self-construal accessible, and the accessible self-construal in
turn affects the style of cognition. For example, Kühnen,
Hannover, and Schubert (2001) reported that participants

of Eastern cultures’ attention to contextual information. It
may well be adaptive to pay attention not only to a target
person (object), but to all in-group members (context) in
order to maintain in-group harmony in a collectivist culture.
However, strictly speaking, this cognitive style is adaptive
only in the field of person cognition in a collectivist culture.

who were asked to point out the differences between
themselves and their friends or parents (primed as
independent self-construal) showed a tendency to process
stimuli unaffected by the context (analytic cognition),
whereas those who were asked to point out the similarities
between themselves and their friends or parents (primed as

How can this person cognition be transferred to objects and
their context?
Secondly, if Eastern cultures view the world as
changeable, the question is whether they try to predict those
changes using rules such as yin and yang. However, Nisbett
(2003) takes his interpretation of the Eastern view as fact,

interdependent self-construal) were more apt to do
context-bounded thinking (holistic cognition).
For the distinction between rule-based inference and
dialectical inference, Nisbett (2003) adds the importance of
cultural tradition. The Western style of thinking has been
heavily influenced by the philosophy of Ancient Greece,

and infers that the concept of yin and yang reflects this view.

whereas the Eastern style of thinking grew out of the
traditions of Taoism, Confucianism, and Buddhism.

and high context culture. Hall (1976) introduced a dominant
cultural dimension called context to explore the relationship

3. Low Context and High Context Cultures
3.1 Hall’s (1976) Definition
In order to resolve the problems above, we propose an
explanation based on the distinction between low context

2553

between culture and communication. His interest was built
upon the need to understand the factors that facilitate or
inhibit effective communication between individuals from
different cultural backgrounds. In explaining this key

idea that a diamond is very expensive and normally used for
special occasions, then given the statement ‘A presented a
diamond ring to B’ they may infer that A is proposing
marriage to B. Therefore, a speaker can notify you of A’s

cultural dimension, Hall and Hall (1990) integrated three
main concepts: context, information, and meaning. These
three concepts encapsulate context as a system of meaning
for information exchanges between groups of people or
within a group of people. They further argued that context is
embedded in information for the purpose of creating

proposal just by saying that A presented a diamond ring to B
without further information on marriage. On the other hand,
people in a low context culture need explicitly expressed
words for communication, because they have little or no
implicitly shared information to draw on. Hence, they rely
on communication which rests upon direct and explicit

meaning in a message. In other words, without information
or context, a message is deemed to be without meaning,
therefore insignificant.
With this understanding, Hall’s context dimension
provides a framework that enables people to comprehend
communication forms ranging from the purely non-verbal

communication.
As for the problem of the transference from person
cognition to objects, the explanation using the H/L context
distinction does not need to rely on transference. According
to Ishii et al. (2003) using the H/L context distinction can
explain the degree of contextualization, and the degree of

— hand gestures, body language, facial expressions, and
tone of voice (all of which are situational and important in
high context cultures) — to the purely verbal, such as
written text or spoken words (all of which are informational
and important in low context cultures), in order to achieve
meaning as the ultimate goal. Zakaria and Cogburn (2010)

how people attend contextual or situational information,
which are the first two aspects of the dimension between
analytic and holistic cognition. In a high context culture,
people’s attention is attuned to contextual information
because they are accustomed and encouraged to use this
information for communication, whereas in a low context

summarized it thus: high context is known as ‘content
independent’, while low context is known as ‘context
independent.’ There is some evidence that, generally
speaking, Western cultures are low context whereas Eastern
cultures are high context. For example, Ishii, Reyes, and
Kitayama (2003) reported that Americans spontaneously

culture, people’s attention is directed towards the target they
want to identify. It is highly plausible that this cultural
training affects people’s cognition in each culture.

attend more to verbal content than to vocal tone, whereas
Japanese attend more to vocal tone than to verbal context.
This evidence suggests that Japanese prefer indirect and
implicit communication while Americans prefer direct and
explicit communication. In their analysis of websites, Würtz
(2006) found that websites created by Japanese, Chinese,

The H/L context distinction can also provide an
explanation for cultural differences in the usage of rules. The
outline of our argument is as follows;
(1) A global rule is needed when a local rule becomes
useless.
(2) A local rule becomes useless when natural laws and/or

and Koreans, who are from presumed high context cultures,
adopted the visual effects offered by the Internet to convey
their messages efficiently to a greater degree than did sites
created by Germans, Americans, and Northern Europeans,
who are from presumed low context cultures.
In this paper, we propose that the distinction between

social customs are variable.
(3) Social customs are more variable in low context
(Western) cultures than in high context (Eastern) cultures.
(4) Eastern high context cultures’ dialectical inference is not
based on global rules but on local rules, while the opposite is
true of Western low context cultures.

high context and low context cultures (the L/H context
dimension) (Hall, 1976) offers a better explanation for
cultural differences in cognition than the distinction between
individualism and collectivism (the I/C dimension).
People in a high context culture can interpret
messages from others without full descriptions, because

(5) Therefore, Western low context cultures are more
inclined to use rule-based inference than Eastern high
context cultures.
This explanation resolves the problem of why the Chinese,
for example, are less inclined to use rules to describe
changes that they perceive in the world: because by and

implicitly shared information is available to assist the
interpretation. For example, if people implicitly share the

large they encounter less variability in their local world and
therefore local practice remains useful.

3.2 The H/L Context Distinction as an
Explanation for Cultural Differences in the Usage
of Rules

2554

Why have scientific theories been needed for
humans? Rules are used to describe the world in terms of
natural laws, and to predict consequences. Although they do
not give direct suggestions for human action, they are useful

Anne’s father, and marry Anne. However, it is more adaptive
for them both to know the reasons for the two different
rules: that is, the principle of a marriage gift in order to have
a happier life. If they know the reasons, they can abandon

in gaining resources (benefits) or avoiding hazards. For
example, it is adaptive for people to learn the follow law in a
hunter-gatherer society:

the old local rules and create new, more global, rules when
their child gets married.
We propose that local rules are less useful in a low
context culture than in a high context culture. The case of
the marriage of Tom and Anne is a typical example: the
variability between their backgrounds means that their local

If you go to the river in autumn, you can catch salmon.
People learn that they can catch salmon every autumn and
thus can smoke salmon for eating through the winter. A
scientific theory may give an explanation for why one can
catch salmon in autumn. If the law is always true, and you
can count on the appearance of the salmon every year,
theories are not necessary. However, theories which describe

rules differ, and acting on them leads to miscommunication.
In a nutshell, a global or fundamental rule is necessary when
a local rule becomes useless. Cross-cultural studies indicate
that people raised in Western cultures prefer more global
rules than those raised in Eastern cultures. For example, the
results of Norenzayan et al. (2002) cited above showed that

the biological mechanisms, habits or behavior of salmon
become useful when there are no salmon one autumn. These
theories may explain why this situation has occurred and
give people some idea how to deal with it: give up fishing,
move to another place, or clean the river. Therefore, theories
are needed when the environment is not stable, and its

Americans preferred to categorize based on formal rules,
whereas Koreans inferred based on family resemblance.
We propose that the rules used by the Americans are more
global than the family resemblance used by the Koreans.
Family resemblance consists of set of local rules, and each
rule is not true for all members of a category.

natural laws are irregular.
However, we do not assume that the cultural
differences in the tendency to seek for a global rule arise
from differences in environmental variability between West
and East. Rather, we focus on any rule which is used as a
cultural coordination device. It takes the form of a deontic

Spencer-Rodgers, Boucher, Mori, Wang, and Peng (2009)
claim that Eastern cultures’ dialecticism is naïve, by which
they mean that Eastern cultures are more likely to retain
some local rules which are contradictory of each other,
without resolving the contradiction. Therefore, Eastern
cultures’ inference is also more local than Western.

conditional, which codifies obligation, permission, and
inhibition. For example, Tom fell in love with a girl whose
name was Anne when he lived in her country. He wants to
marry her, hence he presents her with a diamond ring based
on the following belief:

The relationship between environmental variability
and the necessity of local and global rules are shown in
Figure 3. A global rule is not necessary if natural laws or
social customs are completely stable. It is needed if the local
rule based on natural law or social customs becomes useless.
Therefore, the lower the utility of local rules, the higher the

If Anne wishes to marry Tom, she accepts the diamond
which Tom presents her.

necessity of global rules. However, in a completely chaotic
situation a global rule is not useful either. Hence, the need
for global rules describes an A-shaped curve, as shown in
Figure 1. In this figure, focusing on the H/L context
distinction, we consider the variability of social customs on
the horizontal axis and necessity of a rule on the vertical axis.

However, it is quite possible that this rule cannot be applied
in another culture where people do not share the common
belief that a diamond is a marriage gift. If Anne lives in such
a society, she may not accept the diamond even if she wants
to marry Tom because the rule that Anne knows is as
follows:
If Anne wishes to marry Tom, her father accepts an amount
of money from Tom.

Social customs are stable in a high context culture, hence it
can be located on the left, whereas a low context culture can
be located in the middle where social customs are variable to
some extent (but not enormously so). However, Nisbett
(2003; Nisbett et al., 2001) argues that the Chinese view the
world as more changeable than Westerners do, hence he

Tom may find out or figure out this rule, give money to

locates the Chinese culture further to the right, where the
environment is not stable. This is contradictory with the idea

2555

that Chinese culture is high context, and may therefore be
wrong. In short, we cast doubt on Nisbett’s argument that
Chinese dialectical thinking is based on their view that the
world is easily changeable.
10

Necessity of rules

9
8
7
6

Local rule

5

Global rule

4
3
2
1
0
Stable

Variable
(Chaos)

Natural laws and/or social customs

Figure 1: Relationship between Variability and Necessity.

3.3 Reinterpretation of the Experimental Results
on Cultural Priming

factors. The ecological bases for individualism and
collectivism have been intensively discussed. The person
level of social independence can be intermediate between
their group life style and their analytic cognitive style. These
studies are known as a socioecological approach (Oishi &
Graham, 2010).
We do not deny these discussions. However, the L/H
context distinction may be explicable by natural factors as is
the I/C distinction. This problem is too large to fully discuss
here; we simply point out some factors contributing to the
difference between low context and high context culture,
which lead people to either rule-based inference or
dialectical inference respectively.
The concept of the L/H context distinction is often
employed by researchers in human communication. When
people perform intercultural communication, both parties

How can the results of cultural priming be explained
based on the H/L context distinction? Studies on cultural
priming by Kühnen et al. (2001) are one reason for
considering an explanation based on the I/C dimension.

are in effect in a low context situation because they share
fewer implicit assumptions than when they communicate
with someone from their own culture. This idea is a
developed version of Langer (1989), who argued that
mindful communication is needed for intercultural
communication. His concept of ‘mindful’ communication

They assumed that participants who were asked to consider
the differences between themselves and their parents or
friends activated their independent self-construal, whereas
participants who were asked to consider the similarities
between themselves and their parents or friends activated
their interdependent self-construal.

can be interpreted as explicitly deliberate and careful
communication in which people read others’ minds when
there is a lack of shared implicit assumptions.
Since a low context situation arises when people
engage in intercultural communication, a low context culture
is more likely to develop in a multicultural environment

However, it is possible that their experimental
manipulation changed the degree of their participants’
feeling of shared context with other people. Asking people
to consider differences between themselves and their parents
or friends may activate their belief that others are different
from themselves, and thus they are not able to rely upon the

(one in which people from different cultures keep their own
culture but interact with each other). This situation also
creates an environment wherein local rules become useless
more often.
A geographical factor that reinforces a multicultural
environment is when there is no spacious plain which can

information which they share with others for communication.
On the other hand, asking them to consider similarities
between themselves and their parents or friends may activate
their belief that others are similar to themselves. In other
words, the former brought participants to a low context
situation whereas the latter brought them to a high context

become the place for a large culturally unified society;
societies must therefore remain geographically separated. In
order for multicultural conditions to arise and persist,
however, these different cultural societies must interact with
each other -- for example, if each society is not
economically self-sufficient, and can prosper only if it trades

situation.

with other societies. An ecological factor that enhances the
likelihood of trade is an unbalanced distribution of resources
among these societies. One place that satisfied all these
conditions was Ancient Greece.

3.4 Accounting for Cultural Diversity
Our more ambitious aim is to connect the L/H context
distinction to the explanation for cultural diversity using
natural, ecological, and geographical factors. In other words,
not only to explain cultural differences in cognition using
the L/H context distinction, but to explain the distinctions
themselves using natural, ecological, and geographical

4. Conclusion: A New Framework
The primary goal of this paper is to propose a possible
explanation for cultural differences in cognition, specifically

2556

the analytic cognition practiced by Western cultures and the
holistic cognition practiced by Eastern cultures, using the
distinction between low context culture in the West and high
context culture in the East instead of the distinction between

Differences among three cultures. Psychological Science,
14, 39-46
Ji, L., Nisbett, R. E., & Su, Y. (2001). Culture, change, and
prediction. Psychological Science, 12, 450-456.

Western individualist culture and Eastern collectivist culture.
Summarizing these points, we propose a framework
as shown in Figure 2. In order to explain cultural diversity
naturalistically, we give the primary role to geographical and
ecological factors. People need rule-based inference in a
low context culture, but whether a low context culture

Kühnen, U., Hannover, B., & Schubert, B. (2001). The
semantic-procedural interface model of the self: The role
of self-knowledge for context-dependent versus
context-independent modes of thinking. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 397-409.
Langer, E. (1989). Mindfulness. Reading, MA:

(multicultural environment) arises depends on these factors.
Our framework is contrasted with that of cultural
psychologists (e.g., Nisbett, 2003; Nisbett et al., 2001), who
assume that culture and mind are inseparable and emphasize
the role of self-construal in culture and cognitive style. By
contrast, we propose that culture and context are inseparable

Addison-Wesley.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self:
Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation.
Psychological Review, 98, 224-253 .
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How
Asians and Westerners think differently…and why. New

and, as such, that context has a strong connection to the
types of information required in order to draw effective
meanings or sense-making into the thinking process.

York: The Free Press.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291-310.
Norenzayan, A., Smith, E. E., Kim, B. J., & Nisbett, R. E.
(2002). Cultural preferences for formal versus intuitive

Individualism – Independent self – Analytic cognition
Culture
Collectivism – Interdependent self – Holistic cognition

(a) Nisbett and colleagues

Low context culture – Rule-based inference
Geographical

(Multi-culture)

Decontextualized cognition

and ecological
factors

High context culture – Dialectical inference
(Mono-culture)

Contextualized cognition

(b) Proposed naturalistic framework

Figure 2: Nisbett's Framework
Framework

vs

Proposed

New

reasoning. Cognitive Science, 26, 653-684.
Oishi, S., & Graham, J. (2010). Social ecology: Lost and
found in psychological science. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 5, 356-377.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and
reasoning about contradiction. American Psychologist, 54,
741-754.
Spencer-Rogers, J., Boucher, H. C., Mori, S. C., Wang, L.,
& Peng, K. (2009). The dialectical self-concept:
Contradiction, change, and holism in East Asian Cultures.
Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin, 35, 29-44.
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individual and collectivism. Boulder,

Buchtel, E. E. & Norenzayan, A. (2008). Which should you
use, intuition or logic? Cultural differences in injunctive

CO: Westview Press.
Varnum, M. E. W., Grossman, I., Kitayama, S. & Nisbett,
R.E. (2010), The origin of cultural differences in
cognition:
The
social
orientation
hypothesis.
Psychological Science. 19, 9-13.
Würtz, E. (2006). Intercultural communication on web sites:

norms about reasoning. Asian Journal of Social
Psychology, 11, 264-273.
Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond culture. Garden City, NJ: Anchor
Books/Doubleday.
Hall, E. T., & Hall, M. R. (1990). Understanding cultural
differences. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press.

A cross-cultural analysis of web sites from high-context
cultures and low-context cultures. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 11, 274-299.
Zakaria, N. & Cogburn, D. L. (2010). Context-dependent
vs. content-dependent: An exploration of the cultural
behavioural patterns of online intercultural communication

Ishii, K., Reyes, J. A., & Kitayama, S. (2003). Spontaneous
attention to word content versus emotional tone:

using E-mail. International Journal of Business and
Systems Research, 4, 330-347.

References

2557

