UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inferring Covert Events in Logical Metonymies: a Probe Recognition Experiment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x434482

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Zarcone, Alessandra
Pado, Sebastian
Lenci, Alessandro

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inferring Covert Events in Logical Metonymies: a Probe Recognition Experiment
Alessandra Zarcone (alessandra.zarcone@ims.uni-stuttgart.de)
Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Azenbergstr. 12
70174 Stuttgart, Germany

Sebastian Padó (pado@cl.uni-heidelberg.de)
Institut für Computerlinguistik, Universität Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 325
69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Alessandro Lenci (alessandro.lenci@ling.unipi.it)
Dipartimento di Linguistica “T. Bolelli”, Via Santa Maria 36
56126 Pisa, Italy
Abstract
It has been widely acknowledged that the interpretation of logical metonymies involves the interpretation of covert events
(begin the book → reading / writing). Whether this implicit
content is part of our lexicon or rather derives from general pragmatic inference, it is currently subject of debate. We present
results from a probe recognition experiment, providing novel
evidence in support of early metonymy processing, consistent
with the hypothesis that covert events are retrieved from knowledge of typical events activated by lexical items.
Keywords: Logical metonymy; generalized event knowledge;
qualia structure; covert events; probe recognition.

Logical metonymy:
lexicon, world knowledge, typical events
In logical metonymies, an event-subcategorizing verb is combined with an entity-denoting patient. Contrast the German
non-metonymic “long variant” (Ex. 1) with the metonymic
“short variant” (Ex. 2), which is understood to have the same
meaning:
1. Peter begann das Bier zu trinken. (“long variant”)
Peter began the beer to drink.
Peter began drinking the beer.
2. Peter begann das Bier. (“short variant”)
Peter began the beer. → drinking the beer

Covert events from lexical knowledge

In (2), the event-subcategorizing verb beginnen (begin) combines with an entity, das Bier (the beer), but the clash is resolved and the interpretation constructed by the recovery of
a covert event which mediates between matrix verb and object (e.g. begin → drinking the beer).1 The reconstruction of
the covert event has well-known behavioral correlates – processing metonymic sentences is more costly than processing
non-metonymic ones (Pylkkänen & McElree, 2006; Baggio,
Chroma, Lambalgen, & Hagoort, 2010).
On the level of theory, logical metonymies pose a challenge
to compositionality (Partee, ter Meulen, & Wall, 1993; Baggio, Lambalgen, & Hagoort, 2012) and therefore touch on a
foundational principle to language research. One of the points
1 This presumed process, namely the coercion of the object into
an event associated with it, explains the use of the term “metonymy”.

of debate is where covert events are retrieved from. The two
main accounts of logical metonymy have suggested that covert
events are part of our lexical knowledge (“lexical hypothesis”)
or that they are retrieved through post-lexical inferences triggered by our general world knowledge and communication
principles (“pragmatic hypothesis”).
We present experimental evidence in support of a third hypothesis, namely that covert events are retrieved from knowledge of typical events stored in our long-term memory. A
previous self-paced reading study (Zarcone & Padó, 2011)
had presented evidence for generalized event knowledge integration in logical metonymy, but its results were relying on a
strong methodological assumption, namely that the same cognitive processes are used to interpret “long variants” (Ex. 1)
and “short variants” (Ex. 2). The present study uses a probe
recognition paradigm in order to avoid this assumption. Additionally, the new paradigm allows us compare reaction times
for low and high inter-stimulus intervals to assess the time
course of metonymy interpretation in more detail. We find evidence for early, expectation-driven processing for metonymy
as opposed to later, strategy expectancy generation, which
points towards a central role of generalized event knowledge
in logical metonymy interpretation.

Pustejovsky (1995) and Jackendoff (1997) provide an account
of logical metonymy which we call the “lexical hypothesis”:
Logical metonymy is a type mismatch between the (semantic)
subcategorization of a metonymic verb for an event and the entity denoted by the object on the other side, which requires the
integration of an event to be resolved. The event is retrieved
from complex lexical entries (qualia structures) associated
with the object in the mental lexicon. In particular, the “agentive quale” (the event that brings about the object) and the
“telic quale” (the main purpose of the object) are the relevant
components of the qualia structure which can be retrieved as
covert events in metonymic contexts.
Being part of the mental lexicon, qualia model linguistic
knowledge – in opposition to world knowledge and pragmatic
inferences. Psycholinguistic work has identified experimental
correlates for the lexical hypothesis (see Pylkkänen and McEl-

1215

ree (2006) for a review), however processing studies have
focused predominantly on the type mismatch and have largely
ignored the question of what covert events are accessible to
metonymic interpretation and what their nature is (lexical vs.
pragmatic).
The lexical hypothesis provides an economical solution to
the problem of covert event retrieval, and it seems very plausible that we associate typical events with lexical items referring
to entities in our mental lexicon. However, this solution seems
to undergenerate the range of potential interpretations for logical metonymy. Consider the following examples:
3. John is a famous wrestler. He really enjoys a good fight.
(→ fighting)
4. John is a wrestling fan. He really enjoys a good fight.
(→ watching)
These examples show a few shortcomings which seem to be
associated with this account: first, fight is an event-denoting
item and, since metonymy is typically claimed to arise from a
type clash, we wouldn’t expect an event reconstruction here,
nevertheless watching seems to be the normal scenario involving wrestling fans and wrestling fights; secondly, qualia structures are only defined for artifacts, but not for event-denoting
items such as fight; lastly, a mechanism to select one or another event depending on the agent involved (e.g. wrestler
vs. wrestling fan) is not specified. Facts like this are well
known at least since Lascarides and Copestake (1998), who
claim that qualia structure alone (as defined in Pustejovsky
(1995)) is not enough to explain the range of reconstructed
events in metonymic sentences, which instead derive from the
contribution of wider contextual information.

Covert events from pragmatic inferences
An alternative approach (the “pragmatic hypothesis”) has argued that metonymy resolution is driven by dynamic inferences based on context and world knowledge rather than static
lexicon entries. This model assumes that lexico-conceptual
representations are atomistic (Fodor & Lepore, 1998) and
that metonymic event reconstruction derives from post-lexical
pragmatic inferences (Cartson, 2002; R. D. de Almeida &
Dwivedi, 2008; R. G. de Almeida et al., 2009). Without resorting to lexical atomism, Asher (2010) similarly models
logical metonymy in terms of general discourse principles for
presupposition accommodation. This approach has the advantage of placing logical metonymy within a broader picture of
inference-driven processes, and it accounts for the most problematic cases for strict lexicalist models. However, it currently
lacks a concrete characterization of the type and organization
of knowledge involved in metonymy interpretation.

Covert events from generalized event
knowledge
Recent work on generalized event knowledge (McRae & Matsuki, 2009) has shown that inferential world knowledge about
typical scenarios plays an early and crucial role in sentence

comprehension processes. There is solid experimental evidence that language understanding makes extensive use of
global plausibility information and event knowledge (e.g.
Altmann and Kamide (1999)). McRae and Matsuki (2009)
established that speakers make use of prototypical knowledge
about events (generalized event knowledge) when rapidly
building expectations about upcoming input. Generalized
event knowledge is assumed to be built from first and secondhand experience: for instance, we learn that a scenario of
washing hair typically includes a shampoo, a sink, a bathroom, and happens indoor; a scenario of washing car would
include different elements (an outdoor environment, a hose).
Such scenarios are available in our memory and can be cued by
linguistic input, e.g. “action verbs as well as nouns referring to
agents, patients, instruments, locations, and events” (McRae
& Matsuki, 2009). Generalized event knowledge can be also
thought as default information associated with lexical items,
according to the proposal in Lascarides and Copestake (1998).
Generalized event knowledge can provide the basis for a
third account of covert event recovery in logical metonymy,
suggesting that covert events are retrieved from knowledge of
typical events stored in our long-term memory. Similarly to
the lexical hypothesis, this third hypothesis links objects to
associated events. The difference between the accounts is that
the lexical hypothesis associates each noun with a fixed set of
events, whereas the picture for generalized event knowledge
is more flexible. In many cases, our experience will comprise
events that do not correspond to classical qualia – in the case of
cars, we know that cars need to be filled up, that they need to be
washed, and that many people lease their cars. Word meaning
is tied up to this sort of scenario knowledge, which typically
contains the qualia as a proper subset. This is not always
true, however – people will only have rich representations for
events and objects that they are familiar with. For example,
Matsuki et al. (2011) found that U.S. college undergraduates
were not familiar with the event of “dusting off” and failed
to build expectations about plausible scenarios. Also, some
events which are part of our generalized event knowledge for a
given entity (a few examples from our experimental materials:
pizza - deliver, fix - car, peel - apple) do not fit well with the
traditional qualia roles.
It follows that the picture painted by generalized event
knowledge is also considerably different regarding the status
of this knowledge: There is no distinction between linguistic
and world knowledge. Resorting to world knowledge is an element of similarity with the pragmatic hypothesis, from which
our proposal however differs with regards to an important aspect. The “pragmatic hypothesis” assumes that metonymic
event reconstruction is carried out by general communication
or discourse based devices, like many other types of pragmatic
inferences; contrastively, generalized event knowledge is activated immediately during sentence processing. Consequently,
the metonymic event reconstructions can be based on exactly
the same type of knowledge responsible for generating predictions during on-line language comprehension and for the

1216

Table 1: Example materials for the self-paced reading study (Zarcone & Padó, 2011) and the present probe recognition study.
Self-paced reading
high-typicality
agent
low-typicality
agent
high-typicality
agent
low-typicality
agent

Probe recognition
Sentence
Der Konditor begann mit der Glasur.
The baker
started with the icing.
Das Kind begann mit der Glasur.
The child started with the icing.
Das Kind begann mit der Glasur.
The child started with the icing.
Der Konditor begann mit der Glasur.
The baker
started with the icing.

Der Konditor begann, die Glasur aufzutragen.
The baker
started the icing to spread.
Das Kind begann, die Glasur aufzutragen.
The child started the icing to spread.
Das Kind begann, die Glasur zu essen.
The child started the icing to eat.
Der Konditor begann, die Glasur zu essen.
The baker
started the icing to eat.

predicate-argument thematic fit (McRae & Matsuki, 2009).
We regard the account proposed here as a generalization of
purely lexicalist approaches, which is able to provide a mode
dynamic model of covert event interpretation triggered by
event knowledge associated with lexical items, while keeping
it distinct from other, genuinely pragmatic processes.

Evidence from self-paced reading
While type clashes and type shifting have received great attention in the experimental literature on logical metonymy, there
is comparatively little work on the source of covert events (lexical vs. inferential). Offline work (Lapata, Keller, & Scheepers,
2003; Zarcone & Padó, 2010) has established that the range
of interpretations for metonymy is larger than predicted from
qualia structure. In an important online study, Frisson and
McElree (2008) “assume that coerced senses are computed
from a broader range of properties than the Qualia structure
of the complement noun”. In order to exclude the possibility
that increased processing costs in logical metonymies might
be determined by competition between different possible interpretations, they carried out an eye-tracking experiment,
contrasting (a) sentences like The teenager began the novel,
where one interpretation is strongly preferred (reading), (b)
sentences like The waitress started the coffee, where multiple
interpretations are plausible (drinking, preparing) and possibly competing, and (c) base forms of (a) and (b) like The
teenager read the novel. However, the authors do not commit
to a specific hypothesis regarding the range of covert events.
Zarcone and Padó (2011) have suggested generalized event
knowledge as an alternative source of interpretation, providing
results from a self-paced reading experiment. The study capitalized on the verb-final word order in German subordinate
phrases, by likening the recovery of a covert event in a “short
variant” metonymy (Ex. 2) to the process of building expectations about the sentence-final event in its “long variant” (Ex. 1)
and by analyzing reaction times for long variants, where the
event was explicit.
The self-paced experiment contrasted a high-typicality
agent condition with a low-typicality agent condition (Der
Konditor / das Kind hörte auf, die Glasur aufzutragen. - The
baker / the child finished spreading the icing). In the hightypicality condition the target event was cued by the preceding
agent-patient pair (baker–icing), creating rich expectation on
the upcoming event. The experiment found that these expecta-

Probe
AUFTRAGEN
SPREAD
AUFTRAGEN
SPREAD
ESSEN
EAT
ESSEN
EAT

tions in fact yield a facilitation effect and shorter reading times
for the target verb compared to the low-typicality condition.
Also, a crucial difference with Frisson and McElree (2008)
is that in this study the same patient noun is used in different
context conditions, in order to restrict variability due to item
idiosyncrasies. Thus, the experiment in Zarcone and Padó
(2011) provided evidence towards a generalized event knowledge account of logical metonymy. However, it was heavily
based on the assumption that the same cognitive resources are
involved when recovering covert events in logical metonymies
and when predicting sentence-final sentences (Lapata et al.,
2003). This assumption is of course debatable.

Experiment
The goal of the present study is to strengthen the case for generalized event knowledge in logical metonymy by avoiding
any assumptions about the relative processing of “short variant”
and “long variant” sentences. We employ a different experimental paradigm, namely probe recognition, and concentrate
on unequivocally metonymical experimental materials. More
specifically, we build “short variant” sentences from the items
used in the self-paced reading study, contrasting two typicality conditions as before. The main difference is in the cued
event, which is now not part of the sentence but is presented
as a probe after the metonymical sentence. The old and new
materials are contrasted in Table 1.
Crucially, in the probe recognition study the probe is not
part of the test sentence: to enhance this and avoid sentence
completion effects (i.e. that participants would be influenced
by verb-final word order in German subordinate phrases and
perceive the probe as part of the sentence), the zu particle was
omitted. Since the cued event is never part of the sentence,
participants are required to answer "no" for all probes. To balance the responses, the material sentences are complemented
by fillers for which the answer is “yes” (see below for details).
Our expectation is that in the high-typicality condition
(baker-icing-spread), the covert event spread is cued by the
agent-patient combination, causing participants to require
longer decision latencies to recognize that the verb was not
part of the sentence than in the low-typicality condition (childicing-spread), where the cued event is a different one (eat).
A second element of novelty is the addition of a second
factor: inter-stimulus interval (ISI). Contrasting a short and a
long ISI can provide insights about the nature of covert event

1217

high-typicality triplets, for a total of 96 agent-event-patient
triplets (48 high-typicality, 48 low-typicality). Table 2 shows
examples for high- and low-typicality triplets.

Table 2: Triplets for Glasur (icing).

high-typicality
triplet
low-typicality
triplet

Agent
Konditor
baker
Kind
child
Kind
child
Konditor
baker

Patient
Glasur
icing
Glasur
icing
Glasur
icing
Glasur
icing

Event
auftragen
spread
essen
eat
auftragen
spread
essen
eat

Test sentences The aim of the probe recognition task was
to replicate the results from the self-paced reading tasks with
strictly metonymical sentences. For this reason, we only used
“short version” main clause sentences (Ex. 2) constructed with
metonymical verbs, as shown on the right-hand side in Table 1.

Method
retrieval: at longer ISI, an expectancy strategy is employed
(strategic expectancy generation) and participants tend to use
the input received to generate a potential set of upcoming targets whose processing is facilitated (Becker, 1980; Ferretti,
McRae, & Hatherell, 2001; Van Der Meer, Krüger, & Nuthmann, 2005); an effect at a short ISI would suggest that covert
events are available online and early on during processing.

Creation of Materials
As mentioned above, we adapted the German materials from
the self-paced reading experiment in Zarcone and Padó (2011)
for the probe recognition task. In the earlier study, elicitation
tasks were used to tap into generalized event knowledge scenarios when preparing materials for the self-paced reading
experiment, according to an established method in research on
generalized event knowledge (see also McRae, Hare, Elman,
and Ferretti (2005)).
Event elicitation We elicited typical events for a set of 50
patients in German, by asking 20 participants in a web experiment to generate verbs in response to typical patients (“list
the things that these objects have done to them”). Space for
10 responses per item was provided and no time limit was
imposed. For each item, we chose four events from those
named early by many participants (i.e., those with highest
mean reciprocal rank measure), ensuring that the four events
referred to different scenarios. Then we paired each patient to
the infinite form of its four selected verbs (200 patient-event
pairs): e.g., the four events selected for Auto (car) were fahren
(drive), reparieren (fix), verkaufen (sell), waschen (wash).
Agent elicitation We elicited typical agents for the resulting
200 patient-event pairs from 10 participants in a web experiments (“list who typically performs these actions”). For each
item, space was provided for 10 responses; no time limit
was imposed. From the initial list of 200 patient-event pairs,
we extracted 24 patients paired with 2 events each, and per
each patient-event combination we selected one of the best
agents (those named early by many participants, i.e. with highest mean reciprocal rank measure), obtaining 48 agent-eventpatient high-typicality triplets.2 48 low-typicality triplets were
obtained by crossing agents between the two events in the
2 An

additional sensibility verification test was run, in order to
check that low-typicality triplets were, although not typical, still
sensible (i.e., did not violate any selectional restriction). See Zarcone
and Padó (2011) for more details on the pre-tests).

Participants Thirty-six students of Universität Stuttgart volunteered to participate in the experiment and were paid for
their participation. All participants were native speakers of
German and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Procedure On each trial, a sentence appeared in the middle
of the screen and the participants were to press a key after
reading it. Pressing the key elicited the presentation of the
probe word with a short (100 ms) or long (900 ms) interstimulus interval (ISI). The participants were instructed to
decide as quickly and accurately as possible whether or not
the probe appeared in the sentence by pressing the green or
the red key respectively. The green key was the left key for
left-handed participants and the right key for right-handed
participants, so that the "no" answers were always given with
the non-dominant hand.
Responses and decision latencies for each probe were
recorded. The experimental session lasted approximately 30
minutes; participants were allowed to take two breaks during
the experiment, one after the first third of sentences and one
after the second third.
Each participant saw all 48 sentence-probe combinations,
half of them in the high-typicality condition and the other
half in the low-typicality condition. The experimental items
were intermixed with 72 filler items, which were the same for
both lists. Since the 48 test probes in each list were never in
the sentence (i.e. the answer was "no"), 60 of the fillers did
include the probe in the sentence and 12 did not, for a total of
60 "yes" answers and 60 "no" answers in each list.
Design The study employed a 2x2 mixed factorial design.
One factor, inter-stimulus interval (ISI: long / short), was
varied between subjects, the other factor, typicality (TYP:
high / low), was varied within subjects.

Results
All participants scored better than 95% correct on the probe
recognition task. Data points corresponding to the wrong
answers and outliers (> 2.5 SD from the mean) were excluded
from the analysis (2% of the data points). The mean of reading
times on the sentences preceding the probes was 2629 ms (SD
1280). At both short and long ISI, mean decision latencies
were longer for the high typicality condition (Table 4).
We examined the effect of ISI and typicality on decision
latencies through 2 x 2 by-subject (F1 ) and 2 x 2 by-item
(F2 ) analyses of variance, which yielded main effects of

1218

Table 3: Fixed effects for the mixed-effect model: log(dl) ∼ ISI ∗TY PICALITY +dlPrecProbe+rtSent +order +(1|sub ject)+
(1|item)
(Intercept)
ISIshort
TYPICALITYlow
dlPrecProbe
rtSent
order
ISIshort:TYPICALITYlow

Estimate
7.4848
-0.5490
-0.0108
0.0000
0.0000
-0.0039
-0.0360

MCMCmean
7.4766
-0.5452
-0.0106
0.0000
0.0000
-0.0039
-0.0366

Table 4: Mean decision latencies (dl, measured in ms).
ISI
short
long

low typicality
Mean dl
SD
969 296
1735 351

high typicality
Mean dl
SD
1026 363
1746 362

Mean diff.
+57
+12

ISI (F1 (1, 35) = 111.03, p < .001; F2 (1, 47) = 2553, p < .001)
and of typicality (F1 (1, 35) = 7.7616, p = .009; F2 (1, 47) =
6.02, p = .015). The difference in decision latencies between
low and high typicality is larger for the short ISI condition,
but the interaction fails to reach significance.
Mixed-effect models have been shown to be more powerful for reading studies, because they allow on the one hand
for separating random effects of item and participant, and
on the other hand for taking into account trial-to-trial longitudinal dependencies between individual observations, by
including covariates such as response latencies at preceding trials. Following the procedure suggested by Baayen, Davidson,
and Bates (2008); Baayen and Milin (2010), we performed
a mixed-effect analysis using as covariates the order of presentation (rank-order of a trial in its experimental sequence),
the reading times at the sentence preceding the probe and the
decision latencies at preceding probe. The mixed-effect analysis (Table 3) shows a number of significant effects. Most
important for our current purpose is the marginally significant
interaction of ISI and typicality (shown in boldface), which
indicates that the effect of typicality indeed diminishes for
longer inter-stimulus intervals.

Discussion
In our experiment, high typicality agents in logical
metonymies cue covert events that are coherent with the generalized event knowledge scenario associated with those agents
and with the given patient. Cued events were integrated in the
sentence meaning and were therefore more difficult to reject
as probes, leading to significantly longer decision latencies
for the high typicality condition than for the low typicality
condition. This supports the hypothesis that covert events can
be predicted by generalized event knowledge scenarios, which
constitute a broader range of interpretation than traditional
qualia-based accounts, which are typically a subset of them.
Elicitation tasks were used to retrieve two generalized event
knowledge scenarios per item, and in some cases these did

HPD95lower
7.3939
-0.6342
-0.0351
0.0000
0.0000
-0.0046
-0.0735

HPD95upper
7.5584
-0.4624
0.0155
0.0001
0.0000
-0.0031
-0.0019

pMCMC
0.0001
0.0001
0.4192
0.0282
0.0952
0.0001
0.0472

Pr(> |t|)
0.0000
0.0000
0.4062
0.0506
0.0879
0.0000
0.0505

not correspond to traditional qualia roles: the events used for
pizza were baking and delivering, the events for apple were
picking and peeling, the events for car were driving and fixing.
The emergence of the effect at long ISI could indeed be explained as a result of an expectancy strategy (that is, pragmatic
inferences driven by the perceived need to perform the task),
but the effect at short ISI provides evidence for early integration of generalized event knowledge, suggesting that covert
event interpretation emerges early on in processing. Firm conclusions on this point require further investigation, but there
is clear parallelism to short SOA effects of generalized event
knowledge typicality in Ferretti et al. (2001).
The early emergence of the typicality effect in Zarcone and
Padó (2011) and in the current experiment is in contrast with
the "inference hypothesis" (if by inference we mean a postlexical late-onset process), in that covert events emerge early
on in processing. Promising work on ERPs (Baggio et al.,
2010; Schumacher & Weiland, 2011) can therefore be of crucial importance in the near future to shed new light into more
fine-grained processes involved in covert event resolution.
In the current experiment, we were able to replicate the
activation effect for events which can be plausibly assumed
to be present in generalized event knowledge observed in
Zarcone and Padó (2011). By using a different experimental
paradigm, we avoided the need to compare "long" and "short"
variants. The parallel outcome of the two experiments provides evidence for a picture of language processing in which
metonymic event reconstruction is carried out by the same
resource – i.e., general event knowledge – which is normally
employed for predicate-argument integration during on-line
comprehension of non-coercion sentences.
To test this hypothesis, we are currently running a further
experiment with non-metonymic verbs and the same probe
recognition design used in this study. There exists indeed a
long standing tradition of experiments contrasting coercion
conditions and control conditions which do not involve coercion (Traxler, Pickering, & McElree, 2002; R. D. de Almeida
& Dwivedi, 2008; Frisson & McElree, 2008), and in such
studies the question of coercion plays a central role. We have
sidestepped this issue in our experiments so far, but our next
step will directly address this question by contrasting the same
sentence-probe combinations illustrated above with sentences
containing a non-coercion predicate (e.g. The man rolled a
cigarette), such that the probe (e.g., smoke) expresses an event

1219

part of the general knowledge activated by the sentence (e.g.,
smoking is the purpose of rolling a cigarette). Our model predicts no significant differences in decision latencies between
the non-coercion sentences of the new experiment and the
coercion sentences of the present study, given that the same
general event knowledge is responsible for on-line expectation
activation during sentence comprehension. In other terms, we
expect that both with The man rolled a cigarette and with The
man enjoyed a cigarette, general event knowledge activates
the cued event of smoking, irrespective of the presence or not
of a coercive predicate.

Conclusion
We have provided evidence in support of the hypothesis
that generalized event knowledge can predict covert event
interpretation. Also, the current study constitutes a further
step towards a characterization of the phenomenon of logical
metonymy within the broader frame of early online integration
of typical event knowledge in comprehension.
Acknowledgments. We acknowledge the support of
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for the project D6
(SFB 732) at the University of Stuttgart. We thank Valentina
Bambini, Berry Claus, Nick Gaylord and Ken McRae for
helpful discussions and our anonymous reviewers for useful
contributions to improve the analysis.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of subsequent
reference. Cognition, 73, 247–264.
Asher, N. (2010). Lexical meaning in context. Cambridge
University Press.
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixed-effects
modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390–412.
Baayen, R., & Milin, P. (2010). Analyzing reaction times.
International Journal of Psychological Research, 3, 12–28.
Baggio, G., Chroma, T., Lambalgen, M. van, & Hagoort, P.
(2010). Coercion and compositionality. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 22(9), 2131–2140.
Baggio, G., Lambalgen, M. van, & Hagoort, P. (2012). The
processing consequences of compositionality. In The Oxford
Handbook of Compositionality. Oxford University Press.
Becker, C. A. (1980). Semantic context effects in visual word
recognition: An analysis of semantic strategies. Memory
and Cognition, 8, 483–512.
Cartson, R. (2002). Thoughts and utterances. Blackwell.
de Almeida, R. D., & Dwivedi, V. D. (2008). Coercion without lexical decomposition: Type-shifting effects revisited.
Canadian Journal of Linguistics, 53(2/3), 301–326.
de Almeida, R. G., Riven, L., Manouilidou, C., Lungu, O.,
Dwivedi, V., Jarema, G., et al. (2009). Coercion effects are
pragmatic: fMRI and behavioral evidence. Poster presented
at the 15th AMLaP. Barcelona, Spain.

Ferretti, T. R., McRae, K., & Hatherell, A. (2001). Integrating
verbs, situation schemas and thematic role concept. Journal
of Memory and Language, 44, 516–547.
Fodor, J. A., & Lepore, E. (1998). The emptiness of the
lexicon: Reflections on James Pustejovsky’s The Generative
Lexicon. Linguistic Inquiry, 29(2), 269–288.
Frisson, S., & McElree, B. (2008). Complement coercion is
not modulated by competition: Evidence from eye movement. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Language,
Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1–11.
Jackendoff, R. (1997). The architecture of the language
faculty. MIT Press.
Lapata, M., Keller, F., & Scheepers, C. (2003). Intra-sentential
context effects on the interpretation of logical metonymy.
Cognitive Science, 27(4), 649–668.
Lascarides, A., & Copestake, A. (1998). Pragmatics and word
meaning. Journal of Linguistics, 34, 387–414.
Matsuki, K., Chow, T., Hare, M., Elman, J. L., Scheepers, C.,
& McRae, K. (2011). Event-based plausibility immediately
influences on-line language comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Language, Memory, and Cognition,
37(4), 913–934.
McRae, K., Hare, M., Elman, J. L., & Ferretti, T. R. (2005).
A basis for generating expectancies for verbs from nouns.
Memory and Cognition, 33, 1174–1184.
McRae, K., & Matsuki, K. (2009). People use their knowledge
of common events to understand language, and do so as
quickly as possible. Language and Linguistics Compass,
3/6, 1417–1429.
Partee, B. H., ter Meulen, A., & Wall, R. E. (1993). Mathematical Methods in Linguistics. Kluwer.
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. MIT Press.
Pylkkänen, L., & McElree, B. (2006). The syntax-semantic
interface: On-line composition of sentence meaning. In
Handbook of Psycholinguistics (p. 537-577). Elsevier.
Schumacher, P., & Weiland, H. (2011). Reading Brecht and
talking to the espresso: Electrophysiological investigations
of conventional and novel metonymy. In Proceedings of the
Metonymy 2011 workshop. Stuttgart, Germany.
Traxler, M. J., Pickering, M. J., & McElree, B. (2002). Coercion in sentence processing: evidence from eye-movements
and self-paced reading. Journal of Memory and Language,
47, 530-547.
Van Der Meer, E., Krüger, F., & Nuthmann, A. (2005). The
influence of temporal order information in general event
knowledge on language comprehension. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 213(3), 142–151.
Zarcone, A., & Padó, S. (2010). "I like work: I can sit and
look at it for hours" – Type clash vs. plausibility in covert
event recovery. In Proceedings of VERB 2010. Pisa, Italy.
Zarcone, A., & Padó, S. (2011). Generalized event knowledge
in logical metonymy resolution. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 944949). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1220

