UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interpersonal Effects of Emotions in Morally-charged Negotiations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1183b80b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Dehghani, Morteza
Gratch, Jonathan
Carnevale, Peter

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interpersonal Effects of Emotions in Morally-charged Negotiations
Morteza Dehghani (morteza@ict.usc.edu), Jonathan Gratch (gratch@ict.usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California,
1205 Waterfront Dr., Playa Vista, CA 90094-2536, USA

Peter J. Carnevale (peter.carnevale@marshall.usc.edu)
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California,
3670 Trousdale Parkway, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0808
Abstract
The majority of research on emotion and moral decisionmaking has focused on the intrapersonal effects of emotion.
However, witnessing and displaying emotional expressions is
also known to play a significant role in the facilitation and
coordination of our social interactions. In this work, we
hypothesize that interpersonal emotions effect moral
appraisals by prioritizing different moral concerns. We
investigate the impact of facial displays of discrete emotions,
specifically anger and sadness, in a morally charged multiitem negotiation task. The results of our experiment support
our hypothesis that moral appraisals can be strongly affected
by interpersonal emotional expressions. We show that
displays of anger may backfire if one of the parties associates
moral significance to the objects of the negotiation, whereas
displays of sadness promote higher concession-making.
Overall, we argue that emotional expressions can shift moral
concerns within a negotiation in ways that can promote
cooperation.
Keywords: Emotion, Sacred Values, Moral DecisionMaking, Negotiations

Introduction
Recent research into emotion and moral decision-making
reveals a consistent pattern. When confronted with possible
threats to moral or sacred concerns, people tend to become
emotional (e.g. Ginges et al., 2007), uncompromising (e.g.
Tetlock, 2003), and act in ways contrary to traditional
formalizations of rational self-interest (e.g. Atran, 2010).
This article adds a bit of hope to this otherwise gloomy
picture. Building on findings from both moral decisionmaking and the interpersonal effects of emotion, we show
how emotion can sometimes foster cooperation rather than
conflict. Our findings have potential important implications
for negotiation and conflict resolution in sacred domains.
In this article, we build on the social-functional
framework of emotions (Keltner & Haidt, 1999; Frijda &
Masquita, 1994) which claims that different sociomoral
concerns are prioritized based on the distinct emotions that
are experienced (Horbeg, Oveis & Keltner, 2011). This
theory argues that our perception of the permissibility of
actions in moral situations is affected by the emotions
experienced, as different emotions heighten the salience of
different moral domains. For example, disgust has been
linked to violations of purity-sanctity (Rozin, et al., 1999),
and research shows that experimentally predisposing
individuals to disgust increases their tendency to focus on

purity related issues (e.g. sexuality) as opposed to other
moral concerns such as justice (e.g. Tapias, Glaser, Keltner,
Vasquez & Wickens, 2007). However, the research on
emotion-related moral appraisals has been mostly limited to
the intrapersonal effects of emotion in decision-making.
In contrast to research on moral decision-making,
research on negotiation and conflict resolution has largely
emphasized both the intrapersonal as well as interpersonal
effects of emotion (Carnevale, 2008; Forgas, 1998). Work
on interpersonal aspects of emotion argues that emotional
expressions by one party can change how the other party
construes and reacts to a situation. The evidence from this
line of research suggests that cognitive emotional appraisals
are not only antecedents of emotions experienced, but they
may also follow from the perception of emotional
expressions in others (Lerner, Han, & Keltner, 2007). For
example, it has been widely documented that perceiving
expressed anger during a course of a negotiation can elicit
more concessions compared to other emotions (such as
happiness) or no emotions at all (e.g. Van Kleef, De Dreu &
Manstead, 2004a, 2004b, 2010; Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006).
These authors argue that anger communicates that a party
has high aspirations and that concessions would be required
from the other party to reach an agreement. The majority of
these findings, however, rely on negotiations only involving
issues that might be of interest to people but have no
sentimental or moral significance to them (e.g. negotiating
over the price of a cellphone and its duration of service). In
this article, we build on these findings and show that
interpersonal effects of emotion unfold somewhat
differently in moral contexts.
Here, we investigate the impact of facial displays of
discrete emotions, specifically anger and sadness, in a
morally-charged multi-item negotiation task. We
hypothesize that perceiving different emotional expressions
in others can influence moral cognition by prioritizing
different moral domains and shifting interpretive-frames. In
other words, our interpretation of a moral issue can be
subjected to the emotional expressions conveyed by other
individuals involved in the negotiation. Anger is connotated
with the prioritization of ethics of autonomy concerned with
rights and justice (Rozin, et al., 1999), and sadness is linked
to eliciting sympathy and heightening the salience of need,
weakness and harm/care (Horbeg, Oveis & Keltner, 2011).
We predict that when an object is perceived as a sacred (or
protected) value (with intrinsic moral significance) (Tetlock,

1476

2003; Baron & Spranca, 1997), angry or sad facial displays
expressed by an opponent will have opposing effects on the
behavior of individuals, as these emotions heighten different
moral concerns. Recent work in social and cognitive
psychology suggests that people with sacred values (SVs)
tend to reject tradeoffs with other values (especially with
secular ones) and will express anger when considering such
tradeoffs (e.g. Tetlock et al. 2000).
We hypothesize that when facing angry opponents, SV
participants (those associating moral significance to the
item) will show the typical rejection of tradeoffs and
concede very little, as their concerns about their sacred
values will be amplified by the anger expressed in the other
party. In other words, we predict perceiving expressed anger
will back-fire for SV participants, that is, will lessen the
likelihood of concession. However, when interacting with
an opponent who displays sadness, concerns about need and
care will become salient, and participants will concede more
than SV participants in the anger condition. For non-SV
participants we expect to see the known pattern of
concession due to perceived anger consistent with findings
of Van Kleef and others in non-moral domains (e.g. Van
Kleef et al., 2004a, 2004b; Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006).
We begin by discussing the negotiation task used in this
study. Then we explain our hypotheses, and describe our
experiments. We close with a discussion of our findings and
its implications.

Sacred-Objects Negotiation Task
It has been argued that research on morally motivated
decision-making relies heavily on a “narrow empirical
base”, in regards to subject populations as well as the

stimuli used in experiments (Medin & Atran, 2004). The
research populations used in these studies mostly consist of
undergraduates at major research universities. And the
scenarios and the stimuli materials used mainly focus on
single-shot trade-offs scenarios where participants are asked
about the permissibility of set hypothetical actions (e.g.
killing one person instead of five). However, many real-life
moral situations unfold over repeated interactions (which
can sometimes span years), such as socio-political conflicts
involving sacred values (e.g. Israel-Palestine conflict:
Ginges et al., 2007; Iran nuclear conflict: Dehghani, et al.,
2009, 2010).
In order to overcome some of the above shortcomings,
we have recently developed a new web-based multi-round
negotiation task involving a participant and an opponent
(computer agent), where different objects are placed on a
board and the participant and the agent take turns in taking
ownership of some of the items and giving away the others
(Carnevale et al., 2011) (Figure 1). Participants can move
items around the board by grabbing them with a mouse and
putting the items either on their own side or on the
opponent's side. After each new proposal is extended by the
participants, the agent evaluates the offer, expresses an
emotional reaction to the offer and decides whether or not to
accept the offer or propose a new offer. Participants can
express emotional reactions at any point by choosing one
the emotional facial displays at the bottom right corner of
the screen (Figure 1).
Aspects of this task are easily configurable in order to
consider a variety of experiment questions. In the context of
this article, all items are initially placed in the middle
section of the board and are up for grabs. The negotiation

Figure 1: Screenshot of the board where negotiation takes place

1477

Imagine the following hypothetical scenario:
There has been an earthquake in the town you live in and
many have been injured. All roads to your town have been
blocked and as a result aid is coming in very slowly. Because
of this every family has to split packages of aid sent using
helicopters with another family.
You and the family that have to split the aids with each
other, both have babies who have [A: been injured and have
developed infections] [B: have caught minor colds]. [A: The
only way to control the spread of infection, which if not
stopped will become lethal, is to use penicillin] [B: In order
to relieve the cold you can give your child acetaminophen].
You are also running low on food, but have enough clean
water that would last you for several days. All the shops in
the town are closed, so it is uncertain whether you can use the
money to purchase goods.
Given the circumstances, you know that no other aid
package will be received for another week. The aid packages
include
medicine
including
[A:
penicillin]
[B:
acetaminophen], canned food, some money and water bottles.
In the task that follows, you have to negotiate how these
items have to be split between your family and the other
household. You do not know how much food and water the
other family has.
The negotiation is done in a sequence of alternating offers.
You will make the first offer. The other negotiator may or
may not accept your offer. If it does not accept it, that is, if it
rejects your offer, it will send you a new offer. You can either
accept or reject its offer. If you accept it, you will get to keep
the items that you did not give them. If you reject their offer,
you can make another offer and submit it to them. If after 12
rounds there is no agreement, the negotiation will end in no
agreement. In this case, you both will only receive one of
each item and the rest will be given away.
Try to get as many items as you can.

Figure 2: Facial displays of sadness and anger used in
the negotiation task

consists of 12 rounds with each player taking turns making
or receiving offers six times. When a participant makes an
offer, the computer opponent decides to accept or reject the
offer based on a pre-programmed strategy unknown to the
participant. If the opponent decides to reject the offer, it will
make a new proposal that the participant can in turn accept
or reject.
Agent Offers
All agents in this study follow the same strategy -- a fixed,
non-contingent series of offers that has been designed to
simulate resistance to tradeoffs involving sacred values. In
pilot testing, most participants perceived this policy to be
tough but plausible. There are four different groups of items
involved in the negotiations (medicine, water bottles, food
cans, money), with three items per group. The negotiation
strategy of the agent is as follows ([medicine, water, food,
money]): Round 2: [0, 0, 0, 0]; Round 4: [0, 0, 0, 1]; Round
6: [0, 0, 0, 1]; Round 8: [0, 1, 0, 1]; Round 10: [0, 1, 0, 1];
Round 12: [0, 2, 0, 2], where the numbers in the brackets
represents how many items in each group the agent chooses
to give to the participant. In the decision-making algorithm
of the agent, the items are given the following qualitative
payoff values: [50, 10, 5, 1]. These payoff values are only
used for internal calculations and are not shown to the
participants. The agent will accept a participants' offer if it
has a higher or equal overall utility than the offer that the
agent was about to make. Otherwise, it will reject it and
make its next offer.
Agent Expressions
Agents follow one of two possible facial display policies
depending on the condition. The angry agent follows a
fixed, non-contingent policy, displaying anger on rounds 2,
6 and 10, and returning to a neutral face after five seconds
(i.e., the policy is the same no matter what the participant
offered). The sad agent follows the same policy but displays
sadness rather than anger.
Figure 2 illustrates the
expressions. In all other rounds, both agents display a
neutral face (Figure 1).

Experiments
In the following experiment we investigate the interpersonal
effects of angry and sad facial displays in the sacred-objects

Figure 3: Participants were presented either with scenario
A (deadly-infection) or scenario B (minor-cold)

task discussed in the previous section. Similar to other
negative emotions, both anger and sadness serve as calls for
adjustment of behavior (Van Kleef et al., 2004). Anger,
which is the most common emotion in conflict situations,
signals potential confrontation (Allred, 1999) and is related
to the ethics of autonomy concerned with rights and justice
(Rozin et al., 1999). On the other hand, the hypothesized
communicative function of sadness, especially when
combined with tears, is to elicit sympathy, signal
appeasement, indicate a social need for help and to prioritize
the salience of need, harm and care (Shariff & Tracy, 2011;
Hasson, 2009; Tiedens, 2001; Horbeg, Oveis & Keltner,
2011). As discussed previously, we hypothesize that
perceiving different emotional facial displays in others
would prioritize different moral domains and affect moral
decision-making. Therefore, we expect that the participants'
moral appraisals would be influenced by the angry or sad
emotional expressions displayed by the agent during the
negotiation. We specifically predict that participants who
view an object of the negotiation as a sacred value would
show the typical rejection of tradeoffs seen in SV

1478

participants (e.g. Tetlock et al. 2000) but only when they
interact with the agent displaying anger. On the other hand,
SV participants interacting with the sad agent would
concede significantly higher than SV participants interacting
with the angry agent. Moreover, the backfiring effect of
anger should only be seen for participants who perceive the
negotiation object as sacred.
Participants
Two hundred and fourteen American Amazon-Turk workers
(age: 33.71, gender: 56% female) were paid $1 each to
participate in our study. On average it took each worker 6
minutes and 16 seconds to complete our task.
Design
The study employed a between subject 2 X 2 X 2 full
factorial design, where the first factor was agent's expressed
emotion (anger/sadness), the second factor was the
experimental scenario (deadly-infection scenario/minor-cold
scenario, Figure 2), and the last factor was whether or not
participants held a SV for the medicine package. After
reading one of the two scenarios described in Figure 3, we
assessed participants' values regarding the medicine package
using Baron and Spranca's (1997) measure. In accordance
with this measure we asked our participants: "How do you
feel about giving up the medicine package?", and they were
provided the following four choices to choose from:
a. I think this definitely needs to happen.

b. I do not object to this.
c. This is acceptable only if the benefits of trading the
medicine are great enough.
d. This shouldn’t be done no matter how great the beneﬁts
are.
Participants who answered “d” were categorized as holding
a SV for the medicine package. Participants then played the
Sacred-Objects task as described in the last section.
Results
Participants who dropped out of the negotiation before
Round 4 (made only one or two offers and were exposed to
the emotional displays of the agent only once) were
excluded from the analysis (N = 21). From the participants
who read the deadly-infection scenario, 62.77% (N = 59)
perceived the medicine package as a sacred value, compared
to 44.44% (N = 44) in the minor-cold scenario (χ2 (1 , N =
193) = 5.7884, p = 0.0161). However, the scenario
manipulation did not have an effect on the course of the
negotiation and there was no difference in participants’
responses and offers between the two scenarios. Therefore,
for the rest of the analysis we combine the data from the two
scenarios into one condition.
We examined demands for the items through the course
of the negotiation (Figure 4). As predicted, SV participants
conceded less on medicine than Non-SV participants
throughout the negotiation (Demand 1: t(191) = 2.8485, p =
0.0292; Demand 2: t(191) = 5.1783, p < 0.0001; Demand 3:

Figure 4: Participants' demands over the course of the negotiation

1479

t(191) = 4.5055, p < 0.0001; Demand 4: t(191) = 3.2353, p
= 0.0086; Demand 5: t(186) = 3.7789, p = 0.0013; Demand
6: t(185) = 2.8966, p = 0.0254; p-values have been adjusted
for multiple comparisons using Bonferroni correction).
Corresponding effects were not obtained for the non-sacred
objects (water bottles, food cans, money). Repeated
measures ANOVA with Greenhouse-Geisser correction,
with proposal round number as the within-subjects factor,
and SV/NoSV and displayed-emotion as between-subjects
factors, determined an overall main effect of time (p <
0.001) for all the four objects, and an interaction between
time, SV/NoSV and agent’s emotion for medicine (F(4.585,
839.99) = 2.082, p = 0.053). Again, corresponding effects
were not obtained for the non-sacred objects.
To further analyze the differences in concession rates
between the groups for different items, we used demand
difference (number of packages in the first offer deducted
from last offer) for medicine as a dependent variable in a 2
X 2 ANOVA where the first factor was the displayed
emotional reaction (sadness/anger) and the second factor
was the presence or absence of sacred values. For medicine,
there was a significant interaction between SV and the
agent’s displayed emotion (F(1,189) = 4.7615, p = 0.0303)
(Figure 5). As predicted, SV participants who interacted
with the sad agent conceded significantly higher than SV
participants who interacted with the angry agent (t(101) =
2.3809, p = 0.0191). Interestingly, SV participants who
interacted with the angry agent conceded much less on
medicine than Non-SV participants interacting with the
same agent (t(94) = 2.1191, p = 0.0367).
Given that the trends of negotiation for the rest the objects
were similar, we combined them into a single group called
non-sacred objects. A 2 X 2 ANOVA (SV/NoSV X
AngryAgent/SadAgent) with average demand difference for
non-sacred objects as the dependent variable, revealed a
significant main effect of SV/NoSV, where SV participants
conceded less (F(1,189) = 3.8550, p = 0.0511), and a main
effect of agent's emotion, where displayed sadness induced
more concession (F(1,189) = 3.8915, p = 0.0499). There
was no interaction between SV and Agent's emotion for the
non-sacred objects.
We also analyzed the participants' expressed emotion
throughout the length of the negotiation. A planned
comparison revealed that the difference in expressed anger
between SV participants who interacted with the angry
agent and non-SV participants interacting with the same
agent was marginal (t(86) = 1.2613, p = 0.1053, one-tailed).
Also, another planned comparison showed that SV
participants who interacted with the agent that displayed sad
facial expressions, expressed more sadness than SV
participants who interacted with the angry agent (t(93) =
1.6826, p = 0.0479, one-tailed).

Discussion
Our experiment shows that there was an overall concession
over time for all items. However, for the medicine package,
the amount of concession made by participants depended on

Figure 5: Demand difference for medicine as a function of
Agents' emotional expressions and Sacred Value (SV)

whether they viewed the item as sacred and the agent’s
displayed emotion. As predicted, SV participants who
interacted with the agent that displayed anger made
significantly smaller concessions compared to SV
participants who interacted with the sad agent. This finding
supports our hypothesis that not only are moral concerns
prioritized based on experienced intrapersonal emotions
(Horbeg, Oveis & Keltner, 2011), but interpersonal
emotions also affect moral appraisals by heightening
different moral concerns. Specifically, we had predicted that
witnessing sad facial displays would affect the decisionmaking of SV participants, by heightening the salience of
need, weakness and harm/care (Horbeg, Oveis & Keltner,
2011). On the other hand, SV participants interacting with
the angry agent showed the typical rejection of tradeoffs, as
witnessing anger expressions amplified their concerns about
their sacred values. Interestingly, consistent with findings of
Van Kleef and others in non-moral domains (e.g. Van Kleef
et al., 2004a, 2004b; Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006), anger
expressions for non-SV participants resulted in higher
concession rates.
Overall, the contribution of our work is two-fold. First,
our result emphasizes that moral appraisals can be strongly
affected by interpersonal emotional expressions of other
parties. Second, we showed that expressing anger may not
be the best strategy to achieve higher concession rates in
negotiation. Our result demonstrates that displays of anger
may backfire if one of the parties associates moral
significance to the objects of the negotiation. Displaying
sadness was found to be a far more effective strategy to
elicit concessions from the other party.

1480

Sacred values play important roles in many cultural and
political conflicts (e.g. Ginges et al., 2007; Dehghani et al.,
2009, 2010). In this work we argued that moral concerns
can be shifted within a negotiation in ways that promote
cooperation and concession-making. One real-world
implication of our research is that in negotiation involving
sacred values, displaying anger and aggression might
backfire, in the sense that it will result in conflicts to
escalate and anger to reciprocate. However, non-aggressive
and non-confrontational signals may result in better
outcomes and larger concessions in these circumstances.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by AFOSR FA9550-09-1-050.

References
Allred, K. G. (1999). Anger driven retaliation: Toward an
understanding of impassioned conflict in organizations. In
R. J. Bies, R. J. Lewicki, & B. H. Sheppard (Eds.),
Research on negotiations in organizations (Vol. 7).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press
Atran, S. (2010). Talking to the Enemy: Violent Extremism,
Sacred Values, and What it Means to be Human. London:
Penguin
Baron, J., & Spranca, M. (1997). Protected values.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
70, 1
Carnevale, P.J. (2008). Positive affect and decision frame in
negotiation. Group Decision and Negotiation, 17, 51-63
Carnevale, P., Kim, Y., de Melo, C., Dehghani, M. &
Gratch, J. (2011). These Are Ours: The Effects of
Ownership and Groups on Property Negotiation.
Appeared in The 24th Annual Conference of the IACM,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Dehghani, M., Atran, S., Iliev, R., Sachdeva, S., Medin, D.
& Ginges, J. (2010). Sacred values and conflict over
Iran’s nuclear program. Judgment and Decision Making,
5, 7, pp. 540-546.
Dehghani, M., Iliev, R., Sachdeva, S., Atran, S., Ginges, J.
& Medin, D. (2009). Emerging sacred values: Iran’s
nuclear program. Judgment and Decision Making, 4, 7,
pp. 930-933.
Forgas, J. P. (1998). On feeling good and getting your way:
Mood effects on negotiating strategies and outcomes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 74, 565577
Frijda, N. H., & Mesquita, B. (1994). The social roles and
functions of emotions. In S. Kitayama & H. R. Markus
(Eds.), Emotion and culture: Empirical studies of mutual
influence. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Associatio
Ginges, J., Atran, S., Medin, D., Shikaki, K. (2007). Sacred
bounds on rational resolution of violent political conﬂict.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 104,
7357
Hasson, O. (2009). Emotional tears as biological signals.
Evolutionary Psychology, 7, 363–37

Horberg, E. J., Oveis, C., & Keltner, D. (2011). Emotions as
moral amplifiers: An appraisal tendency approach to the
influences of distinct emotions upon moral judgment.
Emotion Review, 3, 237-244.
Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (1999). Social functions of emotions
at four levels of analysis. Cognition and Emotion, 13,
505–521
Lerner, J. S., Han, S., & Keltner, D. (2007). Feelings and
consumer decision making: Extending the appraisaltendency framework. Journal of Consumer Psychology,
17, 184-187.
Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (2004). The native mind:
Biological categorization and reasoning in development
and across cultures. Psychological Review, 111, 960–983
Rozin, P., Lowery, L., Imada, S., and Haidt, J. (1999). The
cad triad hypothesis: A mapping between three moral
emotions (contempt, anger, disgust) and three moral
codes (community, autonomy, divinity). Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 574–586.
Shariff, A. F., & Tracy, J. L. (2011). What are emotional
expressions for? Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 20, 395-399.
Sinaceur, M., & Tiedens, L. Z. (2006). Get mad and get
more than even: When and why anger expression is
effective in negotiations. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 42(3), 314–322.
Tapias, P. M., Glaser, J., Keltner, D., Vasquez, K., &
Wickens, T. (2007). Emotions and prejudice: Specific
emotions toward outgroups. Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations, 10, 27-39.
Tetlock, P. E. (2003). Thinking the unthinkable: sacred
values and taboo cognitions. Topics in Cognitive Science,
7, 32
Tetlock, P. E., Kristel, O., Elson, B., Green, M., & Lerner, J.
(2000). The psychology of the unthinkable: Taboo tradeoffs, forbidden base rates, and heretical counterfactuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78:853870.
Tiedens, L.Z. (2001). Anger and advancement versus
sadness and subjugation: The effect of negative emotion
expressions on social status conferral. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 86–94
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W.,& Manstead, A. S. R.
(2004a). The interpersonal effects of anger and happiness
in negotiations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 86, 57-76.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R.
(2004b). The interpersonal effects of emotions in
negotiations: A motivated information processing
approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
87,510-528.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. W., & Manstead, A. S. R.
(2010). An interpersonal approach to emotion in social
decision making: The Emotions as Social Information
Model. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology (Vol. 42, pp. 45-96). Burlington, VT:
Academic Press.

1481

