UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigation of effects of working memory capacity on rule discovery process using eye
movement data

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1t42x47w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Matsumoto, Miki
Miwa, Kazuhisa

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigation of effects of working memory capacity on rule discovery process
using eye movement data
Miki Matsumuro (muro@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Fro-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan
Abstract
Many studies have investigated the process of rule discovery. However, the data utilized in these studies, such as performance and verbal protocol data, were course-grained. In
this study, we designed a new experimental method using eye
movement data to observe the detailed process of rule discovery. In the proposed method, we corresponded the task display
and a rule space in the participants’ minds to understand how
they consider the rules and observe instances by eye tracking.
Then, we compared the process of rule discovery by people
with high and low working memory capacities. The results of
the experiment revealed that those with high working memory
capacity tried to consider one or similar rules from multiple
instances. On the other hand, those with low working memory
capacity tended to consider various rules from one instance.
Keywords: Rule discovery; eye tracking; working memory
capacity; search strategy

Introduction
It is one of the most important activities to find regularities
not only in science but also in many aspects of daily life. In
this study, we tackle two goals in order to understand the process of rule discovery. Our first goal is to propose a new experimental method so as to observe the detailed process of
rule discovery. The second goal is to investigate the relation
between working memory capacity (WMC) and strategies of
rule discovery.
The origin of this study is traced back to the dual space
search theory proposed by Simon and Lea (1974). They suggested that the process of rule discovery develops through the
interaction between two types of searches in two spaces, a
rule space and an instance space. Problem solvers state rules
by searching in a rule space while generating and observing
instances in an instance space, and modify the rules or propose new rules based on their observations.
Although their theory can successfully explain the process
of rule discovery, when conducting experiments based on this
theory, there are limitations. One is that it is difficult to observe the detailed process of search in a rule space because the
thought process to state rules cannot be monitored directly.
To investigate this process, the researchers have utilized the
protocol analysis method (e.g., Haverty, Koedinger, Klahr, &
Alibali, 2000). The participants’ think-aloud protocol data
were used for this analysis. However, the data were coarsegrained on the time scale, and the participants mentioned only
their conscious thoughts. Therefore, the analysis of the detailed patterns of search in the two spaces from protocol data
often faced essential limitations. For these reasons, our first
purpose is to propose a new experimental method to observe
the detailed process of rule discovery.

The second goal is to investigate the relation between
WMC and strategies of rule discovery. Dougherty and Hunter
(2003) showed that people with high WMC maintained more
alternative hypotheses in their mind when they engaged in
hypothesis generation. However, their task was a probability
judgment task and their analysis was based on participants’
performance of the thought-listing task that was even more
coarse-grained than the protocol data. Other studies also analyzed the effects of WMC based on the score of the reasoning
tasks (e.g., Süß, Oberauer, Wittmann, Wilhelm, & Schulze,
2002). In the current study, we focus not on outputs as results
but on the process of rule discovery by using eye movement
data.
In summary, the first purpose of our study is to propose a
new experimental method by which we obtain detailed data
about the process of rule discovery. The second purpose is
to investigate how participants’ WMC affects such a process.
Our method using eye tracking was established based on the
SDDS (Scientific Discovery as Dual Search) model of Klahr
and Dunbar (1988). The reason we use eye tracking is that
eye movement data are more fine-grained than verbal reports
and obtained directly without participants’ conscious effort
(cf. Rehder & Hoffman, 2005). With this method, we examine differences in search strategies affected by WMC, selecting those who have high or low WMC based on screening test
scores.

Experimental Method
Search in Each Space
We designed an experimental method by means of eye tracking. We utilize the idea of the structure of a hypothesis space
in the SDDS model. It extends the dual space search theory
for investigating scientific discovery. The hypothesis space
in the SDDS model corresponds to a rule space in dual space
search. The hypothesis space includes all available hypotheses, each of which is connected with others through search
paths. The search path does not connect hypotheses that have
different schema. Therefore, similar hypotheses with an identical schema construct a subspace of the hypothesis space.
Based on this idea, in our method, we manipulate the structure of a rule space by giving a different function to each
rule. Since a different function evokes a different schema,
only rules that have the same function are connected, and they
construct a subspace in a rule space.
We obtain search patterns in the rule and instance spaces by
means of eye tracking. First, we define search in each space
as follows. The search in a rule space is the process where

1984

search in an
instance space!
single!

multiple!

single!

single /
single!

single /
multiple!

multiple!

multiple /
single!

multiple /
multiple!

search in a
rule space!

Figure 1: Four search statuses of the rule and instance spaces
and transition patterns among the statuses.
participants consider rules from instances. On the other hand,
the search in an instance space is defined as the activities
where participants generate or observe instances to consider
rules. In actual processes of rule discovery, timing to switch
between searches in the rule and instance spaces is not clear.
Therefore, in this method, we collect eye movement data as
the search in a rule space and observations of instances as the
search in an instance space.
There are two modes in the search process (Figure 1): the
single- and multiple-subspace search in a rule space and the
single- and multiple-instance search in an instance space.
First, we define two modes of search in the rule space. The
single-subspace search is the search mode in which participants search only in one subspace. In other words, they consider rules in the same subspace that are characterized by
an identical function. On the other hand, in the multiplesubspace search mode, they try to decide which subspace
they should search. Whereas the single-subspace search is
a “search in a subspace,” the multiple-subspace search is a
“search for a subspace” to be focused on.
For search in the instance space, we also define two modes
of search. Participants in the single-instance search mode focus on observing one instance. They consider multiple rules
from a single instance. In contrast, they observe various instances for stating rules in the multiple-instance search mode.
They compare multiple instances to obtain cues for rule discovery.
Each participant’s search status is categorized into one of
the four search statuses in Figure 1. The single/single status is
one in which participants observe one instance and consider
rules with an identical function. When participants consider
a complex process, they do so in this status because they may
concentrate their attention on a single event. Participants in
the single/multiple status also consider rules in an identical
subspace, but they observe and compare multiple instances to
obtain the cues for rule discovery. On the other hand, in the
multiple/single status, participants consider rules with various functions across multiple subspaces while focusing on
examining one instance. Last, the participants in the multiple/multiple status also consider various rules across multiple

!"#$%&'!!()*%'!

Figure 2: Example screenshot of task display in this study.
The upper panel is the number panel, the lower-left panel
is the arrow panel, and the lower-right panel is the compass
panel. The directions were presented in Chinese characters.
The target alphabet is presented in the center of the display.
subspaces while observing multiple instances in a short time.
This status seems not to be suitable for rule searching because
they simultaneously vary both factors, rules and instances,
preventing efficient searches for rule discovery. To identify
each search status (a circle in Figure 1) and each transition
among the search statuses (an arrow in Figure 1), we systematically designed a rule discovery task as follows.

Rule Discovery Task Using Eye Tracking
The task display consists of three panels (arrow, compass, and
number panels) and eight letters (a to h) in the center of the
display as shown in Figure 2. The eight letters are placed in
circle. The presented letter (we call this the “target”) is determined based on the objects displayed on one of the three
panels. The participants are asked to find a rule determining
which panel relates to the target and how the target is determined by the objects in the related panel. Only one of the
three panels relates to the target and the other two panels have
no relation to it. The participants are required to find a rule as
quickly as possible.
The experimental procedures are as follows. Before the
experiment, an experimenter prepares six instances as stimuli. In the example instance in Figure 2, the rule may be:
“the target is the letter (h) in the opposite position (NorthWest) of the combination of two directions (South-East) on
the compass panel.” In this case, the experimenter selects five
other instances so as to be instances consistent with the same
compass rule. The participants are instructed that only one
panel is related to the target in advance. The participants observe all six instances one-by-one using right- and left-arrow
keys on the keyboard. The panel that has the same function
is always presented in the same position on the display. Additionally, the six instances are presented in a cyclic manner;
the participants can observe instances as many times as they
want. When the participants think of a rule, they press the
space key and report their rule to the experimenter. When the

1985

Table 1: Functions and example rules of each panel
panel
number

function
order

how to decide target
a letter corresponds to a number
in alphabetical order (“a” is 1)

example rule (see example in Figure 2)
Target is the sum of numbers in
alphabetical order (e.g., 1 + 3 = 4 → d)

arrow

rotation

a letter corresponds to
an angle of arrows

Target is a shifted letter from “a” by an
angle of left object (e.g., 180 degrees → e)

compass

position

a letter corresponds
to a direction (based on map)

Target is pointed at by
right object (e.g., East → c)

correct rule is discovered, the experiment is terminated. Every five minutes, the calibration for recording eye movement
is performed. Table 1 shows functions and example rules in
each panel. Before starting the task, the participants learn
these functions sufficiently.

Data and Search in Each Space
Figure 3 shows example data obtained in the experiment. For
example, from 520 to 530 seconds in Figure 3, this participant focused her attention on the arrow panel, meaning that
she considered only rules that use arrows; that is, she searched
in the subspace of “rotation” rules in a rule space. The shift
of fixation from the arrow to the number panel at around 530
seconds means that her search subspace shifted to the “order”
rule subspace. In the same manner, the behavior after 530
seconds is interpreted that she expanded her attention toward
the three panels, meaning that she searched all subspaces in a
rule space simultaneously. Soon after broadening the search,
she fixed her attention on the compass panel. In the final part,
she shifted her search subspace to the “order” rule without
broadening the search. On the other hand, for the search in
an instance space, the participant seemed to focus on a single
instance before around 560 seconds. Then, she moved to observe multiple instances during a short time after around 570
seconds.
With reference to Figure 3, around 520 seconds, her search
mode was in the single/single status. Then, she searched
in multiple subspaces in a rule space with an identical instance at around 530 seconds, meaning that her search status
shifted to the multiple/single. Soon, she came back to the single/single status, and this status continued for a while. After
around 570 seconds, she observed multiple instances one-bynumber
compass
arrow
520

530

540

550

560

570

580
(sec.)

Figure 3: Timeline graph of collected data.
Each red horizontal line indicates a panel that the participant
focused on. Labels of the vertical axis indicate three panels.
Arrows on the top of the graph mean timing at which the participant shifted an instance to the previous or next one.

one, meaning that she moved to the single/multiple status. As
shown in this example, it is possible to obtain detailed search
processes in the rule and instance spaces by our experimental
method.
We conducted an experiment with this method to observe
the process of searches in the rule and instance spaces to understand the effect of WMC on the rule discovery process.

Experiment
First, we measured the participants’ spatial span capability as
a screening test.

Screening Test
Fifty-seven undergraduates engaged in the spatial span test
by Shah and Miyake (1996). In the task, a capital letter was
presented on a computer screen that was not in the upright
orientation. The participants were asked to indicate whether
the letter was normal or mirror-imaged and were required
to store the orientation of each letter for a subsequent recall
test. One participant whose judgment score was around the
chance level was excluded from analysis. Fifty-six participants’ data were scored based on the partial-credit unit scoring by Conway et al. (2005). The mean score was 0.576
(SD = 0.200), the highest score was 0.920, and the lowest
score was 0.121.

Rule Discovery Task
Method
Participants The twelve participants with the highest
WMC scores participated as the high-WMC group. Their
mean score was 0.825 (SD = 0.068). The twelve participants
with the lowest WMC scores participated as the low-WMC
group. Their mean score was 0.290 (SD = 0.091). The mean
WMC score of the high group was significantly higher than
that of the low group (t(22) = 16.318, p < .001).
Apparatus We presented the task display on a 17-in. monitor with a resolution of 1280 × 1024 pixels. The participants were seated approximately 60 cm away from the monitor. The size of panels was approximately 5.25◦ × 7.82◦ of
visual angle. Each panel was placed as shown in Figure 2 on
the upper-center, lower-left, and lower-right of the task display. The participants’ eye movements were recorded using
the Tobii T60 eye tracker at 60 Hz. The participants were
allowed to move their heads naturally.

1986

0.7!

panel
task 1

task 2

task 3

compass

Ratio of Segments!

Table 2: Rules used in this study
rule
Target is the opposite position
of combination of two
directions on the panel

arrow

Target is a shifted letter by
sum of an angle of two arrows
on the panel and 135 degrees

number

Target is the sum of the
difference between two numbers
and the bigger one on the panel

p =!.001 !
high

0.6!

low

0.5!

p =.005 !

0.4!
0.3!
0.2!
0.1!
0!
single /
single!

Procedures Approximately one month after the screening
test, the rule discovery task was conducted individually. First,
the participants were instructed on the task and learned the
function of each panel sufficiently through practice. Task 1
was preliminarily performed to let the participants establish
their own strategies. In task 1, the participants needed to find
a simple rule in ten minutes. Soon after task 1 ended, task 2
was conducted with the same procedure as that in task 1. The
participants needed to find a relatively complex rule in twenty
minutes in task 2. The data of task 2 were used for analysis.
As an exception, the participants who found the rule before
fifteen minutes passed were led to engage in another task (task
3) with the same procedure as that in task 2. In this case, the
data of task 3 were used for analysis. Table 2 shows the rules
used in the experiment.

Results
One participant in the low group was excluded from analysis because we did not obtain the data for more than fifteen minutes. We analyzed only the participants from whom
more than 60% of eye movement data were recorded correctly. Based on the criterion, six participants in the high
group and two participants in the low group were excluded;
therefore, the data of six participants in the high group (WMC
score M = 0.858, SD = 0.058) and nine participants in the
low group (WMC score M = 0.289, SD = 0.100) were used
for analyses. The average WMC score of the high group was
still significantly higher than that of the low group (t(13) =
12.551, p < .001).
Search Status Fixations longer than 100 msec were analyzed, and fixations outside the panels were excluded from
analysis. First, we traced each participant’s data along a timeline to acquire on which panel the fixations were observed and
when an instance was shifted, as shown in Figure 3. We defined that the fixation shift happened when the participant’s
fixation point was observed on a different panel from the preceding one. Similarly, we defined that the instance shift happened when the participants pressed the arrow keys to observe
another instance. Based on the median of the fixation time in
one panel (8.961 seconds) and the mean of observation time
in one instance (7.531 seconds), we segmented the timeline

single / multiple /
multiple!
single!
Search Status!

multiple /
multiple!

Figure 4: Ratio of segments in four search statuses in each
WMC group (bars show standard errors).
every 7.5 seconds.
Then, we counted how many fixation and instance shifts
happened in each segment. We also performed the same analysis with the segmentations at six, seven, and eight seconds,
and similar results were confirmed. We defined that the participants were in the multiple-subspace search mode in a rule
space when the fixation shifts were observed more than once
in each segment. Similarly, for search in an instance space,
in each segment when more than one instance shift were observed, the participants were defined to be in the multipleinstance search mode. Based on the definitions, we classified
the participants’ status in each segment into four categories
shown in Figure 1.
Figure 4 presents the ratio of segments categorized into
each search status in each WMC group. Mixed ANOVA
with WMC (high and low) as between-subject factor and
search status (four statuses) as within-subject factor was performed on the ratio of segments. The interaction between the
WMC and the search status reached significance (F(3, 39) =
6.328, p = .001). The ratio in the single/single status in the
high-WMC group was significantly higher than that in the
low-WMC group (F(1, 52) = 12.116, p = .001). On the other
hand, the ratio in the single/multiple status in the high-WMC
group was significantly lower than that in the low-WMC
group (F(1, 52) = 8.663, p = .005). These results show that
the participants in the high-WMC group compared multiple
instances more frequently than those in the low-WMC group
when they were in the single-subspace search mode in a rule
space search. On the other hand, the participants in the lowWMC group searched in the single subspace in a rule space
with fewer shifts of instances. When they searched in a rule
space with the multiple-subspace search mode, there was no
significant difference in search status between the two WMC
groups.
Transition Probability among Each Search Status Next,
we calculated the transition probability of shifting from one
to another or being in the same search status. There are sixteen transition patterns shown in Figure 1. Figure 5 shows

1987

0.5!

p < .001 !

high

0.4!

low

0.3!
0.2!
Transition Probability!

p < .001 !

p = .009 !

0.1!
0!

to S/S!

to S/M!

to M/S!

to M/M!

to S/S!

to S/M!

from S/S!

to M/S!

to M/M!

from S/M!

0.5!
0.4!
0.3!

p = .002 !

0.2!
0.1!
0!

to S/S!

to S/M!

to M/S!

to M/M!

to S/S!

to S/M!

from M/S!

to M/S!

to M/M!

from M/M!
Shift Pattern!

Figure 5: Probability of each transition pattern in each WMC group (bars show standard errors).
S/S = single/single, S/M = single/multiple, M/S = multiple/single, M/M = multiple/multiple.

the transition probability of each transition pattern in each
WMC group. Mixed ANOVA with WMC (high and low)
as between-subject factor and transition pattern (sixteen patterns) as within-subject factor was performed on the transition
probability. The interaction between the WMC and the transition pattern reached significance (F(15, 195) = 5.323, p <
.001). Four comparisons reaching significance are shown in
Figure 5: the transition probability of single/single to single/single in the low-WMC group was significantly higher
than that in the high-WMC group (F(1, 208) = 43.283, p <
.001); the transition probability of single/single to multiple/single in the low-WMC group was significantly higher
than that in the high-WMC group (F(1, 208) = 6.955, p =
.009); the transition probability of single/multiple to single/multiple in the high-WMC group was significantly higher
than that in the low-WMC group (F(1, 208) = 14.012, p <
.001); and the transition probability of multiple/single to single/single in the low-WMC group was significantly higher
than that in the high-WMC group (F(1, 208) = 9.819, p =
.002). Other comparisons did not reach significance.
These results indicate that when they searched in a single
subspace of a rule space, the participants in the high-WMC
group tended to continue the multiple-instance search in an
instance space, and those in the low-WMC group tended to
continue to the single-instance search. On the other hand,
the participants in the low-WMC group tended to shift to the
search in multiple subspaces of a rule space focusing on a
single instance more frequently than those in the high-WMC
group, even though their multiple-subspace search did not
continue very long.

Discussion
Our first purpose was to propose a new experimental method
by which we could capture the detailed process of rule discovery. This purpose was achieved by manipulating a structure of a rule space and using eye tracking. We successfully

observed the search statuses in the rule and instance spaces
and the transition patterns among those in detail. The second purpose of this study was to compare the process of rule
discovery by people with high or low WMC. Our method detected the different processes of the two types of participants.

Advantages of New Method
The protocol analysis has two main limitations; as a result,
we could not capture the detailed process of search in a rule
space. The first difficulty is the grain size of data. Reporting
one’s thoughts cannot happen at the speed of thought, making
it impossible for participants to report all of their thoughts.
Participants would omit reporting their short-term thoughts.
The use of eye tracking has the potential to solve this problem. We can directly obtain which direction participants focus their attention in by eye tracking. Furthermore, the sampling rate is very fine, 60 Hz in this study.
The second limitation of verbal protocols appears when
participants have difficulty putting their thoughts into words.
Participants sometimes have “no idea” during an experiment.
In this study, all except one participant reported in the posttask interview that there were periods when they came up
with no idea. In such a situation, the participants were usually confused and had difficulties in putting their thoughts
into words. Moreover, the verbalization of confused thoughts
would further muddle their thoughts. Eye movement data are
always recorded throughout the task, even if participants cannot verbalize their thoughts.
We designed our task based on the SDDS model by Klahr
and Dunbar (1988) to maximize the advantages of eye movement analysis. The task display as the observable externalized space consistently corresponds to the subspaces in a rule
space as the internal representation. Due to this design, we
could analyze search in a rule space from eye movement data.
These features in our experimental method enabled us to capture each search status and the transition among the statuses

1988

in detail.

Differences between Each WMC Group
As a result of the experiment, different strategies were observed according to participants’ WMC.
The analysis of the occurrence ratio of each search status
and each transition pattern suggested that the participants in
the high-WMC group tended to search in a rule space focusing on one subspace compared to those in the low-WMC
group. Additionally, when they considered the rules that have
an identical function, they observed and compared multiple
instances more continuously. These results suggest that the
participants with high WMC considered complex rules with
an identical function while comparing multiple instances,
meaning that they preferred the depth-first search in a rule
space. Note that they did not necessarily fix their search to
one single subspace because they actually shifted the search
from one to another subspace at their own pace.
On the other hand, quick shifts of fixation among multiple panels, i.e. being in the multiple-subspace search mode
in a rule space, were more frequently observed in the lowWMC group. However, this mode did not continue, and they
soon came back to the single-subspace search mode. These
results indicate that the participants with low WMC searched
in a rule space switching the single- and multiple-subspace
search modes alternatively. For the search in an instance
space, they did not observe multiple instances as the participants in the high-WMC group did. This implies that they
tried to consider rules from one instance, whereas the participants in the high-WMC group tried to consider one rule
from multiple instances. These results suggest that they valued the breadth-first search. These two strategies, depth-first
and breadth-first searches, were also observed in our previous
study (Matsumuro & Miwa, 2011).
We suggest a possible reason that the search strategy
was different according to their WMC based on the studies of category learning. Two strategies have been shown
(DeCaro, Thomas, & Beilock, 2008; Rehder & Hoffman,
2005): the rule-based strategy where participants conduct
hypothesis testing explicitly, and the information-integration
strategy where rules are learned implicitly by integrating
stimuli across multiple dimensions. The participants in the
high-WMC group in our study observed multiple instances
while searching in a single subspace in a rule space. They
would generate hypotheses by comparing instances and tested
these hypotheses as with the rule-based strategy. The explicit
strategy was suitable for the participants with high WMC because it relies heavily on working memory. By contrast, the
participants in the low-WMC group searched in multiple subspaces with a single instance. They would have gathered information from multiple dimensions and tried to figure out
the relation between the target and the objects on the three
panels implicitly, as with the information-integration strategy.
The implicit strategy is processed without conscious control.
Therefore, this strategy is suitable for the participants with
low WMC because it does not require working memory load.

Given these points, it may be possible that our participants in
each group selected a strategy suitable for each WMC. Note
that the search in multiple subspaces by the participants in
the low-WMC group did not continue. They had to conduct
explicit hypothesis testing because all participants were required to find a rule that could be reported in words.
To investigate this possibility, we should analyze verbal
protocols along with the eye movement data recorded in this
study. Additionally, in future work, we need to investigate the
relation between the search strategies and the discovery rate,
and interaction of such a relation and individual differences.

References
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick,
D. Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working memory span tasks: A methodological review and user’s guide.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(5), 769–786.
DeCaro, M. S., Thomas, R. D., & Beilock, S. L. (2008).
Individual differences in category learning: Sometimes less
working memory capacity is better than more. Cognition,
107(1), 284–294.
Dougherty, M. R. P., & Hunter, J. E. (2003). Hypothesis generation, probability judgment, and individual differences
in working memory capacity. Acta Psychologica, 113(3),
263–282.
Haverty, L. A., Koedinger, K. R., Klahr, D., & Alibali, M. W.
(2000). Solving inductive reasoning problems in mathematics: Not-so-trivial pursuit. Cognitive Science, 24(2),
249–298.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12(1), 1–48.
Matsumuro, M., & Miwa, K. (2011). An investigation of
search strategies for hypothesis generation using eye movement data. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 3424–3429). Boston, MA: Cognitive
Science Society.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005). Eyetracking and selective attention in category learning. Cognitive Psychology,
51(1), 1–41.
Shah, P., & Miyake, A. (1996). The separability of working
memory resources for spatial thinking and language processing: An individual differences approach. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 125(1), 4–27.
Simon, H. A., & Lea, G. (1974). Problem solving and rule induction: A unified view. In L. W. Gregg (Ed.), Knowledge
and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Süß, H. M., Oberauer, K., Wittmann, W. W., Wilhelm, O., &
Schulze, R. (2002). Working-memory capacity explains
reasoning ability - and a little bit more. Intelligence, 30(2),
261–288.

1989

