UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is embodied cognition infallible or falsifiable? Investigating the thesis as a sound scientific
theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60v8n1f3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Livins, Katherine
Doumas, Leonidas

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Embodied Cognition Infallible or Falsifiable?
Investigating the Thesis as a Sound Scientific Theory
Katherine A. Livins & Leonidas A.A. Doumas (klivins; leonidas@hawaii.edu)
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Department Psychology
2530 Dole St., Sakamaki C400, Honolulu, HI 96822
Abstract
Embodied cognition is a growing area of research within
cognitive science—one that it is often presented as a
framework that may help us account for cognition as a
whole. It is, however, a theory and, as such, it must live
up to the requirements that all scientific theories do. Of
particular importance is the degree to which it is
falsifiable. This paper investigates this issue.
Keywords:
falsifiability

embodied

cognition,

embodiment,

Embodied cognition has been a growing theoretical
framework within the field of cognitive science for the
past twenty years. It has influenced research on topics
from low-level perception (e.g., Meteyard et al., 2008)
to high-level reasoning (e.g., Casasanto, 2009) and, as it
continues to grow, it is often put forth as an organizing
explanation of cognition in general (e.g., Schubert &
Semin, 2009). That said, it is a theory—specifically, a
scientific one. As a result it must be evaluated as any
theory would be. To date, the field has done a
reasonable job: confirmatory evidence has rolled in, and
its methodologies have been refined (e.g., Spivey,
2007). However, despite the field’s efforts to do good
science through the lens of embodiment, one
fundamental evaluation factor seems absent: “Is it
falsifiable?” remains an open question. Given the
importance of falsifiability to scientific enterprise,
answering the question is necessary. Addressing this
question of falsifiability is the goal of this paper.
Part 1: What is falsifiability?
Falsifiability is a cornerstone of scientific theory. As
Popper (1963) argued, the difference between theories
such as Freudian psychoanalysis and Newtonian
physics lies not in whether it is possible to verify each
theory, nor in whether they possess explanatory power
(e.g., a way of explaining experimental results), but in
their capacity to be debunked.
For a theory to be falsifiable, it is insufficient to only
provide ways of supporting it. Instead, it must be
possible to specify the types of evidence necessary for
showing that the theory would not hold. Because it is
impossible to directly observe a theory (since a theory
is only an organizing principle built to explain a body
of information or phenomena), defining only what
would support it may allow for confirmation biases and
the exclusion of important data. Thus, a scientific
theory must involve making specific predictions about
what must or should be observed if it holds, and what

must or should not be observed if it does not.
Take, for example, the Bohr model of atomic
structure. While it is unnecessary to go into detail, the
model generally specified a structure of the atom and
the way that its nucleus could be related to its electrons.
Despite its seeming simplicity, the theory made
predictions, including what the energy levels of certain
atoms should have been if the theory was correct. Thus,
boundaries of what the model could and could not
account for were established. When these predictions
were violated (e.g., multi-electron atoms displayed
energy levels different from what the model predicted)
the theory was falsified.
Having the ability to falsify a theory becomes crucial
when competing theories exist. If each theory is not
specific enough to make predictions, then it becomes
impossible to decide which one (if any) is correct.
Furthermore, theories that do not make such predictions
are often over-generalized (e.g., Freudian psychoanalysis) such that they can account for almost any sort
of data. As a result, they can be warped to account for
any phenomenon, data, or unique case, creating a
confirmation bias. In other words, they become
explanatory catch-alls with little real explanatory
power. Falsifiability protects against exactly these sorts
of problems and, as a result, should play an important
part in the development of any theory.
Part 2: Embodiment and Falsifiability
“Embodied cognition” is something of an umbrella
term for work that is interested in the ways in which the
body is involved in cognitive processing. In fact, there
are so many definitions under the umbrella its
boundaries are somewhat contentious. Take, for
example, the quantitative issue of how many types of
embodiment there are: Shaprio (2011) outlines three
types; Wilson (2002) presents six, and there are more
accounts still (e.g., Anderson, 2003; Ziemkie, 2003).
This lack of agreement could be considered a
complication with regard to evaluating the falsifiability
of embodiment; after all, if there exists multiple
theories, then each one may require separate analyses.
However, the heart of the differences usually centers on
what it means philosophically for the body to be
involved in cognition. For example, the Enactive
Approach seems premised on the idea that there is no
core self that resides inside a body, but that the self
dynamically makes itself through interactions with the
world. Furthermore, the world is not taken as pre-given,

1936

instead being shaped through the actions of the
individual (Shapiro, 2011). As a result, all cognition is
enacted through a symbiosis of body and world.
Situated cognition is similar but it does not break down
the concept of “self”, instead maintaining a philosophic
distinction between self and not-self (Shapiro, 2011).
Cognition ends up being equally dependent upon (and
shaped by) pressures from the world, though the self
remains a meaningful unit of discussion and study.
Despite the many definitions that exist within the
philosophic literature, cognitive scientists and
experimental researchers, generally define and
operationalize embodiment as some version of the
claim that the body affects cognition, or that the body
plays a meaningful role in it (whether that be through
changes in perception and attention, differences in
behavior, or the activation of neural motor systems)
(e.g., Markman & Brendl, 2005; de Koning & Tabber,
2011). Thus, while there do exist competing
philosophic offshoots of this basic idea, this more basic
theoretical claim underlies most of them; it is at the
heart of how the theory is defined and used empirically.
The goal of this paper is to look at embodiment within
this type of empirical (read, practical or scientific, not
philosophic) context; we are interested in the ways in
which experiments are designed when inspired by it,
and the ways in which results are interpreted in light of
it. In other words, we are interested in embodiment as a
true scientific theory. If it does not live up to this type
of scientific standard, it is important to ask whether it
should be used as the basis for empirical work, or
alternatively, whether there is something that can be
done to make it live up to scientific standards. To the
point, we proceed with an analysis of existing work,
with an eye specifically towards whether the current
application of embodiment meets the requirement of
falsifiability.
To start this analysis we begin by looking at some of
the research that has been done thus far. The remainder
of this section will analyze two papers that investigate
the affects of the body on cognition, and which are
often cited as quintessential exemplars of this type of
research. Special attention will be paid to the
interpretations of the findings and their potential for
allowing embodied cognition to be falsified.
Part 2.1
The paper “Action observation and acquired motor
skills: An fMRI study with expert dancers”, by CalvoMerino et al. presents the idea that motor history affects
future cognitive processing. It has been cited
approximately six hundred times1, often as evidence for
a meaningful relationship between mind and body (e.g.,
Spivey, 2007; Barsalou, 2008).
1

Per GoogleScholar.

The study addresses whether one’s motor history
affects one’s ability to observe movements in others.
For this project, a number of expert dancers (skilled in
either ballet or capoeira), along with an untrained
control group, were recruited. All participants were
asked to watch videos of choreographed sequences
from both dance styles. As participants watched the
videos, neural activity was monitored with fMRI. Of
interest were the premotor and parietal cortices, along
with the superior parietal lobe and the superior temporal
sulcus—areas previously associated with human action,
and observation of action in others (Calvo-Merino et
al., 2004; Grafton et al., 1996).
The hypothesis was that activity in these areas would
be strongest when watching a dance sequence that one
had enacted firsthand. This result was observed. CalvoMerino et al. argued that it must be the case that
watching physical activity in others activates some sort
of sensory-motor representation (Calvo-Merino, 2004),
furthering the idea that bodily experiences affect
cognition (as embodied cognition theory posits).
In order to address the degree to which this design
offers the chance for falsification of embodied
cognition, let us consider other possible outcomes of
the study, and how Calvo-Merino et al. could have
interpreted them. First, the dancers (and/or the control
group) could have shown more neural activation when
watching dance sequences that they had not engaged in
firsthand. Embodiment could be supported by such a
result equally well by arguing that the finding was due
to a need for learning: motor areas activated more for
understanding movements that could not, immediately,
be made sense of by referencing past experiences. In
fact, this interpretation would be consistent with other
data, since it has been shown that the same motor areas
that Calvo-Merino et al. were interested in demonstrate
increased activation during visuomotor learning
(Ghilardi et al, 2000). Consequently, whether or not the
dancers showed more or less activation than controls,
the embodied cognition thesis would still be supported
given that bodily experiences would be shown to affect
cognitive processing in either case.
Alternatively, the same activation could have been
seen between the dancers and the control group,
irrelevant of the observed sequences. However, this
finding would not necessarily contradict embodiment
either. Perhaps the use of representations does not
require activation of the motor-systems, but encoding is
entirely dependant upon them and, as a result, the body
still affects cognition. Or, perhaps more radically, one
might suggest that such an outcome implies that
humans do not possess representations at all. In fact,
this is a popular claim among some embodied cognition
theorists (Varela, et al., 1992; Smith, 2005) and it could
be that no difference was found between groups
because there are no static representations stored in the

1937

brain to be activated in the first place, leaving only
motor areas to encode the video information.
While the possible interpretations of the results of the
present study certainly indicate that embodiment theory
is confirmable, it does not bode well for its ability to be
falsified. In fact, it would be equally possible to explain
Calvo-Merino et al.’s findings by adopting a competing
perspective. A disembodied framework could be
supported by suggesting that the dancers had encoded
static representations of the sequences, which included
the muscle groups necessary for performing them. This
would account for why the motor areas of their brains
lit up in response to watching them, without a need for
participants to “simulate” anything. This explanatory
flexibility is not a new idea; Mahon and Caramazza
(2008) explicated the ways in which many findings that
are supposed to support embodied cognition (such as
Calvo-Merino et al.’s) may also be used to support a
disembodied theory of cognition. It is troubling, though,
that the theory’s explanatory flexibility would exist no
matter how the experiment turned out.
One could argue that the problems with this study are
a function of how easily neuroimaging can be
misapplied, and not of embodied theory itself.
However, neuroimaging is a tool and, as such, there
will always be ways to use it well and ways to use it
poorly. It is quite possible to use this tool well (e.g.,
Engel et al., 1994), but doing so requires the production
of specific predictions so that the meaning of the scans
can be clearly interpreted. A failure to do indicates a
problem with the theoretical framework underlying the
scans. In the case of the current study, the problem lays
with the fact that any scan result could have been used
to support embodied cognition. This is a problem of the
theory, not of the technology.
Part 2.2
As another example, consider Tucker and Ellis’ “On
the relations between seen objects and components of
potential actions” (1998). With almost as many
citations2 as Calvo-Merino et al.’s work, this study
looks at whether the presentation of objects also
potentates the affordances3 that they allow from the
human body. The primary concern of the study is how
perception is affected by one’s body, and the ways that
one can interact with the world through it.
More specifically, the study looks at the relationship
between the hand movements used when dealing with
everyday objects and the ways that those objects are
visually perceived. Tucker and Ellis argued that if an
object’s affordances are part of its representation, then
2

Per GoogleScholar.
A concept developed by Gibson (e.g., 1950), affordances are
the potential ways in which one can interact with a given
object (i.e., what sorts of bodily movements that object
affords the human body).
3

it should be easier or faster to respond to the object with
a physical movement that is somehow aligned with the
affordance. They addressed this question by conducting
three experiments.
First, they investigated whether participants would be
faster to identify an object if it were presented in
congruency with the hand responding to the
presentation. For example, if a picture of a knife were
presented in the direction that it would be grasped with
the right hand, then the interest would be in whether a
participant would press a response button more quickly
with that right hand since movement in the right hand
would be primed. However, an obvious problem is that
this design does not determine whether participants are
simply sensitive to left/right orientation, or handedness
specifically. Thus, the second study asked participants
to respond with two fingers on the same hand; the idea
being that if participants were sensitive to handedness,
instead of left/right orientation, then greater efficiency
should not be demonstrated on a single hand.
Results indicated that participants responded more
quickly to objects when they were presented in
congruency with the hand that was pressing the button
(i.e., with the hand that would be used to interact with
the object as it was presented). Furthermore, this effect
was not confused with simple left/right orientation or
response since one-handed responses showed no
difference in response times between left and right
finger responses.
At first glance, these findings support the idea that an
object’s affordances are a part of how it is perceived
and responded to. Consequently, they seem to support
the claim that worldly interactions are embodied;
however, if the other possible ways that the study could
have turned out are analyzed in the same way that
Calvo-Merino et al.’s study was, it becomes improbable
that such a claim could have been denied.
First, Tucker and Ellis could have found that
participants responded more slowly when a stimulus
was presented to match the side of the grasping hand
(i.e., the experiments’ results had come out the opposite
way). An obvious explanation for such a finding is that
participants were asked to push a button instead of
actually grasping – given that these are two distinct
movements, it could have been that pushing buttons did
not represent the affordances properly, causing
interference. In fact, Tucker and Ellis realized this, and
offered a third experiment to address it.
In the third condition, participants were given a new
response method: responding involved the same wrist
rotation and hand positioning that would be required for
interacting with the presentation objects. Interestingly,
Tucker and Ellis did not find a strong effect between
hand positioning and response times, however, they
concluded that their findings suggest that more than
hand selection (left versus right) is involved in seeing

1938

and responding to objects (Tucker & Ellis, 1998).
Even if Tucker and Ellis had found a strong effect in
their third condition, it would be difficult to argue with
(i.e., falsify) any embodied interpretation. First, it could
have been that participants responded to a stimulus with
convergent affordances much more slowly than they
responded to a stimulus with divergent affordances.
While the exact meaning of such a finding is not
obvious, it would suggest that there is some systematic
relationship between the ways that we think about an
object and the ways we can interact with it. Perhaps it
could argued that when a stimulus is in congruence
with the response action, we begin to activate the next
step of movement necessary for interacting with the
object and, as a result, move more slowly. For example,
if we are presented with a teacup, perhaps we begin
preparing our mouths for tea, or our throats for
swallowing. Such an interpretation would be supported
by other experimental data, which suggests that visually
controlled grasping motions (especially in children) are
preceded by a series of planning motions, sometimes
causing longer response times if the plan is non-ideal
(Hofsten & Ronnqvist, 1988). Alternatively, embodied
cognition often posits that representations (if they exist)
are dynamically updated to include experiences (Smith,
2005). It could be argued that more processing time is
required to recode a perceived thing based on new data.
Finally, it could have been the case that Tucker and
Ellis found no relationship at all. Such a null result
would likely be interpreted as puzzling and could be
explained away by pointing out that this experiment
(like any) required a commitment to a specific
methodology and, therefore, specific types of
movement and stimuli. One could argue that the
movements chosen by Tucker and Ellis were simply
non-ideal for demonstrating a relationship (perhaps a
knife is more about chopping or sharpening than
grasping, and perhaps tea cups are more about sipping,
pouring, washing, dunking or even swallowing).
In short, the experiment, although motivated by a
prediction of the embodied theory of cognition,
provided no easy means for falsifying that theory
without running conditions with every possible
movement ever associated with a given object.
However, even then, research into perceptual
dominance could be mobilized to explain such null
results, For example, it appears that some sensory
modalities are more dominant than others. Vision is
often considered the most dominant of human
modalities (Sinnett et al., 2007). As a result, any study
that is interested in the embodied relationship between
vision and bodily movement, and that involves visual
stimuli while looking for manual or tactile responses,
may be considered flawed in that it could be the case
that simply showing a participant a visual stimulus
activates more visual experiences or representations

(embodied
or
otherwise)
than
hand-oriented
experiences or representations. If it is the case that
visual responses dominate motor responses, then any
null results from a methodology employing visual to
manual responses could be criticized and dismissed.
Importantly, we are not suggesting that anyone would
actually use some of these alternative outcomes to
demonstrate that embodied cognition is the case (e.g.,
that some absence of proof is proof for the thesis). The
point is that all of these outcomes can be dealt with
within an embodied framework. Consequently, it does
not appear that this experiment (like the last) offers
much by way of an opportunity for falsification.
Part 2.3
We are not lodging any sort of specific attack on the
researchers whose work we have reviewed (these
papers were selected for their popularity and clarity).
Our concern is that given such experiments are used as
support for embodied cognition qua a scientific theory
(e.g., for Calvo-Merino’s paper, Gallese, 2008;
Barsalou, 2008; de Konin, 2011; and for Tucker and
Ellis’ paper, Wilson 2002; Semin & Smith, 2008). It is
problematic that such experiments could accommodate,
or even explicitly support, an embodied account, no
matter how they turned out.
Likewise, we are not trying to discredit any of the
subtheories or philosophic work that has been inspired
by embodied cognition; certainly, their subtheories, and
empirical work based on those theories, that do make
and test predictions (e.g., Gray et al, 2006; Hommel et
al, 2001). However, embodied cognition itself is not
just an inspirational tool—it is posited as a theory in
and of itself, and at this point, it is one that seems
remarkably susceptible to methodologies that suffer
from confirmation biases.
Part 3: Can We Fix The Problem?
Just because something has not been done, does not
mean it cannot be. Thus, it seems important to look at
embodied cognition and to determine whether it is
theoretically possible to falsify. We begin by making
the requirements of falsification explicit.
For a theory to be useful scientifically, it cannot
simply lend itself to supporting research, but must also
be sensitive to the ways that it could be shown not to
hold. This requires specificity: “theory x would be
untrue if y (and z and […]) were to happen”, where y
and z are observable, measurable and definitive. Doing
so ensures that everyone (both supporters and
dissenters) can recognize when it is time to abandon the
theory. Furthermore, we must accept the possibility (no
matter how small) that the theory will be falsified.
Falsification would not be such a bad thing though—
after all, it would mean that we get an opportunity to
build a new, more complete theory of cognition.
Currently, embodied cognition does not seem to have

1939

these sorts of specific boundaries. To date, the closest
attempt seems to be a set of claims explicated by
Wilson (2002). Unfortunately, even they seem too
vague (i.e., unobservable, unquantifiable, indefinite) to
act as falsifying predictions. To see this vagueness in
action, we consider the first three.
First, Wilson argues “cognition is situated”. That is,
cognition takes place in an environment and, therefore,
cannot take place without perception and action. It is
studied by looking for the ongoing impact of perceptual
input during cognitive tasks (Wilson, 2002). However,
if this claim is a concrete prediction (open to
falsification), then embodied cognition fails whenever
such tasks are completed without perception or action.
However, Wilson herself posits that this prediction may
not hold for all types of cognition; she points out that
some things do not always rely on the intake of new
information (her examples include planning, reasoning,
etc.). Thus, the claim does not involve a clear list of
conditions under which it does or does not hold. As a
result, it seems more like a “sometimes” prediction than
a definitive one.
Second, embodied cognition is supposed to support
the idea that cognition is “time pressured” (i.e., that,
when pressured to work quickly, cognition can differ).
This claim does not make any more forward momentum
than the first. If it is a prediction, then falsification
should occur any time that cognition does not change
based on time-pressure. While, of course, many
cognitive activities do, Wilson herself provides us with
examples of “time-locked” cognition, such as skilled
hand movements (Wilson, 2002). As a result, if this
claim is a crucial prediction, the thesis is already in
trouble. Alternatively, if it is a “sometimes” prediction
like the last claim, then it is simply not specific enough.
Third, embodied cognition expects that we “off-load”
cognitive work onto the environment. This claim is
evidenced by the fact that people make use of items
from the world to solve problems (thus lessening the
work required of processes such as working memory).
Obviously though, there are times that tasks are not offloaded, even within the realm of a single task. For
example, when determining where furniture should go
in a room, it is possible to move it around or draw a
diagram, or to visualize different patterns that may be
used. It is also possible to mentally map the room
instead. Embodied cognition is not definitive enough to
predict the “why”, or enough of the “how”, to account
for anything more specific than that it can happen. This
seems incomplete and, again, not usefully predictive.
Because of space constraints, we cannot engage in a
similar analysis of the other three claims. As they are,
though, they offer no opportunity for falsifiability as
they also reduce to variations of “the body is important
for cognition under some conditions”. While it is true
that such a claim can be turned into experimental work,

it is not enough to fill out the statement, “theory x
would be untrue if y (and z and […]) were to happen”
with observable, measurable and/or definitive claims.
Without the capacity to produce such claims, embodied
theory remains unable to produce sufficiently specific
predictions to be falsified.
Basing empirical work on a theory with an unclear
foundation can be problematic. Any experiment (like
those in Section Two) will have confusing results. No
matter how such a study turns out, it can account for the
data within the embodied framework, and any null
result can be dismissed. This lack of definitiveness
leaves researchers that are already invested in
embodiment frozen in unsolvable debates without a real
possibility of coming to a conclusion, let-a-lone
unifying cognition. Similarly, researchers outside the
debate may have trouble finding application for
embodiment within their own domains.
Newell (1973) argued that Cognitive Science is often
guilty of discovering a phenomenon, doing a plethora
of experiments to explore it, and never moving on to
think about what the research “means”. It seems that
this “plethora” point is where embodied cognition is
now—at the crux of exploration and synthesis, with a
real opportunity to move forward. The collection of
confirmatory data definitely suggests that the body is
likely important for cognition in some way, however,
we have yet to answer what this way is in a specific or
systematic sense, and this is what needs to be changed.
We are not suggesting that there is a quick fix,
however, we believe this issue of falsifiability can
guide future research in a meaningful way: Researchers
need to start asking a few questions every time they
invoke embodiment. First, asking, “Under what specific
conditions do we expect this cognitive process to be
embodied?” in combination with, “What cognitive
functions are most penetrable to bodily or action-based
manipulations (and which are not penetrable at all)?”
will allow for the boundaries of the theory to be reigned
in. It is unlikely that the answer to every cognitive
mystery is “embodiment”, so we need to commit to
specific claims about when we think embodiment is
meaningful and to what processes we think it makes an
important difference. Second, asking “What would it
mean for embodiment, as a theory, if my results came
out differently?” will force attention to the issues raised
in this paper. If this answer cannot possibly be “it
would suggest that process x is not embodied”, then the
methodology may need to be revised.
We are certainly not saying that embodiment should
be dismissed (quite the opposite, actually). However, to
the extent that embodied cognition is going to be used
as a theory, limiting cases need to be defined. Any
research that does this is a step in the right direction,
and would be useful, not only for the embodiment
community, but also for interested outside observers.

1940

We cannot offer a definitive end point for such
efforts—we wish we could provide a fast, or easy
answer, however developing a comprehensive theory
that is aimed at organizing cognition in a deep and
meaningful way is not a simple task. Our goal is simply
to point out what we see as an important problem. It is
our hope that those dedicated to embodied cognition
research will respond by becoming more sensitive to
the issues raised here, and that, as a result, these
researchers will start making their claims more explicit
and, more importantly, begin establishing limiting cases
of the theory.
Works Cited
Anderson, M.L. (2003). Embodied cognition: a field
guide. Artificial Intelligence, 149, 91-130.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded Cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-45.
Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D.E., Grezes, J., Passingham,
R.E., & Haggard, P. (2004). Action Observation and
acquired motor skills: An fMRI study with expert
dancers. Cerebral Cortex, 15.8, 1243-1250.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract
concepts: Good and bad in right- and left-handers.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 183.3,
351-367
Descartes, R. (1641). Meditations on first philosophy.
In R. Ariew (Ed.), René Descartes: philosophical
essays and correspondence (pp. 97-141). Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishing Company Inc.
Engel, S.A., Rumelhart, D.E., Wandell, B.A., Lee,
A.T., Glover, G.H., Chichilnisky, E.J., & Shadlen,
M.N. (1994). fMRI of human visual cortex, Nature,
369, 525.
Gallese, V. (2008). Empathy, embodied simulation and
the brain: Commentary on Aragno and
Zepf/Hartmann. Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association, 56, 769-781.
Gibson, J.J. (1950). The perception of the visual
world.Oxford: Houghton Miffin
Ghilardi, M.F., Ghez, C., Dhawan, V., Moeller, J.,
Mentis, M., Nakamura, T., Antonini, A, Eidelberg, D.
(2000). Patters of regional brain actiation associated
with different forms of motor learning. Brain
Research, 871, 127-145.
Grafton S.T., Arbib, M.A., Fadiga, L., & Rizzolatti. G.
(1996). Localization of grasp representations in
humans by positron emission tomography:
Observation compared with imagination.
Experimental Brain Res, 112. 103-111.
Gray, W.D., Sims, C., Fu, W.T., & Schoelles, M.J.
(2006). The soft constraints hypothesis: A rational
analysisof resource allocation for interactive behavior.
Psychological Review, 113.3, 461-482.
von Hofsten, C., & Ronnqvist, L. (1988). Preparation
for grasping an object: A developmental study.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 14.4, 610-621.

Hommel, B., Musseler, J., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz,
W. (2001). The theory of event coding (TEC): A
framework of perception and action planning.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 849-937.
de Koning, B.B., & Tabbers, H.K. (2001). Facilitating
understanding of movement in dynamic visualizations:
an Embodied Perspective. Educational Psychological
Review, 23, 501-521/
Mahon, B.Z., Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at
the embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal
for grounding conceptual content. Journal of
Physiology – Paris, 102, 59-70.
Markman, A.B., Brendl, C.,M. (2005). Constraining
theories of embodied cognition. Psychological
Science, 16.1, 6-10.
Meteyard, L., Zokaei, N., Bahrami, B., & Vigliocco, G.
(2008). Visual motion interferes with lexical decision
on motion words. Current Biology, 18.17.
Newell, A. (1973). You can’t play 20 questions with
nature and win: Projective comments on the papers of
this symposium. In W.G. Chase (Ed.), Visual
information processing (pp. 283-308). New York:
Academic Press.
Popper, K. (1963). Science as Falsification. In
Conjectures and Refutations. New York: Routledge
Semin, G.R., & Smith, L. (2008). Embodied
grounding: Social, cognitive, affective and
neuroscientific approaches. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schubert, T.W., & Semin, G.R. (2009). Embodiment as
a unifying perspective for psychology. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 39.7, 1135-1141
Shaprio, L. (2011). Embodied cognition. New York:
Routledge
Sinnett, S., Spence, C., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2007).
Visual dominance and attention: The Colavita Effect
Revisited. Perception and Psychophysics, 69.5, 673686.
Smith, L.B. (2005). Cognition as a dynamic system:
Principles from embodiment. Developmental Review,
25, 278-298.
Spivey, M. (2007). The continuity of mind. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (1998). On the relations
between seen objects and components of potential
actions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 24.3, 830-846.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1992). The
embodied mind: Cognitive science and human
experience. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9.4, 625-636.
Ziemke (2003). What's that thing called embodiment?
In: Alterman & Kirsh (Eds.) Proceedings of the 25th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1134-1139). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum

1941

