UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning unattested languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d3968m5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Finley, Sara

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Unattested Languages
Sara Finley (finleys@elmhurst.edu)
Department of Psychology, Elmhurst College
Elmhurst, IL, 60126, USA
Abstract
This paper demonstrates the role of morphological
alternations in learning novel phonotactic patterns. In an
artificial grammar learning task, adult learners were exposed
to a phonotactic pattern in which the first and last consonant
agreed in voicing. Long-distance phonotactics encoded as
strictly piecewise languages suggest that first-last phonotactic
patterns should be unattested in natural language. However,
recent theories of morphologically induced phonological
patterns predict that long-distance agreement between the first
and last consonant of a word can occur when the agreement is
induced as a morphological alternation. The results of two
experiments support the prediction that first-last harmony
patterns are more easily learned when morphological cues to
the pattern are present. Participants only learned the first-last
pattern when presented as a morphological alternation.
Keywords: statistical learning, phonotactics, morphology.

Introduction
One of the major goals of generative linguistics is to explain
the nature of language in terms of computational constraints
on the cognitive capacity for human languages.
Computational models of phonotactic patterns work to
understand the restrictions that underlie the set of patterns
that are possible in natural language and the set of patterns
that are not possible. Recent work has argued that
phonotactic patterns, defined as constraints on the cooccurrence of different sounds within a word, are subject to
a very specific set of computational constraints (Heinz,
2007, 2011a, 2011b). In particular, it has been demonstrated
that long-distance phonotactic patterns derived from
consonant harmony can be simulated using strictly
piecewise languages (Heinz, 2010; Heinz & Rogers, 2010;
Rogers et al., 2010), a subset of regular languages.
Computational models of phonotactic patterns raise three
important questions for a theory of the cognitive science of
language. First, is there a correlation between the patterns
that are learnable and the patterns that can be generated by
computational models? There is a prediction that any longdistance consonant agreement pattern that does not fall
within the set of strictly piecewise languages should not be
learnable. Second, do computational models of phonotactic
patterns capture the intricacies of generative models of
phonological representations? If morphological and
syntactic constructions require more complex computational
machinery to generate, then there is a question of whether
patterns at the interface between phonology and
morphology, and phonology and syntax are subject to the
same computational constraints as purely phonotactic
patterns (Heinz & Idsardi, 2011). Third, is there a way to

reconcile apparent exceptions to general tendencies
linguistic typology? Linguistic tendencies are typically
proposed as opposed to universals because almost any
‘universal’ has exceptions (Evans & Levinson, 2009).
These questions are particularly salient for a specific,
hypothetical phonotactic pattern: first-last agreement (Lai,
2012). For the purposes of this paper, a first-last agreement
pattern is any phonotactic pattern in which the first and last
segment in a word must agree in terms of some
phonological feature. For example, a first-last consonant
voicing pattern requires that the first and the last consonant
in a word share the same value for the feature [Voice]. In
such a pattern, the word [boteg] would be a possible word
because the first consonant ([b]) and the last consonant ([g])
are voiced, even though the medial consonant ([t]) is
voiceless. However, *[boget] would not be a possible word
because the first consonant ([b]) is voiced and the final
consonant ([t]) is voiceless.
First-last patterns are said to be unattested in natural
language (Lai, 2012). One possible explanation for the
failure to find a true case of first-last agreement is that such
patterns can not be generated with a strictly piecewise
grammar (Heinz & Rogers, 2010). If long-distance
phonotactic patterns must be generated with a strictly
piecewise grammar, patterns that fall outside of the
cognitive constraints on phonological patterns may not be
learnable.
While purely phonotactic first-last patterns have not been
described in natural languages, there are some possible
cases of first-last agreement patterns when morphology is
considered. A morphologically controlled phonological
alternation is any sound pattern that occurs only in the
presence of a specific morphological environment. For
example, the alternation between /o/ and /e/ in ‘goose’ vs.
‘geese’ is induced by the alternation between singular and
plural. Such morphologically controlled patterns may
manifest as a first-last agreement pattern. For example, in
Lokaa, a Benue-Congo language spoken in Nigeria, the
future tense is marked with a low tone on the final syllable
and a prefix containing a low tone (e.g., [nà-à-fúkà] ‘you
will gather’). In this case, the first and last vowels of a word
must agree in tone, but only in the future tense. (Iwara,
Akinlabi, & Truckenbrodt, 2003). Finley (2009) accounts
for this morphological alternation using morpheme-specific
constraints that target specific edges of the word. Finley’s
analysis suggests that morphologically controlled patterns,
also referred to as ‘featural affixation’, are subject to
different constraints than purely phonotactic patterns. The
possibility that featural affixation can target the first and last
element of a word leads to the prediction that long-distance

1536

patterns that cannot be generated with a strictly piecewise
model of phonotactics may be generated at the interface
between phonology and morphology.
There are three reasons to believe that phonotactic
patterns and morphologically controlled phonological
patterns are subject to different representational and learning
constraints. First, as discussed above, the typological
restrictions on morphologically controlled patterns tends to
be more open than the restrictions placed on phonotactic
patterns (Finley, 2009). Second, infants appear to learn
phonotactic patterns earlier than morphologically controlled
phonological patterns (Jusczyk, Friederici, Wessels,
Svenkerund, & Jusczyk, 1993). Third, Lai (2012)
demonstrated that adult learners are worse at learning a firstlast consonant agreement pattern than a typical consonant
harmony pattern that targeted all relevant segments of the
word.
The problem with understanding the difference between
morphological and phonotactic patterns in terms of
representation and typology is that there are reasons why the
typology of phonotactic constraints may be different from
the typology of morphologically controlled phonological
patterns. For example, the lack of existence of a first-last
phonotactic agreement pattern may reflect constraints on
phonotactic representations, or it could simply reflect an
accidental gap. In addition, phonotactic patterns may be
learned faster than morphologically controlled phonological
patterns because phonotactic patterns apply to a large range
of words, while morphologically controlled patterns only
apply to specific morphological environments. In this case,
the infant must learn both the phonological pattern, but also
the morphological environment.
One possible way to understand the relationship between
typological and computational constraints on long-distance
phonotactic patterns is to explore the existence of learning
biases for long-distance patterns. Previous research suggests
that first-last phonotactic agreement patterns may not be
learnable (Lai, 2012). While Onnis, Monahan, Richmond,
and Chater (2005) showed learning of first-last
phonotactics, this pattern was based on syllables, rather than
features, and therefore may be subject to different
constraints. However, there is a question of whether adults
may be able to learn first-last agreement patterns if they are
presented as a morphologically controlled phonological
alternation. In an artificial grammar learning task, it is
possible to compare learners with the same language
backgrounds (American English) with two languages that
are minimally different (phonotactic first-last agreement vs.
morphologically controlled first-last agreement). If
morphologically controlled patterns are subject to different
constraints on learning and representation, one should
expect that in the case of first-last agreement patterns,
morphologically controlled patterns should be easier to learn
than a phonotactic agreement pattern. This prediction is
particularly interesting because it goes against the general
findings that phonotactic patterns are learned before
morphological patterns. In an artificial grammar learning

paradigm, adult participants were exposed to a first-last
agreement pattern that was induced either as a
morphological alternation or as a phonotactic pattern.
Participants who were exposed to the pattern as a
phonotactic pattern did not differ significantly from chance
or control participants. This is similar to Lai’s (2012)
results, which showed that an unattested first-last agreement
pattern is less easily learnable than a version of an attested
consonant harmony pattern. However in the study reported
here, participants were exposed only to the first-last
agreement pattern, either presented as a phonotactic
constraints or as part of a morphological alternation.

Experiment 1
Participants
All participants were adult native speakers of English with
no previous exposure to a language involving first-last
agreement or consonant harmony. Forty-six University of
Rochester undergraduate students and affiliates and were
paid $10 for their participation. Two additional participants
were from the Elmhurst College Psychology Department
Human Subject Pool, and were given extra course credit for
their participation.

Design
Participants were trained on a first-last voicing agreement
pattern via auditory exposure. In this pattern, the first and
the last consonants of every word agreed in voicing. All
words were of the form CVCVC, where C refers to stop
consonants drawn from the set /p, t, k, b, d, g/, and V refers
to vowels drawn from the set /i, e, o, u, a/. The first and last
consonants were either both voiced /b, d, g/ or both
voiceless /p, t, k/, with no restriction on the voicing of the
medial consonant.
Participants in the Morphological Training condition were
exposed to 24 pairs of CVCVC items (repeated five times
each) in which the first CVCVC item contained voiceless
stops in the first and last positions and the second item
contained voiced consonants in the first and last positions
(e.g., /kidat gidad/ and /topak dopag/). Participants in the
Morphological Training condition were told that they were
listening to a novel language, and that they would hear pairs
of words, the first of which was a ‘singular’ form and the
second of which was a ‘plural’ form. The use of ‘singular’
and ‘plural’ labels was designed to create the effect of a
morphologically controlled alternation. Because adult
English speakers are familiar with the distinction between
singular and plural, it was assumed that participants
recognized that the pairs of items were morphologically
related. There was no other semantic information
accompanying the training items.
Participants in the Phonotactic Training condition were
exposed to the same 48 words that were presented to the
participants in the Morphological Training condition, and
were told that they would be listening to words from a novel
language. There were two main differences between the

1537

Morphological Training condition and the Phonotactic
Training condition, reflecting the two main differences
between phonotactic and morphologically controlled
phonological patterns. First, participants in the Phonotactic
training condition were given no semantic information about
the items. Second, items in the Phonotactic Training
condition were not presented as pairs of items, but as single
words presented in a random order.
The medial consonant varied between voiced and
voiceless such that half of the items showed voicing
agreement for all consonants, and the other half of exposure
items showed voicing agreement only between the first and
last consonant. In addition, the distribution of consonants
was even, such that each consonant appeared in an equal
number of items in both final and initial positions. One third
of training items contained identical consonants in both first
and last positions Examples of the training stimuli can be
found in Table 1.

Participants were told that they would hear two words. One
word was from the language they had just heard, and the
other word was not from the language they had just heard; if
they believed the first word was from the language, they
were instructed to press the ‘a’ key; if they believed the
second word was from they language, they were instructed
to press the ‘l’ key. Participants did not hear pairs of words
in the test phase.
Table 2: Example Test Items.

Table 1: Example Training Items.
Voiceless
kidat
topak
pibot

Harmonic
gidad
dopag

Old Items
Disharmonic
gidat
dopak

Harmonic
bikad
depod

New Items
Disharmonic
bikat
depot

gutub

Voiced
gidad
dopag
bibod

In the Morphological Training condition, all ‘singular’
words had voiceless consonants in first and last positions,
and all ‘plural’ words had voiced consonants in the first and
last positions. There are two reasons why this design was
chosen (as opposed to adding a suffix that alternated
depending on the quality of the first consonant, as in /kidakidat, dopa-dopad/). First, the present design allows the
Morphological Training and the Phonotactic Training
conditions to use the exact same set of training items, as
opposed to two different sets for each condition. Second, the
voiceless-voiced alternation mirrors the morphological
harmony patterns described in Finley (2009). For example,
Kanembu shows an alternation in which the incompletive
form are all [–ATR], while the completive forms are all
[+ATR] (Akinlabi, 1996).
Following exposure, all participants were given a twoalternative forced choice test. This test was designed to
probe whether participants had learned the agreement
pattern. All participants received the same set of 40 test
items that contained ten Old Items (items heard in the
training set), ten New Items (items not heard in the training
set), and 20 filler items that contained the voiceless
alternation.
All test items were of the form CVCVC in which the
‘correct’ (harmonic) item contained a voiced consonant in
the first and the last position of the word, and the ‘incorrect’
(disharmonic) item contained a voiced segment in the first
position and a voiceless consonant in the final position.
Examples of test items can be found in Table 2, below.
Participants in both training conditions were given
identical instructions for how to complete the test phase.

gutup

A female native speaker of English produced the spoken
materials that were used in the experiment, and had no
knowledge of the design or purpose of the experiment. The
speaker produced all sounds in a sound-attenuated booth.
All bi-syllabic stimuli were produced with stress on the first
syllable, but instructions were given to the speaker to
pronounce all vowels (as English vowels in unstressed
position tend to be reduced). All stimuli items were
normalized for intensity (set at 70dB) using Praat (Boersma
& Weenink, 2005).
All phases of the experiment were run in Psyscope X
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). Participants
were given both written and verbal instructions. The entire
experiment took approximately 20 minutes.

Results
Proportion of correct responses (i.e., choosing the item that
contained a voiced stop in the first and last position) for all
conditions are given in Figure 1. Responses were compared
via a 2x2 mixed design ANOVA. There was a significant
effect of Training, F(1, 34) = 4.24, p < 0.05, in that
participants in the Morphological Training condition (mean
= 0.63, CI ± 0.084) selected the harmonic option more often
than participants in the Phonotactic Training condition
(mean = 0.51, CI ± 0.085). There was no effect of Test Item,
F<1, and no significant interaction, F(1, 34) = 2.30, p =
0.14.
Responses to Old and New items were compared to 50%
chance via Bonferroni corrected one-sample t-tests. There
was a significant effect in the Morphological Training
condition for both Old Items, with a mean of 0.64, CI ±
0.11, t(17) = 2.75, p < 0.05, and New Items, with a mean of
0.62, CI ± 0.083, t(17) = 2.99, p < 0.01. This suggests that
participants in the Morphological Training condition learned
the harmony pattern at a level greater than chance. There

1538

Proportion Harmonic Responses	


was no significant differences in the Phonotactic Training
condition for either Old Items, with a mean of 0.47, CI ±
0.12, t(17) = -0.49, p = 0.63, or New Items, with a mean of
0.54, CI ± 0.082, t(17) = 1.14, p = 0.27. This suggests that
participants in the Phonotactic Training condition failed to
learn the harmony pattern at a level greater than chance.

Training condition. First, participants in the Morphological
Training condition received information about the
morphological status of the items in the training (singularplural pairs). Phonotactic patterns are not morphologically
restricted, and morphological information is therefore
irrelevant to the phonotactic pattern. Second, the training
items in the Morphological Training condition were
presented as pairs of words, voiceless followed by voiced.
This reflects the fact that morphologically controlled
phonological alternations are typically described in terms of
an alternation. While both pieces of information are
necessary to differentiate between phonotactic patterns and
morphologically controlled alternations, it is unclear
whether the unattested phonotactic first-last agreement
pattern might be learnable if words were simply presented
as pairs of words that differed in voicing. Presentation of
items as pairs of words may highlight the regularities
present in the word, regardless of the morphological status
of the pairs of words. Experiment 2 tests whether adult
English speakers are able to learn the unattested phonotactic
first-last alternation if the items are presented in pairs of
voiceless-voiced ‘alternations’ without morphological
information.

1	

Old Items	

New Items	


0.5	


0	

Phonotactic
Training	


Morphological
Training	


Experiment 2	


Training Condition	


Figure 1: Results.
It is important to note that the success of the participants
in the Morphological Training condition was not limited to
correct items that were fully harmonic. Participants in the
Morphological Training condition selected the correct item
64%, of the time when the medial item was voiceless and
the first and last item was voiced (e.g., /beteg/), CI ± 0.11,
t(17) = 2.86, p = 0.011 (because of the small number of
items, Old and New items were combined in this analysis,
with a mean of 67% for Old items and 59% for New Items).
This analysis rules out the possibility that participants only
learned a harmony pattern that required all consonants to
share the same feature for voicing.
There was a high amount of individual variation in the
present experiment. Three of 18 participants in the
Morphological Training condition showed a mean below
50%, while nine of the 18 in participants in the Phonotactic
training condition showed a mean lower than 50%. The fact
that so many participants in the Phonotactic Training
condition scored below chance suggests that these
participants were not attending to the relevant aspects of the
stimuli. These participants may have simply been ‘guessing’
incorrectly more often than correctly, or they may have
inferred a pattern that was not actually present in the data.
The results of the present experiment support the
hypothesis that a first-last agreement pattern is more easily
learnable as a morphologically controlled phonological
alternation than as a phonotactic pattern. Participants in the
Morphological Training condition responded correctly to
harmonic items at a level greater than chance, and
significantly outperformed participants in the Phonotactic
Training condition, who failed to learn the first-last
agreement pattern.
There were two major differences between the
Morphological Training condition and the Phonotactic

Experiment 2
Participants
All participants were adult native speakers of English with
no previous exposure to consonant harmony. All 18
participants were Elmhurst College undergraduate students,
recruited from the Elmhurst College Psychology
Department Human Subject Pool, and were given extra
course credit for their participation.

Design
Participants in Experiment 2 were given the same exposure
items as participants in the Morphological Training
condition in Experiment 1. Participants were exposed to 24
pairs of items that reflected an alternation between CVCVC
words in which the first and last consonants agreed in
voicing; the first word of each pair contained voiceless
stops, and the second word of each pair contained the
corresponding voiced stops. Unlike Experiment 1,
participants in Experiment 2 were not given any information
about the morphological status of the pairs of items.
Participants were simply told that they would be listening to
words from a novel language. They were not told that the
items were presented in pairs. Participants in Experiment 2
received the same test items as participants in Experiment 1.

Results
Proportion of correct responses (i.e., choosing the item that
contained the voiced stops in first and last position) were
recorded, and are present in Figure 1, above.
Responses to Old and New items were compared to 50%
chance via Bonferroni corrected one-sample t-tests. There
was no significant effect for Old Items, with a mean of 0.57,

1539

CI ± 0.11, t(17) = 1.27, p = 0.22. There was, however, a
marginal difference for New Items, with a mean of 0.60, CI
± 0.093, t(17) = 2.26, p = 0.074. These results suggest that
participants in Experiment 2 did not reach full criterion for
learning, but did show some evidence of learning beyond
the chance level.
In addition, a 2x3 ANOVA was performed comparing
results for Experiment 1 with results for Experiment 2.
There was a marginal effect of Training, F(2, 51) = 2.21, p
= 0.080, no effect of Test Item, F<1, and no significant
interaction F(1, 51) = 1.10, p =.34. Pairwise comparisons
revealed no significant differences between Experiment 2,
with a mean of 0.58, CI ± 0.084, and the Phonotactic
Training condition of Experiment 1, p = 0.21, or the
Morphological Training condition of Experiment 1, p =
0.42. These lack of significant differences suggest that
participants in Experiment 2 performed at a level
intermediate between that of the Phonotactic Training
condition and that of the Morphological Training condition
in Experiment 1.
There are potentially many reasons why participants in
Experiment 2 did not perform significantly different than
either the Morphological Training condition or the
Phonotactic Training condition. First, it is possible that
some of the learners imposed morphological structure on the
pairs of words. In informal debriefing, several participants
noted that they had analyzed the pairs of words as being
related ‘like singular and plural’. If some learners naturally
impose morphological structure on alternating pairs of
words, it would suggest that learners use morphological
cues when they have the potential to be helpful. Second, it is
possible that the presence of cues to a morphologically
controlled phonological pattern (alternations and
morphological information) provide the best learning
environment for the most people. If only one of the cues is
present, learning will be intermediate between having both
cues and no cues at all. Third, it is possible that the high
degree of individual differences across both experiments
made finding a significant effect difficult. Of the 18
participants in Experiment 2, five showed means lower than
50%. These individual differences may have been
compounded the additional factors that lead to an
intermediate result for Experiment 2. Fourth, the lack of a
difference may simply reflect a floor effect. It may be
difficult to show substantial differences between training
conditions, due to the fact that learning in the
Morphological Training condition of Experiment 1 was
significant, but not highly robust.

Discussion
The present study explored the role of alternations and
morphological information in learning phonotactic patterns.
First-last agreement patterns, which fall outside of the
strictly piecewise grammars, are predicted to be unlearnable
(Heinz 2010; Lai, 2012). However, linguistic analyses that
demonstrate the possibility of a morphologically controlled
alternation that targets the first and last segments of a word

(Finley, 2009), along with the existence of morphologically
controlled first-last agreement patterns, leads to the
prediction that morphologically controlled phonological
patterns may not be subject to the same constraints on
learning and representation as purely phonotactic patterns.
This prediction was tested using an artificial grammar
learning paradigm in which adult native English speakers
were exposed to an artificial first-last agreement pattern that
was either presented as a morphological alternation or as a
phonotactic alternation. Participants failed to learn the
phonotactic pattern, but successfully learned the
morphologically controlled phonological alternation. This
result suggests that unattested phonotactic patterns may be
possible given the right morphological cues.
The results of the present experiment have important
consequences for theories of typological linguistic
universals. One of the major issues with proposing a
linguistic universal is that it is very difficult to interpret
potential counter-examples, or a lack of counterexamples
(Evans & Levinson, 2009). For example, if there are no
cases of first-last agreement patterns in natural language, is
it because of a cognitive restriction or because of an
accidental gap? In the case of first-last agreement patterns,
potential counter-examples can often be ‘explained-away’ in
terms of morphological restrictions. Using an artificial
grammar learning paradigm, it is possible to tease apart
issues of the source of a typological restriction (Nevins,
2009). First, if two patterns that are minimally different
except for a predicted restriction on language, there is a
clear prediction that one pattern will be learned more easily
than the other. For example, Finley (in press) compared
learning between minimally different vowel harmony
languages. One language had typologically (and
phonetically) salient mid vowels as the source for harmony,
while the other language had typologically (and
phonetically) less salient high vowels. Participants who
were exposed to the typologically salient cues were able to
learn the harmony pattern, while participants who were
exposed to the less salient cues failed to learn the pattern.
Second, it may be possible to find explanations for potential
counterexamples to proposed linguistic universals.
Additional social and cognitive cues may support learning a
pattern that falls outside a predicted learning space.
Artificial grammar learning experiments provide a
mechanism to control for these factors. In the present study,
it was demonstrated that the proposed restriction that strictly
piecewise languages patterns form part of the cognitive
constraints on phonological grammars may not hold in the
case of morphologically controlled alternations.
Jusczyk and colleagues (1993) suggest that infants may
learn phonotactic patterns faster than morphological ones.
This appears to be at odds with the results of the present
study, in which the morphologically controlled pattern was
learned with greater ease than the phonotactic pattern. There
are two possible explanations for this difference. First, the
present study addressed phonotactic patterns that are outside
of the range of naturally occurring attested phonological

1540

patterns. Thus, it may be possible that phonotactic patterns
are easier to learn that morphologically controlled
alternations, but only when the phonotactic pattern falls
within the set of strictly piecewise languages. Second, the
artificial nature of the present study may have provided a
shortcut to learning. Participants were told that they were
hearing morphological alternations. In a natural learning
situation, the learner has to discover both the morphological
component to the pattern as well as the phonological
component. Infants may be better at learning phonotactic
constraints simply because there is less information to
attend to. Adults in a language learning task can use
morphology as a cue to learning in a way not possible in
infant language learning.
The present study leaves open the question of why
morphologically controlled phonological alternations might
allow for a larger range of possible languages than
phonotactic patterns. One possibility is that morphology
provides additional cues to learning that may not be possible
when learning a purely phonotactic pattern. This falls in line
with theories that predict that metalinguistic cues such as
social factors and communicative intent play an important
role in the typology of language and language learning.
Another possibility is that the computational power of
morphological and syntactic processes exceeds that of
purely phonotactic patterns. Thus, patterns at the interface
of phonology and morphology/syntax may thus fall outside
of the computational power of purely phonological patterns
(Heinz & Idsardi, 2011). If this is the case, there is a
question of how to integrate phonotactic patterns at the
interface between morphology and syntax.
This issue has important implications for computational
models. If morphologically controlled phonological patterns
are governed by a different set of constraints than
phonotactic patterns, there is a question of how to
incorporate both into a computational model of language
and language learning. The ultimate goal of linguistics is to
provide a model of language that explains the mechanisms
that underlie the processes that are found (and are not
found) in natural language that is both cognitively plausible
and computationally elegant. Understanding the factors that
learnability of various types of phonological patterns will
ultimately lead to an understanding of the cognitive capacity
for language.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Jeffrey Heinz, Regine Lai,
Patricia Reeder, Elissa Newport, Gary Dell, members of the
Aslin-Newport Lab, as well as participants at the 2011
MidPhon Conference for helpful comments and discussion.
In addition, we would like to thank Kelly Johnston, Anna
States and Emily Kasman. I assume all responsibility for
any errors. Funding was provided by NIH Grants DC00167
and T32DC000035.

References
Akinlabi, A. (1996). Featural affixation. Journal of
Linguistics, 32, 239-289.
Boersma, P., & Weenink. (2005). Praat: Doing phonetics by
computer.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25, 257271.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance for
cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(5),
429-492.
Finley, S. (2009). Morphemic vowel harmony as featural
correspondence. Lingua, 119(3), 478-501.
Finley, S. (in press). Typological asymmetries in round
vowel harmony: Support from artificial grammar
learning. Language and Cognitive Processes.
Heinz, J. (2007). Inductive learning of phonotactic patterns.
Ph.D. dissertation, UCLA.
Heinz, J. (2010). Learning long-distance phonotactics.
Linguistic Inquiry, 41(4), 623-661.
Heinz, J. (2011a). Computational phonology part I:
Foundations. Language and Linguistic Compass, 5(4),
140-152.
Heinz, J. (2011b). Computational phonology part II:
Grammars, learning, and the future. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 5(4), 153-168.
Heinz, J., & Idsardi, W. (2011). Sentence and word
complexity. Science, 333(6040), 295-297.
Heinz, J., & Rogers, J. (2010). Estimating strictly piecewise
distributions Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Uppsala,
Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Iwara, A., Akinlabi, A., & Truckenbrodt, H. (2003). The
tonal phonology and phonetics of the future negative in
Lokaa. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on
African Linguistics, 33, 103-115.
Jusczyk, P., Friederici, A., Wessels, J., Svenkerund, V., &
Jusczyk, A. M. (1993). Infants' sensitivity ot the sound
patterns of native language words. Journal of Child
Language, 32, 402-420.
Nevins, A. (2009). On formal universals in phonology.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 461-462.
Onnis, L., Monaghan, P., Richmond, K., & Chater, N.
(2005). Phonology impacts segmentation in online speech
perception. Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 225237.
Rogers, J., Heinz, J., Bailey, G., Edlefsen, M., Vissher, M.,
Wellcome, D., et al. (2010). On languages piecewise
testable in the strict sense. In C. Ebert, G. Jaeger & J.
Michaelis (Eds.), The mathematics of language (Vol.
6149, Lecture Notes in Artifical Intelligence, pp. 255265). Berlin: Springer.

1541

