UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning transfer in small group coordination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82x336gm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Frey, Seth

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

	  

Learning transfer in small group coordination
Seth Frey (sethfrey@indiana.edu)
Cognitive Science, 1101 E. 10th St., rm. 290B
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA

	  
Abstract
This work tests the adaptation of groups from two generalizations
of the multiple-player stag hunt to a difficult third version, the
notorious weakest-link game. The two training conditions either
encouraged or discouraged the development of stable subgroups.
Theories of modularization predict that stable subgroups will
facilitate coordination in larger groups by helping them “scale up.”
However, internal structure may also cause “overfitting,” or
adaptation to only spurious features of training. In this experiment,
experience with internal structure prevented coordination at larger
scales, while experience in environments that discourage internal
structure led to performance at least as high as in the control
environments. I offer the analogy from individual learning
transfer, that distracting details from superficially-similar domains
may transfer and interfere with coordination. This work has
implications for the development and adaptability of small
coordinating groups. In particular, it demonstrates that
coordination is not a monolith, and experience with one sense may
impair performance under others.
Keywords: stag hunt; learning transfer; n-player games;
coordination games; group structure.

Introduction
Adaptability and transfer have been a focus of group
research since its inception (Bavelas, 1950; Guetzkow &
Simon, 1955). The research in “endogenous” groups applies
modern experimental methods and game theoretic
approaches to understanding adaptability and learning
during group formation.
Traditional group experiments impose groups by
design, and they use careful matching procedures and
information conditions to minimize interaction and
reputation effects, and to maintain the independence of
individual reasoners. Investigations of endogenous group
formation encourage interactions and attend to the
processes of group formation within an experiment.
Endogenous group experiments permit the study of	   internal
(often “network”) structure. In groups, internal structure
describes the heterogeneous but systematic pattern of
coordinated behavior between subgroups. Internal structure
can be measured by observing the behavior of group
members over time. As the demands on a group change,
these internal patterns should also change. For large
networks, group structures can be compared along
innumerable dimensions, but for the small groups featured
in this study it is possible to meaningfully quantify structure
with fewer variables.
Ahn, Isaac, & Salmon (2008) documented segregation
processes as a result of reputation formation and individual
choice. Camerer and Weber elicited unprecedented

1572

coordination in the weakest-link game by starting with
successful groups of two and “growing” them slowly up to
the standard 7-person case (Camerer & Weber, 2008). Their
work shows that coordination can be attained if the learning
process occurs in parallel with the group formation process.
Across a diversity of paradigms, many other experiments
have found conditions in which the internal structure
created by local information improves group-level
outcomes (Ahn, Esarey, & Scholz, 2009; Goldstone,
Roberts, Mason, & Gureckis, 2010; Kearns, Suri, &
Montfort, 2006; Mullen, Johnson, & Salas, 1991; Mason,
Jones, & Goldstone, 2008).
There is also conflicting evidence that internal
structure interferes with coordination among endogenous
groups. Weber & Camerer (2003), complementing their
“slow growth” result above, showed that combining two
successful medium-sized groups can induce coordination
failure in the large merged group. Rick, Weber, & Camerer
(2006) hypothesized that decentralization would promote
adaptability. After their result failed to materialize, they
reframed the experiment in terms of learning transfer (Rick,
Weber, & Camerer, 2007). Frey & Goldstone (2010) show
the simultaneous emergence of internal structure and
coordination failure in a multiple-player stag hunt.
Participants in groups of many sizes could coordinate on
equilibria that required larger quora for larger payoffs.
Despite many trials and large groups, coordination failure
was common, and the successes were most typical for the
smallest subgroups of pairs and triplets, despite the much
larger rewards available with more concentrated groups.
There is no theory to reconcile the conflicting effects of
group formation on individual outcomes.
This experiment explores whether internal structure
will help or hinder groups in coordinating at larger scales.
The complex experimental designs and large networked
groups of most endogenous group experiments make it
difficult to carefully distinguish hypotheses. I introduce a 4player coordination game that elicits three types of
coordination, depending on the value of an experimentally
manipulated parameter. An experiment with only four
players can be represented as a very small network. The
design focuses on learning transfer from each of three
coordination games.
Learning transfer is a growing area of behavioral
game theory. Studies suggest that experiences of
cooperation or coordination can transfer across very
different types of games (Stahl, 2000; Devetag, 2005). In
the most ambitious study, Woolley, Chabris, Pentland, &
Hashmi (2010) give evidence for a general Collective

Figure: Structure of the game, and design of the experiment
Groups of four picked from three choices over thirty rounds of a Stag Hunt game, moving from twenty training
rounds to ten identical test rounds. Two of the three choices (the top two) required coordination with exactly n other
group members for 16 points (Stag), and the remaining choice guaranteed 2 secure points (Hare).

Intelligence factor by which certain groups seem to transfer
easily across many unrelated collective tasks. But the
processes of individual learning and transfer are complex,
and we cannot cherry-pick concepts from the individuallevel without acknowledging this complexity. For example,
one individual-level phenomenon that complicates the idea
of general intelligence is negative transfer, a type of
learning transfer. In cases of negative transfer, a superficial
similarity between two tasks will induce transfer of
spurious concepts that actually hinder performance (Gagne,
Baker, & Foster, 1950; Day & Goldstone, 2012). For
example, tennis and badminton are superficially similar
sports, but skills developed in one should not necessarily
transfer to the other; Some tennis techniques, like
maintaining firm wrists, will not improve performance in
badminton. Negative transfer complicates general
intelligence factors by introducing order effects, and
generally by raising questions about what it means for two
tasks to be similar or distant.
With the right design, a failure of internal structure to
improve large-scale coordination implies negative transfer.
Groups in this environment did in fact show negative
transfer from their experience of a seemingly congruent
coordination game. The consequence is that transfer is
better from a less similar game––one that discouraged the
slow, modular development of large-scale coordination.

1573

Method
Participants played a novel multiple player
generalization of the stag hunt, a classic two-player game.
This paradigm was designed to explore the relationship
between a group’s internal patterns of behavior and their
ability to coordinate at larger scales.
In the prototypical stag hunt, two players choose
blindly to either hunt Hare or Stag. Hare offer little meat
but can be caught without another’s assistance. Stag reward
both hunters with more food per person, but they cannot be
successfully hunted by an individual alone. A decision to
hunt hare instead of stag reflects an aversion to risk,
because a lone stag hunter gets nothing while hare hunters
are guaranteed a small but secure reward. The stag hunt
captures many of the general incentives and pressures
behind coordination, and the properties of agents in the stag
hunt are well documented, both theoretically and
empirically (Harsanyi & Selten, 1988; Camerer, 2003;
Skyrms, 2004). However, upon expanding to multiple
players, the number of generalizations explodes, and most
extant research is in simulation.
In the multiple player stag hunt reported here––the
structured stag hunt––players have three choices: they may
hunt hare alone for a small payoff (2 points) or they may
hunt either of two stag for a larger payoff (16 points).
Group size in this game is fixed at four players.
The payoff structure of the two stag strategies
depends on parameter n, which may equal 2, 3, or 4. At

n=4, the Full coordination condition, players who select
one of the Stag strategies receive the large payoff only if all
4 players select it (See Figure). At this equilibrium, four
hunters have successfully coordinated to hunt one of two
large stag. At n=4, there are three pure strategy Nash
equilibria, corresponding to the decision of all four players
to all choose one of the three strategies. Previous work
suggests that, as the game is iterated, players will settle into
one of these three pure strategy equilibria (Camerer &
Weber, 2007). The game also has many mixed-strategy
equilibria––at all parameterizations––but I will attend only
to the more salient pure equilibria. The Full coordination
condition functioned as a control baseline condition for
comparison with the other two conditions.
For n=3, the Well-mixed condition, only 3 players
may hunt stag in order to receive a payoff. If all four
players chose the same Stag strategy, then they each receive
0 points. In this condition, the proverbial stag has plenty of
meat for three people, but is, perhaps, very likely to be
startled by the stirrings of a larger crowd. At n=3, the
structured stag hunt resembles the game of Chicken, in
which the most profitable strategy for individual players
gives the lowest payoff if all players select it.
Both theory and experiment suggest that coordination
will be unstable in this condition of the game (Bornstein,
Budescu, & Zamir, 1997). There are nine pure-strategy
Nash equilibria in the Well-mixed condition but, unlike the
other two conditions, there is no equilibrium in which all
four players receive the largest payoff. Because the only
symmetric equilibria involve selecting randomly from a
distribution over the three strategies (mixed strategies),
experience in the Well-mixed condition should select
against the development of stable internal structure.
Finally, in the Modular condition, when n=2, an
internal group structure becomes possible. When n=2 the
same penalties apply if more than 2 players select the same
stag strategy––players earn nothing. However, the n=2
condition is special because it is possible to split four
players evenly between the two Stag such that all four
players receive the higher payoff. The condition is called
Modular because it requires division into two subgroups.
With social learning, experience in the Modular condition
should promote the development of an internal group
structure. Based on results from previous work (Frey &
Goldstone, 2010), my prediction is that groups in the
Modular condition will naturally stratify between the two
stag strategies over time. Whether this facilitated transfer to
the Full coordination condition was an open question.
In all three conditions, Pareto dominance fails to
select between the two pure equilibria involving Stag
strategies, and there is an equilibrium selection problem on
top of the traditional problem of selecting between Hare and
a single Stag. The complexity of introducing two Stag was
necessary to create the three nearly identical conditions.

1574

Experiment
These three versions of the structured stag hunt
provide the basic ingredients for distinguishing between
two competing theories of how a group’s internal structure
influences its ability to coordinate.
Participants played the structured stag hunt in three
conditions: a Full control condition and the Modular and
Well-mixed conditions.
Participants played thirty rounds of the game. In all
three conditions, the last ten rounds functioned to test
performance in the Full coordination version of the game.
In the control condition, the first 20 training rounds were
also played with n=4. In the Well-mixed condition, groups
played these first twenty rounds at n=3. In the Modular
condition, groups played the first twenty rounds at n=2.
Subjects and procedure
52 psychology undergraduates played the game in 13
groups of four. Experiments were conducted over
networked computers concealed in separate cubicles.
Complete instructions were read aloud before participants
were given the opportunity to review them individually.
After the first round, participants saw their group’s previous
round’s choices before the next round began. However,
participant icons were made identical to make it more
difficult to use reputation to form internal structure.
Experimental sessions lasted just under five minutes on
average, with about 10 seconds per round. Participants were
paid a small bonus of 1¢ per point, and mean earnings were
$1.25, or $15.00 an hour. The experiment was always run in
the free time after other collective behavior experiments.
Measures
The main dependent variable in this experiment is the
number of test rounds, out of ten, for which groups settled
on one of the pure equilibria containing the Stag strategy. If
internal group structure can improve higher-level
coordination, then Modular groups will coordinate more
successfully in test trials than the Well-mixed groups.
Other dependent variables were influenced by
condition and number of rounds, including group clustering
and group internal structure, payoff, opting out, and
fixation.
Group clustering and internal structure were
measured as the mean and standard deviation of the
distances between participants. In each round, two
participants shared distance 0 if they had made the same
choice, and 1 otherwise. Summed over all rounds, two
participants have distance 30 if they never selected the same
choice, and distance 0 if they always selected the same
choice. Using pairwise distances between group members,
the structure of the group can be represented as a fully
connected distance network. If the mean of these distances
is low, participants are tending toward clustering on the
same choice. For small groups, the standard deviation of
distance is equivalent to closeness centrality (Frey &
Goldstone, 2010), a measure of relational structure in
networks. If the standard deviation is high, participants tend

Dependent	  
measures	  

Grand	  
Mean	  

Performance	  
Group	  distance	  
Group	  structure	  
Payoff	  
Opting	  out	  [0,1]	  
Fixation	  [0.3̄3,1]	  

1.92	  
3.56	  
2.82	  
4.19	  
0.09	  
0.7	  

Full	  (n=4;	  control)	  
Train	   change	   Test	  
0.25	  
	  
3	  
ê	  
3.8	  
1.0	  
ê	  
3	  
0.92	  
1.6	  
	  
5.9	  
0.15	  
	  
0.14	  
é	  
0.66	  
0.93	  

Well-­‐mixed	  (n=3)	  
Train	  
change	  
é	  
3.5	  *	  
ê	  
3.81	  
ê	  
2.9	  
4.8	  *	  
0.074	  *	  
0.71	  

	  
	  
é	  

Test	  
4.25	  
2.25	  
2.25	  
7.2	  
0.045	  
0.79	  

Modular	  (n=2)	  
Train	  
change	  
1.25	  
	  
4.6	  *	  
	  
3.48	  *	  
	  
5.56	  *	  
	  
0.045	  *	   	  
é	  
0.57	  

Test	  
0	  
4.25	  *	  
3.41	  *	  
0.712	  
0.089	  
0.72	  

Table: Summary measures of group performance
Distance is reported instead of clustering. Distance and clustering are inversely related.
bold* reports a significant effect (p<0.01). In a “Train” column, comparison is with respect to training in the control condition. In a
“Test” column, comparison is with respect to tests in the control condition.
Arrows report significant effect directions of experience, within a condition, from Train to Test (p<0.01). All regressions report
statistics distributed on F(5,30).
Italics in upper right Test columns represent one significant post-hoc test between Modular and Well-mixed test performance.

to be close to some group members and distant from others.
By this definition, a modular arrangement of two groups of
two will register as having the highest internal structure.
Payoff was the mean number of points per participant.
Opting out was measured as the percentage of secure Hare
choices, out of thirty. Fixation measured pure strategy play,
the phenomenon of choosing the same strategy repeatedly.
Fixation was defined as the maximum value in a
participant’s observed distribution of choices. By this, purestrategy play will register a maximum fixation of 1.0, and
random mixed-strategy play will register the minimum
value of 0.3̄3.

Results
Two separate ANOVAs were used to compare the
three conditions in the training trials separately from in the
test trials. These analyses encoded three dummy variables,
one for each condition. Additionally, a multiple regression
tested the effects of experience within each condition. The
adjusted R2 of the regression over performance was 71%,
and the model was significant (F(6,30)=11.2, p<0.01). To
maintain the independence of observations, these analyses
were conducted at the group-level. Means and significance
values are summarized in the Table.
Looking first at the 20 training trials of the control
condition, it is clear that Full coordination is difficult.
Participants successfully coordinated on Stag in an average
of 0.5 of the 20 training rounds. Groups performed much
better during training in the Well-mixed condition,
coordinating successfully on a Stag in 7 of the 20 training
rounds (and significantly more often than groups in the Full
coordination condition; F(1,21)=24, p<0.01).
During training in the Modular condition, participants
settled upon the stable configuration (two subgroups of
two) in only 2.5 of the 20 training rounds. This was not
significantly higher than control. However, partial solutions
were more common, with 21 instances (out of a possible 40,
or two per round), of exactly two subjects successfully
coordinating on a Stag.

1575

Performance in the control condition increased (nonsignificantly) from 0.5/20 to 2.75/10 during the final ten test
rounds. The first ten rounds of the Full condition may be
understood as an alternative baseline, corresponding to an
entirely untrained experience of the game. Across all
sessions of the Full coordination condition, no groups
successfully coordinated on Stag in the first ten rounds of
training. Variance in performance was much higher in this
condition than in the other two; Groups in the control
condition tended either to converge stably on coordination
success (10/10 test trials) or coordination failure (0/10 test
trials), with little behavior in between these extremes.
Groups trained in Well-mixed trials showed
improvement upon advancing to the test trials (t(32)=3.16,
p<0.01). Mean performance on test was 4.25 out of 10
rounds. This was not significantly different than the test
performance of the control group. However, a t-test showed
that after training in the Well-mixed condition, groups
exhibited better test performance than Modular groups
(t(3)=-5.67, p=0.010), even though the Well-mixed game is
less similar to the Full coordination game.
Across all test rounds of all groups in the Modular
condition, no group successfully coordinated on Stag during
test (0/20). Groups in the Modular condition did not show
significantly different performance between training and
test trials.
Group clustering, group internal structure, payoff,
opting out, and fixation were modeled in the same manner
as performance, with a linear model to establish the effects
of increasing experience in the game, and separate
ANOVAs for train and test trials to establish differences
between the three conditions. These dependents were also
modeled at the group level. Though many of these results
may not become motivated until the discussion, means and
significance values are summarized in the Table.
Groups exhibited significant internal structure. In the
Well-mixed and Full coordination conditions, experience in
the game (number of rounds played) predicted increased
clustering (t(32)=-5.86; t(32)=-7.6, respectively––both

p<0.01) and decreased internal structure (t(32)=-3.95;
t(32)=-5.95, both p<0.01). Clustering and structure did not
change for Modular groups, and during test trials, only
Modular groups showed less clustering and more internal
structure than control groups (F(1,33)=6.22, p<0.01;
F(1,33)=6.76, p<0.01).
Payoffs in the training rounds were significantly
higher in both the Modular and Well-mixed conditions than
in the Full coordination condition (F(1,21)=14.9, p<0.01;
F(1,21)=20.5, p<0.01). These differences did not persist
between the test trials, and the change between train and
test trials was not significant in the regression.
Opting out (choosing the secure payoff) showed the
same pattern as payoffs. Opting out was significantly below
control during the training of both Modular and Well-mixed
groups (F(1,21)=13.2; F(1,21)=12.7, both p<0.01), but
these changes did not persist in test and were not reflected
in the model of experience. Over all trials and conditions,
only 9% of choices were to the assured payoff.
Over all subjects, mean fixation was 70%; the most
common strategy selected by a given subject was selected
for 70% of the rounds. Fixation increased with experience
in all three conditions, but did not differ significantly across
conditions (Control: t(32)=6.06, p<0.01; Well-mixed:
t(32)=4.83, p<0.01; Modular: t(32)=2.99, p<0.01)

Discussion
In the Full coordination control condition, groups face
a more complex version of the already-difficult weakestlink game (Van Huyck, Battalio, & Beil, 1990). They
performed moderately well in the test trials.
In the Well-mixed condition, groups showed
moderate performance solving the n=3 coordination
problem, and their performance on test was at least as good
as that of groups trained in the control condition. Data
support the prediction that these groups would not form
modules or other manifestations of an internal structure, or
at least not to the degree exhibited by groups in the Modular
condition.
For groups trained in the Modular condition, there
was a stable efficient outcome for two subgroups of two
whereby all four players receive the largest payoff.
Evidence supports the prediction that this environment
promotes the emergence of stable subgroups; groups in the
Modular condition did in fact exhibit high internal structure
consistent with a modular group structure. However, while
groups in this condition earned more during training than
other groups, they were unable to settle consistently upon
two groups of two simultaneously. Modular groups were
also unable to use their experience within a structured group
to coordinate upon stag during the test rounds.
Why did groups with internal structure test worse than
groups without internal structure? I will reject a few
possibilities. The first is that subgroups of two are small,
while subgroups of three are almost as large as subgroups

1576

of four. Previous work has shown that incremental growth
can aid coordination at higher scales (Camerer & Weber,
2008) while larger growth spurts can hinder it (Weber &
Camerer, 2003). However, this perspective ignores that fact
that coordination in all three conditions is coordination
among four people. The structure of the Well-mixed
condition, which creates conditions like those in the game
of Chicken, makes successful coordination more than a
matter of finding three willing risk-takers; it also involves
coordinating with a fourth who will forgo the greatest
payoff. Perhaps subjects in the structure condition learned
to randomize. This would be consistent with the moderately
efficient mixed strategies that exist in this condition. But
mixed strategies are even more efficient in the well-mixed
condition, which should have elicited randomized behavior
most effectively. Subjects in the structure conditions could
not have fixated too intently on specific strategies because
fixation was not higher than in the other conditions. Poor
performance can also not have been due to Modular groups
opting out and selecting Hare; opting out was also not
significantly higher than in any other condition during test,
and it did not change with experience.
One more possible explanation is that internal
structure itself caused the coordination failure at higher
levels. The measures of group structure indicate that
participants in the Modular condition overcame the
difficulties of positively identifying each other and
managed to form groups with internal structure. The
structures that the Modular condition selected for were
congruent with the demands of Stag in the Full coordination
condition; subgroups need only merge into one larger
group. However, the experience of stable subgroups seems
to have transferred negatively to the Full coordination trials.

Conclusion
This work looks at the interaction of individual
reasoning processes as group members interact and learn to
coordinate. Some previous work suggests that building up
small coordinating subgroups will aid growth to full-scale
coordination. This work supports competing claims, that the
spontaneous emergence of local stable patterns of
coordination may interfere with large-scale coordination.
While groups without stable internal structure performed as
well as control groups, groups that adapted to match the
modular structure of their problem found that this structure
interfered with full-scale coordination in the test
environment. While groups are certainly adaptive in an
important sense, adaptability is not a universal, or even well
defined property of group behavior. Similarly, not all
experiences of coordination and cooperation are the same,
and experience with one type of coordination can impair
performance in others.

Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank Tatsuya Kameda, Keigo
Inukai, Tom Wisdom, and Robert L. Goldstone for their
support and Benjamin Marchus for his assistance in
conducting this research. This project was funded by NSF
EAPSI 1108165 and National Science Foundation IGERT
training grant 0903495 in the Dynamics of Brain-BodyEnvironment Systems at Indiana University.

References
Ahn, T., Esarey, J., & Scholz, J. (2009). Reputation and
Cooperation in Voluntary Exchanges: Comparing
Local and Central Institutions. The Journal of Politics,
71(02), 398–413.
Ahn, T., Isaac, R., & Salmon, T. (2008). Endogenous group
formation. Journal of Public Economic Theory, 10(2),
171.
Bavelas, A. (1950). Communication patterns in taskoriented groups. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 22(6), 725–730.
Bornstein, G., & Yaniv, I. (1998). Individual and group
behavior in the ultimatum game: Are groups more
“rational” players? Experimental Economics, 1(1),
101–108.
Bornstein, G., Budescu, D., & Zamir, S. (1997).
Cooperation in intergroup, N-person, and two-person
games of chicken. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
41(3), 384.
Camerer, C. F. (2003). Behavioral game theory:
Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton
University Press.
Camerer, C. F., & Weber, R. (2007). Experimental
Organizational Economics. in The Handbook of
Organizational Economics, eds. R. Gibbons and J.
Roberts. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Camerer, C., & Weber, R. (2008). Growing organizational
culture in the laboratory. Handbook of Experimental
Economics
Day, S., & Goldstone, R. L. (2012). The Import of
Knowledge Export: Connecting Findings and Theories
of Transfer of Learning. Educational Psychologist.
Devetag, G. (2005) Precedent transfer in coordination
games, Economic Letters 89, 227–232.
Feri, F., Irlenbusch, B., & Sutter, M. (2009). Efficiency
gains from team-based coordination–Large-scale
experimental evidence. Preprints of the Max Planck
Institute for Research on Collective Goods.
Frey, S., & Goldstone, R. (2010). Group Stratification and
Coordination Failure in a Continuous N-Player Stag
Hunt. In 2010 Proceedings of the Cognitive Science
Society. Presented at the 2010 Proceedings of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Gagne, R. M., Baker, K. E., & Foster, H. (1950). On the
relation between similarity and transfer of training in

1577

the learning of discriminative motor tasks.
Psychological Review.
Goldstone, R. L., Roberts, M., & Gureckis, T. (2008).
Emergent processes in group behavior. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 17(1), 10–15.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00539.x
Goldstone, R. L., Roberts, M., Mason, W., & Gureckis, T.
(2010). Collective Search in Concrete and Abstract
Spaces. in Decision Modeling and Behavior in
Complex and Uncertain Environments (Eds. T.
Kugler, J. C. Smith, T. Connolly, Y. Son ). New York:
Springer Verlag (pp. 277–308).
Guetzkow, H., & Simon, H. (1955). The impact of certain
communication nets upon organization and
performance in task-oriented groups. Management
Science, 1(3/4), 233–250.
Harsanyi, J. C., Selten, R. (1988) A General Theory of
Equilibrium Selection in Games, MIT Press Books.
Kearns, M., Suri, S., & Montfort, N. (2006). An
experimental study of the coloring problem on human
subject networks. Science, 313(5788), 824.
Mason, W., Jones, A., & Goldstone, R. (2008). Propagation
of innovations in networked groups. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 137(3), 422–433.
Mullen, B., Johnson, C., & Salas, E. (1991). Productivity
loss in brainstorming groups: A meta-analytic
integration. Basic and Applied Social Psychology,
12(1), 3–23.
Rick, S., Weber, R. A., & Camerer, C. (2006). The Effects
of Organizational Structure and Codes on the
Performance of Laboratory “Firms.” Department of
Social and Decision Sciences Working Paper.
Rick, S., Weber, R., & Camerer, C. (2007). Knowledge
Transfer in Simple Laboratory Firms: The Role of
Tacit vs. Explicit Knowledge. Department of Social
and Decision Sciences Working Paper.
Schelling, T. C. (1960). The strategy of conflict.
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Shupp, R., Williams, A., & Hall, W. (2008). Risk
preference differentials of small groups and
individuals. Economic Journal, 118 (525), 258–283.
Skyrms, B. (2004). The stag hunt and the evolution of
social structure. Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, D. O. (2000) Action reinforcement learning versus
rule learning, Department of Economics, University of
Texas.
Van Huyck, J., Battalio, R., & Beil, R. (1990). Tacit
coordination games, strategic uncertainty, and
coordination failure. The American Economic Review,
80(1), 234–248.
Weber, R., & Camerer, C. (2003). Cultural conflict and
merger
failure:
An
experimental
approach.
Management Science, 49(4), 400–415.
Woolley, A., Chabris, C., Pentland, A., & Hashmi, N.
(2010). Evidence for a Collective Intelligence Factor
in the Performance of Human Groups. Science.

