UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Logical or Pragmatic, as Long as it Suits our Convenience: Scalar Inferences in a Pro-and
Contra-attitudinal Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/43v231kk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Heyman, Tom
Schaeken, Walter
Pipijn, Katrijn

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Logical or Pragmatic, as Long as it Suits our Convenience: Scalar Inferences in a
Pro-and Contra-attitudinal Context
Tom Heyman (tom_heyman123@hotmail.com)
Department of Experimental Psychology, 102 Tiensestraat
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Department of Experimental Psychology, 102 Tiensestraat
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Katrijn Pipijn (Katrijn.Pipijn@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Department of Experimental Psychology, 102 Tiensestraat
3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract

(e.g., ‘all’), it is called a scalar implicature. For instance,
when confronted with a sentence like (2), people tend to
interpret ‘some countries’ as ‘not all countries’. Although
logically, ‘some countries’ could mean ‘all countries’,
people rarely take this possibility into account.

In the present study we propose a context wherein the
endorsement rate of the scalar inference from ‘some’ to ‘not
all’ either increases or decreases. It is known that people tend
to interpret the quantifier ‘some’ as ‘not all’, though logically
some means ‘some and possibly all’. However, we argue that
this tendency to derive the scalar inference is variable and
depends on the attitude of the reader or listener. When the
‘not all’ interpretation implies a confirmation of one’s
attitude, we expect a higher endorsement rate of the inference.
On the other hand when the ‘some and possibly all’
interpretation contains pro-attitudinal information, we expect
a decrease in endorsement rate. These predictions are derived
from Kunda’s theory of motivated reasoning (1990) and are
supported by the data. Theoretical implications and
suggestions for further research along this line are discussed.
Keywords: Scalar inferences;
Attitudes; Relevance theory.

Motivated

(2)

The explanation for this tendency can be found in Grice’s
cooperative principle (1975, 1989). According to this
principle, people should make their contributions such as it
is required, when they interact. For that purpose, he
proposed four maxims, enabling people to communicate
effectively. One of these maxims, the maxim of quantity,
states that any contribution to a conversation should be as
informative as possible. Returning to the example, if the
speaker knows for a fact that all countries are poor, he
would have used the stronger quantifier ‘all’. However, the
speaker employed the weaker term ‘some’, which is taken to
mean that the stronger term is not appropriate (either
because the speaker knows that not all countries are poor or
because he is unsure that all countries are poor).
Looking through the literature, one can find two
contradicting opinions concerning the mechanism
underlying the production of scalar inferences (Noveck &
Reboul, 2008). The neo-gricean account (e.g., Levinson,
2000) assumes that the ‘not all’ interpretation (also called
the pragmatic interpretation) is derived by default. A logical
interpretation of ‘some’ may be possible, but only when the
pragmatic interpretation is cancelled in a certain context.
Chierchia (2004) has also proposed a default theory in
which he argues that scalar inferences are derived by default
except when the scalar term occurs in a downward entailing
context. These contexts include negations, question forms
and antecedents of conditionals (Noveck & Reboul, 2008).
On the other hand, there are theorists who argue against the
default character of scalar inferences. Instead, they defend a
contextualist view, which comprehends that the narrowing
from ‘some’ to ‘not all’ is entirely determined by the
context. The best known of these theories is probably
Relevance theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1986, 1995; Wilson &

reasoning;

Introduction
Understanding utterances requires knowledge about
grammar and the semantics of words, but also about nonlinguistic properties such as the speaker’s intentions and the
context in which the utterance is expressed. The
interpretation of utterances has been studied extensively and
belongs to pragmatics (Sperber & Wilson, 1986). Within the
field of pragmatics one can distinguish different topics such
as deixis, presupposition, speech acts, implicatures
(Levinson, 1983). However, in the present paper we will
only focus on the latter. An implicature, a term introduced
by Grice (1975), is what is suggested by an utterance though
not explicitly stated nor logically deducible. Consider the
following classic example:
(1)

Some countries are poor.

They got married and had a baby.

Here, it is suggested that they first got married and then had
children (i.e., the implicature), though logically the
sequence of events could also be reversed. A lot of research
has been devoted to a subclass of implicatures called scalar
implicatures. When a weaker term (e.g., ‘some’) is used to
imply the negation of a more informative, stronger term

456

Sperber 2003). This theory states that people will only
derive a scalar inference when it yields sufficient positive
cognitive effects. To interpret an utterance as (2), listeners
and readers are thought to follow a path of least effort in
computing cognitive effects and to stop when their
expectation of relevance is satisfied.
Evidence from different experimental studies seems to
favour Relevance theory. Studies involving response time
measures showed that a logical interpretation of
underinformative utterances like ‘some oaks are trees’ takes
less time than a pragmatic interpretation (Bott & Noveck,
2004; Noveck & Posada 2003). Also when participants were
instructed to respond quickly, they produced less scalar
inferences (Bott & Noveck 2004). Moreover, De Neys and
Schaeken (2007) found that people made more logical and
fewer pragmatic interpretations under high cognitive load.
Breheny, Katsos and Williams (2006) took another
approach and manipulated the context wherein the
implicature was embedded. They found longer reading
times in an upper-bound context (i.e., a context that
warrants the scalar inference) than in a lower-bound context
(i.e., a context that makes the inference inappropriate).
Recently, two studies examined the computation of scalar
inferences using a visual world paradigm (Grodner, Klein,
Carbary & Tanenhaus, 2010; Huang & Snedeker, 2009).
Where Grodner et al. (2010) report that the scalar inference
is computed immediately, Huang & Snedeker (2009) found
a short delay in the computation of the scalar inference.
Since the latter is in line with Relevance theory and other
experimental studies (Bott & Noveck, 2004; Noveck &
Posada, 2003), we can conclude that most of the
experimental evidence favours Relevance theory.
As already mentioned, Relevance theory states that the
scalar inference from ‘some’ to ‘not all’ is highly dependent
on the context. Some theorists have tried to identify contexts
in which the availability of the scalar inference varied
(Bonnefon, Feeney & Villejoubert, 2009; Breheny et al.,
2006). Two of them, the lower-bound and upper-bound
contexts, were already discussed above. Furthermore,
Bonnefon et al. (2009) established that the endorsement of
the inference declines in face-threatening contexts. In this
paper we propose a different context wherein the occurrence
of the scalar inference depends on one’s attitudes. Such a
context is more subjective (compared with more objective
upper/lower-bound and face-threatening contexts) since
scalar inferences here depend on feelings and motives of
people.
In the literature, one can find many examples of how
reasoning is affected by beliefs and attitudes. Performance
on the Wason selection task for instance improved
significantly when the task rule was contra-attitudinal
because participants were motivated to look for
disconfirmation, which leads to the correct solution to the
task (Dawson, Gilovich & Regan, 2002). Kunda (1990)
developed a theory that explained how reasoning might be
influenced by attitudes. The theory of motivated reasoning,
as it is called, postulates that when one is motivated to

arrive at a particular conclusion, one applies certain
strategies that are considered most likely to yield the desired
conclusion. Put differently, if confronted with contraattitudinal information, one is motivated to reject this
information (i.e., disconfirmation bias). On the other hand if
the information is consistent with one’s attitude, one is
inclined to believe in it (i.e., confirmation bias). With this in
mind, it should be possible to design a context where the
scalar inference is either appropriate or inappropriate.
Consider the following example:
(3)
a. in countries where the death penalty is applied,
crime has decreased.
b. in some countries where the death penalty is
applied, crime has decreased.
c. not all countries applying death penalty
experience decreasing crime.
d. some and possibly all countries applying death
penalty experience decreasing crime.
Depending on someone’s attitude towards the death
penalty, the utterance (3a) is either pro-or contra-attitudinal.
For people in favour of the death penalty (3a) is in line with
their attitude whereas for people opposed to death penalty it
is contrary to their beliefs. If the utterance were prefaced by
the scalar “some” as in (3b), it can be interpreted either
pragmatically (3c) or logically (3d). The logical
interpretation, which is consistent with (3a), is proattitudinal for people in favour of death penalty but contraattitudinal for people opposed to it. The reverse is true for
the pragmatic interpretation. Therefore we predict, based on
the theory of motivated reasoning, that people are inclined
to interpret the scalar pragmatically when they are against
the death penalty and logically when they are sympathetic to
it. Note that these predictions apply only to the current
example. If the word ‘decreased’ were to be replaced by
‘increased’, we would predict the opposite pattern.
Furthermore, it is possible that one holds a neutral attitude
towards the death penalty. This neutral condition serves as a
baseline against which the effect of the pro-and contraattitudinal context is evaluated. In general, given that the
content of the utterance (i.e., 3a) is pro-attitudinal, we
expect more logical interpretations while for contraattitudinal utterances we expect more pragmatic
interpretations compared with neutral utterances. In other
words, we expect the endorsement rate of the scalar
inference in the neutral condition to lie somewhere in
between those of the pro-attitudinal and the contraattitudinal condition.

Methodology
Participants
The study has been carried out in two different groups of
participants. One group consisted of 73 12th grade students
at the Groenendaalcollege in Merksem (34 men, 39 women,
mean age 17,2), who participated voluntarily. The other
participants were 197 first-year psychology students of the

457

University of Leuven (26 men, 171 women, mean age 18,5),
who participated in return for course credit. In the analysis
data from both groups are combined because results for each
group were very similar.

Participants scoring 4 or 5 on this second scale were thought
to be sure about their attitude whereas 3 or less indicates a
rather uncertain opinion concerning death penalty.
Participants were divided in these two categories because
people with uncertain attitudes might attach less importance
to the pro-or contra-attitudinal utterance. As a consequence,
their interpretations of the scalar term might be less affected
(or even uninfluenced) by the context. Therefore,
participants who felt uncertain about their beliefs were
excluded from the analysis1.
Crossing the type of story (i.e., crime has decreased
versus crime has increased) with attitude towards death
penalty yields six combinations which can be arranged in
three groups or conditions: a pro-attitudinal condition (i.e.,
crime decreased and in favour of death penalty + crime
increased and against death penalty), a contra-attitudinal
condition (i.e., crime decreased and against death penalty +
crime has increased and in favour of death penalty) and a
neutral condition (i.e., crime decreased and neutral + crime
increased and neutral). A chi-square test revealed a
significant difference in interpretation of the scalar term
between these three conditions (χ2(2, N=225) = 20.14, p <
0.001). As predicted, subjects in the contra-attitudinal
condition made more pragmatic interpretations than those
who are neutral regarding the death penalty (Table 1). On
the other hand, subjects in the pro-attitudinal condition
made more logical interpretations compared with the neutral
condition. Nevertheless, the tendency to derive the scalar
inference seems to be so natural that still two-third of the
subjects interpret ‘some’ as ‘not all’. If we look at the data
for pro and contra death penalty attitudes separately, we find
similar results. For those opposed to the death penalty, the
endorsement rate of the scalar inference is 66% in the proattitudinal condition and 93% in the contra-attitudinal
condition (χ2(1, N=158) = 17.71, p < 0.001). Subjects in
favour of death penalty derived the scalar inference in 62%
of the instances when they received the pro-attitudinal story
and 86% when they received the contra-attitudinal story
(χ2(1, N=27) = 2.05, p > 0.1). Although this latter result did
not reach significance (due to the small sample size), it is
clearly in accordance with the other results.

Materials and procedure
We used a self-constructed questionnaire to gauge
participants’ attitudes towards different issues. We asked
them to indicate how they felt about e.g. the death penalty,
more police on the streets, legalization of soft drugs,… on a
scale from 1 to 5, 1 meaning strong in favour and 5 meaning
strong in disfavour. They also had to indicate on a similar
scale how certain they felt about their answers, with 1
meaning not sure at all and 5 very sure. The item assessing
one’s attitude towards the death penalty was the crucial item
of the questionnaire. The other items were merely fillers.
To measure whether or not the subjects derived the scalar
inference, we took a similar approach as in Bonnefon et al.
(2009). Half of the subjects received the following story:
A research group of sociologists and criminologists did a
large-scale study into the relationship between death
penalty and crime. From this research has become clear
that in some countries where the death penalty is applied,
crime has decreased.
Do you think then that it is possible that in all countries
where the death penalty is applied, crime has decreased?
Subjects were then asked to circle the correct answer (yes
or no). The other half got a slightly adapted story in which
the word ‘decreased’ each time was replaced by ‘increased’.
Subjects received the questionnaire in small groups and
were randomly assigned to one of these two versions. Since
the experiment was conducted in Belgium, all materials
were in Dutch.

Results
Based on their responses to the attitude questionnaire,
participants were divided into three groups: in favour of
death penalty (4 or 5 on the scale), against the death penalty
(1 or 2) and neutral towards death penalty (3). These groups
were again divided according to attitude strength.

Discussion

Table 1: Contingency table of content of the utterance
against interpretation of the scalar (percentages are in
parentheses).
Interpretation of
the scalar
Logical
Pragmatic

Pro-attitudinal
30
(34.5%)
57
(65.5%)

The present research identifies a new context wherein the
occurrence of the scalar inference either increases or

Content of the utterance
Neutral
Contra-attitudinal
7
8
(17.5%)
(8.2%)
33
90
(82.5%)
(91.8%)

Total
45
(20%)
180
(80%)

1
Including all participants in the analysis had little effect on the
results, probably due to the low number of uncertain attitudes (45
on a total 270). Still, we decided to preserve the distinction
between certain and uncertain attitudes.

458

decreases. It is the first study to demonstrate the crucial role
of attitudes in the interpretation of the scalar term ‘some’.
Depending on one’s attitude, the scalar is more likely to be
interpreted pragmatically, in contra-attitudinal utterances, or
logically, in pro-attitudinal utterances, compared with a
neutral condition.
These findings are in line with Kunda’s theory of
motivated reasoning (1990), in that people are motivated to
reach a conclusion consistent with one’s attitudes and
beliefs. Furthermore, they complement previous studies
demonstrating that context plays a crucial role in the
interpretation of scalar terms.
The present study does not only differ in the kind of
contextual manipulation, also the position of the scalar term
relative to the context deviates from previous research.
Formerly, the crucial context occurred either before or right
after the scalar term. Here, the contextual manipulation (i.e.,
the word ‘increased’ or ‘decreased’) is situated nine words
after the scalar ‘some’ and this has important theoretical
implications2. Recent studies have shown that the
computation of scalar inferences occurs relatively fast
(Grodner et al., 2010; Huang & Snedeker, 2009). Also,
Hartshorne and Snedeker (submitted) report that the
interpretation of ‘some’ manifests itself nine words after
encountering the scalar term. Given these findings, the
contextual manipulation in the present study can initially
have no effect on processing and interpretation of the scalar
term. Before being confronted with the pro-or contraattitudinal context, participants have already adopted either
a logical or a pragmatic interpretation of the scalar. Thus
from the perspective of Relevance theory, people will stop
at the optimally relevant interpretation of ‘some’ without
being influenced by the contextual manipulation. However,
the ultimate interpretation of the scalar is affected by this
context as evidenced by the varying number of logical
interpretations in the different conditions. This suggests that
readers (and listeners) do not necessarily stop at the first
optimally relevant interpretation but rather keep on
searching for a more relevant interpretation. In other words,
people may temporary hold a certain interpretation of
‘some’ but eventually move to a different one due to the
context. Further research should be conducted in order to
support this claim, especially because it is inconsistent with
an assumption of Relevance theory (i.e., that the reader or
listener stops at the first interpretation that satisfies his
expectations of relevance).
A recent study of Bonnefon, De Neys and Feeney (2011)
regarding face-threatening contexts, actually provides
evidence for a “second push towards another equilibrium
between effect and effort”, as they call it. The authors found
that logical interpretations took longer and were more
difficult to reach in face-threatening contexts. A possible
way to reconcile our findings and those of Bonnefon et al.
(2011) with Relevance theory is to allow a reconsideration

of the interpretation of the scalar once the meaning of the
sentence is fully grasped. This process would only be
triggered in certain situations (i.e., pro-or contra-attitudinal
context, face-threatening context) and requires processing
time and effort. Thus, when people read the word
‘increased’ or ‘decreased’ they might revise their initial
interpretation of the scalar term but this comes at a cost.
Further research should help to determine whether the
suggested modification of Relevance theory is valid.
In sum, this study adds to the existing literature in two
ways. First, it provides evidence for the existence of a new
context wherein the interpretation of the scalar term varies.
Second, through the position of the contextual manipulation
it challenges the assumption made by Relevance theory that
people stop at the first optimally relevant interpretation of
the scalar.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Frank Mannaerts for his assistance
in collecting the data at the Groenendaalcollege.
Correspondence should be addressed to Tom Heyman,
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven,
Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. E-mail:
tom_heyman123@hotmail.com.

References
Bonnefon, J. F., De Neys, W., & Feeney, A. (2011).
Processing scalar inferences in face-threatening contexts.
In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Bonnefon, J.F., Feeney, A. & Villejoubert, G. (2009). When
some is actually all: Scalar inferences in face-threatening
contexts. Cognition, 112, 249-258.
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are
underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar
inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 437457.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are
generalised scalar implicatures generated by default? An
on-line investigation into the role of context in generating
pragmatic inferences. Cognition, 100, 434–463.
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity
phenomena, and the syntax/pragmatics interface. In A.
Belletti (Ed.), Structures and beyond: The cartography of
syntactic structures (Vol. 3, pp. 39–103). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dawson, E., Gilovich, T., & Regan, D.T. (2002). Motivated
reasoning and performance on the Wason Selection Task.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 13791387.
De Neys, W., & Schaeken, W. (2007). When people are
more logical under cognitive load: Dual task impact on
scalar implicature. Experimental Psychology, 54, 128–
133.

2

Because death penalty is a single word in Dutch, the contextual
manipulation occurs nine words after the scalar (not ten words, as
it would be in English).

459

Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3): Speech
acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Grodner, D., Klein, N., Carbary, K., & Tanenhaus, M.
(2010). “Some,” and possible all, scalar inferences are not
delayed: Evidence for immediate pragmatic enrichment.
Cognition, 116, 42-55.
Hartshorne, J. K., & Snedeker, J. (submitted for
publication). The speed of inference: Evidence against
rapid use of context in calculation of scalar implicatures.
Huang, Y. T., & Snedeker, J. (2009). On-line interpretation
of scalar quantifiers: Insight into the semantic-pragmatics
interface. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 376-415.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480-498.
Levinson, S.C. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory
of generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Morris, W. (1969). The American heritage dictionary of the
English language. New York: American Heritage
Publishing Co. Inc.
Noveck, I. A., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterizing the time
course of an implicature: An evoked potentials study.
Brain and Language, 85, 203-210.
Noveck, I. A., & Reboul, A. (2008). Experimental
pragmatics: A Gricean turn in the study of language.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 425–431.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986/1995). Relevance:
Communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wilson D, & Sperber D. (2003). Relevance theory. In G.
Ward & L. Horn (eds.), Handbook of Pragmatics (pp.
607-632). Oxford: Blackwell.

460

