UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Manipulating Manner: Semantic Representations of Human Locomotion Verbs in English and
German

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1936z8v6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Phelps, Katherine
Duman, Steve

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Manipulating Manner:
Semantic Representations of Human Locomotion Verbs in English and German
Katherine S. Phelps (Katherine.Phelps@Colorado.Edu)

Department of Linguistics, Hellems 290, 295 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA
Steve Duman (Steven.Duman@Colorado.Edu)

Department of Linguistics, Hellems 290, 295 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA
Abstract

The research we report here manipulates cadence
independently from other gait features and shows that it is
the latter that influence the category boundary between
‘walking’ and ‘running’ terms, but cadence influences
naming on either side of the boundary. Second, it
incorporates naming patterns from a German dialect that
suggest Malt et al.’s (2008) claim may be too strong.
Though some German verbs of human locomotion do
encode the biomechanical distinction between ‘walking’ and
‘running’, the term ‘laufen’ (often translated as both walk
and run) does not. This runs contrary to prior predictions.
Moreover, the extent to which cadence influences naming
may be language-dependent, as some German verbs appear
to be less sensitive to manipulations of cadence than their
English counterparts.
The present study therefore contributes to research of
event categorization in two ways. First, it adds to our
understanding of the semantic representations underlying
motion verbs by providing a concise picture of the gait
features speakers attend to when naming human locomotion.
Second, it compares naming patterns of human locomotion
in English and German, revealing unexpected patterns not
present in previous cross-linguistic comparisons.

It has been argued that real-world structure constrains the
semantic representations of verbs, resulting in cross-linguistic
convergence of naming patterns for motion events. This
study explores the nature of this real-world structure by
manipulating individual features of human locomotion in
video stimuli and comparing the responses of English and
German speakers in an elicitation task. We show that
individual features influence naming patterns and that
languages encode these features differently. Furthermore, the
semantic representations of several German motion verbs
sharply contrast with their English equivalents.
Keywords: semantic representations; naming; concepts; crosslinguistic diversity; motion verbs; locomotion

Introduction
Languages divide the world in different ways. Moreover,
the boundaries between semantic categories within a
particular language are not necessarily fixed. These two
factors contribute to a complicated picture in any crosslinguistic comparison of naming patterns. Still, such
research has yielded strong evidence of convergent naming
patterns across languages in domains such as color (Berlin
& Kay, 1969; Kay et al., 1997), emotion (Eckman, 1972),
body terms (Majid, Enfield & van Staden, 2006) and events
(Majid, Boster, & Bowerman, 2008; Malt et al., 2008).
While cognitive biases shared by humans may result in
similar construals, humans are also sensitive to salient
discontinuities in the world. This real-world structure
constrains naming patterns.
Malt et al. (2008) show that structure in the world has a
strong influence on the naming patterns of motion events. In
a cross-linguistic study in which participants were asked to
describe human locomotion, the researchers demonstrate
that Dutch, English, Japanese and Spanish speakers
uniformly mark a biomechanical distinction between
‘walking’ and ‘running’ gaits when naming these events.
However, gait is a cluster of co-occurring features and Malt
et al.’s (2008) data do not indicate which of these features
are encoded by motion verbs. Also, their study is limited to
four languages and should be augmented with data from
more languages.

Naming Human Locomotion Events
Continuous human locomotion is particularly interesting
due to its biomechanical complexity; it is composed of
many co-occurring features. These biomechanical features
include but are not limited to stride length, knee bend,
elbow bend, and cadence, i.e., the number of steps per unit
of time (Kiss, Kocis & Knoll, 2004). Combined, these
features can be described as a person’s gait, or their manner
of motion. A speaker may draw on several of these gait
features when naming a human locomotion event.
Importantly, at a particular speed there is a dramatic switch
between the clusters of features often categorized as a
‘walking’ gait—a pendulum-type body motion where at
least one foot stays on the ground at all times—and a
‘running’ gait—characterized by more elastic, springing
movement (Alexander, 1992).
Malt et al. (2008) demonstrate how this real-world
structure—namely the dramatic shift in gait—informs the

857

semantic representations of motion verbs in Dutch, English,
Japanese, and Spanish. While viewing stimuli of a woman
on a treadmill at varying speed settings and inclines,
participants were asked to fill in the blank in the sentence:
“What is the woman doing? She is _____.” The striking
finding of this study was the uniformity in responses with
regard to the 4.5 to 5.5 mph treadmill settings. For
each
language, ‘walking’ terms always appeared from 4.5 mph
and slower (and never over 4.5 mph) whereas ‘running’
terms always appeared from 5.5 mph and faster (and never
under 5.5 mph). As mentioned above, this distinction marks
an important gait difference. The authors argue that this
cross-linguistic convergence is the result of structure in the
world exerting strong influence over naming patterns.
This cross-linguistic convergence does not appear to the
same extent on either side of the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary. In
English, for example, much more within-language variation
for lexemes such as ‘jog’ and ‘run’ was found, where use of
the latter increases with an increase in treadmill speed
(between 5.5 and 8.5 mph), but it is never used 100% of the
time.
While the authors acknowledge that there are many
features to which speakers may attend, they admit that “the
data do not tell us exactly what cues our participants were
responding to” (Malt et al. 2008, p. 239). Through a small
manipulation of the video stimuli in Study 1 and the
addition of a German dialect in Study 2, we demonstrate the
detailed nature of speakers’ semantic representations of gait
terms and show how individual features, particularly
cadence, can be a driving force behind naming patterns. We
suggest that naming on either side of the 4.5/5.5 mph
boundary is quite sensitive to cadence. Thus, individual
features may significantly affect naming patterns in some
circumstances (on either side of the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary)
and not others (at the boundary marked by other gait
elements).

slower than Normal Playback. The remaining 7 videos were
manipulated to Fast Playback, or 20% faster than Normal
Playback.1
The Slow and Fast Playback conditions are the critical
manipulation in this study. In the Normal Playback
condition, all features of human locomotion are coordinated.
Digital manipulation disrupts this coordination by altering
cadence, i.e., the number of steps per unit of time, while
controlling other gait elements. (We recognize that cadence
is a sub-parameter of gait, but for the purposes of this study
we refer to cadence as separate from gait, where the latter
remains a collection of co-occurring features such as stride
length, knee bend, elbow bend, etc.). For example, with the
6.5 mph Treadmill Setting at Normal Playback, gait (stride
length, knee bend, elbow bend, etc.) and cadence are in
sync. In the Slow Playback, all of these elements except for
cadence remain constant. The stride length, knee bend, and
elbow bend are all identical to the Normal Playback
condition. However, the cadence is different. There are
fewer steps in the same amount of time. In the Fast
Playback condition, there are more stride revolutions than
the Normal Playback condition. In other words, this
manipulation allows us to ‘mismatch’ cadence with other
gait elements.

Methods
Stimuli were shown to 30 native English-speaking
undergraduates at the University of Colorado at Boulder. All
undergraduates were monolingual in English with limited
experience in a foreign language. Videos were randomized
to prevent order biases from previous videos and were
displayed using the online survey system Qualtrics. The
videos were mixed with 8 distracters featuring the same
actor on a treadmill engaging in activities such as crawling
and skipping.
Upon presentation of each video, participants were asked
to respond to the following question: “What is the man
doing? He is ______.” Participants were asked to use as few
words as possible when describing the motion, but using
more than one word was allowed. Moreover, they were
instructed to repeat any word they used as many times as
they liked. All participants viewed all videos and the data
from all participants was included in the final analysis.

Study 1: English
The first study had two primary goals. The first was to
replicate the English findings of Malt et al. (2008). For this
reason, we created stimuli as similar as possible to their
original human locomotion study. The second goal was to
explore the nature of the semantic representations that may
underlie naming patterns in terms of relevant features
encoded by motion verbs. This required a manipulation of
the video stimuli so as to manipulate cadence while
controlling other gait features.

Results
All responses were grouped based on the head verb.
Responses such as ‘running’ and ‘running quickly’ were all
grouped as ‘running’. The ‘other’ category includes
responses that appeared infrequently (five or fewer times)

Stimuli
Stimuli consisted of 21 videos of a college student on a
treadmill at varying treadmill settings (1 mph increments
from 2.5 to 8.5 mph), in three different playback conditions.
Seven of the videos were unmanipulated and shown at
Normal Playback. Using Final Cut Express video editing
software, the remaining 14 videos were digitally
manipulated to be in either ‘slow motion’ or ‘fast motion’.
Seven videos were manipulated to Slow Playback, or 20%

1

Prior to the study, naturalness ratings for manipulated videos
were obtained. Nine undergraduates at the University of Colorado
at Boulder were shown video stimuli and asked to answer the
question “How natural is this motion?” by providing a rating on a
scale from 1 (not natural) to 5 (very natural). The mean
naturalness rating for manipulated videos was 2.8, indicating that
while the manipulations were noticeable, they were not unnatural.

858

within a Treadmill Setting, such as ‘meandering’ or
‘moseying’.
The results of the first study reveal two important
findings. First, the Normal Playback condition replicates the
results of Malt et al.’s (2008) study. ‘Walking’ terms are
used from 2.5 to 4.5 mph and ‘running’ terms are used from
5.5 to 8.5 mph.
Second, playback condition is shown to influence naming
patterns on either side of the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary, such
that some videos are named differently depending on
playback condition. The overall effect of playback condition
was confirmed by a binomial test (p < .005).2 Across all
Treadmill Settings (2.5 to 8.5 mph), playback speed
influences naming patterns. For example, at the Treadmill
Setting of 6.5 mph, the term ‘jogging’ is preferred by 83%
of the participants for the Slow Playback condition, 40% for
Normal Playback, and only 5% for Fast Playback. A
comprehensive view of the data can be seen in Figure 1.

event. Indeed, the manipulation causes additional semantic
categories to appear such as ‘power walking’3, which is the
most common response for 4.5 mph, but only in Fast
Playback. At the very slowest cadence (2.5 mph, Slow
Playback), participants are compelled to use a term other
than ‘walking’, though there is less agreement as to what
that term should be. This accounts for the large ‘other’
category here, consisting of words such as ‘meandering’,
‘sauntering’, and ‘moseying’.
Despite their attendance to the playback manipulation,
participants did not use the same lexical item to refer to
stimuli on either side of the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary. Rather,
at this boundary, other gait features seem to be more critical
than cadence. If cadence alone were a determining feature,
we might expect to see ‘running’ terms applied to 4.5 mph
in Fast Playback, but this is not the case. Increased cadence
in this condition did not ‘override’ the category boundary,
nor did decreased cadence in the 5.5 mph Slow Playback
condition. In the English data, this is without exception.
Study 1 teases apart cadence from other gait elements and
shows that a change in cadence influences naming patterns
on either side of the biomechanical boundary. While Malt
et al. (2008) indicate that strong structure in the world
influences naming patterns, they are agnostic in terms of
which features are attended to. Our results indicate that
there is clearly ample structure to which speakers can
selectively attend, and that a single feature can play a central
or peripheral role in driving naming patterns.

Study 2: German
By manipulating cadence while controlling other gait
elements, Study 1 provides a concise picture of what
external structural elements of human locomotion influence
naming patterns. It also opens up the possibility that
speakers of other languages will draw upon these structural
features differently than English speakers. To explore this
possibility, Study 2 replicates Study 1 in a German dialect.

Figure 1: The English data from Study 1. Treadmill Settings
from 2.5 mph to 8.5 mph and Playback Conditions are Slow
(S), Normal (N), and Fast (F).

Stimuli

This provides a very clear picture of the structure that
informs English lexemes: cadence seems to be a critical
feature in many terms of human locomotion. Even when
other gait features remain constant, a change in cadence can
result in a change of the most common lexeme for that

Study 2 used the same stimuli as Study 1.

Methods
The videos were shown to 28 speakers of a Bavarian dialect
of German known as Rieserisch. This dialect is spoken in
the Ries area, the capital of which is the town of
Nördlingen. Rieserisch is closely related to the more
common German dialect of Schwäbisch, spoken primarily
in the state of Baden-Württemberg (Schmidt, 1898). Though
there are several important differences between the grammar
and lexicon of Rieserisch, Schwäbisch, and standard
German,
specific
contrasts
between
semantic

2

To conduct the binomial test, 12 undergraduates from CU
Boulder were asked to provide a speed ranking of the lexemes
from Study 1 (e.g., ‘running’ was rated as faster than ‘jogging’ by
the majority of participants). These speed rankings were then
compared to the data in Study 1. Across Treadmill Settings, videos
in Slow Playback were more often paired with lexemes that were
rated slower than the most common lexemes in Normal Playback
(e.g., ‘jogging’ < ‘running’), while videos in Fast Playback were
more often paired with lexemes that were rated faster than the most
common lexemes in Normal Playback (e.g., ‘running’ <
‘sprinting’). The binomial test compared the number of times the
lexeme changed in the predicted direction (e.g. ‘jogging’ <
‘running’ < ‘sprinting’) to the total number times there was a
lexeme change due to playback condition.

3

‘Power walking’ was not considered a modified form of
‘walking’, but rather a compound lexical term, in part because
‘power’ in this case does not pattern with other adverbial modifiers
of ‘walking’, e.g., ‘quickly’, which can occur pre- or post-verbally.

859

representations of human locomotion verbs in these dialects
remain largely unexplored. It is possible that Study 2’s
results could extend to speakers of more standard German,
but this hypothesis requires further investigation.
Speakers ranged in age from 17 to 48. Participants viewed
the videos on their own computers through the use of the
survey system Qualtrics. Data from 4 speakers were
discarded due to incompleteness. Of the remaining 24, all
but 2 claimed to have relatively good knowledge of English.
An additional 13 claimed knowledge of a third language,
and 4 claimed knowledge of a fourth. Therefore, only 2 or
the 24 participants could be described as monolingual. All,
however, identified themselves as native speakers of the
Rieserisch dialect.
Upon presentation of each video, participants were asked
to respond to the following question: “Was macht der
Mann? Er _____.” (What is the man doing? He is _____.).
Again, participants were asked to use as few words as
possible when describing the motion, but using more than
one was allowed. They were instructed to repeat any word
they used as many times as they liked. All participants
viewed all videos.

Third, ‘laufen’ is used at every Treadmill Setting. While
never the most frequent term in any given condition,
‘laufen’ is used with high frequency overall, equal to that of
terms such as ‘gehen’ and ‘joggen’. Fourth, ‘laufen’ does
not appear to be affected by the cadence manipulation.
Hypotheses concerning these observations will be addressed
in the General Discussion.
The effect of playback condition for verbs other than
‘laufen’ was confirmed by a binomial test (p < .05),
indicating that a change in cadence affected the choice of
lexeme.4 The verb ‘gehen’ (translated as go or walk) seems
to behave differently than English ‘walk’. At 2.5 mph, the
change in cadence did little to change naming patterns (as
seen in Figure 3). The same is true for 4.5 mph: where
English speakers designate a category of ‘power walking’
for 4.5 mph in the Fast Playback condition, German
speakers do not seem to agree on a motion lexeme in this
same condition. This suggests that ‘gehen’ may not encode
cadence in the same way ‘walk’ does, and therefore its
underlying representation may be qualitatively different.
Cadence effects for other verbs were similar to their
English counterparts. The verbs ‘joggen’ (jog), ‘rennen’
(run), and ‘sprinten’ (sprint) were sensitive to the change in
cadence. For example, at 6.5 mph, ‘joggen’ was used by
58% of the participants in the Slow Playback condition,
42% of participants in Normal Playback, and 17% in Fast
Playback.
With the exception of ‘laufen’, German naming patterns
align with those in other languages that mark the
biomechanical distinction between ‘walking’ and ‘running’.
The term ‘gehen’ only appears at 4.5 mph and slower;
terms such as ‘joggen’ and ‘rennen’ only appear from 5.5 to
8.5 mph. As in English, the cadence manipulation did not
cause speakers to break this boundary.

Results
Again, all responses were grouped based on the head verb.
The ‘other’ category includes responses that appeared
infrequently (five or fewer times within a Treadmill
Setting), such as ‘spazieren’ (stroll) and ‘bummeln’
(saunter).
To begin, use of the term ‘laufen’ gives rise to four
noteworthy observations. First, contrary to Malt et al.’s
(2008) predictions, the term ‘laufen’—translated as both
walk and run—was used to refer to stimuli on either side of
the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary (see Figure 2). Close analysis
indicates that 6 speakers used ‘laufen’ across the boundary,
14 used ‘laufen’ but did not cross the boundary, and 4
speakers did not use the lexeme at all. Therefore, usage of
‘laufen’ across the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary does not seem to
be idiosyncratic or limited to one speaker. Second, the use
of ‘laufen’ seems to be most common at 5.5 mph.

Figure 3: The German data from Study 2. Treadmill Settings
from 2.5 mph to 8. 5mph and Playback Conditions are Slow
(S), Normal (N), and Fast (F).

4

Lexical rankings for the binomial test were provided by 3
additional native Rieserisch speakers who did not contribute to the
elicitation task in Study 2.

Figure 2: Comparison of English ‘walking’ and ‘running’
with German ‘laufen’ in Normal Playback.

860

General Discussion

semantic representations should proceed by induction,
testing how the possible dimensions of semantic space may
be encoded in a given language.
The German verb ‘laufen’, a difficult term for English
speakers, is of particular note. It is commonly translated as
both walk and run. However, as can be seen in Study 2, this
translation is not accurate. There is little overlap in terms of
the semantic space encoded by English ‘walk’ and ‘run’ in
comparison to ‘laufen’. Therefore, direct translation is
problematic or even impossible.
Though such a verb is not present in their data, Malt et al.
(2008, p. 239) suggest that it may be “possible that some
[languages] do not have separate words for walking and
running gaits.” While German clearly does have words that
mark the biomechanical distinction, ‘laufen’ is a frequent
verb that crosses the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary. In fact, ‘laufen’
seems to be used most often at these treadmill settings,
perhaps indicating a grouping of 4.5 and 5.5 mph to the
exclusion of speeds such as 2.5 and 8.5 mph. This is in
contrast to previous predictions regarding such a grouping.
One possible interpretation of this finding is that ‘laufen’
is a term of general motion. There are at least two reasons
why this explanation is not likely. First, use of ‘laufen’ is
used most frequently at 5.5mph. If it were a term of general
motion, then it should be distributed evenly across all
treadmill settings. Second, ‘laufen’ features similar
metaphorical extensions as the English manner verb ‘run’,
not of general motion verbs such as ‘go’. This is
demonstrated in (3) and (4):

Both Study 1 and Study 2 bring relevant observations to
bear on the nature of the real-world structure that informs
semantic representations of human locomotion. They also
help support and inform the findings of previous studies.
We show that cadence is a structural feature to which
English and German speakers attend and that this salience is
reflected in naming patterns. Presumably, underlying
concepts of these verbs will also highlight cadence in this
way.
Both studies show the relative roles of cadence and other
gait elements in naming patterns of continuous human
locomotion. First, previous hypotheses that the
biomechanical distinction between a ‘walking’ and
‘running’ gait (the 4.5/5.5 mph boundary) is the primary
structure influencing speakers’ lexeme choices are strongly
confirmed. The manipulation of Playback (and thus
cadence) did not cause any speakers to use a ‘walking’ term
from 5.5 mph and higher or a ‘running’ term from 4.5 mph
and lower. Clearly, the biomechanical gait distinction is a
critical aspect of speakers’ semantic representations of these
human locomotion verbs at this point in the continuum of
motion.
However, results also indicate that some English and
German lexemes are extremely sensitive to the manipulation
of cadence. In other words, digitally manipulating playback
causes people to change the lexeme they use to describe the
event (with respect to Normal Playback). This has important
implications. First, it demonstrates that, though the 4.5/5.5
mph biomechanical distinction is of great importance, so too
are cues of cadence. Moreover, the relative weight given to
these features when naming depends on where individual
events occur in the continuum of motion. At the 4.5/5.5
mph boundary, motion verbs are distinguished by gait
features rather than cadence. On either side of this
boundary, however, cadence drives naming patterns to some
extent. This is not to say that only cadence drives naming
patterns in these regions. Rather, it seems that the
conjunction between cadence and gait elements (e.g., stride
length, knee bend, elbow bend, etc.) is important in the
encoding of motion verbs. That is, the semantic space is
multidimensional, with cadence (perhaps perceived as
speed) set against other gait elements. The combinatory
nature of these dimensions gives rise to particular semantic
categories, e.g., ‘jog’ is the conjunction between selfpropelled, bounce-and-recoil gaits at medium cadence (see
Malt et al., 2011 for similar treatments of this
multidimensional
space).
Furthermore,
contextual
dimensions are undoubtedly critical (see Labov, 1973). For
example, people may also attend to the weight of the person
(under, average, or overweight), where the locomotion is
taking place (indoors, outdoors, on a treadmill), or what
they are wearing (casual or sports clothes, etc.). Therefore,
subsequent studies in this domain should take into account
the complicated nature of semantic representations. Rather
than assume a priori that certain structure in the world will
determine naming patterns, we suggest that descriptions of

(3) Die Maschine läuft (The machine is running).
(4) Das Wasser läuft (The water is running).
These reasons are compelling evidence to dismiss the
characterization of ‘laufen’ as a verb of general motion. A
second response is that ‘laufen’ is not a manner verb at all.
Instead, it is aspectual, meaning “put into motion without
delay” (Cadiot et al. 2006, p. 182). Again, the metaphorical
extensions above argue against this treatment, as ‘laufen’ is
used to denote a continuous state, rather than indicating the
placement of the event in time. Second, participants only
viewed videos in which motion had already begun. The lack
of transition from a non-motion state to a motion state in the
videos runs counter to this aspectual reading. In other
words, the videos do not indicate that the subject was ‘put’
into motion.
We propose, instead, that ‘laufen’ is a specific manner
verb of continuous human locomotion that simply draws
upon different structure than verbs in English, Dutch,
Japanese and Spanish. However, due to the lack of response
to the cadence manipulation, we are unable to posit which
features in particular figure prominently in its semantic
representation.
These results also have important implications with
regard to so-called ‘manner’ and ‘path’ languages (Talmy,
1985). With these studies, we show that ‘manner of motion’
is not an unanalyzable primitive, as has been assumed in the

861

Linguistics literature (Slobin, 1996; Talmy, 1985) and the
Psychology literature (Gennari et al., 2002; Papafragou &
Selimis, 2010). Rather, ‘manner’ has a fine-grained
structure, and the current studies are an attempt to tease
apart this structure (following efforts of e.g., Ikegami,
1969).

Ekman, P. (1972). Universals and cultural differences in
facial expressions of emotion. In J. Cole (Ed.), Nebraska
symposium on motivation, Vol. 19. Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press.
Gennari, S., Sloman, S. A., Malt, B. C., & Fitch, W. T.
(2002). Motion events in language and cognition.
Cognition, 83, 49-79.
Ikegami, Y. (1969). The Semiological structure of the
English verbs of motion. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Kay, P., Berlin, B., Maffi, L., & Merrifield, W. (1997).
Color naming across languages. In C.L. Hardin & L.
Maffi (Eds.), Color categories in thought and language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kiss, R., Kocsis, L., & Knoll, Z. (2004). Joint kinematics
and spatial-temporal parameters of gait measured by an
ultrasound-based system. Medical Engineering &
Physics, 26, 611-620.
Labov, W. (1973). The Boundaries of words and their
meanings. In C-J. N. Bailey & R. Shuy (Eds.), New ways of
analyzing variation in English. Washington, D. C.:
Georgetown University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (1997). From outer to inner space: Linguistic
categories and non-linguistic thinking. In J. Nuyts & E.
Pederson (Eds.), Language and Conceptualization.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Majid, A., Boster, J., & Bowerman, M. (2008). The crosslinguistic categorization of everyday events: A study of
cutting and breaking. Cognition, 109, 235-250.
Majid, A., Enfield, N. J., & van Staden, M. (Eds.). (2006).
Parts of the body: Cross-linguistic categorization.
Language Sciences, 28 (2-3) [Special issue].
Malt, B. C., Ameel, E., Gennari, S., Imai, M., Saji, N., &
Majid, A. (2011). Do words reveal concepts? In L.
Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 519-524). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Malt, B. C., Gennari, S., Imai, M., Ameel, E., & Tsuda, N.
(2008). Talking about walking: Biomechanics and the
language of locomotion. Psychological Science, 19, 232241.
Papafragou, A., & Selimis, S. (2010). Event categorization
and language: A Cross-linguistic study of motion.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 25, 224-260.
Schmidt, F. G. G. (1898). Die Rieser Mundart. Munich: J
Lindauersche Buchhandlung.
Slobin, D. (1996). Two ways of travel: Verbs of motion in
English and Spanish. In M. Shibatani & S. Thompson
(Eds.), Grammatical constructions: Their forms and
meaning. Oxford: Carendon Press.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language
typology and syntactic description: Vol. 3. Grammatical
categories and the lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Conclusion
As close follow-ups to previous studies of motion verbs, the
two studies presented here have confirmed prior findings
while adding to our understanding of the cues to which
speakers may attend when naming human locomotion. By
manipulating cadence while controlling for other gait
elements, Studies 1 and 2 demonstrate that cadence is a
critical feature driving naming patterns in addition to the
biomechanical distinction between ‘walking’ and ‘running’
gaits. The addition of German data provided unexpected
results in the form of the lexeme ‘laufen’, which does not
follow the trends found in previous literature. This finding
highlights the importance of including as many languages as
possible when analyzing semantic representations.
This study has concentrated on the semantic
representations of human locomotion verbs. We believe,
however, that these semantic representations may have
important implications for underlying conceptual
representations, as defined by Levinson (1997). It is
possible that the differences in how people talk about human
locomotion events may also influence how they think about
these events. Therefore, this work can inform current
research (e.g., Malt et al., 2011) on the relationship between
semantic representations and underlying concepts.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a student research grant from
the Institute of Cognitive Science at The University of
Colorado at Boulder. We thank Dr. Bhuvana Narasimhan,
Dr. Gary McClelland, Jill Duffield, Dr. Les Sikos, Michael
Thomas, Alison Hilger, Shaw Ketels and David Harper for
support, advisement and discussion. German data collection
was made possible by our contact in Germany, Brigitte
Ulbricht. We would also like to thank the anonymous
reviewers of the previous draft who pointed us to important
research related to the current study.

References
Alexander, R. M. (1992). The human machine. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their
universality and evolution. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Cadiot, P., Lebas, F., & Visetti, Y. (2006). The semantics of
motion verbs: Action, space and qualia. In M. Hickman &
S. Robert (Eds.), Space in Languages: Linguistic Systems
and Cognitive Categories. Amsterdam & Philadelphia:
John Benjamins Publishing Company.

862

