UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory Indexing of Sequential Symptom Processing in Diagnostic Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2fq5j2vk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Jahn, Georg
Braatz, Janina

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory Indexing of Sequential Symptom Processing in Diagnostic Reasoning
Georg Jahn (georg.jahn@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology
Franz-Mehring-Str. 47, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany

Janina Braatz (janina.braatz@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology
Franz-Mehring-Str. 47, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany
Abstract

working memory as well, capacity limits increase in
importance. Cued recall of candidate hypotheses and
sequential symptom processing to update the focal
hypotheses’ degree of support are cognitive processes,
which elude observation and are altered if ratings are
elicited during reasoning. If external representations of
symptoms or knowledge about causes were permanently
ready for inspection, patterns of information search could be
recorded via behavior records (e.g., Mouselab) or eye
tracking. Here, we demonstrate a similar process tracing
method (Renkewitz & Jahn, in press) that is suitable for
investigating purely memory-based hypothesis generation
and symptom processing. It builds on the tendency to direct
the gaze to locations where information was presented
before when one attempts to retrieve it from memory or
reactivates it in working memory (the “looking-at-nothing”
phenomenon; Richardson & Spivey, 2000).
Our participants learned about the four chemicals and the
symptoms that they could cause in a spatial array. During
diagnostic reasoning, symptoms were presented auditorily
and the participants’ eye movements on the emptied spatial
array were tracked. Our goal was to trace the activation,
updating, and revision of hypotheses. In particular, we were
interested to see whether the activation of initial hypotheses
reflected the strength of support by the first symptom,
whether focal hypotheses had an advantage over equally
supported alternative hypotheses, and whether fixation
proportions corresponded to the final diagnosis in trials with
ambiguous symptom sequences. Extending previous
findings, we demonstrate the stability of looking-at-nothing
over an interval of one week.

Explaining symptoms by the most likely cause is a process
during which hypotheses are activated and updated in
memory. By letting participants learn about causes and
symptoms in a spatial array, we could apply eye tracking
during diagnostic reasoning to trace the activation level of
hypotheses across a sequence of symptoms. Fixation
proportions on former locations of possible causes reflected
the causal strength of initial symptoms, a bias towards focal
hypotheses, and the final diagnosis. Looking-at-nothing
revealing memory activation consistent with process models
of diagnostic reasoning was stable even after one week.
Keywords: Diagnostic reasoning, Probabilistic inference,
Eye tracking, Order effects, Spatial index

Introduction
The goal of diagnostic reasoning is to determine the most
likely cause of observed symptoms. In routine cases,
medical diagnosis may proceed as simple pattern
classification. Often, however, symptoms are ambiguous
and the clinician has to consider multiple alternative
diagnoses. Then, medical diagnosis is a case of hypothesis
generation and hypothesis testing (Lange, Thomas, &
Davelaar, 2012; Thomas, Dougherty, Sprenger, & Harbison,
2008) as it occurs in science, criminal investigation, or
searching for faults in technical systems. Diagnostic
reasoning with limited information search, for example,
when clinical cases are presented as case histories, requires
information integration based on knowledge and multiple
probabilistic cues. In the present study, we used the cover
story of an accident in a chemical plant, in which workers
were affected by one of four chemicals (Mehlhorn, Taatgen,
Lebiere, & Krems, 2011). Participants had to decide, which
chemical had caused a worker’s symptoms. By laying out
chemicals and symptoms in a spatial array in a learning
phase, we could use eye tracking for process tracing of
memory-based diagnostic reasoning to study the updating of
diagnostic hypotheses.
In sequential diagnostic reasoning, the first symptom
triggers a limited number of candidate hypotheses, which
frame the processing of subsequent symptoms. Equally
supported alternative hypotheses may be missed or rated
less likely than the focal hypothesis. Similar primacy order
effects have been documented for judicial decision making
and social judgment, for example.
The focal hypothesis or the set of focal hypotheses is held
in working memory. If symptoms have to be retained in

Experiment
Method
Participants. Thirty-six students of the University of
Greifswald (28 female, 8 male) with a mean age of 22.1
years (SD = 2.4) completed the first session. 32 of them
returned for the second session 7.3 days later on average
(SD = 1; range 6 to 10 days).
Materials. To prepare for the diagnostic reasoning task,
participants learned about four chemicals and possible
symptoms. There were six symptom classes each containing
two symptoms that are listed in Table 1. The four chemicals
and the symptom classes that each could cause were
presented in a 2x2 arrangement as shown in Figure 1. The
square in the bottom right quadrant measured 9.1° by 9.1° of

497

visual angle. Symptoms from the symptom class in the top
rectangle were “almost always” caused by the respective
chemical, those in the middle and bottom rectangles were
“occasionally” caused by the respective chemical.

again. Eye movements were recorded during diagnostic
reasoning only.
Knowledge acquisition. Participants were instructed that
their task would be to determine the cause of a patient’s
symptoms. They were told that the patients are workers in a
chemical plant, which processes four chemicals. Each
patient was affected by exactly one of those chemicals.
They should determine, which chemical most likely had
caused a patient’s symptoms. Next, they studied Table 1 and
worked through test trials until the set of twelve symptoms
was once assigned to symptom classes without errors.
Then, participants were told that each chemical could
cause three of the six symptom classes and the frequency
with which a chemical causes a symptom class would vary.
The symptom class shown in line one would be caused
“almost always” and the symptom classes shown in lines
two and three would be caused “occasionally”. Next, the
chemicals with symptom classes were presented as shown in
Figure 1. They could be studied until participants felt ready
to be tested.

Table 1: Symptom classes and symptoms. The original
materials were in German.
Symptom Class
Symptom
Symptom
Eyes
Eyelid swelling
Lacrimation
Respiration
Cough
Difficult breathing
Skin
Acid burn
Rash
Neurological
Paralysis
Speech disorder
Circulatory Pr.
Sweating
Swoon
Pain
Twinge
Sting
As can be seen in Figure 1, each symptom class appeared
with two chemicals. For example, “Eyes” symptoms were
almost always caused by the top left chemical, but only
occasionally by the top right chemical. Such symptoms are
denoted “Ab” (frequent for A, occasional for B) or “Ba”
(frequent for B, occasional for A) in the following.
Furthermore, each chemical shared an occasional symptom
class (Circulatory Problems, Pain) with a chemical in the
diagonally opposite quadrant. Symptoms from these classes
are denoted “ac” in the following.
A single trial in the diagnostic task consisted of a
sequence of four symptoms, for example: Eyelid swelling,
Cough, Swoon, and Difficult Breathing (Ab_Ba_ac_Ba).
Note that in this example, the third symptom (a circulatory
problem) disambiguates the symptoms heard up to then and
leaves only “A” (the top left chemical in this example) as
the final diagnosis.
Ten different item types were constructed that are listed in
Table 2. The point in the sequence at which a symptom in
combination with foregoing symptoms determined the final
diagnosis did vary across item types. In item type 10 the
symptom pattern remained ambiguous. The column denoted
“Specific symptoms” shows which item types are equivalent
regarding the evidence provided by the symptoms
irrespective of symptom order.
The symptom orders in Table 2 were used with each of
the chemicals in the A-role. This was possible because the
chemicals’ symptom patterns were symmetric. Furthermore,
all possible assignments of symptoms to item types were
constructed with the restriction that no single symptom was
repeated in a symptom sequence.
Procedure. The experiment consisted of two sessions. In
the first session, the participants acquired the knowledge to
be used in diagnostic reasoning and then completed two
phases of diagnostic reasoning trials. In the first half of
diagnostic reasoning trials, the 2x2 arrangement of
geometric forms was the same as during learning. In the
second half, the arrangement was changed. The bottom pair
became the top pair and the top pair became the bottom pair.
In the second session, which took place 6 to 10 days later
(M = 7.1), the participants returned for diagnostic reasoning
trials, in which the original arrangement was presented

Figure 1: The four chemicals as they were presented in the
learning phase. During diagnostic reasoning, the rectangular
frames containing the symptom categories were empty.
In each test trial of the learning procedure, the emptied
spatial array of geometric forms was shown and a symptom
was presented acoustically followed by either “almost
always” or “occasionally”. Participants responded by
indicating the chemical that causes this symptom with this
frequency. The response was given with adjacent keys on a
standard keyboard (u, i, j, and k), whose arrangement
approximately matched the 2x2 arrangement on the screen.
Feedback was provided acoustically with a mellow or an
unpleasant tone. After positive feedback, the next trial
started automatically. After negative feedback, the filled
arrangement was presented until participants hit the space
bar to proceed to the next test trial. Testing continued until
the set of 20 different testing items presented in random

498

order was once answered without errors. Learning was
completed within 19 min on average (SD = 7).
Before diagnostic reasoning in the second session,
participants had the opportunity to refresh their knowledge
by inspecting the patterns of symptom classes for the four
chemicals. These were printed on separate cards within
rectangular frames but without the surrounding geometrical
forms. There was also one card showing the symptom
classes and the single symptoms they contained.
Diagnostic reasoning. Each diagnostic reasoning trial
started with a fixation cross in the center of the screen for
1000 ms followed by a screen showing the emptied spatial
array and the acoustic presentation of the symptom
sequence with delays of 3000 ms between symptoms that
each lasted 1000 ms. After the fourth symptom, participants
indicated their diagnosis with one of the four keys already
used during learning. After the response, a confidence rating
was collected, which is not reported further in this paper.
In the first session, each participant, worked twice
through the 40 possible combinations of chemicals with
item types: once viewing the original arrangement and once
viewing the flipped arrangement. Participants returning for
the second session, worked through the 40 possible

combinations again viewing the original arrangement. In
addition, there were four training trials in each session.
The order of the 40 trials in each diagnostic reasoning
section was pseudo-random and balanced across
participants. For each trial, the actual sequence of symptoms
was drawn randomly from the 8 or 4 possible sequences for
this combination of item type and chemical in the A-role.
The diagnostic reasoning sections in the first session took
approximately 75 min in total. Between sections participants
took a rest for about 5 min. The second session took
approximately 30 min.
Apparatus. The experimental stimuli were presented on a
19” LCD-monitor at a resolution of 800 x 600 pixels, the
symptom sequences were presented through headphones.
During the diagnostic reasoning phases, eye movements
were monitored by a desk-mounted SMI RED eye tracker
(Sensomotoric Instruments, Teltow, Germany) with a
sampling rate of 60 Hz and an accuracy of approximately
0.5 degrees of visual angle. The eye tracker was calibrated
before each diagnostic reasoning phase. Participants sat at a
distance of approximately 60 cm to the monitor. Head
movements were restrained with a chin rest.

Table 2: The ten item types, the specific symptoms that they contain, the symptom orders, and the chemicals that remain as
diagnostic hypotheses after each symptom.
Item
type
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Specific
symptoms
BB
ABB
ABB
AB
AA
AA
ABB
ABB
ABB
AABB

Order

After 1st

After 2nd

After 3rd

Ba_ac_Ba_ac
Ba_ac_Ba_Ab
ac_Ba_Ba_Ab
ac_Ba_ac_Ab
ac_ac_Ab_Ab
Ab_Ab_ac_ac
Ab_Ba_ac_Ba
Ab_Ba_Ba_ac
Ba_Ba_Ab_ac
Ab_Ab_Ba_Ba

B,(A)
B,(A)
A,C
A,C
A,C
A,(B)
A,(B)
A,(B)
B,(A)
A,(B)

A
A
A
A
A,C
A,(B)
A,B
A,B
B,(A)
A,(B)

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A,B
A,B
A,B

After
4th
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A,B

Accuracy. The mean proportion of A-diagnoses for each
item type is shown in Figure 2. The item types are ordered
by the combination of specific symptoms that they contain
and numbered as in Table 2. Overall, accuracy was high.
For the ambiguous item type AABB_10, the mean
proportion of A- or B-diagnoses was .99 and .98 in the first
and second session, respectively (both SEs .01).
The five ABB item types did not differ significantly in
accuracy. The two AA item types were similar in accuracy
as well. Thus, we computed mean accuracy for ABB and
AA for a comparison with AB and BB item types in a
repeated-measures ANOVA including session and item type
(AA, AB, ABB, and BB). Accuracy was higher in the
second session, F(1, 31) = 5.49, MSE = 0.011, p = .03, the
main effect of item type was significant, F(3, 93) = 6.43,
MSE = 0.015, p = .002, and there was no significant
interaction, F < 0.9. In both sessions, accuracy for AA was
similar to AB, higher than ABB (Cohen’s d = 0.64 and 0.77

Results
In all non-ambiguous item types the single correct diagnosis
is denoted “A” (see Table 2). In the ambiguous item type
AABB_10, both “A” and “B” were correct diagnoses
consistent with the pattern of symptoms. In every trial, the
following spatial relations held between chemicals in the A-,
B-, C-, and D-roles: the B-chemical was located
horizontally next to the A-chemical, the C-chemical was
diagonally opposite to the A-chemical, and the D-chemical
was below or above the A-chemical (see Figure 1). When
the layout on the screen was flipped for the second half of
the first session, eight participants immediately noticed the
flipped layout, eleven participants noticed the change at
some point during the 40 trials, and the remaining seventeen
apparently did not notice the change at all. Because of this
variability, we focus on diagnostic reasoning sections with
original layouts.

499

in sessions 1 and 2, respectively), but only slightly higher
than BB (d = 0.34 and 0.27).

Figure 3. Median response times for A-diagnoses
Plots of mean fixation proportions across the four
intervals of a symptom sequence are shown for three
exemplary non-ambiguous item types in Figure 4. The three
non-ambiguous item types are BB_1 starting with a Basymptom, ABB_3 starting with an ac-symptom, and ABB_8
starting with an Ab-symptom. In addition, plots for item
type AABB_10 separated for trials with A-responses and
trials with B-responses are shown.
Apparent from a brief inspection, the item types induced
very different fixation patterns, which were replicated for
each item type with only small deviations in the second
session one week later. In the interval from the onset of the
first symptom to the onset of the second symptom, mean
fixation proportions reflected how much the first symptom
supported the individual hypotheses. With Ba as the first
symptom, the largest proportion (nearly 40%) of fixations in
the first interval was directed to the B-quadrant, a smaller
proportion (about 20%) to the A-quadrant, and only about
10 % to the C- and D-quadrants, respectively. With Ab as
the first symptom, the analogous pattern was observed
except for the ambiguous AABB items that were answered
with B finally. With ac as the first symptom, both A- and Cquadrants were fixated for a similar proportion (nearly 30%)
and longer than the B- and D-quadrants.
As soon as an ac-symptom had occurred with either an
Ab- or a Ba-symptom, the diagnosis A was determined. In
the following intervals, fixation proportions for all other
hypotheses dropped sharply and remained low (third and
fourth intervals for BB_1 and ABB_3). Thus, later
symptoms triggered only fixations to the A-quadrant, but
not to quadrants with which they were associated as well
and which were fixated in the first interval for the respective
symptom. For example, the B-quadrant received a large
proportion after Ba as the first symptom but only a small
proportion after Ba as the third symptom in BB_1.
Similarly, the C-quadrant received hardly any fixations after
ac as a later symptom in BB_1 and ABB_8 compared to
after ac as the first symptom in ABB_3.

Figure 2. Mean proportions of A-diagnoses; for AABB
items B-diagnoses were correct as well
Response times. Response times were measured from the
onset of the fourth symptom. Median response times for Aresponses were computed after trimming outliers 3 SD
above the individual session means (2.2 % of all Aresponses). As shown in Figure 3, median response time
was prolonged for the ambiguous item type AABB_10 in
both sessions. In the first session, median response time was
also prolonged for ABB items, in which the final diagnosis
was determined late with the third symptom (ABB_8 and
ABB_9), and for the BB item. These three item types
differed significantly from all other non-ambiguous item
types with ds varying between 0.31 and 1.06. In the second
session, these differences between the nine non-ambiguous
item types were attenuated, F(8,232) = 2.02, MSE = 851180,
p = .045.
Fixation proportions on quadrants. Gaze data were
analyzed for trials with correct responses, in which the
original layout had been presented. Trials with more than
40% missing gaze data were discarded (2.4 % in the first
session, 4.0 % in the second session). We focus on
aggregated gaze data to examine the distribution of gaze
allocation between screen quadrants representing diagnostic
hypotheses in response to each symptom.
The quadrants of the screen were defined as areas of
interest and each trial was divided in four intervals defined
by the onsets of the four symptoms and the response after
the fourth symptom. For each interval in a trial, the
proportions of total fixation time that fell upon the four
quadrants were computed and coded as A, B, C, or D
according to a quadrant’s chemical’s role in the respective
trial. Means of these fixation proportions were computed
separately by session and item type for each participant. For
the ambiguous AABB item type, mean fixation proportions
were computed separately for trials with A- and Bresponses.

500

Figure 4: Mean fixation proportions on A-, B-, C, and D-quadrants in each interval of a symptom sequence. Fixation
proportions for the ambiguous item type AABB_10 are shown separately for trials answered with A and those answered with
B. Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

501

When the diagnosis was determined late with an acsymptom as the fourth symptom (ABB_8) or not at all
(AABB_10), the alternative hypothesis B received
considerable fixation proportions even in the fourth interval.
In AABB_10, fixation proportions were higher for B in the
trials that were finally answered with B than in those finally
answered with A.
Furthermore, ABB_8, in which the diagnosis was
determined late, showed a strong influence of the first
symptom. The A-hypothesis that was supported more
strongly by the first symptom and remained consistent with
the following symptoms drew a larger fixation proportion
than the alternative B-hypothesis in the second interval
although the alternative was equally supported. For ABB_8
in the first session, the A quadrant received a larger
proportion even in the third interval although B was more
strongly supported at this time. For the ambiguous item type
AABB_10, in which support was equal for A and B,
fixation proportions were also influenced by the first
symptom but finally rose for B above A when responded
with B.
Overall, fixation proportions were similar in both sessions
with a tendency towards fixation proportions better
reflecting support for alternative hypotheses in the second
session.

Excluded hypotheses did receive hardly any fixations in
the subsequent intervals. Thus, fixations were not
involuntarily directed towards any location associated with
presented symptoms. Instead, symptoms supported the
remaining focal hypothesis, and its location was fixated.
The unique information to be gained by memory indexing
is clearly shown, for example, in the symptom sequence that
starts with a symptom supporting strongly a hypothesis that
is not the correct final diagnosis (BB_1). The time course of
fixation proportions reveals the change of the initial focal
hypothesis that, of course, left no trace in the final response.
And for the ambiguous item, for which the final response
varied, memory indexing reveals that the finally chosen
hypothesis is reflected in the relative weighting of focal
hypotheses right from the beginning of the ambiguous
symptom sequence.
Possibly, gaze was not only a correlate of memory
activation, but also actively used as a deictic pointer to
support or relieve working memory. In this study, gaze as
deictic pointer was particularly useful because the spatial
array of hypotheses matched the arrangement of response
keys. Consequently, fixation proportions may reflect both
memory activation and intended memory retention.
Nonetheless, memory indexing revealed the current status of
hypotheses in diagnostic reasoning, which proves this
method as a valuable tool for informing and testing process
models of information integration in reasoning and decision
making.

Discussion
Process models of diagnostic reasoning postulate selective
and changing activation of hypotheses in working memory
during sequential symptom processing (Mehlhorn et al.,
2011). To observe correlates of these memory dynamics, we
have assigned the hypotheses to spatial locations and
applied eye tracking for process tracing. Fixation
proportions were influenced by memory activation because
the possible causes (candidate hypotheses) had been
spatially indexed during learning. Thus, process tracing was
possible despite purely memory-based diagnostic reasoning.
Extending previous successful applications of memory
indexing (Renkewitz & Jahn, in press) and previous studies
of looking-at-nothing (Richardson & Spivey, 2000), we
found surprisingly stable patterns of fixation proportions
one week after learning. Associations with locations and
geometric figures in long-term memory strongly influenced
gaze behavior similar to knowledge triggering fixations in
the visual world paradigm.
The first symptom triggered fixations to its possible
causes that are set up as focal hypotheses in working
memory according to process models. The participants had
to remember the symptom class that the first symptom
belonged to and which chemicals could cause this symptom
class. The result that fixation proportions were higher for
more strongly supported hypotheses suggests that relative
status as a focal hypothesis and the according activation
level in working memory directed fixations. Hence, not just
retrieval from long-term memory, but also rehearsal in
working memory seems to trigger looking-at-nothing.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by German Research
Foundation (DFG) Grant JA 1761/7-1. We thank Agnes
Scholz and Markus Krüger for helpful comments.

References
Lange, N. D., Thomas, R. P., & Davelaar, E. J. (2012). Data
acquisition dynamics and hypothesis generation. In N.
Rußwinkel, U. Drewitz, & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Cognitive
Modeling
(pp.
31-36),
Berlin:
Universitaetsverlag der TU Berlin.
Mehlhorn, K., Taatgen, N. A., Lebiere, C., & Krems, J. F.
(2011). Memory activation and the availability of
explanations in sequential diagnostic reasoning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 1391-1411.
Thomas, R. P., Dougherty, M. R., Sprenger, A. M., &
Harbison, J. I. (2008). Diagnostic hypothesis generation
and human judgment. Psychological Review, 115(1), 155185.
Renkewitz, F. & Jahn, G. (in press). Memory Indexing: A
novel method for tracing memory processes in complex
cognitive tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Richardson, D. C. & Spivey, M. J. (2000). Representation,
space and hollywood squares: Looking at things that
aren’t there anymore. Cognition, 76, 269–295.

502

