UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling dilution effects in perceptual load search tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0512c362

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Neokleous, Kleanthis
Avraamides, Marios
Schizas, Christos

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling dilution effects in perceptual load search tasks
Kleanthis C. Neokleous1,2(Kleneokl@Cs.Ucy.Ac.Cy)
Marios N. Avraamides1 (Mariosav@Ucy.Ac.Cy)
Christos N. Schizas2 (Schizas@Cs.Ucy.Ac.Cy)
1

Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus
Department of Computer Science, University of Cyprus
P.O. Box 20537, 1678 Nicosia, Cyprus

2

Abstract
A computational model of selective attention has been
previously used to provide a concrete and comprehensive
account for perceptual load findings in visual search tasks
(Neokleous, Koushiou, Avraamides, & Schizas, 2009).
Here, the same model was used to simulate findings from an
experiment in which perceptual load effects were attributed
to distractor dilution (Benoni & Tsal, 2010). By modeling at
the neural level the continuous inhibitory interactions that
take place among visual stimuli competing for cortical
representation, the model reproduced successfully the
behavioural pattern of results. The model thus offers a
biologically-plausible way to reconcile findings that
contradict Perceptual Load theory with those that support it.
Keywords:Computational Modeling, Spiking Neural Networks,
Perceptual Load Theory, Dilution.

Introduction
The Perceptual Load theory was proposed by Lavie and
Tsal (1994; Lavie, 1995) to resolve the early vs. late debate
concerning the locus of attention (e.g., Broadbent, 1958;
Deutsch & Deutsch, 1963). It posits that selection of stimuli
may take place early or late depending on the perceptual
load of the task.
In a paradigmatic study of perceptual load Lavie and Cox
(1997) had participants carry out a high load or a low load
visual search task. In the high load task participants
searched for two target letters (X and N) among 5 similarlyshaped letters arranged in a circular array. In the low load
task, they searched for these targets among five instances of
the letter O. In both conditions, a distractor letter, which
participants were asked to ignore, was presented to the left
or to the right of the array. Depending on condition, the
distractor letter could either be congruent with the target
(i.e., the same letter as the target), incongruent (i.e., the
other target), or neutral (i.e., the letter “L”). Results
revealed that in the low load task participants took longer to
identify the target in the presence of an incongruent

distractor compared to when the disctractor was congruent
or neutral. In contrast, in the high load task, no difference
between the three distractor conditions was found. Lavie
and Cox (1997) argued that distractor interference was
absent in the high load task because all attentional resources
were consumed by the task leaving none to process the
irrelevant distractor. In contrast, in the low load task only
minimal resources were devoted to the task allowing spare
resources to spill over to the processing of the distractor.
Thus, the Perceptual Load theory posits that selection is
early under high load conditions and late in low load
conditions.
Despite its appeal, the Perceptual Load theory has been
criticized on various grounds. First, a number of studies
have provided findings that seem at odds with the theory
(Eltiti, Wallace, & Fox, 2005; Johnson, McGrath, and
McNeil, 2002; Torralbo & Beck, 2008). For example,
Johnson et al. (2002) showed that cueing the target location
with a 100%-predictive central cue in a low load visual
search task eliminates distractor interference despite the fact
that it does not alter the load of the task. Neokleous et al.
(2009) reported the same result using an 80%-predictive
peripheral cue. Second, Torralbo and Beck (2008) argued
that the theory is unsatisfying because it does not provide a
clear definition for perceptual load, and because the concept
of exhaustive capacity cannot be easily reconciled with what
is known about brain mechanisms.
To provide a more concrete formulation of the Perceptual
Load Theory we have previously presented a biologicallyplausible computational model, capable of simulating both
the basic pattern of findings from Lavie and Cox (1997)and
findings considered contradictory to the theory(e.g., Johnson
et al., 2002). The model offered an explicit account for the
possible neural mechanisms that give rise to perceptual load
findings without relying on vague terms such as high and
low load. The model simulated the data by modeling at the
neural level the continuous inhibitory interactions that take
place among visual stimuli competing for cortical
representation. The strength of these inhibitory interactions
is determined by the saliency of stimuli whereas top-down

2091

signals are allowed to bias this competition by amplifying
neural activity that matches the current goals.
Recently, Benoni and Tsal (2010) proposed a theoretical
account for perceptual load effects that resembles the one
implemented in our model. In their Dilution account,
Benoni and Tsal (2010; see also Tsal & Benoni, 2010;
Wilson, Muroi, & MacLeod, 2011) claim that the
distractorsin the visual search tasks employed by Lavie and
Cox (1997) are processed regardless of load. However,
distractor interference in the high load condition is
eliminated due to diluting effects exerted by non-target
letters in the search array towards the distractor.
Benoni and Tsal (2010) provided support for the Dilution
account by showing that distractor interference is absent in a
low load condition with high dilution (Exp.1). In this
condition, participants searched for a red target in an array
with three additional green letters or a green target in an
array with three additional red letters, while ignoring a
larger white distractor presented adjacently to the array. In
the high load-high dilution condition the 4 letters of the
search array, including the target, were displayed in the
same color, either red or green. Finally, in a low load-low
dilution condition the red or green target was presented
without any accompanying letters in the search array.
Results showed that, as predicted by the Perceptual Load
theory, (1) overall latencies were shorter for the low loadlow dilution than the high load-high dilution, and (2)
distractor interference was present in the low load-low
dilution condition but not in the high load-high dilution
condition. However, in contrast to the predictions of the
Perceptual Load theory, no distractor interference was
observed in the low load-high dilution condition despite the
fact that latencies in this condition were as short as those of
the low load-low dilution condition. Benoni and Tsal (2010)
interpreted this finding as evidence that the perceptual load
effects reported in the literature previously are caused by
dilution.
Although the Dilution account aspires to offer a more
concrete explanation of perceptual load effects than the
Perceptual Load theory itself, it is also somewhat vague in
some respects. For example, Benoni and Tsal (2010) argued
that dilution requires the mere presence of non-target letters
“...whose features are visually similar to those of the
distractor” (p.1293). It is not very clear what constitutes a
visually similar feature and how exactly a task can be
cateogorized as high-dilution or low-dilution. Benoni and
Tsal (2010) employed a low load task in which the target
was presented alone in the search array thus no dilution was
possible. However, Lavie and Cox (1997) have used a low
load task in which the target is presented among flanking
O’s. Are O’s expected to exert diminished dilution effects or
none at all?
Here, we use the same computational model we described
in Neokleous et al. (2009) to simulate the findings from
Benoni and Tsal (2010; Experiment 1). The model requires
neither a definition of load nor an explicit differentiation of
tasks in terms of dilution. Also, in contrast to the Dilution

account in which inhibitory signals originate only from nontarget letters in the search array and are directed only
towards the distractor (i.e., the target is considered immune
to inhibition), our model allows for inhibitory signals
among all stimuli in the display.

The computational model
The computational model has been previously used in
similar form to simulate findings from the attentional blink
phenomenon
(Neokleous,
Avraamides,
Neokleous,
&Schizas, 2009)and the relation between attention and
consciousness(Neokleous, Avraamides, & Schizas, 2011). It
is comprised of integrate-and-fire (I&F) neurons combined
with coincidence detector (CD) neurons and simulates
attention as a continuous stream of neural activity that is
initially based on bottom-up information and gradually
incorporates biases from top-down processes.
The model (Fig.1) involves two stages of processing
implemented as spiking neural networks (SNN). The first
stage involves the initial bottom-up competitive neural
interactions among visual stimuli and corresponds to early
visual areas in the occipital regions of the brain (e.g., V1,
V2). The second stage of processing extends the neural
pathway towards working memory and allows for relevant
top-down information to exert an influence on neural
activity.

Figure 1.The modules of the computational model of visual
selective attention.
In the first stage of processing, the initial representations
of visual stimuli are created in the model on the basis of a
saliency map. The modulation of visual activity by saliency
in the early stages of visual processing is supported by
neurophysiological findings that in area V1 of the visual
cortex a neuron’s response can be significantly suppressed

2092

or enhanced by stimulation in the vicinity of its receptive
field (Nothdurft, Gallant, & Van Essen, 1999; Wachtler,
Sejnowski, & Albright, 2003; Shibata et al., 2008). In our
model, we adopted a saliency map algorithm proposed by
Koch and Ullman (1985). This algorithm was implemented
by Walther and Koch (2006) into a Matlab toolbox
(Saliency Toolbox - http://www.saliencytoolbox.net), that is
used in the model to produce saliency values for spatial
locations in the visual field. These values are produced
based on a simple transformation algorithm that converts
grayscale pixel values into frequency of spikes to establish
the initial firing rates of the neurons that encode visual
stimuli (Fig.2).
During the first stage of processing, neural activity can be
modulated by spatial top-down factors. For example, when a
cue is used to prime the location of a stimulus ahead of
presentation, the neural activity corresponding to the
stimulus is amplified. This implementation is based on
findings from several studies showing that cues may
enhance the neural activity of neurons that encode visual
stimuli (e.g., Shibata et al., 2008; Silver, Ress, &Heeger,
2007).

Figure 2.Initial firing rate computations based on a saliency
map algorithm.
The second stage of processing simulates the modulation
of neural activity that represents visual stimuli by activity
that maintains information about the targets as specified by
the set of instructions (e.g., “Find x or y in the central
array”). Support for such modulations stems from studies
showing that neural activity in area V4 of the cortexis
influenced by top-down activity (e.g., Moran & Desimone,
1985; Reynolds & Desimone, 2003). The top-down effects
in the second stage of processing are implemented in the
model in a way that produces both rate amplification and
synchronization of neural activity as suggested by
neurophysiological evidence (e.g., Fries, Reynolds, Rorie &
Desimone 2001; Gregoriou, Gotts, Zhou & Desimone
2009). That is, according to the model, attending a stimulus
enhances the firing rates of neurons that correspond to that

stimulus and at the same time forces them to fire in a more
synchronous rhythm. Similarly, the firing rates of neurons
that correspond to unattended stimuli are suppressed.
The main components in the second stage of processing
of the model have been inspired by Crick and Koch’s (1990)
theoretical analysis on the role of attention and neural
synchronization for the establishment of awareness. Crick
and Koch (1990) based on neurophysiological findings
showing that visual stimuli can elicit synchronized activity
in the visual cortex, suggested that a prerequisite for the
presence of neural synchronization is to have synchronous
impulses in selected neuronal populations. Therefore, they
proposed that visual selective attention may function in a
way that it causes changes to the temporal structure of the
neural spike trains that represent the information to be
selected, and that this temporal structure may facilitate the
transfer of the encoded information to working memory.
The idea presented by Crick and Koch (1990) was later
supported by experimental evidence. In a comprehensive
review, Womelsdorf and Fries (2007) presented evidence
showing how attention selectively modulates the neurons
that represent the attended stimulus feature or spatial
location in a way that it synchronizes their responses. For
example, Bichot, Rossi and Desimone (2005) recorded the
neuronal spiking responses and LFPs in the visual area V4
of macaque monkeys and demonstrated that the allocation
of attention towards a particular feature synchronizes the
responses of selective sensory neurons, tuned to the attended
feature. They suggested that feature salience is not only
demonstrated with an increasing firing rate, but also by
selectively synchronizing specific neuronal responses based
on the similarity between feature preferences and the
attended stimulus feature.
To incorporate these ideas in our model, templates that
contain features of visual search targets are created and
maintained in the endogenous goals module of the model
and are used to evaluate the resemblance between any
incoming visual input and a target. The evaluation of each
stimulus takes place by computing the correlation between
spike trains representing the stimulus and the spike trains
maintaining target identity in the endogenous goals module.
This is performed in the Correlation Control Module (CCM)
of the model (Fig.1).However, before the neural activity of
each incoming stimulus is processed in the CCM, it passes
through a temporal filter that reorganizes the timing of
spikes without altering the average firing rate. This
mechanism is implemented in the model according to a predefined probability that reflects the degree of resemblance
between the features of the incoming stimulus and those of a
target. Thus, only the spike train patterns of a stimulus that
shares features with the target will significantly change and
become closer to the distinct spike train pattern of the target.
The temporal filter mechanism used in the model is in line
with Crick and Koch’s (1990) suggestion about the impact
of selective attention on neural synchronization.
During the progression of neural activity through the two
stages of processing, the encoded stimuli compete for access

2093

to working memory (WM) through forward and lateral
inhibitory interactions (from the pools of inhibitory
interneurons), resulting into modulation of the strength of
their neural response(Fig.3). This implementation is based
on neurophysiological findings showing that competition for
neural representation in visual areas V1 and V2 is initiated
when two or more stimuli fall within the receptive fields of
the same or nearby cells (Reynolds & Chelazzi, 2004;
Reynolds &Desimone, 1999).

Figure 4.The three conditions and the output of the saliency
map algorithm.

Figure 3.Top-down and bottom-up interactions during the
progression of neural activity in the two stages of
processing.
These interactions during the progression of neural
activity produce enhancement and synchronization of neural
activity that eventually lead to the selection of a particular
stimulus for further processing.

Computational Simulations
The computational model described in the previous
section was used to simulate the pattern of findings reported
by Benoni and Tsal (2010). Three aspects of the model are
important for simulating the data: (1)spatial top-down
signals enhance the neural activity of the neurons whose
receptive fields fall within the area of the search array,
(2)the saliency analysis produced different values for stimuli
in each condition of the experiment (Fig.4)and led as a
result to different initial firing rates, and (3) stimuli whose
neural representation matches that of a target template held
in the endogenous goals module are biased regardless of
whether they appear, at a given trial, in the search array or
as a distractor.

These aspects of the model allow the target to “win” the
race to working memory but with different speed depending
on the combination of load/dilution (low load-low dilution,
low load-high dilution, high load-high dilution) and
distractor compatibility (congruent vs. incongruent).
Fifty simulation trials were run for each of the
combinations of load and compatibility. Median latencies
from the model are shown in Fig.5. As seen in the figure,
the model successfully produced the pattern of latencies
reported by Benoni and Tsal (2010). Specifically, a
compatibility effect (i.e., slower latency for incongruent vs.
congruent distracters) was produced in the low load-low
dilution condition only. Latencies were overall shorter in the
low load-high dilution condition than in the high load-high
dilution condition, but no difference between congruent and
incongruent distractors was present in either condition. It
should be noted that although the model successfully
produced the patterns reported by Benoni and Tsal (2010), it
was in all conditions slower that human participants by 150200ms. However, it should also be pointed out that the
simulations were run with exactly the same parameter
settings that were previously used to simulate the findings
of Lavie and Cox (1997; see Neokleous et al., 2009). That
is, no effort was made to fit the behavioral data by tweaking
the parameters of the model.
In the next section we discuss how exactly the model
simulates the behavioral data.
How the model simulates the experimental data
High Load-High Dilution Condition
In this condition the saliency analysis produced similar
values for the target and the non-target letters in the search
array. Saliency was somewhat higher for the distractor due
to its larger size. As the task instructs participants to focus
on the search array, the effects of spatial top-down signals
were modeled by raising the firing rate for the four letters of
the array. The higher neural activations for theseletters
resulted in greater inhibition from the letters of the search
array (both target and non-target letters)towards the

2094

distractor. As a result, the neural activity of the distractor
was significantly reduced from the very early stages of
processing, thus reaching the second stage of processing
with low activation. Due to its low activation, the distractor,
regardless of begin congruent or incongruent with the target,
could not influence much the response latency.
Besides inhibition exerted towards the distractor, the nontarget letters of the search array produced strong inhibitory
signals towards each other and towards the target. As a
result, the neural activity of the target was reduced and the
time needed to pass the set response threshold was
increased. This accounts for the long response latencies
observed in this condition.

was amplified to model top-down spatial effects. As a result,
the target accumulated substantial activation which allowed
it to exert strong inhibition towards the other elements of the
display, including the distractor. As in the high load
condition, the distractor reached the second stage of
processing with low neural activation and was thus unable
to exert strong influence on the processing of the target.
The main difference between this condition and the high
load condition, is that here, because of the initial
amplification of the target’s neural activity, the neural
activations of the non-target letters in the search array were
suppressed which allowed the target to be processed easier
and faster.

Discussion

Figure 5. Experimental data for the conditions reported by
Benoni and Tsal (2010) compared to the simulation results
from the computational model.
Low Load -Low Dilution Condition
Due to the absence of non-target letters in the search array
of the low load-low dilution condition, the target and the
distractor had about the same saliency. In fact, due to its
larger size, the distractor initially had a somewhat higher
saliency value than the target. The neural activity of the
target was, however, amplified as it fell within the area that
participants are instructed to attend. Although inhibitory
interactions take place between the target and an
incongruent distractor, both enter the second stage of
processing with enough activation to produce a match with
the goal templates held in the endogenous goals module.
While a congruent distractor assists the target’s processing,
an incongruent distractor inhibits it. This results into (1)
overall shorter latencies than in the high load condition, and
(2) longer latencies for trials with incongruent than
congruent distractors.
Low Load-High Dilution Condition
The low load-high dilution is the critical condition for
differentiating the Dilution account from the Perceptual
Load theory. The saliency analysis resulted in a higher value
for the target letter than for the non-target letters of the
search array because it was presented in a different color. In
addition, the neural activity for all letters in the search array

The computational model of selective attention that was
described in the present paper was previously implemented
to account for the basic pattern of findings from the
Perceptual Load paradigm (Lavie & Cox, 1997). The model
was capable of simulating not only the basic pattern of load
findings, but also findings that were considered
contradictory to the theory (Johnson et al., 1992). Here, the
same model, with no tuning whatsoever, was able to
reproduce the pattern of findings from a study manipulating
dilution (Benoni &Tsal, 2010).
Although the Dilution account of Benoni and Tsal (2010)
resembles the functioning of the model we had presented
earlier (Neokleous et al., 2009), its premises are not entirely
in line with the way our model reproduces the behavioral
data. According to the Dilution account, the representation
of the distractor in high dilution conditions and in the
typical high load conditions is degraded by inhibitory
signals exerted from the non-target search array letters
towards the distractor. Although we agree that such
inhibitions take place, our model posits that in some cases,
such as the in low load-high dilution of Benoni and Tsal
(2010), the major source of inhibition on the distractor
originates from the target. In contrast to the Dilution
account, our model allows for inhibitory signals among all
elements of the display. The amount of inhibition that any
stimulus exerts on others depends on the strength of its
neural activity, which according to the model, is based on its
initial saliency and the biasing from top-down factors.
The computational model presented here is an attempt to
provide a comprehensive and concrete account for
Perceptual Load findings based on what is currently known
about the neural mechanisms of selective attention. The way
the model is implemented allows for modeling a wide range
of empirical data related to perceptual load effects. Future
empirical research will allow us to test predictions from the
model and evaluate its validity.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grant 0308(BE)/16 from the
Cyprus Research Promotion Foundation.

2095

References
Benoni, H., &Tsal, Y. (2010).Where have we gone wrong?
Perceptual load does not affect selective attention.Vision
Research, 50, 1292–1298.
Bichot, P., Rossi, F., Desimone, R., (2005). Parallel and
serial neuralmechanisms for visual search in macaque
area V4.Science, 308, 529-534.
Broadbent, D. (1958). Perception and Communication.
London: Pergamon Press.
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (1990).Some reflections on visual
awareness. Cold Spring HarborSymposia on Quantitative
Biology, 55, 953-962.
Deutsch, J. A., & Deutsch, D. (1963). Attention: Some
theoretical considerations. Psychological Review,7080-90.
Eltiti, S., Wallace, D., & Fox, E. (2005). Selective target
processing: perceptual load or distractor salience?
Perception & Psychophysics, 67, 876-885.
Fries, P., Reynolds, J. H., Rorie, A. E., &Desimone, R.
(2001).Modulation
of
oscillatory
neuronal
synchronization by selective visual attention. Science,29,
1560-1563.
Gregoriou, G. G., Gotts, S. J., Zhou, H., &Desimone, R.
(2009).High-frequency, long-range coupling between
prefrontal and visual cortex during attention.Science, 324,
1207-1210.
Johnson, D. N., McGrath, A., & McNeil, C. (2002). Cuing
interacts with perceptual load in visual search.
Psychological Science,13, 284-28.
Koch, C. &Ullman, S. (1985). Shifts in selective visual
attention: towards the underlying neural circuitry. Human
Neurobiology, 4, 219-227.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition
for selective attention.Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human, Perception, &Performance , 21,
451-468.
Lavie, N.& Cox, S. (1997). On the efficiency of attentional
selection: Efficient visual search results in inefficient
rejection of distraction. Psychological Science, 8, 395398.
Lavie, N., &Tsal, Y. (1994).Perceptual load as a major
determinant of the locus of selection in visual
attention.Percepion& Psychophysics, 56, 183-197.
Moran J,&Desimone R (1985).Selective attention gates
visual processing in the extrastriate cortex. Science, 229,
782-784.
Neokleous, K.C., Avraamides, M.N., Neocleous, C.K.,
&Schizas, C.N. (2011). Selective attention and
consciousness: Investigating their relation through
computational modeling. Cognitive Computation,3, 321331.
Neokleous K.C., Avraamides M.N., Neocleous, C.K.,
&Schizas, C.N. (2009).A neural network model of the
attentional blink phenomenon. International Journal of
Engineering Intelligent Systems,17, 115-126.
Neokleous,
K.C.,
Koushiou,
M.,
Avraamides,
M.N.,&Schizas, C.N. (2009). A coincidence detector
neural network model of selective attention.Proceedings

of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Nothdurft, H. C., Gallant, J. L., & Van Essen, D. C. (1999).
Response modulation by texture surround in primate area
V1: correlates of "popout" under anesthesia. Visual
Neuroscience, 16, 15-34.
Reynolds, J. H., &Desimone, R. (2003).Interacting roles of
attention and visual salience in V4.Neuron, 37, 853-863.
Reynolds, J. H., Chelazzi, L.&Desimone, R. (1999).
Competitive mechanisms subserve attention in macaque
Areas V2 and V4. Journal of Neuroscience, 19,17361753.
Reynolds, J.H., &Chelazzi, L. (2004).Attentional
modulation of visual processing. Annual Review of
Neuroscience,27, 611–647.
Shibata, K., Yamagishi, N., Goda, N., Yoshioka, T.,
Yamashita, O., Sato, M. A., et al. (2008).The effects of
feature attention on prestimulus cortical activity in the
human visual system.Cerebral Cortex, 18, 1664-1675.
Silver, M. A., Ress, D., &Heeger, D. J. (2007). Neural
correlates of sustained spatial attention in human early
visual cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 97, 229-237.
Torralbo, A., & Beck, D. M. (2008).Perceptual-loadinduced selection as a result of local competitive
interactions in visual cortex.Psychological Science, 19,
1045-1050.
Tsal, Y. &Benoni, H. (2010).Diluting the burden of load:
Perceptual load effects are simply dilution effects.Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 36, 1645–1656.
Wachtler, T., Sejnowski, T. J., & Albright, T. D.
(2003).Representation of color stimuli in awake macaque
primary visual cortex.Neuron, 37, 681-691.
Walther, D.& Koch, C. (2006).Modeling attention to salient
proto-objects.Neural Networks, 19, 1395-1407.
Wilson, D. E., Muroi, M., & MacLeod, C. M. (2011).
Dilution, not load, affects distractor processing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 37, 319-335.
Womelsdorf, T. and Fries, P. (2007).The role of neuronal
synchronization in selective attention.Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 17, 154-160.

2096

