UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mothers Do Not Drive Structure in Adult Homesign Systems: Evidence from Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/87h5n840

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Carrigan, Emily
Coppola, Marie

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mothers Do Not Drive Structure in Adult Homesign Systems:
Evidence from Comprehension
Emily M. Carrigan (emily.carrigan@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 406 Babbidge Road
Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA

Marie Coppola (marie.coppola@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 406 Babbidge Road
Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA
Department of Linguistics, 337 Mansfield Road
Storrs, CT 06269-1145 USA
Abstract
Some profoundly deaf individuals without conventional
linguistic input develop gestures, called “homesign,” to
communicate. We examined homesign systems (HSs) used
by four deaf Nicaraguan adults (ages 15-27), and evaluated
whether homesigners’ mothers are potential sources for these
systems. Study One measured mothers’ comprehension of
descriptions of events (e.g., “A man taps a woman”) produced
in homesign and spoken Spanish. Mothers comprehended
spoken Spanish descriptions (produced by a hearing child)
better than homesign descriptions, suggesting a greater degree
of sharedness for spoken Spanish. Study Two compared the
homesign comprehension of each homesigner’s mother to that
of a native user of American Sign Language (ASL). ASL
Signers performed better than mothers, confirming that
homesign productions contain comprehensible information, to
which mothers are not fully sensitive. Taken together, these
results suggest that mothers are not the source of their deaf
child’s HS, and add to evidence that HSs are more like
language than like gesture.
Keywords: Language acquisition; homesign; deafness;
language creation; gesture; sign language; Nicaragua

Introduction

2003). The gestures and gesture combinations produced by
the mothers of child homesigners lack the morphological and
syntactic structure observed in the children’s productions
(e.g., Goldin-Meadow & Mylander 1984, 1990; GoldinMeadow et al. 1994, Goldin-Meadow 2003). While mothers’
gestures may serve as an initial foundation for their deaf
child’s homesign system, children surpass whatever “input”
they might receive from their mother. These mothers tended
not to engage in gestural communication with the child
homesigners, and such child homesigns are used for a
relatively short time, until the children reach school age. It is
possible that, given increased gestural communication and a
lengthier period of use, mothers might play a greater role in
the development of homesign systems.
This research examines homesign systems developed with
communication partners who engage homesigners using
gesture, unlike the young deaf children studied by GoldinMeadow and her colleagues. In Nicaragua, we can locate rare
cases in which deaf individuals develop and use homesign
systems as their primary means of communication for their
entire lives. These individuals are not part of the Deaf
community that uses the recently emerged Nicaraguan Sign
Language (NSL) (Senghas, 1995; Senghas & Coppola, 2001).
The homesigners do not learn conventional sign language, and
they have not acquired the Spanish spoken around them.
These mature homesign systems display many linguistic
features, for instance, the grammatical relation of Subject
(Coppola & Newport, 2005), proto-pronouns (Coppola &
Senghas, 2010), use of space, and devices for establishing
reference (Coppola & So, 2005). Given the accumulated
interactions over time between a homesigner and his or her
family members, and the more abstract, language-like devices
that homesigners produce, it is possible that these family
members may have contributed more to the development of
the homesign system than the mothers of the homesigners
Goldin-Meadow & colleagues observed. One step in
determining the source of the linguistic features we observe in
mature homesign is evaluating family members’ potential
contributions.

The language sciences have long grappled with the question of
what drives language acquisition. At the heart of this debate is
the question: What are the contributions of language input
versus the contributions of the learner? It can be difficult to
disentangle these two factors in typical language acquisition
situations, as such situations do not offer the opportunity to
experimentally manipulate the presence of linguistic input.
Studying spontaneously occurring cases of degraded
linguistic input can help discern human predispositions for
language learning. Previous research has shown that children
can surpass their linguistic input (e.g., Singleton & Newport,
2004, Senghas & Coppola, 2001). In addition, some deaf
children born into hearing families have no access to signed
or spoken linguistic input. While their parents primarily
speak, and do not use gesture with them, these children
nevertheless use a system of manual gestures, called
“homesign,” to communicate. Homesign has many, but not
Study One
all, of the features of fully developed languages (e.g., a stable
lexicon, basic syntax and morphology, Goldin-Meadow, We begin by evaluating homesigners’ mothers as potential
sources, because they each have significant gestural

1398

communication experience with their deaf child, and
because this type of transmission (mother to child) parallels
that of typical language acquisition situations. One approach
would be to compare Mothers’ and homesigners’ gesture
productions. However, comparing their productions now
does not allow us to assess Mothers’ role in the development
of their child’s homesign system, especially in cases where
Mothers’ and homesigners’ productions are similar.
Looking instead at how well Mothers comprehend
homesign productions can address this. We reason that, if
mothers served as models for homesigners’ abstract
linguistic devices, they should comprehend their child’s
homesign productions.

Study One: Predictions
If mothers invent and pass down homesign systems to their
deaf children in the same way that they serve as models for
the spoken Spanish acquired by their hearing children, we
would expect mothers to comprehend descriptions of events
produced by their deaf child at least as well as they
comprehend spoken Spanish descriptions of the same events
produced by one of their hearing children.

Participants
Producers: Four deaf adult Nicaraguan homesigners (1
female), ages 16-26 at the time of production, produced the
descriptions used as stimuli for this task.
All four
homesigners were deaf, with very minimal knowledge of
spoken or written Spanish. Some could produce and/or
comprehend a limited number of common spoken Spanish
words, such as “mamá,” “papá,” and “agua” (water). All
find writing their names effortful. They had had little to no
formal education, had not acquired Nicaraguan Sign
Language (NSL), and do not interact with each other.
Four hearing siblings of homesigners (1 female), ages 1743. The siblings were native monolingual Spanish speakers,
had an average of 8.5 years of education (range 0-14), and
had not acquired NSL.
Receivers: Four hearing mothers (henceforth “Mothers”) of
homesigners, ages 45-60.
The mothers were native
monolingual Spanish speakers, had an average of 2.25 years
of education, and had not acquired NSL.

Materials
The stimuli were descriptions of 83 simple videotaped
events involving live actors and real, everyday objects. The
events had one or two participants; the two-participant
events included all combinations of animate and inanimate.
The two animate participants in the events were the same
man and woman throughout, and the inanimate participants
were objects such as “cup,” “banana,” and “flower.”
Example events include “A man kisses a woman” and “A
sheet of paper falls”.
The comprehension array used in this task included four
pictures. One picture always depicted the target event. For
one-participant events, the non-target foil pictures could

depict: a) the same participant/object involved in a different
action or state (“Other Action”); b) a different
participant/object involved in the same action/state (“Other
Entity”); or c) a different participant/object involved in a
different action/state (“Unrelated”). For two-participant
events, the non-target foil pictures could depict: a) the same
participants involved in reversed thematic roles (“Reverse”);
b) one participant involved in the same action with a
different entity (“Other Entity”); c) the same two
participants involved in a different action (“Other Action”);
or d) one participant involved in an unrelated action (either
with or without a second entity; “Unrelated”). Because
these materials were originally designed as an elicited
production task (Coppola & Newport, 2005, which also lists
the stimulus items), the comprehension arrays are not
standardized across all items, and contain different
combinations of foil types.
Homesign descriptions were produced by the
homesigners described above. We videotaped these
descriptions, then clipped and compiled them into
QuickTime video files.
Spoken Spanish descriptions of these same events were
produced by a hearing sibling of each homesigner, in the
presence of their Mothers.

Procedure
Each Mother watched the videotaped homesign descriptions
(83 total) produced by her own deaf child. The task is
divided into two subtests, each beginning with 3 practice
items, to ensure that mothers understood how to do the
task1. Mothers watched each description as many times as
they wanted, then selected, from an array of four pictures,
the picture that best matched that description. One picture
was a still from the target (correct) event, and the others
were distracters.
Mothers also completed the task using spoken Spanish
descriptions of events produced by one of their hearing
children in real time. The order of the homesign and spoken
Spanish tasks was counterbalanced.

Results & Discussion
The Mothers comprehended homesign descriptions at rates
significantly better than chance (25%; exact binomial test,
p<0.001).
However, despite performing above chance, Mothers
comprehended spoken Spanish descriptions better than they
comprehended homesign descriptions of the same events
(For 3 mothers, p<0.05, McNemar’s Test for Correlated
Proportions; fourth mother, p=0.057). This result acts as a
built-in control, showing that Mothers are not having
trouble with the task itself, but rather with the content of the
homesign descriptions.

1

We are confident that mothers understand how to do the task,
as all of them have completed it in the past, though typically with
live descriptions from their deaf child.

1399

Comparing Receivers’ comprehension to different
reference levels of performance (e.g., 25%, 33%, 50%) can
give us clues as to how much of the descriptions (homesign
or spoken Spanish) they understand. For example, in an
event like “A man kisses a woman,” the picture choices
show: a) A man pushing a chair; b) A man sitting; c) A man
kissing a woman (the correct choice); and d) A woman
kissing a man. One homesigner’s description of this event
was glossed as MAN WOMAN KISS. If the Receiver
understands the gestures for the participants, or even just the
action gesture the homesigner produced for this event
description, picture choices (a) and (b) could be eliminated.
It is also possible for Receivers to narrow their choices
based solely on a general, non-linguistic strategy. They
might have noticed, for instance, that two of the picture
choices contained the same two actors, engaged in the same
action (although in different thematic roles), and reasoned
that the correct choice must be one of those two pictures.
The performance of three of the four Mothers does not
differ significantly from 50%. Regardless of the strategy
they might be using to complete the task, Mothers’
performance indicates that they do not understand enough of
the homesign description to reliably select the right picture;
however, we may not be able to make claims from these
data about exactly what Mothers do understand. In future
work, will more carefully control participants’ cognitive
ability (including use of general strategies to complete tasks
such as these), and be designed to isolate which aspects of
the homesign descriptions mothers do understand (see the
Results & Discussion section of Study Two for a brief
attempt at the latter with these data).
Mothers’ poorer comprehension of homesign versus
spoken Spanish descriptions suggests that Mothers play a
different role in the communicative development of their
hearing and deaf children: they share, and are likely a main
source of spoken Spanish input for their hearing children,
but do not share or transmit homesign to their deaf children.
This finding accords with previous studies of the structure
in child homesign, which is also not attributable to the deaf
children’s mothers (Goldin-Meadow & Mylander, 1984).

Study Two
Each mother has had between 20 and 30 years of experience
communicating with her deaf child; why should their
comprehension levels be so low? One could argue that the
homesign descriptions themselves are the cause; perhaps
Mothers fully understood the descriptions, but the
descriptions themselves did not contain sufficient
information for mothers to succeed at the task. It also might
be the case that factors such as age of exposure to a visual
communication system, and quantity and/or length of time
of experience with that system, play a role in
comprehension.

Study Two: Predictions
If ASL Signers comprehend homesign productions at levels
equal to or worse than homesigners’ Mothers, it might be

the case that those productions do not contain sufficient
information to allow any Receiver to succeed at the task. If,
however, ASL Signers comprehend homesign descriptions
better than Mothers, the descriptions do contain enough
information to succeed at the task.

Participants & Methods
Four fluent Deaf users of ASL (3 females), ages 21-66, who
did not know the homesigners or their homesign systems,
participated in this study. The ASL Signers had all been
exposed to ASL before the age of five, used ASL every day,
and had an average of 15.25 years of education. We paired
each ASL Signer with one homesigner’s Mother; that ASL
Signer watched the same homesigner’s productions as did
the Mother, and chose, from the same picture array, the
photo that matched each event description.
Unlike the Mothers, at the start of the task the ASL
Signers saw the 6 practice items, which all involved the man
and/or the woman, to ensure that they had learned the
homesigner’s lexical items for “Man” and “Woman.” As
previously mentioned, the man and the woman in the events
were always played by the same male and female actor;
thus, neither the producers nor receivers in the task ever had
to distinguish one man or woman from another. ASL
Signers were, as Mothers were, allowed to watch each
description as many times as they wanted (they watched
most descriptions no more than once). ASL Signers and
Mothers thus had roughly equal exposure to these stimuli
(although each Mother still had vastly more experience with
her deaf child’s homesign system than the ASL Signer with
whom she was matched).

Results & Discussion
Like homesigners’ Mothers, ASL Signers comprehended
homesign descriptions at rates significantly better than
chance (25%; exact binomial test, p<0.0001). Furthermore,
ASL Signers comprehended the homesign descriptions they
viewed better than that homesigner’s Mother (For 3 pairs,
p<0.01, McNemar’s Test for Correlated Proportions; fourth
pair, p=0.851). Thus, the homesign descriptions did contain
sufficient information to allow a receiver to successfully
complete the task. Mothers did not succeed for some other
reason; we explore this further in subsequent analyses.
Item Type and Error Analyses In order to better
understand which aspects of homesign production drive
comprehension (or non-comprehension) by receivers, we
examined how features of the items themselves might
influence comprehension of homesign descriptions. The
events had one or two animate or inanimate participants; all
events with two animate participants, that is, “Reversible”
events (e.g. “A man kisses a woman”), included a distracter
picture that depicted reversed roles for the participants (e.g.
“A man kisses a woman”).
To show correct comprehension of “Reversible” event
descriptions Receivers need to understand how the
arguments represented by the lexical items relate to the

1400

verb. That is, they need to understand the structure of these
descriptions. Comprehension of “Non-Reversible” event
descriptions, in contrast, only necessitates that the Receiver
recognize and remember the lexical items produced by the
homesigner.
On the Non-Reversible events (collapsing across number
of participants, n=52 items), all four ASL Signers performed
significantly better than chance (25%; exact binomial test,
p<0.0001). Mother also performed significantly above
chance on this subset of items (p<0.01).
Comparing Mothers to ASL Signers, we see the same
pattern as for the overall analyses: the same three out of four
ASL Signers do significantly better than the Mothers with
whom they are paired at comprehending the non-reversible
events (For three pairs, p<0.001, McNemar’s Test for
Correlated Proportions; fourth pair, p=0.359).
This
indicates that even when comprehension relies only on
recognizing and remembering the lexical items, Mothers did
not succeed. This is particularly surprising given that: a)
Mothers were allowed to view the descriptions as many
times as they wanted; and b) Mothers have had much more
practice with homesigners’ lexical items (indeed, with each
homesign system in general) than did the ASL Signers (2030 years interacting with the homesigner and using the
homesign system, as opposed to one hour viewing homesign
descriptions for the ASL Signers). The Mothers’ apparent
lack of comprehension of lexical items does not necessarily
indicate that they did not recognize them—they might have
difficulty processing the lexical items in real time, even with
repeated viewings.
Table 1 presents an analysis of the incorrect foil types
chosen for Non-Reversible items (again, collapsing across
1- and 2-Participant items). .
Table 1: Errors on Non-Reversible Items
(Proportion of each foil type chosen)

Participant
ASL 1
Mother 2
ASL 2
Mother 2
ASL 3
Mother 3
ASL 4
Mother 3

Unrelated
0.22
0.31
0.38
0.23
0.33
0.43
0.13
0.32

Other
Entity
0.22
0.45
0.38
0.77
0.00
0.30
0.38
0.48

Other
Action
0.56
0.24
0.25
0.00
0.67
0.26
0.50
0.20

Proportions). However, this lack of a difference between
Mothers and ASL Signers may be due to the small number
of items on which the comparison is based.
If, as discussed in Study One, Receivers understand
something about the lexical items the homesigner produces
in a description (either for the participants or the action in
an event), they should be able to narrow their picture
choices to two for the Reversible items. Previous work with
three of the four homesigners who produced these event
descriptions has demonstrated that they reliably place the
noun phrase expressing the subject in clause-initial position
(Coppola & Newport, 2005). If Receivers are further
sensitive to the systematic way homesigners represent
argument structure, we would expect to see comprehension
of these reversible event descriptions at rates significantly
above 50%.
Table 2: Proportion Correct on Reversible Items

Number
Participant
Correct
ASL1
8
Mother 1
9
ASL 2
11
Mother 2
11
ASL 3
15
Mother 3
8
ASL 4
11
Mother 4
5
*: significant

Three out of the four ASL signers performed significantly
or marginally better than 50% correct on the reversible
items, compared with only one of the Mothers (Table 2).
An analysis of the incorrect foil types chosen for
Reversible items can be found in Table 3.

Total
Number
of Errors
9
29
8
13
6
23
8
25

Each Mother chose the “Other Entity” foil more often
than the ASL signer with whom she was paired. This
indicates that Mothers are poorer than ASL Signers at
understanding or remembering the homesign gestures
produced for the participants in these items.
Comparing Mother-ASL Signer pairs on the Reversible 2participant events (n=16), only 1 ASL signer performed
significantly better than the Mother with whom he was
paired (p<0.05, McNemar’s Test for Correlated

Difference from
Number of
50%, Exact
Reversible
Test, p-value (2Items
tailed)
16
0.598
16
0.402
15
0.059†
15
0.059†
16
<0.001*
16
0.598
15
0.059†
15
0.941
†: marginally significant

Table 3: Errors on Reversible Items
(Proportion of each foil type chosen)
Participant
ASL 1
Mother 1

Unrelated
0.13
0.14

Other
Entity
0
0.14

Other
Action
0
0

Reverse
0.88
0.71

Total
Errors
8
7

ASL 2
Mother 2

0
0

0
0

0
0

1.00
1.00

4
4

ASL 3
Mother 3
ASL 4
Mother 4

0
0
0
0.30

0
0.13
0
0.10

0
0
0
0

1.00
0.88
1.00
0.60

1
8
4
10

Both Mothers and ASL Signers chose the “Reverse” foil
most often when they erred, although Mothers showed
slightly more variability than ASL Signers. The fact that
Mothers mostly selected the “Reverse” foil means that they
were likely narrowing the picture choices for this type of
item to just the “Correct” and “Reverse” pictures. As

1401

outlined in the Results & Discussion section of Study One,
for most of the Reversible items, it is possible to narrow
choices using three strategies: 1) By understanding the
gesture produced for the two participants in the event; 2) By
understanding the gesture produced for the action in the
event; or 3) By using a general test-taking strategy that
assesses the similarity of the different foil pictures. The data
from the Error Analysis of Non-Reversible items indicate
that Mothers do not always recognize or remember the
gestures produced for the participants in an event, which
allows us to eliminate the first candidate strategy. It is
likely, therefore, that Mothers are able to narrow their
options for the correct picture either via an understanding of
the action or event gesture produced by the homesign
(which tends to be highly iconic), or via a direct comparison
of the picture foils to one another.
The results of the comparison to fifty percent and the
Error Analysis for Reversible items indicate that, although
ASL Signers’ comprehension of homesign descriptions is
not error-free, they comprehended enough of both the
lexical items and the structure to outperform the
homesigners’ Mothers. Indeed, the ASL Signers’ errors are
understandable, since their experience with the homesign
systems is so limited.
The success of ASL signers indicates that the homesign
descriptions do contain systematic, comprehensible
information. Homesigners’ Mothers, despite their much
greater experience with the individual homesign systems,
are apparently not sensitive to the information that ASL
Signers are presumably using to succeed in the task.

General Discussion
Taken together, the results of Studies 1 and 2 suggest that
Mothers do not directly transmit homesign systems to their
deaf children. Mothers’ comprehension of their adult child’s
homesign system is relatively poor; this lack of
understanding apparently persists despite the fact that
Mothers report regularly using gesture to communicate
since their now-adult offspring were children. These
findings do not preclude the possibility that Mothers’
gestures served as a foundation for their child’s homesign
system. However, these data do indicate that Mothers are
not masters of their adult child’s homesign system, which
tells us that, at present, homesign is qualitatively different
for Mothers than it is for homesigners. This, in turn,
suggests that it is homesigners rather than Mothers who
drive the development of their homesign systems.
Our failure to find a statistically significant difference
between Mothers’ and ASL Signers’ comprehension of
reversible events is likely due to the small number of items
of that type. We are currently designing new stimuli that
will include greater numbers of these informative events.
Our dataset is obviously limited by the small number of
homesigning participants, and the logistical difficulty of
working with them. Though we have a small number of
Mother-ASL Signer pairs, each participant contributes a
relatively large number of data points. A hierarchical linear

model will allow us to better account for sources of
variability at the levels of Item (Reversible vs. Nonreversible events); Receiver Type (ASL Signer, Homesigner
Sibling, etc.) and Homesigner Family Unit.
Mothers’ poor comprehension of their child’s homesign
systems compared with that of ASL Signers raises several
questions: Which factors distinguish Mothers from ASL
Signers? Which of these factors drives comprehension (or
non-comprehension) of homesign descriptions?
One difference between Mothers and ASL Signers is their
length of experience with the homesign system itself;
Mothers have significantly greater experience with the
homesign system than do ASL Signers. However, given
this, we would expect mothers to comprehend homesign
production better than ASL Signers, which they do not.
Mothers and ASL Signers also differ in their age of
exposure to a visual communication system. This factor
could explain Mothers’ poorer comprehension of homesign.
Brentari, Coppola, Mazzoni & Goldin-Meadow (2012)
show that the handshapes produced by homesigners pattern
more like those of established sign languages than like the
gestures produced by hearing individuals in terms of
phonological features (specifically, finger complexity in
Object and Handling handshapes used in classifier
predicates). These comprehension data could provide
further evidence that homesign is closer to a linguistic
system than to gesture; that is, homesign must be acquired
beginning at an early age in order to reach proficiency
(Johnson & Newport, 1989; Newport,1990).
The mother of Homesigner 2, who shows the best
comprehension compared to the ASL Signer with whom she
is paired, began using homesign with her son at an earlier
age than the other mothers in our study (she was 16 years
old when he was born). Although well beyond the critical
period for language acquisition established by Newport and
colleagues, her relative youth might have conferred a crucial
advantage in acquiring her deaf child’s homesign system.
It might also be the case that ASL Signers’ early and
significant experience with an established visual-manual
language helped them perform better than Mothers in
comprehending homesign productions. Perhaps the ASL
Signers are drawing on their (implicit) knowledge of how
visual languages are structured to understand homesign.
Comparing our two current groups with two additional
groups could further distinguish the effects of the age of
exposure to a visual communication system, and the type of
system (homesign vs. an established language), on
homesign comprehension (summarized in Table 4).
First, we can measure the comprehension of homesign by
siblings of those homesigners. The siblings of homesigners
who are close to them in age likely started using homesign
at a young age to communicate with their deaf sibling.
Comparing homesigners’ siblings to their mothers will tell
us whether early exposure to homesign can also drive better
comprehension. In addition, comparing the comprehension
of homesigners’ siblings to that of native ASL Signers will
reveal whether the nature of the visual communication

1402

matters (e.g., homesign vs. an established visual language
like ASL).
Second, we can look at comprehension of homesign by
signers who acquired ASL later in life (e.g. in adolescence
or beyond). In our current groups of native ASL Signers,
age of exposure is confounded with knowledge of a
complex, established language.
Measuring the
comprehension of late-learning ASL signers can tell us
whether (and if so, how much) experience with an
established
visual
language
supports
homesign
comprehension.
Table 4: Comparison groups and their characteristics
Group
Mothers of
Homesigners
Native
ASL Signers
Siblings of
Homesigners
Non-native
ASL signers

Type of visual
system

Age of
Exposure

Length of
exposure

HS

late

significant

ASL

early

significant

HS

early

significant

ASL

late

Range from
minimal to
significant

These comparisons will help elucidate the nature of
homesign systems. If more experience with an complex,
established visual communication system (ASL) supports
better comprehension of homesign, we can, in conjunction
with data regarding the systematicity of homesign
production, provide further support that homesign systems
are
themselves
linguistic.
Moreover,
if
better
comprehension of homesign is predicted by factors that are
associated with acquiring linguistic systems (namely, age of
exposure), such results would accord with Brentari et al.’s
findings, providing evidence that homesign systems are
more like language than like gesture.
More work must be done to create a full and accurate
characterization of the structure and development of
homesign systems. If such research supports our claim that
homesigners and not their mothers drive the development of
homesign systems, this will have interesting implications
regarding the capacity of the human brain for language. To
the degree homesigners are innovating their systems and to
the degree that their systems resemble existing visual
languages, we can say there is something in the learner that
is capable of producing language. As others have suggested
(e.g., Senghas & Coppola 2001), it may be that the
capacities that evolved to support language acquisition are
also capable of creating language, to some degree. Future
work involving converging methods—spontaneous and
elicited production and comprehension—and different
populations—such as homesigners and different cohorts of
users of Nicaraguan Sign Language—will help further
clarify the specific contributions of the brain, and the
environmental conditions necessary for different features of
language to emerge.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the Nicaraguan and American
participants. We thank Deanna Gagne, Julia Fanghella,
Diane Lillo-Martin, Letitia Naigles, Cris Ortega, and
Russell Richie for assistance with data collection and
processing, as well as helpful discussions. This research was
supported by NIH grant P30 DC010751 to the second
author and Diane Lillo-Martin.

References
Brentari, D., Coppola, M., Mazzoni, L, & Goldin-Meadow,
S. (2012) When does a system become phonological?
Handshape production in gesturers, signers, and
homesigners. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory,
30, 1-31.
Coppola, M. & Newport, E. L. (2005). Grammatical
Subjects in home sign: Abstract linguistic structure in
adult primary gesture systems without linguistic input.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102,
19249-19253.
Coppola, M. & Senghas, A. (2010). Deixis in an emerging
language. In D. Brentari (Ed.). Sign Languages: A
Cambridge Language Survey. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Coppola, M., and W. C. So. (2005). Abstract and ObjectAnchored Deixis: Pointing and spatial layout in adult
homesign systems in Nicaragua. In A. Brugos, M. R.
Clark-Cotton, and S. Ha (Eds.) Proceedings of the Boston
University Conference on Language Development, 29.
Boston: Cascadilla Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). The resilience of language.
New York: Psychology Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. & Mylander, C. (1984). Gestural
communication in deaf children: the effects and
noneffects of parental input on early language
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 49, 1-151.
Goldin-Meadow, S. & Mylander, C. (1990). Beyond the
input given: The child’s role in the acquisition of
language. Language, 66, 323-355.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Butcher, C., Mylander, C., Dodge, M.
(1994). Nons and Verbs in a Self-Styled Gesture System:
What’s in a Name? Cognitive Psychology, 27, 259-319.
Senghas, A. (1995). Children's contribution to the birth of
Nicaraguan Sign Language. Doctoral dissertation, Brain
and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Senghas, A., & Coppola, M. (2001). Children creating
language: How Nicaraguan Sign Language acquired a
spatial grammar. Psychological Science, 12, 323-328.
Singleton, J. L., & Newport, E. L. (2004). When learners
surpass their models: The acquisition of American Sign
Language from inconsistent input. Cognitive Psychology,
49, 370-407.

1403

