UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Musicians are better at learning non-native sound contrasts even in non-tonal languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9g9917w5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Prefors, Amy
Ong, Jia Hoong

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Musicians are better at learning non-native sound contrasts
even in non-tonal languages
Amy Perfors (amy.perfors@adelaide.edu.au)
Jia Hoong Ong (jia.h.ong@student.adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide, Australia
Abstract

of this paper. We perform two main manipulations, comparing the effectiveness of the same implicit distributional
training method on different populations (musicians and nonmusicians) as well as different phonemes (tonal and timingbased). We find that musicians show improved phonetic perception on all phonemes, and that any effects of training are
smaller than these population differences. The implications
of these findings for language acquisition and representation
more broadly are considered in the discussion.

It is very difficult for adults to perceive phonetic contrasts
in their non-native language. In this study we explored the
effects of phonetic training for different populations of people (musicians and non-musicians) and with different kinds
of phoneme contrast (timing-based, like the Hindi /g/-/k/ contrast, and pitch-based, like the Mandarin /ı̄/-/ı́/ tonal contrast).
We found that musicians had superior perception for both contrasts, not just the pitch-based one. For both phonemes, training had little to no effect. We consider the implications of this
for first and second language acquisition. Keywords: phonetic
learning; music perception; language acquisition;

Different phonemes, different populations
Tonal vs timing-based phonemes. A phoneme is the smallest unit in a language that forms a meaningful contrast, like
the /b/ in bat and the /p/ in pat. Many phonemes are distinguished from another based on timing. For instance, one of
the differences1 between the English “g” and “k” sounds is
the presence of voicing (i.e., the vibration of the vocal cords).
English “g” and “k” differ in their voice onset time, or VOT,
which refers to the time at which voicing begins and the vocal
cords begin to vibrate. For the English “g” sound, voicing is
immediate as soon as the tongue leaves the roof of the mouth;
for “k”, there is a time delay between the release of the stop
closure and the vibration of the vocal cords.
Hindi makes a further timing-based distinction that does
not exist in English. The Hindi /g/ and /k/ differ according to
the presence of pre-voicing, which is the occurrence of voicing during the silent interval during which the vocal tract is
blocked. Because this distinction does not occur in English,
both sound like a “g” to a native English speaker. It is possible to train English speakers to hear this distinction, although
they are far below native-speaker proficiency even after the
best training. One of the simplest techniques, though not
the most common for adults, is implicit distributional training (Hayes-Harb, 2007; Maye & Gerken, 2000; Maye et al.,
2008). In this type of training, described in more detail later,
participants hear a bimodal distribution of phonemes whose
peaks are centered around the two phonemes to be learned.
Distributional training has been used to teach adults to distinguish these Hindi phonemes given as little as 10 minutes of
exposure (Maye & Gerken, 2000; Perfors & Dunbar, 2010).
Another kind of phoneme occurs in tonal languages like
Mandarin, which uses pitch to convey meaning. In such a language, the meaning of the syllable changes when it is spoken
in a different tone. For instance, in Mandarin, ma in the high
level Tone 1 ([mā]) and the rising Tone 2 ([má]) means mother

Introduction
Second language learning is a difficult task for a variety of
reasons. Adults have difficulty with many aspects of language acquisition, including language processing (Clahsen
& Felser, 2006) and certain aspects of syntax (e.g., Birdsong, 2006), but limitations in phonetic perception relative
to infants and young children are especially strong and welldocumented (e.g., Werker & Lalonde, 1988; Kuhl, 2004;
Maye, Weiss, & Aslin, 2008). Phonological deficits can be
found not just in perception, but in production and processing
as well (e.g., Flege, 1995; Sebastián-Gallés & Soto-Faraco,
1999). Such deficits are sometimes thought to have cascading
effects onto other aspects of language (Perani, 2005; Werker
& Yeung, 2005; Perfors & Dunbar, 2010).
One striking aspect of adults’ poor phonetic perception is
that it is quite difficult to overcome it through training. There
are various training regimes for teaching adults to learn a
phonetic contrast that does not exist in their native language.
Some rely on implicit learning of the phonemic categories
based on distributional information (Maye & Gerken, 2001,
2002; Shea & Curtin, 2005; Hayes-Harb, 2007), while in others some form of feedback is given (e.g., Jamieson & Morosan, 1989; McCandliss, Fiez, Protopapas, Conway, & McClelland, 2002; Wang, Jongman, & Soreno, 2003; Golestani
& Zatorre, 2004; Wayland & Li, 2008; Bradlow, 2008).
These training regimes have rarely been compared directly,
and are often used for different kinds of phonemes and with
different goals. It is therefore still unclear precisely to what
extent different kinds of training are effective and why.
Given the importance of phonetic perception, understanding why phonetic training works (to the extent it does) and
how it can be improved (to the extent it doesn’t) is a matter of some importance. One of the ways to explore this
is by investigating the effectiveness of training on different
kinds of phonemes as well as in different populations of people. Expanding this exploration is one of the central goals

1 The other difference between these two phonemes is aspiration,
which refers to the presence of a puff of air after making a sound (/g/
is not aspirated but /k/ is). We do not considering aspiration here.

839

timing-based phonetic contrasts as well as tones. However,
to our knowledge this question has not been investigated before. Our second goal is therefore to compare the performance of musicians and non-musicians on the Hindi /g/-/k/
contrast. Are musicians better at perceiving that contrast as
well as a Mandarin tonal contrast? How much does musicianship help (if it does) in either case? Are musicians more or
less responsive to distributional training than non-musicians?

Goals of the study
This paper addresses two main questions. First, we are interested in comparing performance on two different kinds of
phonetic contrast within people given the exact same implicit
distributional training. Is one easier than the other? Does
training have more of an effect for one than another? Second, we are interested in comparing different populations of
adults in their ability to perceive these two kinds of contrasts:
namely, musicians and non-musicians. Do musicians have
an advantage in perceiving timing-based contrasts as well as
pitch-based ones? Does training have more or less of an effect
on them than non-musicians?

Figure 1: Distribution of stimuli used in phonetic training, defined
along a continuum based on voice onset time in the H INDI condition
and pitch in the M ANDARIN condition. Tokens 2 and 6 occurred four
times as often as tokens 1 and 7.

and hemp, respectively. People who are not native speakers
of tonal languages process tone differently (Gandour, 1983).
As with Hindi phonemes, there is evidence that non-native
speakers can be trained to perceive lexical tones (Wang et
al., 2003; Wayland, Herrera, & Kaan, 2010; Wong & Perrachione, 2007). However, these training programs generally
take longer (days to weeks) and are more intensive than implicit distributional training, with participants being given explicit feedback and sometimes visual help (e.g., pitch graphs).
To our knowledge, no studies have explored the effectiveness of implicit distributional training on lexical tones.
Our first goal in this study is therefore to compare the effects of distributional training (and baseline perception) of a
Hindi timing-based contrast with a Mandarin tone-based contrast. Are both phoneme types equally easy for native English
speakers to perceive? Does implicit training work better or
worse with one kind of phoneme?
Musicians vs non-musicians. It is well-known that musicians consistently show a superior ability to learn lexical
tones (Alexander, Wong, & Bradlow, 2005; Wong & Perrachione, 2007; Wayland et al., 2010). In many ways, this is
no surprise: because both music and tonal languages involve
pitch, extensive musical training (or superior auditory abilities) may result in increased sensitivity to pitch-related cues.
Much less is known about whether musicianship facilitates
the learning of non-native contrasts that are not defined by
pitch. While there are few studies investigating this issue,
early evidence suggests that it might. For instance, Slevc and
Miyake (2006) found that musical ability predicted Japanese
speakers’ ability to discriminate and produce the English /r//l/ contrast, and Sadakata, van der Zanden, and Sekiyama
(2010) found that Japanese musicians were better than nonmusicians at distinguishing the Dutch vowel /u/. There is also
some evidence suggesting that musicians have higher brainstem plasticity not just for musical stimuli, but for speech
stimuli as well (Musacchia, Sams, Skoe, & Kraus, 2007).
For all these reasons, it seems reasonable to think that people with musical training might have superior perception of

Method
There were two phases in this experiment, a training phase
and a testing phase. Participants were randomly allocated to
either a H INDI or M ANDARIN condition. During the training,
the participants were exposed to a distribution of sounds from
the appropriate language for their condition. All participants
participated in the same testing phase, which included two
common tests of phoneme discrimination. The testing phase
included stimuli from both Mandarin and Hindi, as well as
a control set of English phonemes to ensure that they were
paying attention. This design allows participants from each
condition to serve as each other’s control. For instance, the
performance of participants in the H INDI condition on Mandarin stimuli reflects performance on those stimuli without
having been trained on the Mandarin contrast.
Participants. 96 native English-speaking adults from the
University of Adelaide and surrounding community participated in the experiment. 48 were classified as musicians
according to criteria adapted from Wong and Perrachione
(2007) and later slightly loosened in order to recruit enough
participants. Musicianship in this study was defined as having
had at least five continuous years of formal musical training,
starting before the age of 15. The mean duration of musical
training was 12.75 years for the musicians and 0.89 years for
the non-musicians. There was no significant difference in duration of musical training between the HINDI and MANDARIN
conditions (t(46) = 0.81, p = 0.4245, two-tailed).
Training. Participants in the HINDI condition were trained
on a distribution of seven stimuli that differed according to
voice onset time, while those in the M ANDARIN condition
were trained on a distribution of seven stimuli that differed
according to pitch. The stimuli are described in detail below,
but the training procedure is the same in all conditions. As

840

recording a male native Hindi speaker saying [gi] and systematically removing the pre-voicing component using Praat
phonetics software. This yields a continuum of seven stimuli
from [gi] to [ki], separated by an average of 19ms in VOT from
each other, and identical except for the pre-voicing.
Half of the 16 test trials used the [gi]-[ki] stimuli, with order
of presentation of each and the side of the correct response
counterbalanced. The other half of the test trials (also fully
counterbalanced) consisted of the same contrast spoken in a
different vowel context ([ga]-[ka]) and recorded by a female
native Hindi speaker. The continuum of [ga] to [ka] was constructed in the same way as [gi] to [ki], although only tokens 1
and 7 were used during the test trials. For space reasons, we
will report on overall performance among all of the test trials
rather than on the two kinds of test trials individually.
M ANDARIN. Participants were trained on a continuum
bridging two tones, one of which is high level (Tone 1) and
one of which is rising (Tone 2), as obtained from Xu, Gandour, and Francis (2006) and illustrated in Figure 2. The
training stimuli consisted of a continuum between a vowel
in Tone 1 ([ı̄]) and the same vowel in Tone 2 ([ı́]). A male native Mandarin speaker produced the syllable [ı̄], and its fundamental frequency ( f0 ) contour was systematically altered to
synthesize tokens on the continuum to Tone 2. This resulted
in a seven-equal step continuum, as shown in Figure 2. All
tokens have the same offset frequency (130Hz) and were normalized for duration and amplitude. As documented in Xu
et al. (2006), three native Mandarin speakers judged tokens 1
and 7 to be good exemplars of the [ı̄] and [ı́] syllables.
Analogously to the Hindi stimuli, half of the 16 Mandarin
test trials used the [ı̄]-[ı́] stimuli, with the order and side fully
counterbalanced. The other half of the test trials consisted of
the same tonal contrast spoken by a female Mandarin speaker
with a different vowel ([ā] to [á]), constructed by the same
method as the [ı̄]-[ı́] stimuli. As with the Hindi stimuli, we
will report on overall performance among all of the test trials
rather than on the two kinds of test trials individually.
C ONTROL. In order to make sure that participants were attending to and understood the task, we included 8 trials of
control stimuli during each of the two tests. These corresponded to a phonemic contrast they could already recognize:
the dental plosive aspirated/unaspirated voiced/voiceless contrast (/d/-/th /, which sound like “d” and “t” respectively to a
native English speaker). Because the /d/-/th / contrast also exists in Hindi, the phonemes were recorded by the same male
Hindi speaker as before.

Figure 2: A seven-step continuum of the Mandarin syllable [i]. Each
step differed according to its fundamental frequency ( f0 ) contour.
(Figure adapted from Xu et al., 2006)

in Maye and Gerken (2000), we presented subjects with a bimodal distribution of these phonemes, as illustrated in Figure
1; thus, some tokens (e.g., 2 and 6) occurred four times as
often as others (e.g., 1 and 7). Participants heard a total of
900 tokens presented in random order and separated by 250
ms each, for a total of approximately 10 minutes of exposure.
During stimulus presentation the participants were told not to
speak or read, but also that they need not consciously concentrate on the sounds. To alleviate boredom, they were allowed
to doodle while listening.
Testing. After the training, the participants were presented with two standard discrimination tests, ABX and
same/different (S/D); the order of the tests was randomized
for each participant. In the ABX test, the participants heard
three sounds separated by 1s and were asked whether the third
(“X”) was the same as the first (“A”) or the second (“B”). In
the S/D test, they heard a pair of sounds separated by 500ms
and were asked whether the sounds were the same or not.
Performance is given by the percentage of correct answers,
and chance is 50% for both kinds of tests. Only tokens 1 and
7 were used in testing, since they most resemble the natural
sounds of the language. Both tests consisted of 40 trials presented in random order, with 8 control stimuli corresponding
to an English contrast, 16 stimuli corresponding to the Hindi
/g/-/k/ contrast, and 16 corresponding to the Mandarin /ı̄/-/ı́/
contrast. The stimuli are described in more detail below.
Stimuli. Each of the two conditions were trained on distributions of stimuli taken from their respective languages –
the HINDI condition on a contrast defined by timing, and the
MANDARIN condition defined by pitch.
H INDI. The contrast used in this study was the unaspirated
velar plosive voiced/voiceless contrast (/g/-/k/), which occurs
in Hindi but not in English (both phonemes sound like a “g”
to an English speaker). The /g/ and /k/ phonemes differ in
terms of voice-onset time (VOT), such that /g/ contains a prevoicing component while /k/ does not. It is therefore possible
to gradually convert /g/ tokens into /k/ by successively removing parts of the pre-voicing component. Our training stimuli
consisted of the Hindi syllable pairs [gi]-[ki], constructed by

Results
Our study used two phoneme discrimination tests, the ABX
and the S/D. Performance on these two tests was comparable: there was no significant difference in overall percent correct between discrimination tests (paired-sample
t(383) = 1.33, p = 0.184), with a mean performance of
70.5% (SD=20.4) in the ABX tests and a mean performance
of 69.2% (SD=18.8) in the S/D tests. Moreover, the scores on

841

Effects of musicianship and stimulus type
0.9

Effects of musicianship and training (Hindi phonemes)
0.9

Non−musician
Musician

0.85

0.8
proportion correct

proportion correct

0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65

0.75
0.7
0.65

0.6

0.6

0.55

0.55

0.5

Untrained
Trained

0.85

Mandarin

0.5

Hindi

Figure 3: Overall accuracy by musicianship and stimulus type. Musicians showed superior performance to non-musicians, and performance was also higher on Mandarin than Hindi stimuli. Moreover,
there was an interaction indicating that being a musician helped relatively more for Mandarin than Hindi stimuli.

Non−musician

Musician

Figure 4: Overall accuracy on the Hindi phonemes by musicianship
and training. Musicians did significantly better than non-musicians.
Training did not significantly improve performance, although the
trend among non-musicians approached significance.

Discussion
the two tests were correlated (r = 0.50, p < 0.0001). In all of
the subsequent analyses we therefore collapse performance
on the two tests into one overall accuracy score.
Our first question is whether discrimination performance
is different on the Hindi and the Mandarin contrasts: is one
easier than the other? Is there a differential effect of musicianship on each? We address this by considering performance on the stimuli for each language, collapsing (for now)
any effects of training. As Figure 3 shows, musicians performed better than non-musicians for both types of contrast
(two-way ANOVA, F(1, 380) = 41.5, p < 0.0001) and performance was higher on the Mandarin stimuli (F(1, 380) =
41.5, p < 0.0001). Moreover, there was an interaction, indicating that being a musician helped more for Mandarin stimuli than for Hindi stimuli (F(1, 380) = 9.39, p = 0.002).
How did the effects of musicianship play out within each
stimulus type, and how did that interact with training? Were
musicians or non-musicians helped more by training? Were
the effects different depending upon the nature of the contrast
in question? To address these issues we evaluate performance
on the Hindi and Mandarin stimuli separately.
Hindi stimuli. Figure 4 shows overall accuracy on the
Hindi test stimuli by musicianship and training. Participants were considered to have been trained on the stimuli
if they were in the H INDI condition and untrained if they
were in the M ANDARIN condition. Musicians performed
significantly better than non-musicians (two-way ANOVA,
F(1, 188) = 5.53, p = 0.019), but there was no significant effect of training (F(1, 188) = 1.71, p = 0.193) and no interaction (F(1, 188) = 0.049, p = 0.156).
Mandarin stimuli. Figure 5 shows overall accuracy
on the Mandarin test stimuli by musicianship and training
(where people in the H INDI condition were considered to
be untrained on the Mandarin stimuli). Here too, musicians
performed significantly better than non-musicians (two-way
ANOVA, F(1, 188) = 46.8, p < 0.0001). As before, there
was no significant effect of training (F(1, 188) = 0.001, p =
0.810) and no interaction (F(1, 188) = 0.71, p = 0.402).

Our overall findings show a strong effect of musicianship on
phonetic perception: musicians had superior perception for
both timing-based and pitch-based non-native contrasts (although the effect was much stronger for pitch-based contrasts). Interestingly, there was no effect of distributional
training. Here we consider some of the implications of these
findings for first and second language acquisition in general.

Why did musicians perform better?
These results are consistent with the extensive literature documenting the fact that musicians have superior performance
in linguistic tasks involving lexical tones (Alexander et al.,
2005; Wong & Perrachione, 2007; Wayland et al., 2010).
However, there is relatively little prior work showing that
musicians have an advantage for non-tone-based phonemes,
and none that we know of that investigates phonemes defined by differences in voice onset time (Slevc & Miyake,
2006; Sadakata et al., 2010). This suggests that whatever
advantage musicians enjoy is not limited to differences in
pitch perception, even though the timing-based advantages
are smaller. Indeed, we even found a slight difference in performance between musicians and non-musicians on the control stimuli; although both groups performed extremely well
(98.7% accuracy for the musicians, 95.2% accuracy for the
non-musicians), the difference between the groups was significant (t(94) = 2.94, p = 0.004). This is somewhat surprising, but it is true that even the control sounds were potentially
confusable than more distinct phonemes would have been,
and the difference is small in magnitude.
What is the root of the musician advantage? Consistent
with their slightly better performance even on the control trials, one possibility is that musicians simply have a “better
ear” in general – that is, they have superior auditory processing abilities overall. While this possibility is consistent with
existing research (Schön, Magne, & Besson, 2004; Wong,
Skoe, Russo, Dees, & Kraus, 2007; Musacchia et al., 2007),
it does not really answer the question: why do they have superior abilities? Does musical training itself improve such

842

crimination of phonemes in our experiment.2 Although a few
previous experiments (Maye & Gerken, 2000; Hayes-Harb,
2007; Perfors & Dunbar, 2010) have found effects of distributional training for Hindi contrasts among non-musicians,
these effects were small. Indeed, most training regimes for
adults last far longer than 10 minutes and give reinforcement
of some type, precisely because it is far more effective to
do so(Jamieson & Morosan, 1989; McCandliss et al., 2002;
Golestani & Zatorre, 2004; Bradlow, 2008).
The lack of training effect among musicians and for the
Mandarin stimuli may have occurred for similar reasons.
However, it also may be that implicit distributional training is not an effective means for teaching adults to discriminate pitch-based contrasts like the Mandarin /ı̄/-/ı́/ distinction.
This seems more plausible given the fact that even within the
non-musicians – for whom there was non-significant trend of
training for the Hindi contrast – there was no effect of training
on the Mandarin contrast. But why would distributional training be more effective for one kind of contrast than another?
We know that it is possible to train non-native speakers to perceive this kind of tonal contrast (Wang et al., 2003; Wayland
et al., 2010; Wong & Perrachione, 2007). However, the training programs that have been successful have been far more
intensive and explicit than ours was. We can only speculate,
but perhaps this sort of instruction is necessary for people
to understand the pitch distinctions they should be listening
for. In contrast, distributional training may naturally focus
people’s attention on timing by playing one phoneme after
another in rapid succession. That said, since distributional
training had no statistically significant effect in any case, the
simplest conclusion is that it was insufficient regardless of the
nature of the contrast.
A related possibility is that our participants were already
performing near their ceiling – that is, near the peak of what
would be possible for them without decades of experience
distinguishing the sounds in question. Perhaps the benefits of
training for non-musicians in Hindi found in previous studies
and implied here come from making people aware of the more
obvious cues that can be used to distinguish the sounds. Due
to their superior auditory skills, musicians may already be
aware of those cues; and pitch differences are blatant enough
that even non-musicians can hear some of the differences between /ı̄/ and /ı́/. Of course, the difference between musicians and non-musicians, and between Hindi and Mandarin
phonemes, also implies that if there is a ceiling effect, there
are probably multiple different ceilings rather than only one.
Is there a ceiling effect? Given the widely-documented difficulty of training adults to recognize non-native contrasts,

Effects of musicianship and training (Mandarin tones)
0.9

Untrained
Trained

0.85

proportion correct

0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5

Non−musician

Musician

Figure 5: Overall accuracy on the Mandarin phonemes by musicianship and training. Musicians did significantly better than nonmusicians, and training had no effect on performance.

abilities, or is it simply that people with better auditory processing become musicians in the first place?
This is a hard question to firmly disentangle, but our data
provides one way to address it. We find that although the
total duration of musical training is correlated with overall
accuracy (r = 0.306, p = 0.002), this effect is carried by the
presence of non-musicians in the sample; there is no effect
of duration of musical experience among the musicians only
(r = 0.012, p = 0.932). This occurs despite the fact that our
sample of musicians was fairly diverse, ranging from people
with 5 years to 45 years of training (M = 12.75, SD=7.7). It
implies that perhaps at least part of the difference between
musical and non-musical populations may be due to nontraining-related differences in auditory perception. That said,
since our participants played a wide range of instruments and
were involved with music at different intensities – and any
effects of duration are confounded with age – this is at best
suggestive and should be interpreted with caution.
Could the better performance by the musicians be due to
a motivational difference? While this might explain why the
musicians performed better even on the control trials, it seems
unlikely. The musicians were not told explicitly that they
were being compared to non-musicians; they were only told
that we were interested in how musicians learn language in
general. It is unclear why they would be more motivated in
such a scenario. Furthermore, our findings are consistent with
the large amount of previous work showing superior phonetic processing in musicians (Alexander et al., 2005; Slevc
& Miyake, 2006; Sadakata et al., 2010; Wayland et al., 2010).
That said, in follow-up work we plan to investigate this possibility by recruiting visual artists, who would have the same
motivational advantages (if any) that come from being recruited as a member of a special group, but who we would
not expect to have superior auditory perceptual abilities.

2 We did find that if we performed a post-hoc analysis on only
non-musicians in the Hindi contrast, which is the only condition
directly corresponding to the previous literature (Maye & Gerken,
2000; Hayes-Harb, 2007; Perfors & Dunbar, 2010), the training effect was significant (t(94) = 2.12, p = 0.037). This suggests that
had that been the only condition studied – analogous to the previous
literature – it would have reached significance. However, since this
analysis in our study followed an omnibus ANOVA with no main
effect or interaction, it is not statistically appropriate to apply here.

Why did training have no effect?
In addition to the musician advantage, our other main finding was that distributional training had no effect on the dis-

843

this is certainly possible. After all, native speakers have
decades of experience distinguishing between those sounds,
and it would be quite surprising if these vast differences in
exposure could be eliminated with a small amount of training, even among especially capable subjects like musicians.
The notion of a ceiling effect for training is also consistent
with the Native Language Neural Commitment hypothesis,
which suggests that early experience results in changes in the
brain that encode the phonetic contrasts of one’s native language (Kuhl, 2004). Because of these neural changes, learning non-native contrasts as an adult is therefore extremely difficult. This would also explain why training made no difference among any of the musicians, who may have been already
performing near the limit possible for brains that grew up dedicated to hearing other kinds of contrasts. If there is a ceiling,
it has unfortunate implications for second language acquisition. Perhaps it is intrinsically limited by poor phonetic perception abilities, at least without years and years of exposure
to the new language. That said, we must remind ourselves
that the training approach used in this study was quite simple
and short compared to other, more intensive methods, which
might very well have more of an effect.
In many ways, this study raises more questions than it answers. Why did distributional training have no effect, particularly for musicians and Mandarin contrasts? What is the root
of the musician advantage, and why does it extend to include
timing-based contrasts as well as pitch-based ones? These
questions are still open, but this work is an important step toward understanding the roots of phonetic perception and its
relationship to both first and second language learning.

Jamieson, D., & Morosan, D. (1989). Training new, nonnative
speech contrasts: A comparison of the prototype and perceptual
fading techniques. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 43(1), 88–
96.
Kuhl, P. (2004). Early language acquisition: Cracking the speech
code. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 831–843.
Maye, J., & Gerken, L. (2000). Learning phonemes without minimal pairs. In 24th Annual Meeting of the Boston Uuniversity
Conference on Language Development.
Maye, J., & Gerken, L. (2001). Learning phonemes: How far can the
input take us? In 25th Annual Meeting of the Boston Uuniversity
of the Conference on Language Development.
Maye, J., & Gerken, L. (2002). Infant sensitivity to distributional
information can affect phonetic discrimination. Cognition, 82,
B101-B111.
Maye, J., Weiss, D., & Aslin, R. (2008). Statistical phonetic learning
in infants: Facilitation and feature generalization. Developmental
Science, 11(1), 122–134.
McCandliss, B., Fiez, J., Protopapas, A., Conway, M., & McClelland, J. (2002). Success and failure in teaching the [r]-[l] contrast
to japanese adults: Tests of a Hebbian model of plasticity and stabilization in spoken language perception. Cognitive, Affective, &
Behavioral Neuroscience, 2(2), 89–108.
Musacchia, G., Sams, M., Skoe, E., & Kraus, N. (2007). Musicians
have enhanced subcortical auditory and audiovisual processing of
speech and music. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(40), 15894-15898.
Perani, D. (2005). The neural basis of language talent in bilinguals.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(5), 211–213.
Perfors, A., & Dunbar, D. (2010). Phonetic training makes word
learning easier. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Sadakata, M., van der Zanden, L., & Sekiyama, K. (2010). Influence of musical training on perception of l2 speech. In 11th
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association. Chiba.
Schön, D., Magne, C., & Besson, M. (2004). The music of speech:
Music training facilitates pitch processing in both music and language. Psychophysiology, 41, 341-349.
Sebastián-Gallés, N., & Soto-Faraco, S. (1999). Online processing
of native and non-native phonemic contrasts in early bilinguals.
Cognition, 72, 111–123.
Shea, C., & Curtin, S. (2005). Learning allophones from the input.
In 29th Annual Meeting of the Boston Uuniversity of the Conference on Language Development.
Slevc, L., & Miyake, A. (2006). Individual differences in second
language proficiency: Does musical ability matter? Psychological Science, 17(8), 675-681.
Wang, Y., Jongman, A., & Soreno, J. (2003). Acoustic and perceptual evaluation of Mandarin tone productions before and after
perceptual training. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
113(2), 1033-1043.
Wayland, R., Herrera, E., & Kaan, E. (2010). Effects of musical
experience and training on pitch contour perception. Journal of
Phonetics, 36, 250-267.
Wayland, R., & Li, B. (2008). Effects of two training procedures
in cross-language perception of tones. Journal of Phonetics, 36,
250-267.
Werker, J., & Lalonde, C. (1988). Cross-language speech perception: Initial capabilities and developmental change. Developmental Psychology, 24(5), 672–683.
Werker, J., & Yeung, H. (2005). Infant speech perception bootstraps
word learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(11), 519–527.
Wong, P., & Perrachione, T. (2007). Learning pitch patterns in
lexical identification by native english-speaking adults. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 565-585.
Wong, P., Skoe, E., Russo, N., Dees, T., & Kraus, N. (2007). Musical
experience shapes human brainstem encoding of linguistic pitch
patterns. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 420-422.
Xu, Y., Gandour, J., & Francis, A. (2006). Effects of language experience and stimulus complexity on the categorical perception of
pitch direction. Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 120(2),
1063-1074.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to Natalie May, Angela Vause, and Daniel Carabellese
for recruiting participants and running the experiments, and to Dan
Navarro and the CLCL lab for useful discussions. We especially
thank Dr. Jackson Gandour for generously sharing his Mandarin
stimuli. AP was supported by ARC grant DE120102378.

References
Alexander, J., Wong, P., & Bradlow, A. (2005). Lexical tone perception in musicians and nonmusicians. In 9th European Conference
on Speech Comm. and Tech. Lisbon.
Birdsong, D. (2006). Age and second language acquisition and
processing: A selective overview. Language Learning, 56(1), 9–
49.
Bradlow, A. (2008). Training non-native language sound patterns. In
J. Hansen Edwards & M. Zampini (Eds.), Phonology and second
language acquisition (p. 287-308). Benjamins.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). How native-like is non-native
language processing? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(12), 564–
570.
Flege, J. (1995). Second-language speech learning: Theory, findings, and problems. In W. Strange (Ed.), Speech perception
and linguistic experience: Issues in cross-language research (pp.
229–273). Timonium, MD: York Press.
Gandour, J. (1983). Tone perception in Far Eastern languages. Journal of Phonetics, 11, 149-175.
Golestani, N., & Zatorre, R. (2004). Learning new sounds of speech:
Reallocation of neural substrates. NeuroImage, 21, 494-506.
Hayes-Harb, R. (2007). Lexical and statistical evidence in the acquisition of second language phonemes. Second Language Research,
23(1), 65–94.

844

