UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Negating compound sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9p3838nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Khemlani, Sangeet
Orenes, Isabel
Johnson-Laird, Philip N.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Negating compound sentences
Sangeet Khemlani (khemlani@aic.nrl.navy.mil)
Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intelligence
Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375 USA
Isabel Orenes (iorenes@ull.es)
Departamento de Psicología Cognitiva
Universidad de la Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
P.N. Johnson-Laird (phil@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
Abstract

German, Malay, and Portuguese. And in logic, the negations
of conjunctions and disjunctions, i.e., the NAND and the
NOR connectives, can be used to derive every other logical
connective. Negations therefore have powerful semantic
implications, and they’re used often in daily life, but
individuals probably do not comprehend the full logical
implications of a complex negated assertion. So, how do
reasoners cope with sentential negations? In the present
paper, we show that the theory of mental models can
account for how individuals interpret such negations.

How do reasoners negate compound sentences, such as
conjunctions of the form A and B and disjunctions of the form
A or B or both? A theory based on mental models posits that
reasoners negate each clause independently, and enumerate
the various possibilities consistent with the negation. It makes
a novel prediction: negations of conjunctions should be more
difficult to comprehend than negations of disjunctions. Two
experiments corroborate the prediction. Experiment 1 tested
participants’ ability to comprehend sentential negations by
giving them assertions of the form: Bob denied that he wore a
yellow shirt and he wore blue pants on Tuesday. Participants
selected the clothing options that Bob possibly wore on
Tuesday. Experiment 2 gave participants descriptions such as
Bob loves Mary or Mary loves John or both, and they were
required to formulate a denial by completing a sentence that
started with “No, …”. In both studies, participants’ responses
were more accurate for denials of disjunctions than denials of
conjunctions.
Keywords: enumerative negation, sentential
conjunctions, disjunctions, and mental models

Mental models and enumerative negation
The theory of mental models – the “model” theory for short
– posits that individuals use the meaning of an assertion and
any relevant knowledge to envisage what is possible
(Johnson-Laird, 1983), and that they interpret negations by
considering the various possibilities to which the negations
refer (Khemlani, Orenes, & Johnson-Laird, 2012). Consider
the examples above. When individuals represent the
sentential negation of a conjunction, such as (1a), they need
to consider the three separate possibilities that render it true.
That is, the negation is true when a) neither loves the other;
b) Pat doesn’t love Viv but Viv loves Pat; or c) Pat loves
Viv but Viv doesn’t love Pat. In contrast, the sentential
negation of the disjunction is consistent with only one
possibility: neither loves the other. Assertion 1a above has
the grammatical form:

negation,

Introduction
Consider the following two sentences:
1a. It’s not the case that both Pat loves Viv and Viv loves
Pat.
1b. It’s not the case that Pat loves Viv or Viv loves Pat,
or both.

2.

How do people understand and reason about negated
compound sentences like the negated conjunction (1a) and
the negated disjunction (1b) above? Which one of the
sentences is easier to process? Naïve individuals, i.e., those
with no background in logic, syntax, or semantics, should
have difficulty understanding the logical negation of
multiple clause assertions, particularly when those
assertions are complex (Clark, 1974; Clark & Chase, 1972;
Hoosain, 1973). Nevertheless, people use negations
frequently in everyday reasoning. Indeed, many of the
world’s languages contain a linguistic construction geared
towards negating a disjunction, neither A nor B, where A
and B stand for any clauses. Similar constructions exist in
many other languages (Gazdar & Pullum, 1976) including

It’s not the case that both P and V.

where P stands for Pat loves Viv, and V stands for Viv loves
Pat. According to the model theory, the core interpretation
of negation and conjunction, (1a) refers to the following
mental models:
¬P
¬P
P

¬V
V
¬V

where ‘¬’ denotes the symbol for negation. And (1b) refers
to only the first of these models.
How do individuals construct the models for the
assertions above? If individuals had prior knowledge of De

575

Morgan’s laws for interrelating conjunctions and
disjunctions, then they would not need to build models, and
could simply apply the laws to infer the correct negation.
Naïve individuals are unlikely to have mastered De
Morgan’s laws, however, and so the model theory postulates
a more plausible hypothesis. The theory assumes that
individuals think about discrete possibilities, where a
possibility consists of a conjunction of individuals, their
properties, and the relations among them. In the diagram
above, the three rows refer to models of three separate
possibilities consistent with the negation of the conjunction.
To interpret the negation of a multiple-clause assertion, such
as (1a), individuals envisage these models separately: they
make a series of independent negations of individual clauses
P and V. Hence, with It is not the case that both P and V,
individuals begin with the possibility in which the negation
is applied to each clause: not-P and not-V. This possibility
is not consistent with the original affirmative assertion, P
and V, and so they realize that it is one possibility in which
the negation holds. At this point, some reasoners may stop
and consider only this initial possibility in which both
clauses are negated. However, if individuals go further, they
apply the negation to only one of the clauses, e.g., not-P and
V. Once they do, they can detect that it too is inconsistent
with the original affirmative and accordingly a possibility
consistent with the negation. Likewise, they may grasp that
P and not-V is also a possibility that renders the negation
true. Finally, reasoners neer to consider the case, P and V.
The possibility is consistent with the unnegated conjunction,
and it is therefore inconsistent with the negation of the
conjunction.
The general procedure, which we refer to as enumerative
negation, is to construct a series of models of conjunctive
possibilities for any sort of complex compound assertion. It
starts with negations of both clauses, and checks whether
the resulting possibility is consistent with the unnegated
assertion. It then negates each clause, and accepts only those
possibilities that are not consistent with the unnegated
assertion. Finally, it affirms both main clauses. In each case,
if a model is consistent with the unnegated assertion, it is
rejected; otherwise, it is accepted as consistent with the
negation. This hypothesis applies to all connectives between
main clauses, but it is recursive so that it can cope with
clauses within clauses. To be right for the right reasons
depends on completing the full sequence of all possible
conjunctions based on the two clauses.
There is an important rider to enumerative negation:
individuals are likely to fail to construct the full sequence of
models, which is difficult and time-consuming to envisage.
Hence, they should be more likely to respond correctly if
they are asked to evaluate given possibilities. In sum, naïve
individuals should formulate the denial of compound
assertions with multiple main clauses by envisaging, one at
a time, the various sorts of possibility in which the denial
holds. The order of constructing the models is unlikely to be
constant, but it should usually begin with the negations of
both clauses.

The model theory of negation makes a novel, and perhaps
counterintuitive prediction. In the case, of affirmative
assertions, conjunctions are easier to understand than
disjunctions, but this difference should switch in the case of
their negations. A conjunction has a single model; an
inclusive disjunction has multiple models. But, the negation
of a conjunction has multiple models; and the negation of an
inclusive disjunction has one model. The relation is
complementary. The prediction presupposes that the greater
the number of mental models of various sorts of compound
assertions, the harder it should be to understand them. The
effect is easy to understand in the case of compound
assertions such as conjunctions and disjunctions. Two
atomic propositions and their respective negations yield four
possible models:
A
A
¬A
¬A

B
¬B
B
¬B

A conjunction of the form, A and B, refers to only one of
these models, but an inclusive disjunction of the form, A or
B or both, refers to the first three of them. Hence, the
conjunction should be easier to understand than the
disjunction. In contrast, the negation of the conjunction, not
both A and B, refers to the three models that are the
complement of the model of the original conjunction, A and
B, whereas the negation of the disjunction, not (A or B),
refers to the one model that is the complement of the three
models of the original disjunction, A or B or both. This
predicted interaction hinges, of course, on the theory that
individuals construct mental models of assertions, and on
the core meaning of negation. Theories in which models of
possibilities play no part are unlikely to make the prediction
(cf., e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998; Rips, 1994).
To test this prediction, we carried out two experiments
examining the negation of conjunctions and disjunctions. In
both studies, the participants had to deal with denials instead
of negations, because pilot studies showed that naïve
reasoners don’t understand what it means to “negate” a
sentence. The studies also examined the denials of
conditional if-then assertions. The theory predicts that
conditionals should be complicated to deny. On the one
hand, denials of conditionals should be easier to
comprehend than denials of conjunctions because
individuals are likely to reduce the scope of the negation to
the subordinate then-clause (the consequent). On the other
hand, the correct negation of the conditional, A and not-B, is
unlikely to be the first model that reasoners enumerate, so it
should be difficult. Thus, the theory predicts that denials of
conditionals should be an intermediate case, i.e., not as
difficult to understand as denials of conjunctions but more
difficult to understand than denials of disjunctions. The
results of both studies corroborated the predictions of the
model theory.

576

Experiment 1:
Understanding sentential negations

presentation of the four cases was counterbalanced over the
trials.

Results and discussion

Experiment 1 tested the enumerative negation hypothesis
for the task of listing what is possible given affirmations and
denials of three sorts of statement: A and B, A or B or both,
and if A then B. Conditionals are complicated. Their
affirmations should yield two or three possibilities
depending on whether participants make a biconditional,
(e.g., If and only if A then B) or a regular conditional
interpretation. Their negations, however, should either
reduce the scope of the negation to the main clause, If A
then not-B, or else be the correct response, A and not-B.
We carried out various preliminary studies, both online
and face-to-face, which showed that the task was difficult.
For example, when we asked participants to list what was
impossible given a sentential negation, their performance
was almost at chance. As a result of these initial studies, we
settled on a task in which participants judged whichever of
four cases: A and B, A and not-B, not-A and B, not-A and
not-B, was “possible” given a statement. The statements, in
turn, were either affirmations or denials of the three sorts of
assertion.

No reliable difference occurred in the accuracy of the
responses in the two blocks, and so we pooled the data for
subsequent analyses. The predicted interaction between
polarity and the connectives (conjunctions and disjunctions)
was reliable. For affirmations, conjunctions yielded 86%
correct responses and disjunctions yielded 68% correct
responses; whereas for denials, conjunctions yielded 18%
correct responses and disjunctions yielded 89% correct
responses (Wilcoxon test, z = 3.47, p < .0005). Denials of
conjunctions were very difficult: the participants’ mainly
judged not-A and not-B alone as possible (45%), and 14 out
of the 22 participants thought of only one possibility,
whether right or wrong (Binomial p < .005, given a prior
probability of .33).
The data for the conditionals also corroborated the model
theory. Their affirmations yielded 45% conditional
interpretations, 18% biconditional interpretations, and 27%
interpretations equivalent to conjunctions – a phenomenon
that occurs in judgments of probability (Girotto & JohnsonLaird, 2004; Johnson-Laird, Byrne, & Girotto, 2009), and
which suggests a regression to a more child-like
interpretation in a difficult task (see Barrouillet, Grosset, &
Lecas, 2000). The denials of conditionals fell mainly into
the two predicted categories: an interpretation that reduced
the scope of the negation, if A then not-B (59%, see
Khemlani et al., 2012, for an elaboration of this effect) or
the correct response, A and not-B (14%). No one selected
the correct possibilities for the denial of a biconditional
despite the fact that this interpretation occurred in the
affirmation.
The task called for the participants to understand
affirmative and negative statements and to evaluate explicit
possibilities in relation to them. When connectives
interrelate main clauses, the model theory predicts the
interaction with polarity: conjunctions are easier than
disjunctions when they are affirmed, but their relative
difficulty is reversed when they are denied. Conditionals
also yield the predicted but unusual pattern of judgments:
many individuals take the denial of a conditional, if A then
not-B, to hold in some of the same possibilities as its
affirmation, if A then B. Since this interpretation yields only
a contrary to the affirmed conditional, such “small scope”
interpretations are predictable, but erroneous.
When individuals have to formulate a denial of an
assertion, their task is to map their models of the
possibilities into a conclusion. Hence, the task should be
easier in case their starting point is only one model as in the
case of a denial of a disjunction than in case it is several
models as in the case of a denial of a conjunction. In this
way, the enumerative negation hypothesis yields predictions
about the formulation of negative statements. Experiment 2
tested these predictions.

Method
Participants. 22 adult native-English speaking participants
were recruited through an online system, Mechanical Turk,
hosted by Amazon.com that allows people to volunteer for
experiments for monetary compensation.
Design and materials. Participants acted as their own
controls and selected the possible instances of three
affirmations (based on and, or, and if) and the possible
instances of their three denials. The sentences were
presented as a block of affirmations and a block of denials
in a counterbalanced order. The actual sentences concerned
the color of the clothes of various individuals, who affirmed
or denied what they wore on a particular day, e.g.,
Bob [asserted/denied] that he wore a yellow shirt [and/or]
he wore blue pants on [Monday/Tuesday/…].
Bob [asserted/denied] that if he wore a red shirt then he
wore pink pants on [Monday/Tuesday/…].
We used adverbial phrases, such as “on Tuesday”, to convey
that the statement was about what a person wore on a
particular occasion. For the preceding example, the
participants indicated whichever of the following cases they
judged to be possible given the statement:
Bob wore a yellow shirt and he wore blue pants.
Bob wore a yellow shirt and he wore non-blue pants.
Bob wore a non-yellow shirt and he wore blue pants.
Bob wore a non-yellow shirt and he wore non-blue pants.
The participants were told to select all the cases that they
judged to be possible for each sentence. The order of

577

Experiment 2:
Formulating sentential negations

Results and discussion
Table 1 presents the percentages of the various sorts of
denial. The participants corroborated the predicted trend:
they made correct denials for 67% of inclusive disjunctions
(not-A and not-B), 28% of conditionals (A and not-B), and
0% of conjunctions (not-A or not-B, or the list of three
conjunctive possibilities). The predicted trend was highly
reliable (Page’s L = 281.5, z = 4.55, p < .00001). The
conditionals also elicited 34% of denials of the form: If A
then not-B, which is consistent with the hypothesis that
reasoners reduce the scope of the negation to make it easier
to comprehend. The participants making this response
tended to be different from those who made the correct
denials: 7 out of the 21 participants responded if A then not
B on half or more of the trials, and 10 out of the 21
participants responded A and not B on half or more of the
trials. The difference between these two post-hoc groups in
the frequency with which they responded if A then not B
was highly reliable (Mann-Whitney test, z = 3.50, p <
.0001). In accord with the enumerative negation hypothesis,
when participants had to deny statements, they were most
accurate in denying inclusive disjunctions and least accurate
in denying conjunctions. The model theory predicts this
result, but it is contrary to Rips’s PSYCOP theory (1994, p.
113), which makes the opposite prediction based on its
formal rules for De Morgan’s laws: ¬(A & B), therefore, ¬A
v ¬B; and ¬(A v B), therefore, ¬A & ¬B. For rules that
work forwards from premise to conclusion, a single step
yields the inference from the negation of a conjunction,
whereas three steps based on different rules are needed for
the inference from the negation of a disjunction.

The previous study examined participants’ understanding
of denials; Experiment 2 examined their formulation of
denials. A preliminary study showed that when individuals
are asked to “negate” a conditional, they tended to negate
both of its clauses: they did so on 69% of trials. This result
suggests that the task of “negating” a compound sentence is
unfamiliar to naïve individuals. The present experiment, like
the one before it, was accordingly framed in terms of the
semantic task of “denial”. The participants had to formulate
denials of three sorts of sentence:
conjunctions, A and B.
inclusive disjunctions, A or B or both;
conditionals, If A then B;
The enumerative negation hypothesis predicts that
individuals should construct a set of conjunctive models and
retain those that are inconsistent with the statement. It
follows that the participants should tend to be most accurate
in denying inclusive disjunctions, because the first
conjunction that they are likely to consider, not-A and not-B,
is the one and only correct denial. They should be less
accurate with conditionals, because they are likely to have
to construct more than one conjunction before they
encounter the correct denial: A and not-B. And another
factor of greater importance may intervene. Individuals may
reduce the scope of the negation, and this process is likely to
apply to conditionals too. Hence, some individuals should
assert if A then not-B as the denial of the affirmative
conditional. Finally, the participants should tend to be least
accurate with conjunctions, because their correct denial
depends on enumerating three models of possibilities: not-A
and not-B, not-A and B, and A and not-B. These
possibilities are equivalent to the inclusive disjunction: notA or not-B, but this realization is likely to be beyond anyone
who does not know De Morgan’s laws.

Table 1: The percentages of the different denials of
disjunctions, conditionals, and conjunctions in Experiment
2, where the balances of responses in each column were
different miscellaneous errors that occurred on less than
10% of trials.
Type of assertion to be denied

Method
Participants, design, and procedure. 21 native Englishspeaking participants were recruited though the same
participant pool as in Experiment 1. They acted as their own
controls and had to formulate denials of six conjunctions,
six disjunctions, and six conditionals, all of which were
expressed in English, and which were presented to each
participant in a different random order. They were instructed
to deny the statements by formulating a complete sentence
that began with the word, No, as a preface to their denial,
and the sentence could be of any length. Each clause in the
statements to be denied contained two noun phrases based
on proper nouns, a transitive verb, and one co-reference,
e.g., “If Bob loves Mary then Mary hates Julie.” The
materials were constructed so that no proper name or
transitive verb occurred more than once in the experiment.

The structure of the
participants’ denials
No, not A and not B.
No, A and not B.
No, if A then not B.
No, not A.
No, not B.

Disjunctions:

Conditionals:

Conjunctions:

A or B or
both.

If A then B.

A and B.

67
2
0
11
2

9
28
34
3
21

66
9
0
8
6

In sum, the model theory may be unique in its prediction
that negated conjunctions should be more difficult than
negated disjunctions, and the data from Experiment 2
corroborate the hypothesis.

578

General Discussion

should be if A then not-B. This view, however, has a major
drawback: it no longer treats negations as contradicting
corresponding affirmatives. Likewise, it offers no principled
explanation of why some individuals do take A and not-B to
be the denial of a conditional, or why most people take it to
falsify a conditional too (Espino & Byrne, 2011; Evans,
Newstead, & Byrne, 1993; Johnson-Laird & Tridgell,
1972).

Two experiments showed that participants find negated
conjunctions more difficult to understand and to formulate
than negated disjunctions, whereas previous research has
established that affirmative conjunctions are easier to
understand than affirmative disjunctions (García-Madruga,
Moreno, Carriedo, Gutiérrez, & Johnson-Laird, 2001). The
data therefore revealed a novel interaction between the
grammatical form of a sentence and its polarity, and they
corroborated a theory of negation based on mental models
(Khemlani et al., 2012). The theory posits that individuals
do not know the negations corresponding to the different
sentential connectives. They have to construct them on an
ad hoc basis, so they consider a sequence of conjunctive
models of possibilities, checking that they render the
corresponding affirmative assertion false. This enumerative
negation hypothesis predicts that individuals should find it
easy to comprehend and formulate denials of inclusive
disjunctions of the form A or B or both, because the first
model that individuals should consider is the only true
negation of the disjunction: not-A and not-B. In contrast, the
hypothesis predicts that a conjunction, A and B, should be
difficult to deny, because its denial is equivalent to not-A or
not-B or neither, and so individuals need to envisage fully
explicit models of three separate possibilities.
Denials of conditionals with the structure if A then B are
an intermediate case. They should be easier to comprehend
than denials of conjunctions but harder to comprehend than
denials of disjunctions. The correct negation of the
conditional, A and not-B, should be more difficult to
envisage because, according to the enumerative negation
hypothesis, this model is unlikely to be the first one that
comes to mind. And their denials should also be susceptible
to a reduction of scope, because if introduces a subordinate
clause, whereas neither of the other sorts of compound
contains a subordinate clause. Hence, some individuals
should deny a conditional by using another conditional: if A
then not-B.
When individuals had to understand affirmations and
denials in Experiment 1, their evaluations of what was
possible corroborated the model theory’s predicted
interaction. For affirmations, they found it easier to
understand conjunctions than disjunctions, but for denials,
they found it easier to understand disjunctions than
conjunctions. The affirmation of a conjunction yields one
possibility, and the affirmation of a disjunction yields three
possibilities. In contrast, the denial of a conjunction requires
an inference of three possibilities, and the denial of a
disjunction requires an inference of only one possibility.
The inferential aspect of this task for negatives may explain
why it is so much harder than merely listing the three
possibilities corresponding to an inclusive disjunction.
Experiment 2 corroborated the interaction. Both
experiments also revealed the occurrence of two sorts of
negation of conditionals, as did a study by Handley and
colleagues (Handley, Evans, & Thompson, 2006). These
authors argue that the negation of a conditional, if A then B,

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship to the first
author, and by National Science Foundation Grant No. SES
0844851 to the third author to study deductive and
probabilistic reasoning. We are grateful to Jay Atlas, Jeremy
Boyd, Herb Clark, Alan Garnham, Sam Glucksberg, Adele
Goldberg, Geoff Goodwin, Jennifer Heil, Olivia Kang,
Philipp Koralus, Mark Liberman, Max Lotstein, Anna Liu,
Paula Rubio, Carlos Santamaría, and Elizabeth Sucuyan for
their helpful suggestions and criticisms.

References
Barrouillet, P., Grosset, N., & Lecas, J.F. (2000).
Conditional reasoning by mental models: chronometric
and developmental evidence. Cognition, 75, 237-266.
Braine, M.D.S., & O’Brien, D.P., Eds. (1998). Mental logic.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clark, H.H. (1974). Semantics and comprehension. In T.A.
Sebeok (Ed.) Current trends in linguistics, Vol. 12:
Linguistics and adjacent arts (pp. 1291-1428). The
Hague: Mouton.
Clark, H.H., & Chase, W.G. (1972). On the process of
comparing sentences against pictures. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 472-517.
Espino, O., & Byrne, R.M.J. (2011). It is not the case that if
you understand a conditional you know how to negate it.
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, in press.
Evans, J.St.B.T., Newstead, S.E., & Byrne, R.M.J. (1993).
Human reasoning: The psychology of deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
García-Madruga, J.A., Moreno, S., Carriedo, N., Gutiérrez,
F., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2001). Are conjunctive
inferences easier than disjunctive inferences? A
comparison of rules and models. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology A: Human Experimental
Psychology, 54, 613-632.
Gazdar, G., & Pullum, G. K. (1976). Truth-functional
connectives in natural language. Papers from the Twelfth
Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 220234.
Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2004). The probability
of conditionals. Psychologia, 47, 207-225.
Handley, S.J., Evans, J. St. B.T., & Thompson, V.A. (2006).
The negated conditional: A litmus test for the
suppositional conditional? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, Cognition, 32, 559-569.

579

Hoosain, R. (1973). The processing of negation. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 618-626.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Byrne, R.M.J., & Girotto, V. (2009).
The mental model theory of conditionals: A reply to Guy
Politzer. Topoi, 28, 75-80.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Tridgell, J. (1972). When negation
is easier than affirmation. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 24, 87-91.
Khemlani, S., Orenes, I., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2012).
Negation: A theory of its meaning, representation, and
use. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, in press.
Rips, L.J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

580

