UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Neural Correlates of Episodic Memory Formation in Audio-Visual Pairing Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1qp8108z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Lee, Chung-Yeon
Lee, Beom-Jin
Kim, Joon Shik
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Neural Correlates of Episodic Memory Formation in Audio-Visual Pairing Tasks
Chung-Yeon Lee (cylee@bi.snu.ac.kr)
Brain Science Program, Seoul National University
Seoul, 151-744, Republic of Korea

Beom-Jin Lee (bjlee@bi.snu.ac.kr)
Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
Seoul, 151-744, Republic of Korea

Joon Shik Kim (jskim@bi.snu.ac.kr)
Cognitive Science and Brain Science Programs, Seoul National University
Seoul, 151-744, Republic of Korea

Byoung-Tak Zhang (btzhang@snu.ac.kr)
Computer Science and Engineering &
Cognitive Science and Brain Science Programs, Seoul National University
Seoul, 151-744, Republic of Korea

Abstract
Understanding episodic memory formation of real-world
events is essential for the investigation of human cognition.
Most studies have stressed on delimiting the upper boundaries
of this memory by using memorization tasks with conditional
experimental paradigms, rather than the performance of
everyday tasks. However, naturally occurring sensory stimuli
are multimodal and dynamic. In an effort to investigate the
encoding and retrieval of episodic memory under more
naturalistic and ecological conditions, we here demonstrate a
memory experiment that employs audio-visual movies as
naturalistic stimuli. Electroencephalography measurements
were used to analyze neural activations during memory
formation. We found that oscillatory activities in the theta
frequency bands on the left parietal lobe, and gamma
frequency bands on the temporal lobes are related to overall
memory formation. Theta and gamma power of the frontal
lobes, and gamma power of the occipital lobes were both
increased during retrieval tasks. Furthermore, subjects’
memory retrieval performance on the query task was used to
clarify our experimental results. Correlation between
behavioral differences and neural activation was observed in
the same regions. Our results extend the previous results of
neurocognitive studies on memory formation via naturalistic
stimuli, neural oscillations, and behavioral analysis combined.
Keywords: Memory formation; Naturalistic stimuli; EEG
study; Neural oscillation; Reaction time.

Introduction
Memory processing is one of the most prominent features of
human cognition. Particularly, understanding how the
experience of an episode in our everyday life can be
transformed into a long-term memory is a central issue in
human memory research.
Episodic memory formation is a complex neurocognitive
process that involves many interacting brain regions, and

enables us to store contextual (spatial and temporal)
information about individual events that can be later
retrieved. In contrast, semantic memory consists of isolated
facts that are decontextualized and not organized into a
specific experience.
Research in cognitive neuroscience thus far has focused
on the human memory system, and much knowledge has
been acquired via the neuropsychological examination of
brain-lesioned patients (Milner, Squire & Kandel, 1998;
Squire, 2004). Furthermore, noninvasive neuroimaging
studies in the last decade have revealed numerous functional
roles of particular brain regions related to memory
phenomena (Freeman, Dennis & Dunn, 2010; Spaniol et al.,
2009).
However, the vast majority of experimental protocols
used to study the neural mechanisms of episodic memory
formation (Schacter & Addis, 2007; Vissers et al., 2008)
deal with well-controlled experimental setups in which
conditional static stimuli (e.g., single words or still images)
are presented for memorization. They are typically
dissimilar from what the human brain encounters in
everyday life, since naturally occurring sensory stimuli are
continuous and multimodal. (Bartlett, 1932; Jacobs &
Shams, 2010; Tulving, 2002).
In an effort to investigate episodic memory encoding and
retrieval under more naturalistic and ecological conditions,
we performed a memory experiment employing audiovisual movies to mimic natural stimuli.
Movies are suitable for use as naturalistic stimuli because
they reflect aspects of experiences in our daily lives by
fusing multimodal sensory perception with emotional and
cognitive overtones (Eisenstein, 1947; Hasson et al., 2007;
Morin, 2005). In fact, cinematic materials have been used to
explore memory since the early days of cinema (Boring,
1916), but only recently have some neuroimaging studies
used audio-visual movies as natural stimuli for the
examination of brain activation induced by memory

1864

operations (Ben-Yakov et al., 2011; Furman et al., 2007;
Green, Li & Bavelier, 2011; Hasson et al., 2007; Milton et
al., 2011; Sestieri et al., 2011).
In contrast to recent studies investigating memory
processes with functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) during the presentation of video stimuli, here we
aimed
to
examine
brain
activation
using
electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings. Neural oscillations
have been linked to various cognitive phenomena in humans.
Although there is no exact mapping of neural oscillatory
rhythms to specific cognitive processes, neural oscillations
in a specific frequency range in each brain region may
function as their own cognitive process (Başar et al., 1999;
Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2010; Kahana, 2006; Klimesch et
al., 2008).
We focused in this study on gamma and theta oscillations
because recent research has suggested a functional role of
theta (4–8 Hz) and gamma (30–50 Hz) oscillations in
episodic memory (Doppelmayr et al., 1998; Klimesch et al.,
2001, 2008; Osipova et al., 2006). Other rhythms such as
delta (1–4 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), and beta rhythms (13–30
Hz) have not been discussed because they have not been
consistently reported as being related to episodic memory,
and they correlate not only with episodic memory but also
with semantic memory (Düzel et al., 2005; Hanslmayr,
Spitzer & Bauml, 2009; Weiss & Rappelsberger, 2000).
A secondary aim of this study was to investigate memory
retrieval in consideration of the subject’s behavioral factors.
Because the human brain can be easily affected by
numerous factors that disturb the expected neural response
to experimental paradigms, there may not be a specific
interpretation of the acquired neuroimaging results. To
alleviate this problem, we designed a 2-way analysis of
brain oscillation rhythms based on subjects’ memory
retrieval task performance. Using this approach enables the
results of our oscillatory analysis during memory formation
to be supported by behavioral analyses.

Materials and Methods
Two goals were considered when constructing the task and
methodology used in this study. First, a set of memory tasks
was designed to look at 2 aspects of episodic memory:
encoding and retrieval. Second, we obtained EEG data on
the scalp while memory tasks were being performed by
subjects in order to specify the anatomical locations of brain
activations associated with episodic memory formation.

Stimuli
The experimental stimulus used in the encoding session was
an audio-visual movie containing an episode of a television
sitcom (duration, 27 minutes). The spoken language in the
movie was American English, and subtitles were not
displayed.
We extracted 20 video clips (each of 5 seconds), taking
into consideration the current of its story, and captured 40
subsequent still images from the movie. These short video
clips served as retrieval cues in the retrieval session of the
experiment, and the captured images were used in the query
tasks.
To make the experiment more accurate, we also
developed a software program capable of displaying stimuli,
including movies and images, sequentially following fixed
time as input by an experimenter. Additionally, the program
records subjects’ responses and reaction times (RTs) during
query tasks, so that these records could be used in EEG
analysis. In the program, all the stimuli are 130 mm wide
and 100 mm high, and were displayed with a black
background on a 15-inch LCD monitor placed
approximately 50 cm away from the subject.

Experimental Paradigm
The entire experimental procedure is depicted in Figure 1.
The memory experiment program begins with a tutorial task
consisting of a concise example set of whole experiments in
order to allow subjects to become accustomed to the
experimental procedure.
Following the tutorial, the encoding session starts, playing
an episode of a television sitcom in its entirety. The subjects
watched the movie without requiring any response. EEG
measurement also began at this point. The EEG data were
analyzed later by using the time stamps recorded by the
program.
In the retrieval session, each subject performed video cuebased free recall tasks by imagining the scene immediately
following the cue stimuli. Finally, as for the query task, 2
images contained in the cue video were presented in a
random order. The subject was asked to decide whether the
order of presentation is correct or incorrect, and press the “O

Subjects
Ten neurologically healthy subjects (mean age, 24.0 ± 2.7
years; 4 women) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision
(mean eyesight in left and right eyes, 0.87/0.80) were
recruited from Seoul National University (Seoul, Korea).
Informed consent was obtained from all subjects in
accordance with the guidelines of the institutional review
board (IRB) at the Clinical Research Institute of Seoul
National University Hospital.
Figure 1: Schematic depicting the experimental paradigm.

1865

Figure 2: Theta and gamma oscillatory activation during memory formation. (A) The first row indicates increased theta
frequency power of the frontal lobes in the encoding task, and the second row indicates increased gamma frequency power of
both the frontal and parietal lobes in the encoding task. Differences between retrieval and encoding tasks are depicted in the
third column with ‘x’ markers which stand for locations showing the major differences (B) Normalized theta and gamma
frequency power values on the 8 topographical regions of interest (frontal left, FL; frontal right, FR; parietal left, PL; parietal
right, PR; occipital left, OL; occipital right, OR; frontal center, FC; and occipital center, OC) shows quantitative differences
between encoding and retrieval sessions. In the retrieval session, theta activations on the left and right frontal regions were
increased. Gamma activations on the frontal and parietal regions were increased, although other regions were decreased.
(correct)” or “X (incorrect)” button on a small keypad.
The experiment constituted 20 rounds of the retrieval task.

EEG Measurement
Ongoing brain activity was recorded using Ag/AgCl
electrodes mounted in a 128-channel Quik-cap, and a
Neuroscan SynAmps amplifier (Neuroscan, El Paso, TX) in
a dimly lit, soundproof, electrically shielded room at the
Clinical Cognitive Neuroscience Center of Seoul National
University Hospital. The ground electrode was located 10%
anterior to FZ, with linked mastoids serving as references.
Eye movements and blinks were monitored by a horizontal
electrooculogram (hEOG) and a vertical electrooculogram
(vEOG). Impedance was maintained at 5–10 kΩ or less.
Throughout the experiment, EEGs were continuously
obtained at a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz/channel.

EEG Data Analysis
EEG data analysis was performed using the EEGLAB
toolbox (Delorme & Makeig, 2004) developed at the
Institute for Neural Computation in the University of
California San Diego 1 using MATLAB 7.13 (MathWorks,
Natick, MA). A baseline removal process was applied in
order to eliminate some shift signals and to synchronize the
zero levels of each channel. Eye movement artifacts were
eliminated by excluding hEOG and vEOG components
1

http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab

extracted by Independent component analysis (ICA). All
signals were then band-pass filtered between 4.0 and 50.0
Hz in order to exclude unnecessary frequencies. Some
electrodes on the prefrontal area (AF7, FP1, FPZ, FP2, and
AF8) were excluded to reduce any remaining chance of
including ocular artifacts. A fast Fourier transform (FFT) in
the frequency domain on the artifact-free EEG record was
then performed. Frequency bandwidths were divided
according to the following divisions: theta (4–8 Hz), alpha
(8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), and gamma (30–50 Hz). From
the computed FFTs, overall power averages were computed
for each bandwidth.

Experimental Results
Oscillatory Correlates of Memory Formation
2D brain maps showing the grand-average topographical
distribution of theta and gamma frequency power during the
2 experimental conditions (memory encoding session and
retrieval session) are presented in Figure 2(A).
First, we observed increased theta frequency activation on
the left parietal lobe (C3 and CP1), and increased gamma
activation on the temporal lobes (T7 and T8) during overall
memory formation.
As seen in the topographical plots showing the difference
between the encoding and retrieval sessions, theta and
gamma power on the frontal lobes were more increased in
retrieval sessions than in encoding sessions (indicated by

1866

Figure 4: Theta and gamma oscillatory activation during
query task, classified according to the length of reaction
time. Both theta and gamma were increased on the same
regions with the former result of oscillatory activation
during memory formation. In contrast to the tasks of instant
RT, theta power on the left parietal lobe, gamma power on
the right frontal and the left occipital lobes show greater
activations in the RT-sustained tasks.

Figure 3: RT histogram for one subject. The blue line
stands for the average of RTs (3754ms) and the red line
stands for the sum of the average and standard deviation of
RTs (5053ms). From this subject, 5 trials (1st, 15th, 16th,
17th, and 20th) were chosen for the sustained RTs, and the
remaining 15 trials were considered as the instant RTs.
positive values of the difference between encoding and
retrieval in Fig. 2(A)). Some of occipital theta powers in the
retrieval session were also increased, but they were not
significant differences. Contrarily, theta powers on the
occipital center regions were decreased in retrieval sessions.
Occipital gamma power was increased during the retrieval
session. Independent t-tests verified that both differences are
statistically significant for theta (F = 3.771; p < 0.005) and
gamma frequency powers (F = 3.902; p < 0.001).

parietal lobe, right frontal lobes and left occipital lobes, are
related to episodic memory retrieval.
As for other behavioral factors, the average correct
response rate on the query task was 69.4% (about 14
questions were correct) and the average RT for each query
task was 7.1 ± 3.3 seconds. However, there was no
significant effect observed in the frequency power analysis
of factors such as true/false sequential order of presented
pictures in the query task, correctly/incorrectly answered
tasks, or the correlation between RT and these factors.

Analysis based on Behavioral Factors
To clarify our finding regarding neural oscillations
associated with memory formation, correlation between
EEG and RT of the query task was analyzed. We classified
the experimental results from 20 query tasks into 2 types:
sustained RT and instant RT. Sustained and instant RT
represent an RT that is longer and shorter, respectively, than
the sum of the average and standard deviation of all RTs.
Fig. 3 depicted RT histogram of one subject as an example.
Theta and gamma oscillatory activations during the query
task were then analyzed in consideration of the 2 different
classes of responses on query tasks.
Interestingly, as shown in the topographical plots in Fig. 4,
a correlation between neural activation and RT of subjects
in query tasks were observed in the theta and gamma
oscillations in some meaningful brain regions: increased
theta power on the left parietal lobe, and increased gamma
power on the right frontal and left occipital lobes during
query tasks with sustained RT.
This indicates that memory formation, especially retrieval,
is more activated when subjects make more effort on the
query tasks. Additionally, this result supports the notion that
regions with high theta and gamma power, including the left

Discussion
Recently, many functional neuroimaging studies using
fMRI or positron emission tomography (PET) have shown
that specific brain regions are significantly correlated with
memory formation. For example, the temporal lobes have
been long associated with memory retrieval (Nakamura &
Kubota, 1996), and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and
transverse occipital sulcus (transOcS) have been shown to
play a significant role in subsequent memory retrieval
(Hasson et al., 2007). Furthermore, neural oscillations in the
gamma and theta frequencies have long been observed in
cognitive tasks, such as those used to investigate episodic
memory, and in focal lesion studies (Milner et al., 1985;
Nyhus & Curran, 2010).
In consideration of using naturalistic stimuli, unlike
traditional experiments that have consistently revealed
memory effects for still images or words, we observed
similar results in both the spatial and spectral domains.
Moreover, our results link the frequency domain with each
observed region (i.e., delta frequency on the frontal and left
parietal lobe, and gamma frequency on the frontal and
occipital lobes). This is similar to the results of several

1867

studies that have shown greater gamma power in the
posterior cortex for subsequently remembered items than for
forgotten items (Hanslmayr et al., 2009; Osipova et al.,
2006).
As for the individually different effects of the
experimental stimuli, there is some evidence from previous
studies showing the same effect in a previous experiment
using similar movie narrative stimuli (Hasson et al., 2004;
Wilson, Molnar-Szakacs & Iacoboni, 2008). Thus, a
statistical evaluation showed that the observed brain
activations in our results are significantly different from
each other.
Our study has some limitations. It is not entirely
unexpected that there was no significant correlation
observed between correctly and incorrectly answered
questions in the query task, because the subject might not
care what the correct answer is at the time of the task. In
addition, the paradigm of the query task is too ambiguous to
determine which image has been shown earlier, because the
presented images were both taken from the same scene. This
problem could be addressed by choosing 2 images from
different scenes, but such a paradigm might also evoke
some semantic memory processes, with the subject cued by
many possible different factors in the images or stories, such
as actors’ clothes and the scenery of each scene. Instead, RT
seems to be a more appropriate factor for behavioral
analysis because RT will be longer when subjects make
more effort to retrieve stored memories, and thus, the brain
region related to retrieval memory will be more activated at
that time.

Conclusion
In summary, we have demonstrated episodic memory
formation using with an audio-visual movie as a naturalistic
stimulus, and measured subjects’ EEG signals throughout
the task in order to reveal the neural responses involved in
episodic memory operations. We also developed a memory
task program designed to obtain more accurate experimental
results. We identified oscillatory activities related to
memory formation in the spatial and spectral domains.
Different oscillatory activities in the retrieval session were
also observed. A correlation between RTs and oscillatory
activation during the query task was observed in the same
regions. We expect that our naturalistic and behavioral
factor-based analysis approach for memory investigation
could help extend the range of neurocognitive research.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean
government (MEST) (No. 2012-0005643, Videome; No.
2012–0005801, BrainNet), and the BK21–IT Program. We
thank Clinical Cognitive Neuroscience Center of Seoul
National University Hospital for technical supporting on
EEG acquisition setup.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: a study in
experimental and social psychology, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Başar, E., Başaar-Eroglu, C., Karakaş, S. and Schürmann,
M. (1999). Are cognitive processes manifested in eventrelated gamma, alpha, theta and delta oscillations in the
EEG?. Neuroscience Letters, 259, 165–168.
Bechtel W. & Abrahamsen A. (2010). Understanding the
Brain as an Endogenously Active Mechanism. In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Ben-Yakov, A. and Dudai, Y. (2011). Constructing realistic
engrams: poststimulus activity of hippocampus and dorsal
striatum predicts subsequent episodic memory. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 9032–9042.
Boring, E. G. (1916). Capacity to report upon moving
pictures as conditioned by sex and age. Journal of the
American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology, 6,
820–834.
Buckner, R. L., Logan, J., Donaldson, D. I., and Wheeler,
M.E. (2000). Cognitive neuroscience of episodic memory
encoding. Acta Psychologica (Amsterdam), 105 127–139.
Burgess, N., Becker, S., King, J. A., and O’Keefe, J. (2001).
Memory for events and their spatial context: models and
experiments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, Series B: Biological Sciences, 356, 1–
11.
Delorme, A. & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open
source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics.
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 134, 9–21.
Doppelmayr, M., Klimesch, W., Schwaiger, J., Auinger, P.
and Winkler, T. (1998). Theta synchronization in the
human EEG and episodic retrieval. Neuroscience Letters,
257, 41–44.
Düzel, E., Neufang, M. and Heinze, H. J. (2005). The
oscillatory dynamics of recognition memory and its
relationship to event-related responses. Cerebral Cortex,
15, 1992–2002.
Eisenstein, S. (1949). The Film Sense, New York: Harcourt
Brace & World, Inc.
Freeman, E., Dennis, S., & Dunn, J. C. (2010). An
examination of the ERP correlates of recognition memory
using state-trace analysis. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Furman, O., Dorfman, N., & Hasson, U. (2007). They saw a
movie: Long-term memory for an extended audiovisual
narrative. Learning and Memory, 14, 457–467.
Green, C. S., Li, R. and Bavelier, D. (2011). Perceptual
learning during action video game playing. Topics in
cognitive science, 2, 202-216.
Hanslmayr, S., Spitzer, B. and Bauml, K.H. (2009). Brain
oscillations dissociate between semantic and nonsemantic

1868

encoding of episodic memories. Cerebral Cortex, 19,
1631–1640.
Hasson, U., Furman, O., Clark, D., Dudai, Y. and Davachi,
L. (2007). Enhanced intersubject Correlations during
movie viewing correlate with successful episodic
encoding. Neuron, 57, 452–462.
Jacobs, R. A. & Shams, L. (2010). Visual learning in
multisensory environments. Topics in Cognitive Science,
2, 217-225.
Kahana, M. J. (2006). The cognitive correlates of human
brain oscillations. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26,
1669–1672.
Klimesch, W., Doppelmayr, M., Yonelinas, A., Kroll, N. E.,
Lazzara, M., Röhm, D. and Gruber, W. (2001). Theta
synchronization during episodic retrieval: neural
correlates of conscious awareness. Cognitive Brain
Research, 12, 33–38.
Klimesch, W., Freunberger, R., Sauseng, P. and Gruber, W.
(2008). A short review of slow phase synchronization and
memory: evidence for control processes in different
memory systems?. Brain Research, 1235, 31–44.
Milner, B., Squire, L. R. and Kandel, E. R. (1998).
Cognitive neuroscience and the study of memory. Neuron,
20, 445–468.
Milton, F., Muhlert, N., Butler, C. R., Smith, A.,
Benattayallah, A., and Zeman, A. A. (2011). An fMRI
study of long-term everyday memory using SenseCam.
Memory, 19, 733–744.
Morin, E. (2005). The cinema, or, the imaginary man,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Nakamura, K. & Kubota, K. (1996). The primate temporal
pole: its putative role in object recognition and memory.
Behavioural Brain Research, 77, 53–77.
Nyhus, E. & Curran. T. (2010). Functional role of gamma
and theta oscillations in episodic memory. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 34, 1023-1035.
Osipova, D., Takashima, A., Oostenveld, R., Fernández, G.,
Maris, E. and Jensen, O. (2006). Theta and gamma
oscillations predict encoding and retrieval of declarative
memory. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 7523–7531.
Sestieri, C., Corbetta, M., Romani, G. L. and Shulman, G. L.
(2011). Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and
the default mode network: functional and topographic
analyses. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 4407–4420.
Schacter D. L. & Addis D. R. (2007). The cognitive
neuroscience of constructive memory: remembering the
past and imagining the future. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological
Sciences, 362, 773-786.
Spaniol, J., Davidson, P. S., Kim, A. S., Han, H.,
Moscovitch, M. and Grady, C. L. (2009). Event-related
fMRI studies of episodic encoding and retrieval: metaanalyses using activation likelihood estimation.
Neuropsychologia, 47, 1765–1779.
Squire, L. R. (2004). Memory systems of the brain: a brief
history and current perspective. Neurobiology of Learning
and Memory, 82, 171–177.

Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: from mind to brain.
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 1–25.
Vissers, C. T., Kolk, H. H., van de Meerendonk, N. and
Chwilla, D. J. (2008). Monitoring in language perception:
evidence from ERPs in a picture–sentence matching task.
Neuropsychologia, 46, 967-982.
Weiss, S. & Rappelsberger, P. (2000). Long-range EEG
synchronization during word encoding correlates with
successful memory performance. Cognitive Brain
Research, 9, 299–312.
Wilson, S.M., Molnar-Szakacs, I., and Iacoboni, M. (2008).
Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations
in narrative speech comprehension. Cerebral Cortex, 18,
230–242.

1869

