UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Noisy Newtons: Unifying process and dependency accounts of causal attribution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1496k860

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Gerstenberg, Tobias
Goodman, Noah
Lagnado, David
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Noisy Newtons:
Unifying process and dependency accounts of causal attribution
Tobias Gerstenberg1 (t.gerstenberg@ucl.ac.uk), Noah Goodman2 (ngoodman@stanford.edu),
David A. Lagnado1 (d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk) & Joshua B. Tenenbaum3 (jbt@mit.edu)
1 Cognitive,

Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London, London WC1H 0AP
of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
3 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
2 Department

Abstract
There is a long tradition in both philosophy and psychology to
separate process accounts from dependency accounts of causation. In this paper, we motivate a unifying account that explains
people’s causal attributions in terms of counterfactuals defined
over probabilistic generative models. In our experiments, participants see two billiard balls colliding and indicate to what
extent ball A caused/prevented ball B to go through a gate. Our
model predicts that people arrive at their causal judgments by
comparing what actually happened with what they think would
have happened, had the collision between A and B not taken
place. Participants’ judgments about what would have happened are highly correlated with a noisy model of Newtonian
physics. Using those counterfactual judgments, we can predict
participants’ cause and prevention judgments very accurately
(r = .99). Our framework also allows us to capture intrinsically
counterfactual judgments such as almost caused/prevented.
Keywords: causality; counterfactuals; attribution; physics.

Introduction
There has been a longstanding divide in philosophy between two fundamentally different ways of conceptualizing
causality. According to dependency accounts of causation,
what it means for A to be a cause of B is that B is in some
way dependent on A. Dependence has been conceptualized in
terms of regularity of succession (A is regularly succeeded by
B; Hume, 2000 [1748]), probabilities (the presence of A increases the probability of B; Suppes, 1970) or counterfactuals
(if A had not been present B would not have occurred; Lewis,
1970). For process accounts, in contrast, what it means for
A to be a cause of B is that a physical quantity is transmitted
along a pathway from A to B (Dowe, 2000).
The psychological literature on causal learning and attribution neatly maps onto the two major accounts in philosophy.
On the one hand, people have been shown to use contingency
information when drawing inferences about whether and how
strongly two events are causally linked (Cheng, 1997). On
the other hand, people display a preference to choose causes
that influence an effect via a continuous causal mechanism
over causes that are connected with the effect through mere
dependence (Walsh & Sloman, 2011).
A point that has been raised in favor of process accounts
is that they are capable of capturing the semantics of different causal terms. Whereas dependency accounts have mostly
focussed on causation and prevention, Wolff (2007) has provided a process account that not only predicts when people use
the terms cause and prevent but also enable and despite. Following a linguistic analysis of causation by Talmy (1988) in
terms of force dynamics, Wolff (2007) argues that the aforementioned causal terms can be reduced to configurations of
force vectors. For example, what it means for a patient (P) to

have been caused by an affector (A) to reach an endstate (E)
is that P did not have a tendency towards E, A impacted on P
in a way that their force vectors were not pointing in the same
direction and P reached E. If, in contrast, the force vectors of
both P and A point towards E and P reaches E, the model predicts that people will say “A enabled (rather than caused) P”.
Importantly, according to Wolff’s account, the core dimensions which underlie the different causal terms, such as P’s
tendency towards E, are defined in strictly non-counterfactual
terms. Hence, “tendency” is defined as the direction of P’s
force rather than whether P would reach E in the absence of
any other forces.
While the force dynamics model has strong intuitive appeal
for interactions between physical entities, it is questionable
how it can be extended to capture causal attributions in situations involving more abstract entities. For example, one might
legitimately assert that the fall of Lehman Brothers caused the
financial crisis or that Tom’s belief that he forgot his keys
caused him to turn around and go back home. While it is
unclear how these causal relationships could be expressed in
terms of force vectors, they do not pose a problem for the
more flexible dependency accounts. For example, according
to a counterfactual account, Tom’s belief qualifies as cause of
his behaviour if it is true that his behavior would have been
different had the content of his belief been different. Hence,
there appears to be a trade-off between the semantic richness
of process accounts on the one hand and the generality and
flexibility of dependency accounts on the other hand.
Rather than fostering the divide between process accounts
and dependency accounts, we propose a theory of causal attribution that combines the best of both worlds. In the spirit of
Pearl (2000), we model causal attributions in terms of counterfactuals defined over probabilistic generative models. However, we agree with Wolff (2007) that people’s causal knowledge is often richer than what can be expressed with a causal
Bayes net. We aim to unify process and dependency accounts
by showing that people have intuitive theories in the form of
detailed generative models, and that causal judgements are
made by considering counterfactuals over these intuitive theories. Here we demonstrate the superiority of our approach
over existing models of causal attribution in a physical domain. We show that people use their intuitive understanding of physics to simulate possible future outcomes and that
their causal attributions are a function of what actually happened and their belief about what would have happened had
the cause not been present.

378

counterfactual	  miss	  

1 All clips can be viewed here: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/
lagnado-lab/experiments/demos/physicsdemo.html

counterfactual	  close	  

actual	  close	  

counterfactual	  hit	  
A
A

A

B

B
B

B
B
B

A

A

B

B
B

B

A

B
B

B
B

B
B

A
A

B

B

clip	  1	  

clip	  4	  

B

A

A

B

B

A

A

clip	  7	  
B

B

B

B

B

`

B

A

A

B

_

E

clip	  5	  
B

B
B
B

B

actual	  hit	  

Before discussing the predictions of our model and the supporting evidence from four experiments, we describe the domain to which we applied our model. In all experiments, participants saw the same 18 video clips which were generated
by implementing the physics engine Box2D into Adobe Flash
CS5. Figure 1 depicts a selection of the clips.1 In each clip,
there was a single collision event between a grey ball (A) and
a red ball (B) which enter the scene from the right. Collisions were elastic and there was no friction. The black bars
are solid walls and the red bar on the left is a gate that balls
can go through. In some clips B went through the gate (e.g.
clip 18) while in others it did not (e.g. clip 5). In the 18
video clips, we crossed whether ball B went through the gate
given that it collided with ball A (rows in Figure 1: actual
miss/close/hit) with whether B would go through the gate if
A was not present in the scene (columns in Figure 1: counterfactual miss/close/hit). Participants viewed two clips for each
combination of actual and counterfactual outcome.
In Experiments 1 and 2, the video clips stopped shortly after
the collision event. Participants judged whether ball B will go
through the gate (Experiment 1) or whether ball B would go
through the gate if ball A was not present in the scene (Experiment 2). In Experiment 3, participants saw each clip played
until the end and then judged to what extent ball A caused ball
B to go through the gate or prevented B from going through
the gate. Finally, in Experiment 4 participants chose from a
set of sentences which best describes the clip they have just
seen. All experiments were run online and participants were
recruited via Amazon Mechanical Turk.
In order to model people’s predictions of actual and counterfactual future outcomes, we developed the Physics Simulation Model (PSM) which assumes that people make use of
their intuitive understanding of physics to simulate what will
or what might have happened. Hamrick, Battaglia, and Tenenbaum (2011) have shown that people’s stability judgments
about towers of blocks is closely in line with a noisy model
of Newtonian physics. While in their model, the introduced
noise captures people’s uncertainty about the exact location
of each block, the noise in our model captures the fact that
people cannot perfectly predict the trajectory of a moving ball
(cf. Figure 1, clip 1). We introduce noise via drawing different
degrees of angular perturbation from a Gaussian distribution
with M = 0 and SD = {1, 2, ..., 10} which is then applied to
B’s actual velocity vector (given that it collided with A, clip 1
bottom left) or B’s counterfactual velocity vector (given that
A was not present in the scene, clip 1 top left) at the time of
collision.
We evaluate the probability that B would go through the
gate when A was present, P(B|A), or absent P(B|¬A) by forward sampling from our noisy versions of Newtonian physics.

B

B

actual	  miss	  

Overview of Experiments and Model
Predictions

clip	  9	  

clip	  12	  
B

B
A
B

B
A

B

clip	  14	  

B B

A

B

A

B

A

A

B

clip	  16	  

clip	  18	  

Figure 1: Selection of clips used in the experiment. Solid arrows =
actual paths, dashed arrows = counterfactual paths. Clip 1 depicts an
illustration of the Physics Simulation Model and clip 7 of the Actual
Force Model. Note: actual miss = B clearly misses; actual close = B
just misses/hits; actual hit = B clearly hits; counterfactual miss = B
would have clearly missed; counterfactual close = B would have just
missed/hit; counterfactual hit = B would have clearly hit.

For each clip and degree of noise (SD), we ran 1000 noisy repetitions of the original clip and counted the worlds in which
B goes through the gate given that A was present P(B|A) or
absent P(B|¬A).

Experiments 1 & 2: Intuitive Physics
The aim of Experiments 1 and 2 was to evaluate how well
people make use of their intuitive physical knowledge to predict actual (Experiment 1) or counterfactual (Experiment 2)
future states. Participants saw 18 video clips (see Figure 1 for
some examples) up to the point shortly after the two balls collided (0.1s). After having seen the clip twice, participants answered the question: “Will the red ball go through the hole?”
(Experiment 1, N = 21) or “Would the red ball have gone
through the goal if the gray ball had not been present?” (Experiment 2, N = 20). Participants indicated their answers on a
slider that ranged from 0 (“definitely no”) to 100 (“definitely
yes”). The midpoint was labeled “uncertain”. After having
made their judgment, participants viewed the clip until the end
either with both balls being present (Experiment 1) or with
ball A being removed from the scene (Experiment 2).

Results and Discussion
Participants were accurate in judging whether ball B will go
through the gate (Experiment 1) or would have gone through
the gate (Experiment 2) with a mean absolute difference from
the deterministic physics model (which assigns a value of 100
if B goes in and 0 if B does not go in) of 28.6 (SD = 29.9) in
Experiment 1 and 25.1 (SD = 30.5) in Experiment 2. Figure 2
shows the correlation of the PSM with participants’ judgments
in Experiment 1 (solid black line) and Experiment 2 (dashed
black line) for different degrees of noise. While people’s judgments already correlate quite well with a deterministic Newto-

379

Correlation between PSM and participants’ judgments

1

0.95

0.9

0.85

Experiment 1: Will B go in?
Experiment 2: Would B have gone in?
Experiment 3: Did A cause/prevent B ...?
Experiment 4: Did A cause/help/almost cause B ...?

0.8

0.75

0°

1°

2°

3°

4°

5°

6°

7°

8°

9°

10°

Noise in degrees of angular perturbation

Figure 2: Correlation of the Physics Simulation Model with people’s
judgments in all four experiments for different degrees of noise.

nian physics model (degree of noise = 0◦ ), introducing small
degrees of noise results in much higher correlations with a
maximum correlation of r = .95 in Experiment 1 and r = .98
in Experiment 2 for SD = 5◦ .
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 show that people are
capable of mentally simulating what will happen (Experiment
1) or what would have happened (Experiment 2). Given that
each clip stopped very shortly after the collision event, participants’ accuracy in judging whether ball B will go in or not is
quite impressive.

Experiment 3: Causation and Prevention
In Experiment 3, we wanted to investigate how people use
their intuitive understanding of physics to make judgments
about the extent to which one event caused or prevented another event from happening. Unlike in Experiments 1 and
2, participants (N = 22) saw each clip played until the end.
After having seen each clip twice, participants answered the
question “What role did ball A play?” by moving a slider
whose endpoints were labeled with “it prevented B from going through the hole” and “it caused B to go through the hole”.
The midpoint was labeled “neither”. The slider ranged from
-100 (prevented) to 100 (caused). Participants were instructed
that they could use intermediate values on the slider to indicate that ball A somewhat caused or prevented B.

Model Predictions
Physics Simulation Model According to the PSM, people
arrive at their cause and prevention judgments by comparing
what actually happened with what they think would have happened if the cause event had not taken place. More specifically, our model predicts that people compare P(B|A), the
probability that ball B will go through the gate given that it
collided with ball A, with P(B|¬A), the probability that B
would have gone through the gate if A had not been present
in the scene. Since participants in Experiment 3 watch the
clips until the end, the value of P(B|A) is certain: it is either
1 when B goes through the gate or 0 when B misses the gate.

In order to determine P(B|¬A), the PSM assumes that people
use their confidence in the result of their mental simulation of
what would have happened had A not been present.
In general, if P(B|A) − P(B|¬A) is negative, participants
should say that A prevented B from going through the gate.
Intuitively, if it was obvious that B would have gone in had A
not been present (i.e. P(B|¬A) is high) but B misses the gate
as a result of colliding with A (i.e. P(B|A) = 0), A should
be judged to have prevented B from going through the gate.
Similarly, if the difference is positive, participants should say
that A caused B to go through the gate. If the chance that B
would have gone through the goal without A was low but, as a
result of colliding with A, B goes through the gate, A should
be judged to have caused B to go through the gate. Clip 1 in
Figure 1 shows an example for which our model predicts that
participants will say that A neither caused nor prevented B.
P(B|A) is 0 since B does not go through the gate. However,
P(B|¬A) is also close to 0 since it is clear that B would have
missed the gate even if A had not been present in the scene.
Actual Force Model The Actual Force Model (AFM) is our
best attempt to apply Wolff’s (2007) force dynamics model
to our task.2 According to the AFM, participants’ cause and
prevention judgments are a direct result of the physical forces
which are present at the time of collision.
Clip 7 in Figure 1 illustrates how the AFM works. First,
a goal vector (dotted arrow) is drawn from ball B’s location
at the time of collision to an end state (E), which we defined
to be in the center of the gate. Second, the angle α between
the velocity vector that ball B has shortly after the collision
with A (solid arrow) and the goal vector as well as the angle
β between the velocity vector that ball B has shortly before
colliding with A (dashed arrow) are determined. Third, the
model predicts people’s cause and prevention judgments via
comparison of α and β. In general, if ball B goes in and β − α
is greater than 0, the model predicts people will say that A
caused B. Conversely, if ball B does not go in and β − α is
smaller than 0, the model predicts people will say A prevented
B. For situations in which β − α is greater than 0 but B does
not go in or β − α is smaller than 0 but B does go in, we fix
the model prediction to 0. This constraint prevents the model
from predicting, for example, that people will say “A caused
B” when B missed the gate.

Results and Discussion
Figure 3 shows participants’ mean cause and prevention
judgments for the 18 different clips together with the predictions of the PSM and the AFM. For the particular implementation of the PSM depicted in Figure 3, we directly used participants’ judgments from Experiment 2 in which they indicated
whether ball B would have gone through the gate if ball A
had not been present as the values for P(B|¬A). For example, in clip 5 the ball misses the gate (hence P(B|A) = 0) and
2 While

the force dynamics model only makes predictions about
which out of several sentences participants will choose to describe a
situation, the AFM makes quantitative predictions about the extent
to which an event is seen as causal/preventive.

380

counterfactual miss

counterfactual close

counterfactual hit

actual miss

2
1
0
−1
−2
1

2

3

4

5

6

actual close

2
1
0
−1
−2
7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

actual hit

2
1
0
−1
−2

Figure 3: Z-scored mean cause (green) and prevention ratings (red)
for the different clips denoted on the x-axes. ◦ = predictions of the
Physics Simulation Model (r = .99),  = predictions of the Actual
Force Model (r = .77). Error bars are ± 1 SEM.

participants’ average confidence rating from Experiment 2 of
whether B would have gone through in the absence of A is
97% (hence P(B|¬A) = .97). Thus the PSM predicts that participants will indicate that A strongly prevented B in this clip,
because P(B|A) − P(B|¬A) is close to the minimum of -1.
Overall, the PSM predicts participants’ cause and prevention ratings very well with r = .99 and RMSE = 0.02. A high
median correlation across participants of r = .88 with a minimum of r = .61 and a maximum of r = .95 demonstrates that
the good performance of the PSM is not due to a mere aggregation effect. The PSM achieves its high predictive accuracy
without the need for any free parameters. We directly used
participants’ judgments from Experiment 2 to determine the
value of P(B|¬A) for each clip. Figure 2 shows that participants’ judgments also correlate highly with the PSM when
we generate P(B|¬A) through the noisy simulations of Newtonian physics as described above.
The AFM, in contrast, does not predict participants’ judgments equally well with a correlation of r = .77 and RMSE =
0.44. While the AFM predicts people’s judgments for many of
the clips, there are a number of clips for which its predictions
are inaccurate (most notably: clips 2, 5, 9, 11 and 14).
Interestingly, people’s cause and prevention judgments
were not affected by the closeness of the actual outcome. That
is, participants’ cause ratings did not differ between situations in which B just went through the gate (clips 8, 10, 12:
M = .51, SD = .40) compared to situations in which B clearly
went through (clips 13 - 18: M = .49, SD = .42). Similarly,
prevention judgments were not different between situations in
which B just missed (clips 7, 9, 11: M = −.41, SD = .43)
and situations in which B clearly missed (clips 1-6: M =
−.47, SD = .44).
People’s cause and prevention judgments were very well
predicted by the PSM. In order to judge whether ball A caused
or prevented ball B, participants appear to compare what actually happened with what they think would have happened
had A not been present. This very high correlation is achieved

without the need for any free parameters in the model. P(B|A)
is determined by the outcome of the clip and P(B|¬A) by
participants’ judgments in Experiment 2. The PSM also
correlates highly with participants’ causal attributions when
P(B|¬A) is treated as a free parameter and estimated via the
noisy Newtonian physics model with a maximum correlation
of r = .99 (cf. Figure 2).
The AFM which assumes that people arrive at their judgments via comparing instantaneous force vectors, rather than
a mental simulation of the full physical dynamics cannot capture people’s judgments equally well. Clip 14 (see Figure 1)
gives an example in which the AFM gets it wrong. While
participants indicate that A caused B to go through the gate
(see Figure 3), the AFM model cannot predict this. In this
situation, the angle between the velocity vector of B shortly
after the collision and the goal vector α is greater than the
angle between the velocity vector of B shortly before the collision and the goal vector β. Hence, the model predicts that
A is preventing B but since B does in fact go in, the model’s
prediction is fixed to 0. In defense of the AFM, it could be
argued that clip 14 is better thought of as a causal chain in
which A causes B to hit the wall which then causes B to go in.
Whether participants would count the static wall as a cause of
B going through the gate is an empirical question. In any case,
the other problematic clips mentioned above remain. Each of
these clips only involves a single interaction.

Experiment 4: Almost Caused/Prevented
The results of Experiment 3 show that people’s cause and
prevention judgments are only influenced by their degree of
belief about whether the event of interest would have happened without the cause being present and not influenced by
how close the outcome actually was. However, often the
closeness with which something happened clearly matters to
us, such as when we almost missed a flight to Japan or only
just made it in time for our talk.
As mentioned above, one of the appeals of process accounts
is that they acknowledge the semantic richness of the concept
of causation by making predictions about which out of several causal verbs people will choose to describe a particular
situation. In this experiment, we will demonstrate that our
framework is not only capable of capturing the difference between different causal verbs such as caused or helped but also
predicts when people make use of intrinsically counterfactual
concepts such as almost caused or almost prevented. Current
process accounts (e.g. Wolff, 2007) cannot make predictions
in these situations as they aim to analyze causality without
making reference to counterfactuals.
In Experiment 4, participants (N = 41) had to select from
a set of seven sentences the one that describes the situation
best. The sentences were: A caused / helped / almost caused
B to go in the hole; A prevented / helped to prevent / almost
prevented B from going in the hole; A had no significant effect
on whether B went in the hole or not.

381

Table 1: Predicted probability of choosing different sentences in Experiment 4.
(1) caused
(2) helped
(3) almost caused

hit
hit
miss

(4) prevented
(5) helped to prevent

miss
miss

(6) almost prevented

hit

1 − P(B|¬A)
1 − abs(0.5 − caused)*
p(almost B|A)−
prevented
p(B|¬A)
1 − abs(0.5−
prevented)*
p(almost ¬B|A)−
caused
1 − max((1), ..., (6))

(7) no effect

hit/miss

to range from 0 to 1

Model Predictions
Table 1 gives an overview of the model predictions which
are a function of the outcome, that is, whether B went in
or not, and the probabilities P(B|¬A), P(almost B|A) and
P(almost ¬B|A). For P(B|¬A) we can again use participants’
judgments from Experiment 2 or the predictions of the PSM.
The model’s predictions for caused and prevented are identical to the predictions in Experiment 3. According to our
model, the difference between caused and helped is an epistemic one. People are predicted to select helped when B went
in and when they were uncertain about what would have happened had A not been present. However, when it was clear
that B would have gone in or would have missed, people
are predicted to select no effect or caused, respectively, and
not helped. Similarly, when B missed and it was uncertain
whether B would have gone in, the model predicts that people
select helped to prevent.
In order to predict when people select almost caused or
almost prevented, we first have to define the probabilities
P(almost B|A) and P(almost ¬B|A). These probabilities express the closeness of an alternative counterfactual outcome to
the actual outcome. One way to get at the probabilities would
be to have participants judge how closely B hit or missed the
gate. However, here we used a variation of the PSM to generate these probabilities. For each clip we ran a set of 100
x 10 noisy simulations for different noise levels from SD =
1◦ to 5◦ , whereby the noise was again introduced at the time
of collision. If the outcome in the noisy simulations was different from the original outcome in any of the ten repetitions
in each of the 100 simulated worlds, we counted this as a positive instance. If the outcome in all ten repetitions was the
same as the original outcome, we counted this as a negative
instance. For example, a value of P(almost ¬B|A) = .87 in a
situation in which B goes through the gate in the original clip,
means that in 87 out of the 100 generated worlds, the ball did
not go through the gate in at least one of the ten repetitions
of each of the worlds. For the remaining 13 worlds, the ball
did go in for all ten repetitions. Intuitively, in situations in
which the outcome was close, the chances that the outcome
in the noisy simulation will be different from the outcome in
the original clip in at least one out of ten repetitions are high.
However, if ball B clearly missed, for example, it is unlikely

counterfactual hit

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

actual hit

* rescaled

actual miss

probability

counterfactual close

1

actual close

outcome

counterfactual miss
c
hc
ac
p
hp
ap
n

Figure 4: Frequencies with which different sentences were selected
in Experiment 4 (bars) and predictions by the Physics Simulation
Model (circles), r = .86. The color of the clip number indicates
whether the ball went in (green) or not (red). Note: c = caused, hc =
helped (to cause), ac = almost caused, p = prevented, hp = helped to
prevent, ap = almost prevented, n = no significant effect.

that there will be a noisy simulation in which the introduced
angular perturbation is sufficient to make B go in.
The model predicts that people will select almost caused
when B just missed (which means that P(almost B|A) is high)
and the probability that it would have gone in given that A was
absent is low. People should select almost prevented when B
just went in (P(almost ¬B|A) is high), and when it was clear
that B would have gone in had A been absent (P(B|¬A) is
high). Finally, if none of these calculations result in a high
value, people are predicted to select that A had no significant
effect on whether B went through the gate.
The model predictions for the 18 different clips can be seen
in Figure 4. We used Luce’s (1959) choice rule to transform
the different probabilities into predictions about the frequencies with which the different sentences will be selected. The
model predicts that the modal choice in situations in which B
does not go in changes from prevented for clips in which it
was clear that B would have gone in (clips 5 & 6) to helped to
prevent in situations in which it was unclear whether B would
have gone in (clips 3 & 4). The same switch of the modal
response as a function about the certainty of what would have
happened is predicted for caused (clips 13 & 14) and helped
(clips 15 & 16). If there was little uncertainty about the counterfactual outcome and it matches the actual outcome, people
are predicted to select had no effect (clips 1, 2, 17, 18). For
clip 7 in which B just misses, people are predicted to select
almost caused since it was clear that B would have missed but
for A. Conversely, for clip 12, the model predicts that people
will select almost prevented: B just goes in and it was clear
that it would have gone in without A being present.

Results and Discussion
The model predicts the frequencies with which participants
select the different sentences very well, r = .86 (cf. Figure 4).
Figure 2 shows the correlation when we generate P(B|¬A)

382

through noisily perturbing the vector rather than taking participants’ ratings from Experiment 2. It predicts the modal
choice correctly in 12 out of 18 clips. While participants’
modal response does not change between clips 5 & 6 and clips
3 & 4 as predicted by the model, the proportion of helped
to prevent selections clearly increases. A similar shift is observed between clips 13 & 14 and 15 & 16 for which participants’ selection of helped increases as a function of the
uncertainty over what would have happened.
As predicted by the model, participants’ modal response in
clip 7 is almost caused and in clip 12 almost prevented. The
variance in responses within a clip is greater for the clips in
which the actual outcome was close (middle row) compared
to when it clearly missed (top row) or clearly hit (bottom
row). For example, in clip 10 in which B just goes in and the
counterfactual outcome is close the majority of participants
selected caused or helped while a minority of participants
selected almost prevented. This pattern closely matches the
predictions of our model. Whether a participant is expected
to select caused or almost prevented depends on the participant’s subjective belief about the counterfactual outcome. If a
participant thought that B would have missed she will say A
caused or helped it. However, if a participant thought that B
would have gone in but for A he will select almost prevented
because B barely goes in.
The close fit between our model prediction and participants’ selection of sentences demonstrates that our model is
capable of capturing some of the richness of people’s causal
vocabulary. Our model not only allows to distinguish cases of
causing/preventing from helping but also accurately predicts
people’s almost caused/prevented judgments. Process theories that analyze different causal concepts without the use of
counterfactuals (e.g. Wolff, 2007) cannot make predictions
about when people will say that something almost happened.

General Discussion
In this paper, we developed a framework for understanding causal attributions that aims to break the longstanding dichotomy between process accounts and dependency accounts
of causation. We showed that people’s quantitative cause and
prevention judgments (Experiment 3) as well as people’s use
of different causal verbs (Experiment 4) can be very well predicted by assuming that people compare what actually happened when the cause was present, with what they think would
have happened in the absence of the cause. We provided evidence that people use their intuitive understanding of physics
to simulate possible outcomes (Experiments 1 & 2). Understanding causal attributions in terms of counterfactuals defined over probabilistic generative models sidesteps the presumed trade-off between flexibility and richness described
above. Our model retains the generality of dependency accounts while the use of a generative model based on Newtonian physics allows us to capture some of the richness of
people’s concept of causation.
According to our account, causal attributions are subjective

and model-dependent. Two observers with a different understanding of the underlying generative model are predicted to
reach different causal verdicts for the same clip when their
beliefs about what would have happened in the absence of the
cause event differ. The noisy Newtonian physics model predicted participants’ judgments well in our experiments. However, we are not committed to this particular generative model
– indeed, our account predicts that the ways in which people’s
intuitive understanding of physics is biased will be mirrored
in their causal attributions.
While our framework shares some of the key insights of
Wolff’s (2007) force dynamic account, such as the need for
a richer specification of people’s causal representations, our
proposals are different in critical respects. Most importantly,
our accounts differ in the role that counterfactuals play. Wolff
(2007) aims to reduce causal attributions to configurations
of force vectors and argues that these force representations
(which are primary) can then be used for the simulation of
counterfactual outcomes (which are secondary). Our account,
in contrast, does not try to explain causal attributions in terms
of non-causal representations but postulates that causal attributions are intimately linked with the simulation of counterfactuals. Hence, we claim that in order to say whether A
caused B, it is necessary to consider what would have happened to B in the absence of A and not sufficient to only
consider what forces were present at the time of interaction
between A and B.
In future experiments, we will investigate how our account
can handle more complex physical interactions and interactions between intentional agents.

Acknowledgments
We thank Tomer Ullman, Peter Battaglia and Christos Bechlivanidis for very helpful discussions. This work was supported by a doctoral grant from the AXA research fund (TG), a John S. McDonnell
Foundation Scholar Award (NG), a ONR grant N00014-09-1-0124
(NG, JT), an ESRC grant RES-062- 33-0004 (DL) and ONR MURI
grants W911NF-08-1-0242 and 1015GNA126 (JT).

References
Cheng, P. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal power
theory. Psychological Review, 104(2), 367–405.
Dowe, P. (2000). Physical causation. Cambridge University Press.
Hamrick, J., Battaglia, P., & Tenenbaum, J. (2011). Internal physics
models guide probabilistic judgments about object dynamics. In
Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Hume, D. (2000 [1748]). An enquiry concerning human understanding: A critical edition. Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1970). Counterfactuals. Blackwell.
Luce, R. (1959). Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis.
John Wiley.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge University Press.
Suppes, P. (1970). A probabilistic theory of causation. NorthHolland.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and cognition. Cognitive Science, 12(1), 49–100.
Walsh, C. R., & Sloman, S. A. (2011). The meaning of cause and
prevent: The role of causal mechanism. Mind & Language, 26(1),
21–52.
Wolff, P. (2007). Representing causation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136(1), 82–111.

383

