UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
One-shot lotteries in the park

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8437p189

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Juni, Mordechai
Gureckis, Todd
Maloney, Laurence

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

One-shot lotteries in the park
Mordechai Z. Juni (mjuni@nyu.edu)1
Todd M. Gureckis (todd.gureckis@nyu.edu)1
Laurence T. Maloney (laurence.maloney@nyu.edu)1,2
1 Department

of Psychology, 2 Center for Neural Science, NYU
6 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003 USA

Abstract
How do people manipulate their environment when balancing
trade-offs between probability of success and payoff? Individuals in a city park played a simple lottery using a small set of
marbles placed in an urn. Participants had the ability to actively improve their chances of winning but only by reducing
the amount of money that they could possibly win. Hence,
participants controlled the lottery’s intuitive trade-off between
probability of success and potential payout. Across four different lottery structures, participants, on average, behaved systematically safer than the optimal strategy that maximizes expected gain. We explore two different accounts of this suboptimal choice behavior: probability distortion, and intrinsic
utility of winning.
Keywords: decision making; one-shot lottery; probability distortion; intrinsic utility of winning.

Introduction
Typical decision making studies offer participants choices between two fixed alternatives. Sometimes the prospects are
explicitly described: “Would you prefer to draw from Deck-1
which awards $2 with .8 probability or from Deck-2 which
awards $6 with .3 probability?” Other times the prospects
must be learned from experience: “After sampling repeatedly
from both decks and observing the outcomes, you will choose
which deck to draw from for the trial that counts.” Dissimilar
results from these two kinds of experimental paradigms have
led to an explosion of research concerning the descriptionexperience gap in decision-making under risk (for a brief review, see Hertwig & Erev, 2009).
While this dichotomy has gathered considerable focus, some decisions are not clearly descriptive or clearly
experience-based. We think of these situations as intuitive
“everyday” decisions that implicitly select one out of many
choices available. A key feature of such decisions is that people need not consider explicitly every possible alternative to
make a decision.
In the present study, participants manipulated their environment to choose between a large number of different
prospects that weren’t explicitly described and weren’t directly experienced. The experimental task was a one-shot lottery whose parameters (probability of winning and magnitude
of monetary prize) were partially under participants’ control.
Critically, the lottery was carefully designed so that increasing the probability of winning automatically decreased the
potential monetary prize, and increasing the potential monetary prize automatically decreased the probability of winning
(an inverse relationship typical of many real-world lotteries).
Our goal in this study was three fold. First, we were interested in how people approach situations where they have

control over a potentially rewarding stochastic environment
(see also Juni, Gureckis, & Maloney, 2011). In particular,
do people manipulate their environment to maximize their
expected gain? Second, we were interested in intuitive “everyday” decision-making where a large number of prospects
must be discerned. Finally, we were interested in taking some
of our recent decision making research out of the laboratory
to consider a more diverse population of decision makers.

Taking decision research out of the lab
The majority of psychological research in cognitive science
on decision making is conducted using laboratory studies
with college undergraduates. However, a number of recent arguments have been presented for why such populations may
not be representative of the general human population (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010). In addition, a large percentage of decision making research is conducted in the laboratory on computers for either real or hypothetical amounts
of money. One concern about computer-based studies is that
participants may suspect that the odds or payouts are being
manipulated as part of the study design.
To address these concerns, we ventured outside of the laboratory and into the streets of a large US city to elicit choice
behavior from randomly chosen pedestrians who were posed
with a single, non-hypothetical problem that was played out
for real, in person. Those who agreed to participate were informed that the lottery would be played only once and that
they would receive real money if they won. The lottery was
performed using a physical urn and marbles that the participant could see and touch. This guaranteed that participants
could be certain that there was no manipulation of the odds
(e.g., by a computer program).

The “marbles” game
The one-shot lottery we implemented is very intuitive. The
urn initially contains several black marbles and no white marbles. After agreeing to participate, the subject is handed several white marbles. To win the lottery, the participant must,
without looking, pull out a white marble from the urn. Thus,
the participants must put at least some of the white marbles
into the urn so that they have a chance of winning the lottery.
Of course, one strategy might be to place all the white marbles in the urn (to maximally increase the odds of successfully
drawing a white marble). However, the monetary prize for
pulling out a white marble from the urn is determined by the
number of white marbles that the participant chooses to not
put into the urn but rather set aside as potential prize money.

1745

Each white marble that was not placed into the urn represents
$1 in prize money, which is only awarded if the marble that
the participant pulls from the urn turns out to be white.
Four different conditions were tested which varied the
number of black marbles that were first placed in the urn: 1, 2,
8, or 25. In all conditions the participant was handed 10 white
marbles. If the participant were to put zero white marbles into
the urn, they have no chance of winning. On the other hand,
if they were to put all 10 white marbles into the urn, they win
nothing even if they draw a white marble. Thus, the experimental design restricted participants to put anywhere between
1 and 9 white marbles into the urn. This number becomes our
primary dependent measure (i.e., “how many white marbles
do participants put into the urn as a function of the number of
black marbles in the urn?”).
Figure 1 shows how the different probability structures of
the four conditions affects the respective expected gain functions. The figure also shows the respective number of white
marbles that should be put into the urn to maximize expected
gain in each condition. As is visible, the lottery was deliberately designed so that the normative ideal rule regarding how
many white marbles should be put into the urn is different for
each condition. When there is one black marble in the urn, the
participant can maximize expected gain by putting two white
marbles into the urn. When there are two black marbles, expected gain is maximized by putting three whites marbles into
the urn. When there are eight black marbles, expected gain is
maximized by putting four white marbles into the urn. And,
finally, when there are 25 black marbles in the urn1 , expected
gain is maximized by putting five white marbles into the urn.
The basic question asked in our study is if people combine
information about probability and reward to maximize their
expected gain in this intuitive one-shot lottery.

Methods
Subjects Data was collected from people walking through
Washington Square Park in New York City. 120 people (65
males and 55 females) participated in the experiment (30 per
condition). Ages ranged from 18 to 75 years, with an average
age of 29.77 years (SD=14.65) and a median age of 24 years.
Participants were not compensated for their time, but they did
receive the prize money (anywhere between $1 and $9) if they
won their lottery.
Materials To conduct the lottery we used transparent cups,
an opaque urn, 10 white marbles, and a varying number of
black marbles (1, 2, 8, or 25). The black and white marbles
were identical except for color and could not be identified
through touch.
1 In the limit, as the number of black marbles grows very large,
the rule that maximizes expected gain is to put half of the white
marbles into the urn and set the other half aside as prize money.
Given that participants were given 10 white marbles to work with, it
is impossible for the optimal rule to dictate placing more than five
of them into the urn no matter how many black marbles there are in
the urn. We thank Hang Zhang for pointing this out to us.

Figure 1: Experimental design. The participant decides how
many white marbles to put into the urn and how many to set
aside as the potential prize for winning the lottery. The black
dashed diagonal shows the prize money that the participant
receives if the marble that she pulls out from the urn turns out
to be white. It starts at $9 when only one white marble is put
in the urn and declines to $1 when nine white marbles are put
into the urn. The colored dashed curves show the probability
(p) of winning the lottery as a function of the number of black
marbles in the urn and the number of white marbles that the
participant chooses to put into the urn. Each probability function is multiplied by the gain function (i.e., the black dashed
diagonal) to generate an expected gain function. The colored
solid lines show the discrete expected gains of the lottery as
a function of the number of black marbles in the urn and the
number of white marbles that the participant chooses to put
into the urn. The vertical colored lines show the maximum
expected gain for each of the four experimental conditions.

Procedure The lottery was conducted next to a bench in
Washington Square Park. On the bench there was an empty
urn, a cup with white marbles, and a cup with black marbles. The experimenter handed the participant the cup with
the white marbles and said the following:
“To conduct the lottery we will be using marbles. You are
in control of the white marbles. There are 10 white marbles
and each represents $1. I am in control of the black marbles.
There are (1, 2, 8, 25) of them.”
The experimenter then showed the participant an envelope
with a large number $1 bills and emphasized that if the participant won the lottery they would receive real money. Next,
the experimenter poured the black marbles into the urn and
said the following:
“I have poured the black marbles into the urn. To perform
the lottery, you will be placing your hand into the urn and
pulling out a single marble without looking. If the marble

1746

that comes out is black you win nothing. If the marble that
comes out is white you will win the number of white marbles
that you chose not to put into the urn but rather set aside as
your potential prize money. This lottery will be performed
only once.”
Next the experimenter held the urn in one hand and an
empty cup in the other hand and said the following:
“Take your white marbles and decide how many you want
to put into the urn for the lottery and how many you want to
set aside in this cup as your potential prize money if you win
the lottery. Remember, each white marble is worth $1.”
Once the participant divided up the white marbles between
the urn and the prize cup, the experimenter asked the participant to confirm verbally what the monetary prize would be
if they pulled out a white marble from the urn to ensure that
there weren’t any misunderstandings.
Next the experimenter held up the urn above the participant’s eyes and asked the participant to pull out a single marble from the urn. If the participant pulled out a black marble
they received no money; if they pulled out a white marble
they were paid $1 for each white marble that they set aside in
the prize cup.

Results
Each of the four experimental conditions had 30 different participants. Each participant provided one data point. We report
how many white marbles they chose to put into the urn. The
outcomes of the lotteries are irrelevant to our study and so we
do not report them.
Figure 2 shows a box and whiskers plot for the number of
white marbles put into the urn in each experimental condition. The colored asterisks mark the optimal number of white
marbles that should be put into the urn to maximize expected
gain in each condition. For each of the four conditions we
used a single-sample t-test with the null hypothesis set to the
optimal number of marbles for the given condition. The stars
indicate the level of significance (see Figure 2 caption).
The number of white marbles that participants, on average,
tended to put into the urn increased systematically with an increase in the number of black marbles in the urn. Furthermore
the results indicate that, on average, participants systematically put one more white marble into the urn than dictated by
the normative rule that maximizes expected gain (i.e., people, on average, are sub-optimal with respect to the normative rule, preferring a $1 decrease to their potential prize in
exchange for an increase to their probability of winning the
lottery).

Discussion
Our results seem to indicate that participants, on average, did
not maximize expected gain. Curiously though, the number
of white marbles that they tended to put into the urn was one
more than the normative ideal rule irrespective of the experimental condition. This systematic tendency led us to explore
possible explanations to account for their sub-optimal manipulation of the lottery’s parameters.

Figure 2: Box and whiskers plot showing the results in all
four conditions. The colored asterisks mark the corresponding optimal number of white marbles that should be put into
the urn to maximize expected gain. Participants, on average,
tended to put “one too many” white marbles into the urn with
respect to optimal. Two stars indicate that this was significant
at the .01 level, while one star indicates that it was significant
at the .05 level. The non-significant condition had a p = .08.

Figure 3: Expected utility functions if we take into account
an additional utility of $4 for winning the lottery. Compare
this figure to Figure 1 that shows the expected gain functions
without taking into account any additional utility of winning.
Notice that the maximum expected utilities under this scheme
are shifted one marble to the right in all four conditions relative to the maximum expected gains in Figure 1.

1747

Figure 5: Expected gains based on the S-shaped probability
distortion depicted in Figure 4. Compare this figure to Figure
1 that shows the true probabilities and expected gain curves.
Notice that the maximum expected gains under this scheme
are shifted one marble to the right in all four conditions relative to the maximum expected gains in Figure 1.

Figure 4: S-shaped probability distortion.
The first possibility we explored is that participants might
have had an intrinsic utility for winning the lottery in addition to their utility for the actual money that they receive if
they win (Parco, Rapoport, & Amaldoss, 2005). We explored
this possibility by putting a fixed dollar value on the intrinsic
utility of winning (a free parameter).
Figure 3 shows the expected utility functions when the intrinsic utility of winning is valued at $4. Notice that the maximum expected utilities shift rightward one marble relative to
the normative rule that maximizes expected gain. This rightward shift persists if the intrinsic utility of winning is anywhere between $3.10 and $4.60.
This analysis suggests that participants’ sub-optimal behavior could be accounted for if they have an intrinsic utility
for winning the lottery that is in addition to their utility for
the actual money that they receive if they win.
The second possibility we explored is that participants
might have had a distortion in subjective probability. A standard single-parameter model for distortion of probability in
decision-making under risk is written as follows (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992):
w(p) =

pα
(pα + (1 − p)α )1/α

2012). However, the only way to shift the maximum expected
gain one marble to the right in all four conditions is by having
1.69 < α < 1.92.
Figure 4 shows an S-shaped probability distortion with
α = 1.8. Figure 5 shows the consequent expected gain functions based on this distorted probability function with the
maximum expected gains shifted one marble to the right.
This analysis suggests that participants’ sub-optimal behavior could be accounted for if they have an S-shaped probability distortion, a form only rarely encountered in decisions
from description tasks.

Conclusion

(1)

As our task resembles a decision from description more
than a decision from experience, we hypothesized that an
Inverse-S-shaped probability distortion might be more likely
to account for the data than an S-shaped probability distortion
(Ungemach, Chater, & Stewart, 2009; Wu, Delgado, & Maloney, 2009). In other words, we expected that participants’
average behavior might be accounted for with an α < 1 as is
commonly found in decisions from description, and not with
an α > 1 as is commonly found in decisions from experience
(but see Glaser, Trommershäuser, Mamassian, & Maloney,

Participants in typical decision making experiments select
among a small number of lotteries each with fixed probabilities and rewards. In the experiment reported here we considered a task where participants could manipulate their environment to improve their chances of winning the lottery but only
by reducing the amount of money that they could possibly
win.
While a simple and preliminary study, our results may
prove useful to researchers interested in how people balance
risk and reward in simple, intuitive decision tasks. Our experiment is unique in a couple of ways that are worth pointing
out.
First, participants could actively manipulate the odds of
successfully winning the lottery (by placing more or less
white marbles into the urn). While the literature on risky decision making is immense, we are unaware of previous studies

1748

that considered this active manipulation of the decision environment (one exception is a related study we reported last
year in Juni et al., 2011).
Second, the decision environment was set up to be intuitive, fast, and easy to conduct with everyday people walking through a park. As a result, we collected a more diverse
sample than is typical for research on judgment and decisionmaking.
Our primary results are that participants, on average, did
not maximize expected gain. In particular, participants, on
average, tended to put one additional white marble into the
urn than dictated by the normative ideal rule. By doing so
they slightly increased their probability of winning relative to
ideal, but also decreased their expected winnings slightly.
We considered two different accounts for participants’ suboptimal choice behavior. Participants in decisions from description typically over-weight small probabilities and underweight large probabilities (Inverse-S-shaped probability distortion). However, we found that we could account for the
results obtained only if we assumed that participants underweighted small probabilities and over-weighted large probabilities (S-shaped probability distortion). While such a tendency has been found in decisions from experience, our task
resembles a decision from description more than a decision
from experience, making an S-shaped probability distortion
surprising.
A second account for our data is that participants have an
intrinsic utility for winning the lottery that is in addition to
their utility for the actual money that they receive if they win.
If this account of participants’ behavior is correct, it would
seem that their intrinsic utility of winning is approximately
$4.
Future studies could tease apart these two accounts of participants’ behavior by keeping the objective probabilities of
the lotteries the same and simply scaling up the value of each
white marble. According to the probability distortion account
we should see no change in participants’ average behavior.
But according to the intrinsic utility of winning account we
should see participants’ average behavior shift toward optimal as the intrinsic utility of winning is diluted relative to the
increased potential winnings that the lotteries afford.

References
Glaser, C., Trommershäuser, J., Mamassian, P., & Maloney,
L. T. (2012). Comparison of distortion of probability information in decision under risk and an equivalent visual
task. Psychological Science, 23(4), 419-426.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The
weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(2-3), 61-135.
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description-experience
gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(12),
517-523.
Juni, M. Z., Gureckis, T. M., & Maloney, L. T. (2011). Don’t
stop ’til you get enough: Adaptive information sampling in
a visuomotor estimation task. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher,
& T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society (p. 2854-2859).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Parco, J. E., Rapoport, A., & Amaldoss, W. (2005). Twostage contests with budget constraints: An experimental
study. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 49(4), 320338.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative represenation of uncertainty. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(4), 297-323.
Ungemach, C., Chater, N., & Stewart, N. (2009). Are probabilities overweighed or underweighted when rare outcomes
are experienced (rarely)? Psychological Science, 20(4),
473-479.
Wu, S. W., Delgado, M. R., & Maloney, L. T. (2009).
Economic decision-making under risk compared with an
equivalent motor task.
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 106(15), 6088-6093.

Acknowledgments
MZJ was supported by NIH Grant T32 EY007136. LTM was
supported NIH Grant EY019889. TMG was supported by the
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA)
via Department of the Interior (DOI) contract D10PC20023.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding
any copyright annotation thereon. The views and conclusions
contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or
endorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA, DOI,
or the U.S. Government.

1749

