UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Order Effects in Moral Judgment. Searching for an Explanation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9dw8k367

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Wiegmann, Alex
Okan, Yasmina

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Order Effects in Moral Judgment
Searching for an Explanation
Alex Wiegmann (alex.wiegmann@psych.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, Gosslerstr. 14
University of Göttingen, Germany

Yasmina Okan (yokan@ugr.es)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada
Campus Universitario de la Cartuja s/n, 18071, Granada, Spain

Abstract
Research on moral judgment has shown that the order in
which dilemmas are presented to subjects often has a strong
influence on their judgment. However, the psychological
mechanisms underlying order effects are still opaque. In this
paper we aimed to isolate the features that a scenario must
exhibit in order to influence judgment of subsequent
scenarios. For this enterprise, we identified several features
from a scenario known to cause order effects, and tested
which of these features are necessary to influence subsequent
scenarios. Although we still do not have a full understanding
of what causes order effects, we made significant progress
towards this aim. In five experiments we ruled out some
promising explanations such as order effects being driven by
an emotional activation linked to the first scenario. Instead,
we found order effects to depend on whether the scenario
being influenced and its preceding scenario share rather
subtle structural similarities.
Keywords: Order effects; moral judgment; trolley dilemma.

Introduction
Imagine one group of subjects is presented with two moral
dilemmas, A and B, one after the other. For each of these
scenarios subjects have to make a judgment concerning
which of two different hypothetical actions should be taken
by the agent in each case. In both dilemmas, the life of
people is at stake. Imagine a second group of subjects is
presented with the same task, the only difference being the
order in which the two scenarios are presented. From a
normative perspective it seems clear that the order of
presentation should not influence subjects’ judgments.
However, a number of studies have shown that the order of
presentation actually influences judgments. Moreover, the
impact of the order of presentation is often stronger than
that of factors that are generally considered to influence
moral judgments (e.g., the existence of physical contact with
the potential victim in the scenarios; Wiegmann, Okan, &
Nagel, 2012) Interestingly, not only lay people are
susceptible to order effects but also professional
philosophers (Schwitzgebel & Cushman, 2012).
In the paper at hand we present five experiments aiming to
identify the factors causing order effects. The question
guiding the experiments that will be reported is: Which are
the features of a scenario known to cause order effects that
enable it to influence other scenarios?

Wiegmann et al. (2012) claimed that research on moral
judgment pointed to a systematic pattern of order effects
that had been previously overlooked: Only judgments of
actions that are normally (i.e., if judged in isolation)
regarded as morally acceptable are affected by the order of
presentation, and this is only the case if the dilemma is
immediately preceded by a dilemma in which the proposed
action was not considered as morally acceptable. If there is
such a constellation, judgments of actions normally
regarded as morally acceptable can approach judgments of
previous actions (i.e., they can be deemed as less
acceptable).
In order to test this claim Wiegmann and colleagues
presented two groups of subjects with five trolley dilemmas,
one after another (see Table 1). In all cases a train out of
control was heading towards three railroad workers. An
action was described that could be conducted by an agent in
the situation to save the workers. This action varied in each
of the five scenarios. The ordering of the scenarios was
based on the level of agreement with the proposed action in
each case, according to independent judgments provided in
an independent pilot study (see Table 1). Level of
agreement was measured on a scale of 1 to 6, where 1 was
“not at all”, and 6 was “absolutely”. While in one group the
level of agreement with the proposed action steadily
increased, it decreased in the other group.
Table 1: Summaries of the actions proposed in the five
dilemmas.
Scenario

Proposed action

Push

Push a large person from a bridge to stop the train

Trap

Push a button that will open a trap door that will
let a person on top of the bridge fall and stop the
train

Redirect

Redirect a train with a person inside that is on a
parallel track onto the main track to stop the train

Run Over

Redirect an empty train that is on a parallel track
onto the main track to stop the train, running over
a person that is on the connecting track

Standard

Press a switch that will redirect the train that is out
of control to a parallel track where one person will
be run over

1143

Table 2: Mean ratings (standard deviations) of agreement
and percentage of subjects disagreeing with the proposed
action in the five scenarios when evaluated independently.

Scenario (each n=20)
Run
Measure
Push
Trap
Redirect
Over
Standard
Mean Rating
1.95
3.4
4.15
4.4
4.45
(SD)
(1.76)
(1.76)
(1.42)
(1.14)
(1.15)
% Disagreement
80
40
30
10
15
Note. % Disagreement is the percentage of subjects who gave a rating ≤ 3
on a scale ranging from 1 to 6.

According to the pattern of order effects outlined above,
subjects’ ratings for actions in the condition where the
level of agreement was steadily decreasing (i.e., from
Standard to Push; in the following called Least Aversive
First, LAF) should not differ from ratings for the same
actions when presented separately. The reason is that in
such a constellation it is never the case that a judgment of an
action normally (i.e., if judged in isolation) regarded as
morally acceptable is preceded by an action that is normally
regarded as morally unacceptable. In contrast, ratings for the
actions in the last three scenarios in the Most Aversive First
(MAF) condition (i.e., Redirect, Run Over and Standard)
should decrease to the level of agreement of the preceding
scenario (i.e., Trap), according to the pattern outlined above.
That is, the low rating of Trap is assumed to reduce the level
of agreement in Redirect, that in turn is assumed to decrease
the rating for Run Over, that eventually decreases
Standard’s rating. This prediction was confirmed (see
Figure 1). Unexpectedly, the ratings of the action in Trap
were also affected by the ratings of the action in Push,
although Trap is normally judged as unacceptable by a slim
majority of subjects.

This finding motivated a closer look at the results at the
level of individual participants. In particular, the data was
explored treating the ratings as a set of binary choices made
by each participant (i.e., treating ratings ≤ 3 as indication of
disagreement and ratings ≥ 4 as indication of agreement
with the proposed action). The following tendency was
observed: A disagreement with an action was virtually
always “transferred” to the judgment of the action in the
next scenario. That is, an action receiving a positive rating
when judged independently received lower ratings when
presented as part of a sequence if the preceding action was
rated negatively by the same participant. However, positive
ratings did not affect the ratings of the next action (by
changing them into positive ones) if this action was rated
negatively in independent ratings. Reformulating the pattern
this way allows order effects to occur not only for actions
rated positively when judged independently, but also for
actions rated negatively on average. It just has to be the case
that the number of participants that disagree with the
proposed action in a particular scenario is sufficiently higher
than the number of participants that disagree with the action
in the subsequent scenario. This excess of “disagreements”
can be transferred to the next scenario and cause an order
effect. On the flipside, an order effect might also occur
when a particular dilemma is preceded by another one
where the proposed action is judged positively. Again, it
just has to be the case that the number of disagreements in
the preceding scenario is sufficiently higher than in the
following scenario.
Although the pattern outlined at the individual level fits
the data and allows making accurate predictions, the
psychological mechanisms underlying order effects are still
opaque. The experiments reported below pinpointed some
of the features of the Push scenario that could be affecting
other scenarios, and tested the effect of each of them
individually. Features include differences in an emotional
activation associated with Push, the activation of moral
principles (e.g., “do not kill”) and the trade-off of lives.

Experiment 1

Figure 1: Mean ratings of agreement (1 stands for “not at
all, 6 stands for “absolutely”) with the proposed action in
the five scenarios when evaluated sequentially, as a function
of the order of presentation. Error bars indicate SEM. MAF
= Most Aversive First; LAF = Least Aversive First.

In this experiment we aimed to test the hypothesis that the
order effect described can be explained in terms of an
emotional activation linked to Push, which would affect
judgments in subsequent scenarios. As Green and his
collaborators have shown, dilemmas like Push are more
likely to activate brain regions associated with emotional
processing than dilemmas like Standard (Green,
Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001). Thus, in
the sequence of scenarios described above (MAF) subjects
might first experience a negative emotion when they are
presented with Push, and once this negative emotion is in
place, it might lead subjects to judge all the actions
proposed in the remaining scenarios as morally
unacceptable (cf. Haidt, 2001, Prinz, 2007). If the activation
of such negative emotion is sufficient to cause order effects,
then the presentation of other aversive scenarios that elicit a

1144

similar emotion should also affect the judgment for other
less aversive dilemmas (e.g., Standard).
Participants 259 subjects were recruited for a
compensation of £ 0.50 via an online database located in the
U.K..
Design, Materials, and Procedure Subjects were randomly
assigned to one of four conditions. In two conditions
subjects first had to read an aversive story, and then they
were asked to judge the proposed action in Standard. The
story was different in each of these two conditions. The
following two stories were used:
Incest (Haidt, 2001):
Julie and Mark are brother and sister. They are traveling
together in France on summer vacation from college. One
night they are staying alone in a cabin near the beach. They
decide that it would be interesting and fun if they tried making
love. At the very least it would be a new experience for each
of them. Julie was already taking birth control pills, but Mark
uses a condom too, just to be safe. They both enjoy making
love, but they decide not to do it again. They keep that night as
a special secret, which makes them feel even closer to each
other.

Starving Child (actual newspaper article ):
1

The 41-year-old man and 25-year-old woman, who met
through a chat website, reportedly left their infant unattended
while they went to internet cafes. They only occasionally
dropped by to feed her powdered milk.
According to the Yonhap news agency, South Korean police
said the couple had become obsessed with raising a virtual girl
called Anima in the popular role-playing game Prius Online.
The game, similar to Second Life, allows players to create
another existence for themselves in a virtual world, including
getting a job, interacting with other users and earning an extra
avatar to nurture once they reach a certain level.

In the two remaining conditions subjects had to either judge
Standard alone (to obtain a baseline rating), or Standard
after having judged Push. Additionally, as the study was
conducted online, at the end of the questionnaire subjects
completed a simple logical task to identify those who did
not pay sufficient attention to the task.

answer the test question, failed to solve the logical question
or went through the whole survey in less than 40 seconds.
The results for the remaining subjects are summarized in
Figure 2. The mean rating for Standard when judged
independently was 4.02 (SD=1.18), while it was lower
(M=3.28, SD=1.39) when it was preceded by Push
(Push_Standard), as predicted. A planned-contrast test
confirmed this difference to be significant, F1,205=9.68,
p<0.001. In contrast to this, reading and judging Newspaper
or Incest did not have any effect on Standard (Standard vs.
Incest_Standard: F1,205=0.01, p>0.9; Standard vs.
Child_Standard: F1,205=0.10, p>0.7).
Discussion The findings obtained suggest that an emotional
activation may not be sufficient to cause the kind of order
effect described above. That is, judgments for Standard
were not affected by the prior presentation of different
scenarios that are likely to have elicited negative emotions.
Further evidence for this idea comes from ongoing research
conducted in Spain in which participants were presented
with selected pictures of unpleasant affective valence and
high arousal, before judging Standard. In line with the study
described above, preliminary results revealed that the
emotional priming did not affect judgments for Standard.

Experiment 2a and 2b
The two following experiments test the hypothesis that the
order effect described is related to differences in the
activation of principles associated with each dilemma. In
particular, Push could trigger the urge for subjects to justify
their judgment, or the principle “Do not kill!”, while
Standard may not. If the activation of such principle can
account for the carry over effect of judgments when Push is
presented first, it is reasonable to expect that forcing the
activation of a principle relevant for Standard when this
dilemma comes first (e.g., “Save the greater number”)
should lead to an order effect in the opposite direction (i.e.,
people should be more likely to agree with the action
proposed in subsequent scenarios).

Experiment 2a

Figure 2: Mean Ratings for Standard as a function of the
preceding scenario. Error bars indicate SEM.
Results Fifty subjects dropped out because they did not

The rationale for this experiment was as follows: When
subjects judge the action proposed in Push as morally
unacceptable they articulate, so to say, a prohibition or
imposing a ban. Actions which we prohibit are generally
accompanied by a justification. For instance, one often has
to justify or explain to kids why something is forbidden. In
contrast, there are fewer situations where one has to explain
why something is allowed. Justifications for allowed actions
generally only happen when the actions were expected to be
forbidden. In Push, the vast majority of subjects judge the
proposed action as forbidden while in Standard they don’t.
Hence, it could be the case that subjects first judging Push
have a stronger urge to justify their judgment. If the
justification is “You are not allowed to kill innocent people”
(or something similar), judgments for subsequent scenarios
could accommodate this justification, explaining why all

1145

proposed actions are regarded as not acceptable. In contrast,
subjects starting with Standard might not have an urge to
justify their initial judgment, explaining why subsequent
judgments are not affected.

even more subtle principles (Kamm, 2007). In this
experiment we sought to trigger a clear principle (saving the
greater number) and test whether it would be carried over to
the following scenarios, thereby affecting judgments.

Participants 36 subjects were recruited from a student
subject pool. Participants were compensated with course
credits.

Participants 63 subjects were recruited from a student
subject pool. Participants were compensated with course
credits.

Design, Materials, and Procedure Subjects were presented
with the LAF condition. However, in contrast to the original
LAF condition described above, here participants were
required to justify their judgment for Standard. Since
participants were recruited from the same student pool
(mainly psychology students) and this experiment was
conducted only a few weeks after the one conducted by
Wiegmann and colleagues (2012), the original LAF
condition was used as a control condition.

Figure 4: Illustration of the Rescue scenario
Design, Materials, and Procedure Two of the three
conditions tested were LAF and MAF. The third condition
included a new scenario called Rescue that was placed
before Standard and was intended to trigger the principle
“Save the greater number of lives” (see Figure 4). In this
scenario a train is threatening one person and another train
is threatening three persons. There is not enough time to
throw the switch for both trains so that everyone is saved.
We assumed that in such a case virtually everyone would
agree to throw the switch that will save three persons rather
than only one.

Figure 3: Mean Ratings for the five scenarios as a function
of whether subjects had to justify their judgment for
Standard. Arrow indicates order of presentation. Error bars
indicate SEM.
Results One subject failed to answer all questions for
unknown reasons. Results for the remaining subjects are
summarized in Figure 3. As can be seen, being forced to
justify the judgment for Standard did not influence
judgments for the actions proposed in the following
scenarios. An ANOVA with justification (required vs. not
required) as a between-subjects factor and scenario as a
within-subjects factor revealed that there was neither a main
effect of justification (F1,58=.02, p=.88) nor an interaction
between justification and scenario (F4,232=.62, p=.65).

Experiment 2b
The rationale for this experiment was as follows: When
judging Push the principle “Do not kill!” comes easily to
mind because the proposed action in this dilemma is a
paradigmatic case of killing a person. In contrast, Standard
might not trigger such a clear principle. In philosophy, the
permissibility to intervene in Standard is often justified by
rather subtle principles like the Doctrine of Double Effect or

Figure 5: Mean ratings for the 5 (6) scenarios as a function
of both the order of presentation and whether the Rescue
scenario was present. For example, Push->Standard means
subjects started with Push and ended with Standard.
Results The results are shown in Figure 5. As expected, a
transference in judgments was observed for MAF, but not
for LAF (F4,160=11.37, p<.001). However, introducing
Rescue before Standard did not affect judgments for
Standard, as evidenced by the absence of an interaction of
condition and scenario between LAF and the new condition
starting with Rescue (F4, 160=.60, p=.67).
Discussion The results of these two experiments can be
interpreted in at least two ways. First, it could be the case
that the order effect in MAF is neither based on a stronger
urge to justify one’s judgment in Push (2a) nor due to
Push triggering a clear principle (2b). Alternatively, the
order effect in MAF could indeed be driven by a principle

1146

triggered by Push which is carried over. However, the
principle triggered by Standard or Rescue may not be, so to
say, strong enough to override intuitions in other scenarios.
In other words, while a principle like “Do not kill!” may be
carried over once it has been triggered, a principle like
“Save the greater number!” may not be potent enough to
influence moral judgments in following scenarios (cf, e.g.,
Gert, 2007).

Experiment 3
In this experiment we took a further step aiming to
investigate which features of Push are necessary to cause an
order effect. In particular, we examined the impact of the
number of lives that are traded-off in Push.
Participants 343 subjects, each receiving £ 0.50, were
recruited via an online database located in the U.K..
Design, Materials, and Procedure Subjects were randomly
assigned to one of four conditions. In one condition
Standard was judged alone (to obtain a baseline rating),
while in a second condition Standard was judged after Push,
involving the same number of potential victims as in
previous experiments (Standard_Push_3). In the third and
fourth conditions we manipulated the number of potential
victims that would be saved by the intervention in Standard.
In one condition nobody would be saved by pushing the
person from the bridge (Standard_Push_0), while in the
other condition a group of one hundred people would be
saved (Standard_Push_100).

save anyone (i.e., Standard_Push_0) (M=4.26, SD=1.46).
The difference between Standard in this condition and the
baseline rating was not significant, F<1. In contrast, ratings
for Standard where lower in Standard_Push_3 and in
Standard-Push-100 than for the baseline (F1,243=18.14,
p<0.001 and F1,243=4.57, p<0.05, respectively).
Discussion One might wonder why the rating for Standard
is lowered to a lesser extent when it is preceded by Push
involving saving 100 people than by Push involving saving
three. However, the pattern outlined above can account for
this finding. Recall that most of the time only negative
ratings were transferred to the next scenario. Since the
rating for Push_100 (M=3.61, SD=1.50) was already high, it
is not surprising that the rating for Standard_Push_100 was
relatively high too. There were seemingly just not enough
negative ratings for Push_100 to be transferred and lower
the rating of Standard_Push_100 to the same extent as for
Standard_Push_3. Interestingly, the results show that
Standard is not influenced by a version of Push in which
killing the person does not save anyone. Since Push_0 and
Push_3 only differ with regards to whether there is a tradeoff of lives involved, we can infer that a dilemma must
contain such trade-off to influence judgments for Standard.

Experiment 4
The results of experiment 3 suggest that a scenario
preceding Standard needs to contain a trade-off of lives in
order to influence Standard. In this experiment we aimed to
investigate whether Standard could be influenced by a
preceding scenario similar to Push with regards to being
aversive and containing a trade-off, but with a different
cover story. Furthermore, we tested whether just reading
(and not judging) Push or similar scenarios would be
sufficient to influence Standard.
Participants 321 subjects were recruited for a
compensation of £ 0.50 via an online database located in the
U.K..

Figure 6: Mean ratings for Standard and its preceding
scenario, i.e. Push-0 is the rating for Push if nobody is
recued by killing the one person and Push-0_Standard is the
rating for Standard if preceded by Push-0.
Results 96 subjects did not answer the test question, gave
the wrong answer to the logical task, or took less than 40
seconds for completing the task.
The results for the remaining subjects are summarized in
Figure 6. The baseline rating for Standard was the highest in
descriptive terms (M=4.4, SD=1.26). The next highest rating
for Standard was delivered if it was preceded by the version
of Push where pushing the man from the bridge would not

Design, Materials, and Procedure Subjects were randomly
assigned to one of five conditions. As in previous
experiments there was one condition to get a baseline for
Standard and another where Standard was preceded by
Push. In a third condition (Organ) Standard was preceded by
a scenario in which a doctor can save three patients by
transplanting organs from a healthy person into them.. The
last two conditions, (Push_readonly) and (Organ_readonly)
were identical to Push and Organ, respectively, except that
subjects were not given the opportunity to judge the
proposed action.
Results 43 subjects did not answer the test question, gave
the wrong answer to the logical task, or took less than 40
seconds for completing the task.
The results for the remaining subjects are summarized in
Figure 7. The baseline rating for Standard was the highest in

1147

descriptive terms (M=4.35, SD=1.25). Again, the difference
between Standard_Push_3 (M=3.37, SD=1.37) and the
baseline rating was, as expected, significant (F1,282=14.46,
p<0.001). Interestingly, ratings for Standard when preceded
by Organ were also significantly lower than the baseline
(F1,282=6.13, p<0.05). As Figure 7 shows, it did not make a
difference whether subjects just read or also judged the
action proposed in Push or Organ.

Figure 7: Mean Ratings for Standard as a function of the
preceding scenario. Error bars indicate SEM. “ro” stands for
“read only”.
Discussion The results showed that Standard can be
influenced by a scenario with a different cover story than
Push, but that also involves a trade-off of lives. This
influence is not as strong as the influence of Push but it is
still significant. Moreover, whether subjects only read a
scenario or also judged it did not affect judgments.

General Discussion
In this paper we sought to search for an explanation of order
effects in moral judgment. The overarching question
guiding our experiments was: Which features of the Push
scenario are the ones that enable Push to influence other
scenarios such as Standard? Although we still do not have a
complete explanation, we think we have made some
progress towards this aim.
Our findings suggest that the order effect is likely not be
caused by negative emotions activated by Push. Presenting
subjects with aversive stories which were likely to elicit
such emotions did not have any effect on the judgment for
Standard (Experiment 1).
Forcing participants to justify their judgment for Standard or
saliently triggering the principle “Save as many lives as
possible!” did not affect judgments for Standard either
(Experiments 2a and 2b). As noted above, these results can
be explained in two ways: First, it might be that the order
effect is not driven by the activation of a principle for the
Push scenario, which is then applied to subsequent
scenarios. Second, it might be that the principle “Save lives”
affects subsequent judgments only to a lesser extent than the

principle triggered in Push (presumably: “Do not kill”” or
“Do not kill in order to save lives!”).
Interestingly, we found a feature of Push that seems
necessary to influence a subsequent scenario: The trade-off
of lives. A version of Push which did not involve such
trade-off had no influence on judgments for Standard.
Hence, apart from being judged more negatively than
Standard (see Introduction) containing a trade-off of lives
seems to be a necessary feature for a scenario to influence
subsequent scenarios.
Interestingly, when we presented subjects with a scenario
(Organ) similar to Push in that it contained a very aversive
action and a trade-off of lives, but that differed with regards
to the cover story, the agreement with the action proposed in
Standard was also reduced. Future research should examine
other similarities between Push and Organ which could be
related to their potency to cause order effects.
In summary, our findings suggest that the features that a
moral dilemma must exhibit in order to affect judgments in
subsequent dilemmas (here, in Standard) are:
1. It must receive significantly more negative ratings than
the following dilemma (see Introduction)
2. It must contain a trade-off of lives
Furthermore, if the preceding scenario exhibits these two
features the influence on Standard becomes even stronger if
the superficial features of the cover story resemble the ones
in Standard.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG WA 621/21-1), and the
Courant Research Centre Evolution of Social Behaviour„
University of Göttingen (funded by the German Initiative of
Excellence).

References
Gert, B. (2007). Common morality: Deciding what to do.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley,
J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293,
2105–2108.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment.
Psychological Review, 108, 814–834
Kamm, F. M. (2007). Intricate ethics. Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Prinz, J. J. (2007). The emotional construction of morals.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Schwitzgebel, E., & Cushman, F. (in press). Expertise in
moral reasoning? Order effects on moral judgment in
professional philosophers and non-philosophers. Mind
and Language.
Wiegmann, A., Okan, Y., & Nagel, J.(2012). Order effects
in moral judgment. Philosophical Psychology,

1148

