UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preservation of the Initial Analysis in Absence of Pragmatic Inference with Japanese Relative
Clause Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sd3130b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Nakamura, Chie
Arai, Manabu

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preservation of the Initial Analysis in Absence of Pragmatic Inference with Japanese
Relative Clause Sentences
Chie Nakamura (arumakan@nak.ics.keio.ac.jp)
JSPS Research Fellow / Graduate School of Science and Technology, Keio University
3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, Japan

Manabu Arai (m-arai@phiz.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
JSPS Research Fellow / Department of Language and Information Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Abstract

However, in their study as well as their follow-up studies
(e.g., Christianson, Williams, Zacks, & Ferreira, 2006;
Ferreira et al., 2002 for the review), it is arguable that the
initial incorrect analysis, even though it was suppressed
following reanalysis, may have been re-activated by
processing the question sentences. Another criticism for
their argument of incomplete representations is an influence
of pragmatic inference. For example, even with their items
with reflexive verbs such as (1), it is still possible to infer
that the baby spit up while being dressed by Anna even
though such an interpretation is not syntactically licensed.
The first issue was addressed by van Gompel, Pickering,
Pearson, and Jacob (2006), who reported an effect of
syntactic priming for the initial incorrect analysis. In their
study, participants first read a prime sentence that was either
structurally ambiguous (3a) or unambiguous with a comma
following the subordinate clause verb (3b). Next, they
completed a sentence fragment such as When the doctor was
visiti….

Previous studies reported that language comprehenders tend
to preserve the initial incorrect analysis with temporarily
ambiguous sentences following structural reanalysis
(Christianson et al., 2001; van Gompel et al., 2006). One
possible criticism is that the sentences tested in previous
studies allow comprehenders to pragmatically infer that the
initial misanalysis may be true. It is thus unclear whether the
tendency can still be observed where such inferences are not
possible. The current study therefore tested the relative clause
sentences in Japanese, which are temporarily ambiguous
between the main clause and relative clause analysis.
Crucially, our sentences differed from those in the past
studies in that the correct interpretation following reanalysis
makes an interpretation for the initial analysis pragmatically
incompatible. The results demonstrated that an interpretation
for the initial analysis persists even without pragmatic
inference and that such incomplete syntactic representations
are most likely due to excessive processing load.
Keywords: good-enough representation; garden-path
sentence; self-paced reading; eye-tracking; reading

(3a) While the man was visiting the children played outside.
(3b) While the man was visiting, the children played outside.

Introduction

Their results showed that participants produced more
transitive sentences following (3a) than following (3b),
providing evidence that the initial incorrect analysis
remained activated. However again it is possible to infer
that in the example (3a) the man was visiting the children
who played outside. It is therefore unclear from previous
studies that the initial incorrect analysis would still remain
activated and its interpretation would persist even where
such pragmatic inferences are not possible.
To address this issue, the current study tested Japanese
relative clause structure such as (4).

It is known that structurally ambiguous sentences such as
While the man hunted the deer ran into the woods cause
readers to experience difficulty at the point where the
structure is disambiguated (i.e., ran), which indicates that
they initially adopted an incorrect analysis (i.e., the
transitive analysis). Past research showed that in processing
this type of ambiguous sentences, language comprehenders
tend to preserve an interpretation of the initial incorrect
analysis even after the structure was fully reanalyzed and
they often end up with incomplete, or so-called goodenough
sentence
representations
(Christianson,
Hollingworth, Halliwell, & Ferreira, 2001; Ferreira, Βailey
& Ferraro, 2002). In Christianson et al. (2001), for instance,
participants read sentences like (1) and were next shown
comprehension questions like (2). Their results showed that
participants often answered incorrectly by responding “yes”.
Christianson et al. (2001) argued that the reanalysis of
ambiguous sentence structures is not always complete and
the initial incorrect analysis often remains preserved and not
fully suppressed.

(4) Akachan-ga nomimono-o koboshita joyuu-o jitto mitusmeta.
Subject
Βaby-NOM

[RC object RC verb]
RC head adverb MC verb
[drink-ACC spilled] actress-ACC fixedly stared at

‘The baby stared fixedly at the actress who spilled the drink.’

In Japanese, relative clauses precede lexical heads without
an overt complementizer and without any grammatical
marking on the verb. This creates local syntactic ambiguity
up to the first verb (koboshita, ‘spilled’); on hearing the
verb, the structure is ambiguous between a main clause (MC,
henceforth) and a relative clause (RC). It is known that
people initially analyze the first verb as a part of MC and
construct a sentence representation of the sentence-initial

(1) While Anna dressed the baby spit up on the bed.
(2) Did Anna dress the baby?

791

NP (akachan, ‘baby’) to be the agent-subject of the verb, as
in (4a). Upon encountering another noun phrase (NP)
following the verb (i.e., joyuu, ‘actress’), readers are forced
to reanalyze for a correct syntactic structure that the initial
verb phrase is a part of an embedded RC that modifies the
RC-head NP (4b).

and, if it is, whether the difference in processing difficulty
due to the manipulation of semantic bias would in any way
be related to the tendency to preserve the initial analysis.

Experiment 1
We conducted a moving window self-paced reading
experiment with word-by-word presentation.

(4a) [Akachan-ga nomimono-o koboshita]
(4b) Akachan-ga [nomimono-o koboshita] joyuu-o

Participants
Twenty-four native speakers of Japanese, recruited from the
student community at the University of Tokyo, participated
in the experiment in exchange for small remuneration.

Crucially, the correct interpretation following reanalysis
with Japanese RC sentences makes the interpretation of the
initial misanalysis pragmatically incompatible. For the
example (4), it is impossible to infer that the baby spilled
milk after readers correctly reanalyze the structure. This is
because Japanese RC structure does not include an implicit
argument and therefore there is no ambiguity about who did
the spilling action after reanalysis. On the other hand,
English sentences in previous studies always included an
implicit argument for the verb, which created ambiguity
about the direct object.
Using this structure, we manipulated semantic bias of the
direct object noun within the RC. Past research
demonstrated that readers integrate non-structural
information without delay in processing similar ambiguous
sentences (e.g., McRae, Spivey-Knowlton, & Tanenhaus,
1998; Garnsey, Pearlmutter, Myers, & Lotocky, 1997).
McRae et al. (1998) showed that when a subject noun is
plausible as patient but implausible as agent (e.g., The crook
arrested by the detective was guilty…), readers were more
likely to consider the infrequent RC structure on
encountering the verb and the preposition by within the RC.
Also, Garnsey et al. (1997) demonstrated that plausibility of
post-verbal nouns as a direct object immediately affected
the processing of temporary ambiguous sentence
complement sentences (e.g., The senior senator regretted
the decision/reporter had ever…). Importantly, the
plausibility effect interacted with structural bias of
individual verbs; when the verb was biased toward the
sentence complement, there was no ambiguity cost
irrespective of whether the post-verbal noun was plausible
as a direct object or not. These results indicate that the verb
introduces possible thematic roles within its event semantics
and readers check the fit with those roles for each candidate
phrase and assess the probabilities of possible structures.
Importantly, as Garnsey et al. (1997) suggests, the verb bias
appears to exert a stronger influence than the thematic-fit of
postverbal elements in English.
On the other hand, in Japanese, the semantics of any
arguments may affect parsing since the head does not appear
until the end of a clause/sentence. This is rather likely as
many studies now demonstrated evidence for pre-head
structural analysis (Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood, 2003;
Miyamoto, 2002). In fact, Inoue (2006) observed greater
processing difficulty with similar RC sentences when the
subject noun was biased toward the MC analysis than when
it was not. In the present study, we adopted a similar
manipulation on the RC direct object and examine whether
the preservation of the initial incorrect analysis would be
observed where there is no room for pragmatic inference

Materials
We created 24 sets of experimental items such as (5). We
manipulated semantic bias of the direct object for the two
alternative analyses at three levels; MC-biased (the RC
object is biased toward the MC analysis, 5a), Neutral (the
RC object is neutral toward either the MC and the RC
analysis, 5b), and RC-biased (the RC object is biased
toward the RC analysis, 5c).
(5a) MC-biased
Akachan-ga miruku-o koboshita joyuu-o jitto mitusmeta.
Βaby-NOM [milk-ACC spilled] actress-ACC fixedly stared at

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the milk.’
(5b) Neutral
Akachan-ga nomimono-o koboshita joyuu-o jitto mitusmeta.

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the drink.’
(5c) RC-biased
Akachan-ga shanpan-o koboshita joyuu-o jitto mitusmeta.

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the champagne.’
If the manipulation of semantic bias has an influence on
processing the RC sentences before the RC head is
encountered, the sentences in the MC-biased condition and
the Neutral condition should initially be analyzed as a MC
and exhibit processing difficulty at the disambiguating
region. People may commit more strongly to the MC with
the former condition than the latter condition because the
MC analysis is highly plausible. In contrast, the sentences in
the RC-biased condition may be initially analyzed as a RC
or be reanalyzed easier because of the MC analysis is less
plausible and the RC analysis is highly plausible.

Design
Three experimental lists were created using a Latin square
design, in which each experimental item appears only once
in one condition in each list. Each list contained 72 fillers.
The comprehension questions followed all the 24
experimental items and 72 fillers. All the questions
following the experimental items inquired about the agent of
the event denoted by the relative clauses with two options
shown below the questions (e.g., Who spilled the milk?
BABY / ACTRESS for (5a)).

792

0.13 for MC-biased vs. RC-biased, β = -1.49, z = 1.66, p =
0.10 for RC-biased vs. Neutral).

Procedure
Before each trial, participants saw a star that appeared on
the left edge of the screen. They then pressed the space bar
to reveal the first word in the sentence. They pressed the
space bar to reveal the next word, following which the
previous one was masked again. They continued doing so
until they reached the end of the sentence. The experimental
session began with two practice items.

Table 1: Percentage of Correct Answers for the
Comprehension Questions.
MC-biased
Neutral
RC-biased

Results

96.1%
95.6%
98.9%

Experiment 2

Reading Times We removed all trials including a region
with a reading time that was either extremely long (8000 ms
or over) or extremely short (250 ms or under) (Sturt,
Pickering, & Crocker, 1999). This resulted in the exclusion
of 5.0% of the whole data. For the remaining data, all
reading times over 2.5 standard deviations either side of the
mean for each participant and each region were replaced
with the cut-off value (Sturt, Pickering & Crocker, 1999).
We analyzed the reading times using Linear Mixed Effects
models (e.g., Βaayen, 2008; Βaayen, Davidson, & Βates,
2008), including Semantic Βias as a fixed effect with
Number of Characters as a covariate. We also included
participants and items as random effects. Furthermore, we
checked whether the model improved its fit by adding
random slopes for each participant and item with a forwardselection approach. Figure 1 shows the mean reading times
in the disambiguating region; the RC head (e.g., actressACC) per condition.

In Experiment 1, we observed a difference in reading times
due to bias of the RC direct object but failed to observe its
effect on the responses to the comprehension questions. One
possibility for this is that processing of the RC structure
may have been relatively easy despite the difference in the
reading times (i.e., a ceiling effect). In Experiment 2, we
thus used sentences with the longer ambiguous region in an
effort to increase the processing cost by leading participants
to commit to the MC analysis for a prolonged period.

Participants
Thirty native speakers of Japanese were recruited from the
same population as in Experiment 1. None of them
participated in the previous experiment.

Materials, Design, and Procedure
The material and design were identical to those in
Experiment 1, except that we added two adverbial phrases
(underlined) to lengthen the ambiguous region in the
relative clause as in (6).
(6a, b, c) MC-biased / Neutral / RC-biased
Akachan-ga miruku / drink / shanpan-o
koboshita joyuu-o jitto mitusmeta.

te-buru-de

hade-ni

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the milk / drink /
champagne wildly on the table.’

Results
The reading time at the disambiguating region and the
responses to the comprehension questions were analyzed
following the same procedure as in Experiment 1.

Figure 1: Mean reading times for each condition
(Experiment 1). Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.

Reading Times Figure 2 shows the mean reading time in
the disambiguating region; the RC head (e.g., actress-ACC)
for each condition.

The analysis on the reading time in the disambiguating
region revealed significant differences between the
conditions. In the RC-biased condition, the disambiguating
region was read faster compared to the other two conditions
(β = -217.9, t = 2.94, p < 0.01 for RC biased vs. MC
biased; β = -245.9, t = 3.33, p < 0.01 for RC biased vs.
Neutral). There was no difference between the MC-biased
and the Neutral conditions (t < 1).
Comprehension Accuracy Table 1 shows the percentage of
correct answers for comprehension questions. We analyzed
the log-odd of correct answers using LME models with a
binomial function following the same model selection
procedure as for the reading time analysis.
The results showed no difference between the conditions
(z < 1 for MC-biased vs. Neutral; β = 0.03, z = 1.50, p =

Figure 2: Mean reading times for each condition
(Experiment 2). Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.

793

Participants

We removed invalid trials with the same criteria as
Experiment 1, which resulted in exclusion of 8.3% of the
whole data. The results showed that the reading time in the
disambiguating region was significantly longer in the MCbiased and Neutral conditions compared to that in the RCbiased condition (β= -108.78, t = 3.63, p < .001 for RCbiased vs. MC-biased; β= -83.78, t = 2.78, p < 0.01 for RCbiased vs. Neutral). There was no difference between the
MC-biased and Neutral conditions (t < 1).

Twenty-eight native speakers of Japanese were recruited
from the same population as in experiment 1 and 2. None of
them participated in the previous experiments.

Materials and Design
We created 24 sets of experimental items such as (6) with a
2 × 2 design (Semantic Βias [MC-biased, RC-biased]) × RC
Length [Short RC, Long RC]). For the analysis, each
sentence was divided into six regions as shown below,
separated by vertical lines (|).

Comprehension Accuracy Table 2 shows the percentage of
correct answers for the comprehension questions in
Experiment 2. The analysis revealed that participants
answered more incorrectly in MC-biased condition than in
RC-biased condition (β= -1.17, z = 2.11, p < 0.05). No
significant difference was observed between the Neutral and
RC-biased conditions (β= 0.94, z = 1.64, p = 0.10), or
between the MC-biased and Neutral conditions (z < 1). The
results demonstrate that when the RC direct object was
biased toward the MC and the RC was relatively long,
participants tended to preserve the initial incorrect analysis
compared to when it was biased toward the RC. The Neutral
condition showed a similar pattern to the MC-biased
condition, which may suggest that the difference in
plausibility for the RC interpretation (i.e., champagne or
drink for an actress) did not influence the persistence of the
initial analysis. However, the effect was weaker and did not
turn out to be fully significant.

(6a) MC-biased + Short RC
Akachan-ga | miruku-o | koboshita | joyuu-o | jitto | mitusmeta.

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the milk.’
(6b) MC-biased + Long RC
Akachan-ga | miruku-o | te-buru-de hade-ni koboshita | joyuu-o |
jitto | mitusmeta.

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the milk wildly
on the table.’
(6c) RC-biased + Short RC
Akachan-ga | shanpan-o | koboshita | joyuu-o | jitto | mitusmeta.

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the champagne.’
(6d) RC-biased + Long RC
Akachan-ga | shanpan-o | te-buru-de hade-ni koboshita | joyuu-o
| jitto | mitusmeta.

Table 2: Percentage of Correct Answers for the
Comprehension Questions
MC-biased
Neutral
RC-biased

‘The baby stared at the actress who spilled the champagne
wildly on the table.’

Procedure

92.9%
93.8%
97.1%

Four lists of items were created following Latin square
design. Each list included 72 fillers and was presented in
pseudo-random order. The eye-movements were recorded
using Eye-link Ⅱ (SR Research) at the sampling rate of 500
Hz. Participants first underwent a brief calibration
procedure. Before each trial, participants were required to
fixate a square box that appeared in the position of the first
character of the sentences, which triggered the presentation
of sentences. They pressed the space bar when they finished
reading each sentence. Thirty-two comprehension questions
were included to keep the participants focused.

Experiment 3
Experiment 2 revealed both the difference in reading time
and that in question accuracy, suggesting that preservation
of the initial analysis is related to the processing cost.
However, the results from Experiment 1, which showed
only the difference in reading time, are inconsistent with
this. Since the semantic bias and the length of ambiguous
region were not tested in a single experiment, it is not clear
if the processing cost was any greater in Experiment 2 than
1. Thus, in the next experiment, we crossed the two factors
to examine the interaction of the two manipulations. Also,
since people could not make any regressions to earlier
regions with the self-paced reading task and it is arguable
that people may have adopted some task-specific strategy to
deal with the structural ambiguity. The next experiment
therefore examined eye-movements in normal reading of
these sentences. In this experiment, we focus on the
interaction between the semantic bias and clause length and
its influence on processing cost. We did not include
comprehension questions as unrestrained regressive eyemovements make it unlikely to find a subtle difference in
response accuracy.

Results
We removed fixations that were either extremely long (1200
ms or over) or extremely short (80 ms or under). For
statistical analysis, we focus on two eye-movement
measures; first-pass reading times and second-pass reading
times. First-pass reading times are the sum of the fixations
in the region following the first entry in the region until the
first fixation outside the region (either to the left or the
right). Second-pass reading times are the sum of fixations
made in a region after the region has already been exited to
the right. The former measure did not include trials when
the region was skipped (i.e., the value of zero) whereas the
latter measure did. It is generally assumed that first-pass
reading times reflect the early stage of processing and
second-pass the late stage. Table 3 shows mean reading

794

times from Region 2 to Region 5 per condition. In the LME
model, we included Semantic Βias (MC-biased vs. RCbiased) and RC Length (short RC vs. long RC) as well as
the interaction of the two factors as fixed factors, and
participants and items as random factors. Random slopes of
the two fixed factors and of the interaction were included
for participants and items.
First-pass reading times In Region 2, there was an effect
of Semantic Βias ( β = 29.2, t = 3.64, p < 0.001).
Participants read this region slower with the sentences in the
RC-biased than in the MC-biased condition. In Region 3,
we found an effect of RC Length (β = 22.6, t = 10.86, p <
0.001), which simply reflects that the longer region took
longer to read. In Region 5, which is the spill-over region
following the disambiguating phrase, there was an
interaction between the two factors (β = 19.2, t = 3.21, p <
0.01). Further analysis on the effect of Semantic Bias for
each level of RC Length showed that the two simple effects
were in the opposite direction and were both marginally
significant ( β =-19.2, t = 1.93, p = 0.06 for Short RC
condition; β =18.7, t = 9.93, p = 0.07 for Long RC
condition); Participants tended to read this region faster in
the MC-biased than in the RC-biased condition when the
RC was long, but they did slower in RC-biased condition
than in MC-biased condition when the RC was short. In fact,
the mean fast-pass time in the MC-biased and long RC
condition was shortest across conditions and this appears
prima facie at odds with our prediction. However, an
additional analysis on the regression-out rate (the
probability of regressive eye-movements) revealed that
participants made the highest rate of regressive eyemovements in this region in MC-biased + Long RC

condition (0.42). The analysis with the LME model showed
an effect of Semantic Bias (β= 0.5, z = 4.59, p < 0.001)
showing that there were more regressions in the Long RC
condition than in the Short RC condition. There also was a
marginally significant effect of Semantic Bias (β= -0.2, z =
1.88, p = 0.06), showing that there was more regressions in
the MC-biased condition than in the RC-biased condition.
This indicates that the shortest first-pass time in the MCbiased + Long RC condition was not a reflection of reduced
processing difficulty but on the contrary it reflected the
excessive processing difficulty that forced participants to
immediately regress to the previous region for reanalysis.
Second-pass reading times In Region 2, there was a main
effect of RC Length (β= 61.2, t = 4.65, p < 0.001). This
suggests that in this region participants experienced greater
cost for reanalysis when the RC was long than it was short.
From Region 3 to Region 5, there were effects of Semantic
Bias (β= -136.9, t = 3.41, p < 0.01 in Region 3; β= -37.9,
t = 3.22, p < 0.01 in Region 4; β= -44.2, t = 3.60, p <
0.001 in Region 5) and those of RC Length although that in
Region 5 was marginal (β= 455.1, t = 8.67, p < 0.001 in
Region 3; β= 36.0, t = 3.32, p < 0.05 in Region 4; β= 41.2, t = 3.46, p = 0.07 in Region 5). This suggests that in
these regions participants experienced greater cost for
reanalysis when the RC direct object was biased toward the
MC than when it was toward the RC and also did so when
the RC was long than when it was short. Importantly, there
was an interaction between the two factors in Region 3 (β=
-86.8, t = 2.35, p < 0.05). Further analysis revealed that the
effect of Semantic Bias was larger when the RC was long
(β=-224.9, t = 3.63, p < 0.001) compared to when it was
short (β=-50.9, t = 2.41, p < 0.05).

Table 3: Mean reading times for first-pass and second-pass.
Region 2
(milk/champagne-ACC)

Region 3*
(spilled (wildly on the table))

Region 4
(actress-ACC)

Region 5
(fixedly)

MC-biased + short relative clause

283

260 (56)

262

316

MC-biased + long relative clause

288

701 (54)

265

275

RC-biased + short relative clause

330

283 (62)

283

278

RC-biased + long relative clause

356

735 (57)

265

313

First-pass reading time

Second- pass reading time
MC-biased + short relative clause
337
353 (78)
253
MC-biased + long relative clause
464
1462 (116)
329
RC-biased + short relative clause
281
251 (54)
182
RC-biased + long relative clause
403
1006 (79)
249
*Region 3 differs in the number of words across conditions, so that the reading time per character is provided in brackets.

239
331
159
244

responses to comprehension questions. Experiment 2
showed the same pattern of results for reading times when
the relative clause was lengthened. Importantly, the results
from the comprehension questions showed the effect of
semantic biases; participants responded less accurately
when the direct object was biased toward the main clause
compared to when it was toward the relative clause. In

General Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that participants experienced greater
difficulty at the disambiguating information when the direct
object in the relative clause was biased toward the main
clause compared to when it was toward the relative clause.
However, there was no effect of the manipulation on the

795

Acknowledgments

Experiment 3, the results of eye-tracking reading data
showed participants had more difficulty for reanalysis when
the direct object was biased toward the main clause than
when it was toward the relative clause. It also showed that
the reanalysis cost was greater when the relative clause was
longer than when it was short. Importantly, the effect of
semantic biases was larger when the relative clause was
long than when it was short. The results taken together
provided evidence that the initial incorrect analysis persisted
even in absence of pragmatic inference and that it is related
to how much people commit to the initial analysis and how
much difficulty they experience for reanalysis. We argue
that our results are consistent with previous studies in
English which showed that the more committed readers
were to the initial analysis, the more difficulty they
experienced in reanalysis (i.e., “digging-in” effect, Tabor &
Hutchins, 2004; see also Ferreira & Henderson, 1991;
Ferreira & Henderson, 1998; Frazier & Clifton, 1998;
Warner & Glass, 1987).
In a previous study, there was no clear evidence for the
effect of phrase/clause length on the persistence of the initial
incorrect structure (Experiment 1 in van Gompel et al.,
2006) and also for that of the manipulation of plausibility
(Experiment 2 in the same study). One possible reason for
this discrepancy is that these two factors were tested
independently. Yet, another possibility is that this is due to a
qualitative difference in how these ambiguous sentences
were processed between English and Japanese. With
English, it has been shown that readers adopt an
inappropriate transitive analysis even when the post-verbal
noun phrase is semantically inappropriate as a direct object
(Pickering & Traxler, 1998). It is likely that this is at least
partly due to head-driven parsing; speakers of English check
the fit as a direct object for a post-verbal noun phrase
regardless of the verb type (except unaccusative verbs; see
Staub, 2007). On the other hand, in the head-final Japanese,
it is possible that the plausibility of arguments influences
the pre-head structural analysis independently of the verb.
That is, in some trials under the RC-bias condition,
participants may have not adopted the main clause analysis
even as an initial analysis and this may have resulted in the
higher accuracy to the comprehension questions in
Experiment 1 and 2 and in the less reanalysis cost compared
to the MC-bias condition in Experiment 3.
To summarize, the current study provided evidence that
comprehenders tend to preserve the initial analysis even
when the sentence structure does not permit pragmatic
inferences. Our finding of the effects of semantic biases and
clause length revealed that such a tendency is related to the
degree of processing difficulty that reflects how much
people committed to the misanalysis. The results of eyetracking data showed that participants indeed experienced
excessive processing cost with the sentences when both the
semantic bias and clause length encourage the main clause
analysis. The current study also provided evidence for prehead processing in Japanese and also demonstrated that the
persistence of initial misanalysis that has been reported in a
head-initial language such as English occurs in typologically
different head-final language.

We would like to thank Edson T. Miyamoto and Yuki
Hirose for their help on Experiment 3.

References
Βaayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: a practical
introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Βaayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Βates, D. M. (2008). Mixed-effects
modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390-412.
Christianson, K., Hollingworth, A., Halliwell, J., & Ferreira, F. (2001).
Thematic roles assigned along the garden path linger. Cognitive
Psychology, 42, 368–407.
Christianson, K., Williams, C. C., Zacks, R. T., & Ferreira, F. (2006).
Younger and older adults’ “good-enough” interpretations of
garden-path sentences. Discourse Processes, 42, 205-238.
Ferreira, F., Bailey, K. G. D., & Ferraro, V. (2002). Good-enough
representations in language comprehension. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 11, 11-15.
Ferreira, F., & Henderson, J. M. (1991). Recovery from misanalyses of
garden-path sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 725745.
Ferreira, F., & Henderson, J. M. (1998). Syntactic reanalysis, thematic
processing, and sentence comprehension. In J.D. Fodor & F.
Ferreira (Eds.), Reanalysis in sentence processing (pp. 73-100).
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C. (1998). Sentence reanalysis and visibility. In
J.D. Fodor & F. Ferreira (Eds.), Reanalysis in sentence processing
(pp. 143-176). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
Garnsey, S. M., Pearlmutter, N. J., Myers, E., & Lotocky, M. A.
(1997). The contributions of verb bias and plausibility to the
comprehension of temporarily ambiguous sentences. Journal of
Memory and Language, 37, 58-93.
Inoue, M. (2006). Ambiguity resolution or retention in comprehending
Japanese sentences, Cognitive Studies, 13, 353-368.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G. T. M., & Haywood, S. L. (2003). The timecourse of prediction in incremental sentence processing: Evidence
from anticipatory eye movements. Journal of Memory and
Language, 49, 133-156.
McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998).
Modeling the influence of thematic fit (and other constraints) in online sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language,
38, 283–312.
Miyamoto, E. T. 2002. Case markers as clause boundary inducers in
Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 31, 307-347.
Pickering, M. J., Traxler, M. J. (1998). Plausibility and recovery from
garden paths: an eye-tracking study. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 940-961.
Staub, A. (2007). The parser doesn't ignore intransitivity, after all.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and
Cognition, 33, 550-569.
Sturt, P., Pickering, M. J., & Crocker, M. W. (1999). Structural change
and reanalysis difficulty in language comprehension. Journal of
Memory and Language, 40, 136-150.
Tabor, W., & Hutchins, S. (2004). Evidence for self-organized
sentence processing: Digging in effects. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 431-450.
Warner, J., & Glass, A. L. (1987). Context and distance-todisambiguation effects in ambiguity resolution: Evidence from
grammaticality judgments of garden path sentences. Journal of
Memory and Language, 26, 714-738.

796

