UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Role of Error Monitoring Mechanisms in Attribution of Sense of Self-Agency

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30g1h65q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kumar, Neeraj
Manjaly, Jaison A.
Miyapuram, Krishna P.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Role of Error Monitoring Mechanisms in Attribution of Sense of Self-Agency
NeerajKumar, Jaison A. Manjaly (neeraj, jmanjaly@iitgn.ac.in)

Cognitive Science Programme, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar
VGEC Campus, Chandkheda, Ahmedabad-382424, INDIA

K. P. Miyapuram(krishna.miyapuram@cantab.net)

Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, UniversitàdegliStudi di Trento
Via delleRegole 101, 38060 Mattarello (TN), ITALY
in any phase can cause disruption in the sense of agency.
Yet another view is based on established models of motor
control (Wolpert, 1997) as explained below.

Abstract
Sense of agency refers to the sense of authorship of a given
action. While the phenomenon seems too obvious to demand
further investigation, pathological conditions such as
delusions of control suggest the requirement of further
investigation into the phenomenon of sense of agency. The
traditional view point regarding the role of intention in sense
of agency is complemented by computational models of
motor control. Accordingly, we hypothesized and tested the
role of error monitoring mechanisms in the sense of agency
by manipulating the feedback given independent of the
responses of the participant while performing a Flanker task.
The results point out the potential role of error monitoring
mechanisms by modulating the forward model predictions to
experience a sense of agency for unintended actions.

Computational models of motor control (Blakemore et al.,
2001, 2002) have an alternative suggestion about the
mechanisms responsible for the sense of agency. The
computational view is that the sensorimotor loop consists of
an inverse model, which identifies the motor commands
required to achieve a certain desired state and a forward
model, which predicts the sensory consequences of motor
actions. These models are represented within the central
nervous system in the form of internal models. According to
Frith (1992), internal forward model is principally
responsible for the sense of agency because it generates an
efference copy, which predicts the sensory consequences of
motor commands in advance. Predicted sensory information
is matched against subsequent sensory information. If
predicted and sensed information match, then the sensory
events are self-generated, and the subject will experience
sense of agency for those events. If there is mismatch, then
the sensory information registers it as an external event, and
therefore the sense of agency is absent. This model has been
used to explain the perceptual attenuation of self-generated
stimuli (Blakemore et al., 2000), and pathological
experiences, such as delusions of control found in
Schizophrenia. For example, Blakemore et al. (2002) have
suggested that the misattribution of action shown in patients
experiencing delusions of control can be explained by a
deficit in the internal forward model (Frith, 1992).

Keywords: sense of agency; motor control; forward model;
error monitoring mechanisms; Flanker task; error feedback;
action intention.

Introduction
In day-to-day life, we encounter various sensorimotor
events, in which sensory perception and action are
intertwined. A chain of events including intention to act,
movement preparation, generating motor commands and
sensory feedback are part of the underlying components of
our sensorimotor experience (Haggard et al., 2002). The
sense of agency for a given action refers to the sense that an
agent has that s/he is the author of that action (Pacherie,
2007b). In other words, the sense of agency is a prereflective experience which enables the sense of authorship
of one’s own thoughts and actions. The sense of agency also
critically contributes to a sense of self in terms of
experiential immediacy (Tsakiris& Haggard, 2005). Though
actions are found to be accompanied by a sense of agency,
not much is known in terms of its underlying mechanism or
set of processes responsible for this experience.

Simulation theory of agency suggests that in
understanding or predicting other’s action we use our own
experiences to simulate those of others (Goldman, 1989).
Sebanz et al. (2005) found that subjects within the autism
spectrum did not show deficits in representing another
person’s action but exhibited mentalizing deficits. David et
al. (2007) showed autistic subjects show deficits in
perspective taking which has been explicitly linked to
simulation (Gallese & Goldman, 1998; Langdon &
Coltheart, 2001). Children with autism have also shown
reduced error monitoring (Vlamings et al., 2008) and altered
cerebellar feedback projection (Catani et al., 2008).

Different prevailing views have explained regarding the
mediators between sense of agency and action (see David et
al., 2008 for a review). One view proposed by Haggard et al.
(2002) is that the intention of an agent, i.e. ‘‘intentional
binding” has an important roleon the sense of agency
(Haggard et al., 2003; Tsakiris& Haggard, 2003), that
contributes significantly to action awareness. Pacherie
(2007a, b), on the other hand, claims that the sense of
agency contains not only an experience of intentional
causation, but a sense of initiation and control. Disturbance

Another explanation for experienced agency for
unintentional actions is suggested by recent studies on error

641

monitoring mechanisms (Yordanova et al., 2004; Van
Schieet al., 2004). It is well known that after an erroneous
action is selected, internal monitoring mechanisms gives the
feedback that one has committed an error. Such error signals
are based on the detection of a conflict that occurred while
choosing between several action alternatives, rather than on
the comparison between the predicted and actual
consequences of a specific action selected for execution.
Agency for erroneous actions could be experienced because
an error-monitoring signal is used to readjust the system.
The readjustment could serve as a direct indication of
agency or it could influence post-hoc evaluations of
performed actions (Knoblich & Natalie, 2005).

letter). When participants are asked to respond quickly to
the flanker array, they tend to make errors and have low
reliability on their responses. To activate error monitoring
mechanisms, we have given an immediate feedback after the
response which could be right (correct feedback) or wrong
(incorrect feedback). If wrong feedback can alter the
attribution of agency (refer table 1) then it might be possible
that error monitoring mechanisms are capable to modulate
the efferent predictions of forward model before
assimilating the actual sensory outcome.
Thus, the experiment consisted of two within-subjects
factors (a) Type of sensory outcome (Congruent tone or
incongruent tone with prediction), and (b) type of feedback
(Wrong feedback & Right feedback). Notably the error
feedback was manipulated independent of the actual
response.

Experiments by Sato and Yasuda (2005) suggest that
motor prediction contributes to the experience of agency.
Their findings show that agency is experienced not only for
intended, but also for erroneous/unintended actions. This
result supports the view that the experience of agency
depends on the discrepancy between predicted and actual
sensory consequences regardless of whether an action was
intended or unintended (Fourneret & Jeannerod, 1998; Sato
& Yasuda, 2005).

Table 1: Prediction of sense of agency in different
conditions.
Correct
Incorrect
Response →
Condition ↓
Wrong Feedback-Congruent Tone
No
Yes
Wrong Feedback-Incongruent Tone
Yes
No
Right Feedback-Congruent Tone
Yes
No
Right Feedback-Incongruent Tone
No
Yes

Present study aims to investigate the role of error
monitoring mechanism in the attribution of sense of agency.
We propose that error monitoring mechanisms can update
the ‘forward model’ efferent prediction to match the actual
sensory outcome. The activation of error monitoring
mechanisms can cause the online or real time alteration in
predictions by forward model. This modulation in prediction
can occur before assimilating the actual sensory outcome
which can influence the sense of agency. We hypothesized
that the feedback should modulate the sense of agency,
more particularly when the feedback is inconsistent with the
actual responses of the participant. We argue that, this
online modulation of forward model prediction through
error monitoring mechanisms can explain the sense of
agency in unintentional action.

Procedure
Upon entering the laboratory, participants were seated in
front of a computer screen with a pair of headphone. Prior to
the experiment, participants performed300 learning trials.
On each trial, 1000ms after fixation onset, the target
stimulus (i.e., “H” or “N”) was presented for 250ms on the
center of the screen. Participants were told to press the left
button with the left index finger as quickly and accurately as
possible whenever an “H” appeared on the center of the
screen and the right button with the right index finger
whenever an “N” appeared on the screen. After each button
press, a certain tone was immediately presented for 200ms
through in-ear headphones: a 600 Hz tone or a 1000 Hz
tone. The assignment of stimuli and tones to buttons was
consistent for each participant and counterbalanced across
participants. Participants were explicitly told that each
button pressing would evoke a certain tone. Tones were
identical in duration and sound pressure throughout the
experiment.

Materials and Methods
Participants
15 undergraduate students (Mean age = 19.4 years) have
participated in the study. All participants were right-handed
having normal or corrected to normal vision. Participants
provided informed consent and were paid for participation.

In the main experiment, participants performed the
Flanker task for 200 trials. Each trial started with the onset
of centrally presented fixation sign. After the 1000ms of
fixation onset, a five-letter array (i.e., HHHHH, NNNNN,
HHNHH, or NNHNN) was presented for 250ms.
Participants were instructed to respond to one of the two
target letter (central H or N) with one finger and to the other
letter with the other finger as quickly as possible and not to
correct their responses even if they made errors. The
assignment of responding finger to target letter was the

Design
We have used some of the designs proposed by Sato &
Yasuda (2005) to examine the role of error monitoring
mechanism and to explore the possibility of modulation of
the forward model predictions. Participants performed an
Eriksen Flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), which is a
forced choice reaction time task in which the target later is
flanked by distracter letters (either congruent or incongruent

642

same as the learning session. After the response was made,
an immediate feedback was provided on the screen for
200ms which could be right (congruent with response) or
wrong (incongruent with response). After 200ms of offset of
feedback a tone was presented through headphone for
200ms either congruent or incongruent with prediction.
Then participants were asked for their rating regarding the
sense of agency using a question “I was the one who
produced the tone”. The responses could be one of the three
options in the form of ‘Yes’, ‘No’ and “Maybe”. To prevent
demand effects and any other possible biases in responses
such as motor preparation, the question was randomly
alternated with a second question “'I was the one who was
listening to the tone”. Further, the options Yes and No were
counterbalanced across trials. The experiment was designed
using Psychophysics toolbox (Brainard, 1997) in MATLAB
(Mathworks Inc.) (See figure 1).

Results
To check the manipulation effect of flanker task, we have
analyzed the reaction time to target letter for correct and
incorrect trials in both practice and experimental session.
We have found that in practice session participants were
significantly faster [t(14) = 2.97, p = 0.01] in incorrect
responses [Mean = 0.32 Sec, SD = 0.15] than correct
responses [Mean = 0.53 Sec, SD = 0.18]. In experimental
session, participants were significantly slower [t(14) = 3.34,
p>0.01] when they made incorrect responses [Mean = 1.3
Sec, SD = 0.5] in comparison to correct responses [Mean =
0.75 Sec , SD = 0.06]. These results suggest that participants
face internal conflict between various alternatives of actions
in experimental session (target letter was flanked by
congruent/incongruent letters) which in turn delayed the
response and end up in incorrect action.
The rating scores on sense of agency were analyzed
separately for correct-response trials and incorrect-response
trials using repeated measure analysis of variance with two
factors: Tone congruency (2 levels – Congruent &
Incongruent Tone) X Type of feedback (2 levels – Wrong &
Right Feedback). For correct responses, this analysis
revealed the main effect of tone congruency [F(1,14)=12.86,
p<0.01], but there was no significant main effect of
feedback [F(1,14)=1.02, p=0.32]. More crucially, we have
found significant interaction between tone congruency and
type of feedback [F(1,14)=353.0, p<0.01]. Further post-hoc
analysis revealed that under congruent tone condition sense
of self-agency was significantly reduced (p<0.01) in wrong
feedback condition (Mean=0.25, SD=0.08) in compare to
Right feedback condition (Mean=0.81, SD=0.04). It also
revealed that sense of self-agency was significantly
increased (p<0.01) under wrong feedback condition
(Mean=0.68, SD=0.10) than in right feedback condition
(Mean=0.18, SD=0.15) when tone was incongruent with
prediction (See figure 2).

Fixation for 1000ms

Flanker (e.g. HHNHH) for 250ms

Blank screen to respond
RT and accuracy were recorded
Feedback (√/X) for 200ms

Tone (600/1000 Hz) for 200ms

Agency Question
RT and Agency response were recorded
Next Trial
Figure 1: Trial procedure for an experimental trial

Data Analysis
We present the results for the sense of agency, as this is the
main hypothesis of our experiment. We have also analyzed
the reaction time data to check our manipulation effect of
flanker task. For quantitative analysis we have transformed
the ratings into numerical values. Now ‘Yes’ is represented
as 1, ‘No’ is represented as 0 and ‘Maybe’ lies in between as
0.5.These ratings of sense of agency were analyzed using
2x2 repeated measures ANOVA separately for correct and
incorrect response trials (see results).

Figure 2: Sense of self-agency for correct responses
For incorrect response, repeated measure analysis of
variance revealed that neither tone congruency
[F(1,14)=0.12, p=0.73] nor feedback [F(1,14)=2.6, p=0.12]
had a significant main effect on rating of sense of agency.

643

main effect for tone congruency was observed only for
correct but not for incorrect responses. These results point
out the role of error monitoring mechanisms in attribution of
sense of agency.

But there was significant interaction between tone
congruency and type of feedback [F(1,14)=35.40, p<0.01].
Post-hoc analysis revealed that in the Congruent tone
condition sense of self-agency was significantly increased in
wrong feedback condition (Mean=0.63, SD=0.41) from
sense of self-agency in right feedback condition
(Mean=0.24, SD=0.16). It also shown that under the
Incongruent tone condition, sense of self-agency was
reduced when wrong feedback (Mean=0.11, SD=0.12) was
given instead of right feedback (Mean=0.75, SD=0.31) (See
figure 3).

Previous studies have suggested (Blakemoreet al., 2001,
2002) the profound role of forward model prediction in the
attribution of agency to self or an external agent. Forward
model predictions are based on motor program which in turn
are based on our intentions guided by motor planning.
However, forward model of attribution of agency is not able
to explain the self-agency attribution for unintended actions
– actions which are not congruent with the intentions or
motor plan. This incongruency in action could occur
because of multiple causes such as (a) action slips due to
internal noise (Wolpert & Ghahramani, 2000) in the
transformation from motor signal to actual action, (b) the
conflict in choosing an action between various alternatives
as in a forced choice task. Unintentional action through
internal noise or conflict activates the error monitoring
mechanisms, and this activation of error monitoring
mechanism can play a significant role in attribution of
agency by modulating the forward model predictions in real
time.

Post-hoc analysis also has shown the magnitude of
manipulation effect. For Correct responses, reduction of
sense of self-agency in Wrong feedback – Congruent tone
condition is up to level of self-agency in Right feedback –
Incongruent tone (p=0.15), but manipulation effect is not
that much strong in Wrong feedback – Incongruent tone
condition because sense of self agency in this condition is
significantly lesser from self-agency in Right feedback –
Congruent tone condition (p<0.01).

We have found that by activating error monitoring
mechanisms by external feedback after the action (but
before the actual sensory outcome) alters the attribution of
agency. For the correct responses, when forward model
prediction was congruent with actual sensory consequences,
wrong/falsely incorrect feedback (a cross sign) after the
action causes the attribution of agency to an external agent.
Similarly, when prediction and actual sensory consequences
were not congruent, participants tend to attribute the agency
to themselves when their actions were followed by
wrong/falsely incorrect feedback. In contrast, when
participant made an incorrect response and the feedback was
wrong/falsely correct, the sense of self-agency get decreased
when consequence of the action is also incongruent with the
actual sensory consequences. Similarly, when prediction
and actual sensory consequence were congruent, sense of
self-agency get increased when actions were followed by
wrong/falsely correct feedback.

Figure 3: Sense of self-agency for incorrect responses.
These results point towards the potential role of interaction
between the feedback and tone congruency on sense of
agency.

Discussion

Previous experiments on error monitoring mechanisms
show that cerebellum is involved in error monitoring and
optimizing the system (Kawato & Gomi, 1992; Dreher &
Grafman, 2002; Menon et al., 2001). Cerebellum is also
responsible for predicting the sensory consequences of
action (Blakemore et al., 2001). Synofzik et al. (2008)
showed that in a motor learning task cerebellum updates
predictions about the visual consequences of one’s behavior.
These findings suggest that error monitoring mechanisms
play more profound role in generating sense of agency than
just influencing the post-hoc evaluation or serving as direct
indicator of agency. Our findings are also in support with
the previous findings that cerebellum updates the

In this study, we manipulated the effect of error
monitoring mechanisms on sense of agency. Participants
performed a Flanker task and the error feedback was
manipulated orthogonal to the actual responses.
Accordingly, we found a differential but consistent behavior
between the correct and incorrect responses. For both the
correct and incorrect responses, a significant interaction was
observed for tone congruency and type of feedback.
Consistent with our hypothesis, when participant made a
correct choice but the feedback was falsely incorrect, the
sense of self-agency increased. In contrast, when participant
made an incorrect choice and the feedback was falsely
correct, the sense of self-agency decreased. However, a

644

predictions of forward model. Since, the sensory
consequences of actions vary as a result of changes of the
effector’s efficacy, internal predictions need to updated
continuously, our findings suggest that cerebellum as an
error monitoring mechanism serves as a device which
update predictions of forward model in real time before
assimilating any actual sensory consequences.

autism:impaired mentalizing but intact sense of agency.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38(4),
593 – 605.
Drehr, J., & Grafman, J. (2002).The role of the cerebellum
and basal ganglia in timing and error prediction.European
Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 1609-1619.
Eriksen, B. A., &Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise
letters upon the identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task. Perception and Psychophysics, 16, 143-149.
Fourneret, P., &Jeannerod, M. (1998). Limited conscious
monitoring of motor performance in normal subjects.
Neuropsychologia, 36(11), 1133–1140.
Frith, C. D. (1992). The cognitive neuropsychology of
schizophrenia. Hove, U.K.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2(2), 493–501.
Goldman, A. I. (1989). Interpretation psychologized. Mind
& Language, 4, 161–185.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., &Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary
action and conscious awareness. Nature Neuroscience,
5(4), 382–385.
Haggard, P., & Clark, S. (2003). Intentional action:
Conscious
experience
and
neural
prediction.
Consciousness and Cognition, 12, 695–707.
Kawato, M., & Gomi, H. (1992).A computational model of
four regions of the cerebellum based on feedback-error
learning. Biologival cybernetics, 68, 95-103.
Knoblich, G., & Natalie S. (2005).Agency in the face of
errors.Trends in cognitive science, 9(6), 259 – 261..
Langdon, R., & Coltheart, M. (2001). Visual perspectivetaking and schizotypy: Evidence for a simulation-based
account of mentalizing in normal adults. Cognition, 82(1),
1–26.
Menon, V., Adleman, N.E., White, C.D., Glover, G.H., &
Reiss, A.L. (2001). Error-related brain activation during a
Go/NoGo response inhibition task. Human Brain
Mapping, 12, 131-143.
Pacherie, E. (2007a). Towards a dynamic theory of
intentions. In S. Pockett, W.P. Blanks, & S. Gallagher
(Eds.), Does consciousness cause behavior? An
investigation of the nature of volition.Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pacherie, E. (2007b). The sense of control and sense of
agency.Psyche, 13(1).
Sato, A., & Yasuda, A. (2005). Illusion of sense of selfagency: Discrepancy between the predicted and actual
sensory consequences of actions modulates the sense of
self-agency, but not the sense of self-ownership.
Cognition, 94(3), 241–255.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., Stumpf, L., &Prinz, W. (2005).
Far from action-blind: Representation of others’ actions in
individuals with autism. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22,
433–454.
Synofzik, M., Lindner, A., Their, P. (2008). The cerebellum
updates predictions about the visual consequences of
one’s behavior. Current Biology, 18, 814-818.

Alternatively, our results can also be explained by
simulation approach to sense of agency. In this line,
alteration in attribution of agency can be the result of
activation of error monitoring mechanisms which can be
used as a signal to navigate within shared representations.
Our results also suggest that misattribution of agency in
schizophrenia may not be based on imprecise predictions
(Synofzik et al., 2010); they misattribute the agency might
be because of failure in real time update in predictions by
forward model.
These results of alteration in attribution of agency by
activating error monitoring mechanisms suggest that
forward model predictions are being modulated in real time
as soon as they come to know that performed action was not
correct. This modulation in prediction before actual sensory
consequences helps them to experience a sense of agency
for unintended/erroneous actions.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by Neotia Foundation, Kolkata
&Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar.

References
Blakemore, S. J., Frith, C. D., &Wolpert, D. M. (2001). The
cerebellum is involved in predicting the sensory
consequences of action. Neuroreport, 12(9), 1879–1884.
Blakemore, S. J., Smith, J., Steel, R., Johnstone, C. E.,
&Frith, C. D. (2000). The perception of self-produced
sensory stimuli in patients with auditory hallucinations
and passivity experiences: Evidence for a breakdown in
self-monitoring. Psychological Medicine, 30(5), 1131–
1139.
Blakemore, S. J., Wolpert, D. M., & Frith, C. D.
(2002).Abnormalities in the awareness of action.Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6(6), 237–242.
Brainard, D.H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox, Spatial
Vision, 10, 443-446.
Catani, M., Jones, D.K., Daly, E., Embiricos, N., Deeley,
Q., Pugliese, L., et al. (2008).Altered cerebellar feedback
projections in Asperger syndrome. Neuroimage, 41(4),
1184 – 1191.
David, N., Newen, A., &Vogeley, K. (2008). The "sense of
agency" and its underlying cognitive and neural
mechanisms. Conscious Cogn, 17, 2:523-34.
David, N., Gawronski, A., Santos, N.S., Huff, W.,
Lehnhardt, F. G., Newen, A., et al. (2007). Dissociation
between key processes of social cognition in

645

Synofzik, M., Their, P., Leube, D.T., Schlotterbeck, P.,
Lindner, A. (2010). Misattributions of agency in
schizophrenia are based on imprecise predictions about
the sensory consequences of one’s actions. Brain, 133,
262-271.
Tsakiris, M., & Haggard, P. (2003). Awareness of somatic
events associated with a voluntary action. Experimental
Brain Research, 149(4), 439–446.
Tsakiris, M., & Haggard, P. (2005). Experimenting with the
acting self.Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22, 387–407.
Tsakiris, M., Haggard, P., Franck, N., Mainy, N., &Sirigu,
A. (2005).A specific role for efferent information in selfrecognition. Cognition, 96(3), 215–231.
Van Schie, H.T. et al. (2004).Modulation of activity in
medial frontal and motor cortices during error
observation. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 549–554.
Vlamings, P.H.J.M., Jonkman, L.M., Hoeksma, M.R.,
Engeland, H.V., Kemner, C. (2008). Reduced error
monitoring in children with autism spectrum disorder: an
ERP study. Eurpoean Journal of Neuroscience, 28(2),399
– 406.
Wolpert, D. M. (1997). Computational approaches to motor
control. Trends in cognitive science, 1(6), 209-16.
Wolpert, D. M., &Ghahramani, Z. (2000).Computational
principles
of
movement
neuroscience.
Nature
Neuroscience, 3, 1212–1217.
Yordanova, J., Falkensteina, M., Hohnsbeina, J., Koleva, V.
(2004).Parallel systems of error processing in the brain.
Neuroimage, 22, 590–602.

646

