UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Self-Terminated vs. Experimenter-Terminated Memory Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85s5d6m0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Harbison, J. Isaiah
Hussey, Erika
Dougherty, Michael
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Self-Terminated vs. Experimenter-Terminated Memory Search
J. Isaiah Harbison (isaiah.harbison@gmail.com)
Erika K. Hussey (erikahussey@gmail.com)
Michael R. Dougherty (mdougher@umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland at College Park
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Eddy J. Davelaar (eddy.davelaar@gmail.com)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck University of London
Malet Street, WC1E 7HX, London, UK

Abstract

Open- and Closed-Interval Designs

In most free-recall experiments, participants are given a preset
amount of time to search memory. Recently, several studies
have examined retrieval in an open-interval design in which
the participant, not the experimenter, determines when to
terminate memory search. The present study performs the first
direct comparison between participant-terminated and
experimenter-terminated retrieval. No difference was found in
the number of items retrieved from memory; however, interretrieval times (IRTs) did differ, such that the participantterminated paradigm did not show the hyperbolic function
typically found when using the experimenter-determined,
closed-interval design. We were able to account for this result
by equipping a simple relative sampling model with a
memory search stopping rule that assumes that giving
participants a pre-set retrieval interval causes them to search
longer (and tolerate more search failures) than they would in
the open-interval design.

The difference between the open-interval and closedinterval recall design is illustrated in Figure 1. The closedinterval design, shown in Panel A, is restricted, in that the
retrieval interval participants are given is pre-determined by
the experimenter. After the interval has expired, search is
terminated for the participant by the experimenter or by the
software program used for the experiment. One reason this
design has been used is that it allows greater focus on basic
processes of memory retrieval, attempting to eliminate
individual differences in how long participants spend
searching memory. However, it is not necessarily the case
that participants search during the entire pre-determined
interval. In fact, many process models that have been
proposed to account for the retrieval results from the closedinterval design have assumed a stopping decision to be part
of the memory search process (e.g., Raaijmakers & Shiffrin,
1981). Moreover, the closed-interval design might induce
participants to search memory longer than they normally
would, potentially leading to results that do not replicate
when participants are free to retrieve and self-terminate
memory search.
The open-interval design (panel B of Figure 1) gives
participants an unlimited amount of time to retrieve. The
principle strength of this design is that it allows for the
measurement of memory search termination decisions,
including the total time spent in search—determined by the
participant—and the exit latency, or the time between the
final retrieval and the decision to terminate search. Both
measures have proven diagnostic for evaluating memory
search stopping rules (Harbison et al., 2009). The design
also, arguably, has greater ecological validity: Individuals
are unlikely to have a fixed external time limit when
searching memory during most everyday tasks outside the
lab (for an examination of termination decision in response
to external demands, see Davelaar, Yu, Harbison, Hussey, &
Dougherty, 2012). However, the open-interval design too
has potential weaknesses: Self-termination might prime
participants to put less effort into retrieval and therefore
provide inadequate data for the purposes of theory testing. If

Keywords: memory; free-recall; stopping rules.

Terminating Memory Search
At some point, any search of memory must end. Several
recent studies have begun to examine how this decision is
made in free recall tasks, where search is often terminated
while there remain potentially retrievable items unreported
(Dougherty & Harbison, 2007; Harbison, Dougherty,
Davelaar, & Fayyad, 2009; Unsworth, Brewer, & Spillers,
2011). These studies used a slightly modified version of the
standard list recall paradigm; the only difference is that
participants terminate their own memory search. This openretrieval interval design (henceforth, open-interval design) is
in contrast to the standard, closed-retrieval-interval design
(closed-interval design) that gives participants a predetermined retrieval interval. Both the open-interval and
closed-interval designs have strengths and weaknesses, but
to date, they have not been directly compared. The goal of
the present study is to perform this comparison and evaluate
how allowing or not allowing participants to terminate their
own search influences the variables used to describe
memory retrieval.

426

A

increases as the number of items retrieved increases
(Murdock & Okada, 1970; Polyn, Norman, & Kahana,
2009; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980; Wixted & Rohrer,
1994).

1/IRT

participants lacked sufficient motivation to adequately
search memory, they might recall fewer items in the openinterval paradigm. However, to the best of our knowledge,
this account has not been evaluated. Moreover, as far as we
are aware, there has been no comparison between open- and
closed-interval designs more generally. In what ways do
retrieval data obtained from an open-interval design differ
from those obtained in the closed-interval design? And,
what can the open-interval design tell us about memory
retrieval that cannot be discerned from the close-interval
design?
Experimentally Set Time (TT)
IRT

IRT

1

2

IRT3

A
Word1 Word2 Word3

B

IRT

IRT

IRT

1

2

3

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

6

0

0

7

123456

B

3
4
5

12345

Figure 2. 1/IRT data from (A) Dougherty and
Harbison, 2007 and (B) Harbison et al., 2009. The xaxis is the retrieval interval in reverse order, with 1
representing the final interval. The legend indicates the
number of items recalled.

Word4
EL

A particularly informative way of looking at IRT data is
by inverting the IRT (1/IRT) and plotting the results in
reverse order along the x-axis, such that the final IRT is in
the first position. When plotted this way, Equation 1
predicts that the intercept should be zero. Rohrer (1996)
found support for this prediction using the closed-interval
design. However, a reanalysis of data from two openinterval experiments (Dougherty & Harbison, 2007; Exp. 1,
Harbison et al., 2009) revealed a different pattern: Instead of
an intercept of zero, the data from these experiments were
best fit by lines with intercepts greater than zero (ranging
from .103 to .210), as shown in Figure 2.
What does this result mean for the comparison of openand closed-interval designs? In particular, could this
indicate that something differs in the search process when
participants make their own stopping decisions? To answer
these questions, we conducted a simulation evaluating the
predictions of the relative-strength model of retrieval when
stopping decisions were included.

TT

Figure 1. (A) Closed-interval and (B) open-interval
retrieval designs, adapted from Harbison & Dougherty
(2007). X indicates the time when a participant decides
to terminate memory search; hash marks indicate the
time associated with the latency onset of words
recalled. TT=Total Time Searching; EL = Exit Latency;
IRT = Inter-Retrieval Time.

Previous Results
As no experiment has yet directly compared the open- and
closed-interval designs, it is not possible to draw firm
conclusions from existing data. However, there is a wealth
of data from closed-interval experiments suggesting specific
patterns in the temporal dynamics of recall. For our
purposes, we focus on the inter-retrieval times (IRTs), or the
time between successive retrievals. IRTs have played an
important role in constraining theories of memory retrieval
(Rohrer, 1996; Wixted & Rohrer, 1994), and they are
generally well described by the equation:

Simulation
For simplicity and ease of comparison with previous
research examining IRT results from the closed-interval
design, we followed the same simulation procedure as
Rohrer (1996). We used the same relative-strength model,
which is nearly identical to the sample and recovery
processes of the search of associative memory (SAM)
model (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981). We also used the
same activation patterns tested by Rohrer (1996). The model
randomly sampled items based on their relative activation
and attempted to recover the sampled item based on its
absolute activation. An iteration of random sampling and
attempted recovery is referred to as a retrieval attempt and
each retrieval attempt could either succeed or fail. For the

(1)
for i=1,2,…N-1, where i is the inter-response interval
starting with the interval between the first and second
retrieval, τ is the estimated mean retrieval latency, and N is
the total number of items retrieved. Equation 1 captures the
key empirical result that IRTs typically follow a hyperbolic
function, such that the time between successive retrievals

427

current simulations, potential retrieval failures are (1) resampling an already-outputted item or (2) failing to recover
a sampled item due to its absolute activation not meeting the
recovery threshold. As we used the same activation patterns
as Rohrer (1996), we also used the same recovery threshold,
.5.
The one difference between the model tested here and the
model used by Rohrer was our use of a stopping rule that
terminated the search process. Our model included a
stopping rule based on the number of retrieval failures. This
stopping rule, native to the SAM model, is the only rule
tested so far that has been able to account for both the total
time and exit latency data from open-interval experiments
(Harbison et al., 2009).
Other than the recovery threshold, the only parameter in
the model was the stopping threshold, the number of
retrieval failures the model allowed before memory search
was terminated. The stopping threshold was varied between
10 and 40 in steps of 10. Each activation pattern was run
with each stopping threshold 10,000 times. The dependent
variables of interest included the number of items retrieved,
the IRTs, and the intercept of the best fitting line for the
1/IRT data.

Investigating the IRT data more closely, Figure 3b shows
the last (or K) IRT, the second to last (K-1) IRT, the third to
last (K-2) IRT, and so forth for each stopping threshold
value tested. The last IRT showed the greatest variation due
to changes in the stopping threshold. Weaker relationships
between IRT and stopping threshold were observed the
further the IRT was from the final IRT. Importantly, there
were large variations in the last IRT even when there were
only minute changes in the number of items retrieved. For
example, while the mean final IRT more than doubled in
size when going from a stopping threshold of 10 to 40, the
mean number retrieved varied by only ten percent.

Num Retrieved

A

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
10

Table 1. Mean Simulation Results by Activation Pattern.
Stopping Threshold
Act. Pattern
Variable
10
20
30
40
1,1,1,1,1,1
Num Ret 5.60 5.94 5.99 6.00
Last IRT 3.30 5.17 5.80 6.00
Intercept
.16
.03
0
0
.5,.6,1,1.2,1.2,1.5 Num Ret 5.35 5.79 5.92 5.97
Last IRT 3.35 5.54 7.03 8.12
Intercept
.14
0
-.05 -.06
.4,.5,.6,1,1.5,2
Num Ret 4.35 4.78 4.92 4.97
Last IRT 3.37 5.73 7.43 8.42
Intercept
.13
-.02 -.07 -.09

B

20

30

40

10

IRT

8
10

6

20

4

30

2

40

0
K K-1 K-2 K-3 K-4

Results and Discussion
C

The results are reported in Table 1 and a representative
sample of the model’s behavior over various activation
patterns. The results of the second activation pattern in
Table 1 are shown in Figure 3. First, it should be noted that
the variation in stopping threshold did not have a large
impact on the mean number of items retrieved (see Figure
3a). However, Figure 3c illustrates that the intercept of the
inter-retrieval rates did show substantial variation.
Consistent with Rohrer (1996), when the stopping threshold
was larger (e.g., 40 failures), the intercept was indeed near
zero. However, there was a negative correlation between
stopping threshold and the intercept, such that at smaller
stopping thresholds the intercept was greater than zero.
Therefore, the 1/IRT predictions of the relative-strength
model appear to be consistent with closed-interval
experiments at greater stopping thresholds and open-interval
experiments at smaller stopping thresholds.

1

1/IRT

0.8
10

0.6

20

0.4

30

0.2

40

0
K K-1 K-2 K-3 K-4
Figure 3. Simulation results for (A) number of items
retrieved, (B) IRT, and (C) 1/IRT functions for 4
stopping thresholds (10, 20, 30, or 40 failures).
What is the source of the relationship between IRTs and
the stopping threshold? When using the total failures

428

stopping rule, the lower the stopping threshold, the fewer
the number of possible attempts for retrieving each item, on
average. If an item is not retrieved with a minimal number
of failures, it will not be retrieved. For example, if the fifth
item is not retrieved before 10 retrieval failures have
occurred, then search will terminate with only four items
retrieved. Since the probability of retrieval failure increases
with each item retrieved, the limit on the number of
allowable retrieval failures plays a larger role towards the
end of retrieval and particularly for the final item retrieved.
Note that these predictions are particular to the total
failure stopping rule. Although not presented here, of the
four stopping rules tested in Harbison et al. (2009) the only
other stopping rule that correctly predicts the general form
of the IRTs is the total time rule, though this rule cannot
account for the systematic variation in total time spent in
search. When equipped with the time-since-last-success or
the last-IRT stopping rules, the relative-strength model
produces IRT predictions that vary substantially from the
results of both open- and closed-interval experiments.
The apparent difference in IRT data between the openand closed-interval designs are accounted for by the
relative-strength model as long as the model includes a
stopping rule based on total retrieval failures. According to
the model, the difference between the open- and closedinterval designs is expected if the designs induce subjects to
use different stopping thresholds. What is left to determine
is if the pattern is indeed real. Testing this requires a direct
comparison between the designs.

three digits and two operands (e.g., 3 * 2 + 1). Each
component of the problem was presented sequentially at a
rate of one second per item. After viewing the final digit of
the problem, participants saw an equal sign with a question
mark, prompting them to respond with the correct answer.
Participants were then given the opportunity to verbally
recall items from the most recent word list. During openinterval trials, participants were told to press the spacebar
when they could no longer retrieve additional items from the
current memory list; hence, they were given control over
when to end the retrieval interval. During closed-interval
blocks, participants were given 45 seconds to retrieve the
study list items. Based on prior research, we anticipated that
a 45-second retrieval interval would provide ample time for
most participants to complete the recall task.
All participants were presented with both block types to
ensure a proper comparison of IRTs between the open and
closed intervals, and the order of block presentation was
counterbalanced across participants. All retrievals were
made verbally by speaking into a microphone and were
digitally recorded for later scoring. The responses for each
list were recorded in an audio file and hand coded to extract
the time-to-word for each item recalled.

Results and Discussion
We conducted Jeffreys-Zellner-Siow (JZS) Bayes-factor
(BF) tests to verify the results of each significance test.
Moreover, some comparisons reported below are expected
to support the null hypothesis, and JZS BFs provide a means
to assess the degree to which this is indeed the case. Bayesfactor tests reflect the likelihood of support for the null
hypothesis over support for the alternative hypothesis, such
that coefficients less than 0.3 index strong support for the
alternative hypothesis and those greater than 3 index strong
support for the null hypothesis (Rouder, Speckman, Sun,
Morey, & Iverson, 2009).

Experiment
Forty-nine participants were randomly assigned into one of
two counterbalancing conditions: open-then-closed or
closed-then-open. List length was also varied within
participant, resulting in a 2 (retrieval block: open vs. closed)
x 4 (list length: 5, 7, 9, vs. 11 words) within-subjects design.
List length was varied randomly such that all participants
were given four study lists of each of four lengths evenly
and randomly within each block. List length was
systematically varied primarily to prevent participants from
learning exactly how many items were on each list and
using that information to determine stopping decisions.

Block Order We first conducted a manipulation check to
determine whether there was an effect associated with block
order (open-interval first vs. closed-interval first). A
repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed
no effect of Block Order x Block Type for average number
of items recalled (F(1,47)=0.002, p>0.96, BF=4.68) or total
number of intrusions (F(1,47)=0.442, p>0.50, BF=3.84).
Because exit latency cannot be computed for trials in the
closed-interval block, we examined the effect of Block
Order on exit latency only on open-interval trials, and found
no main effect (F(1,47)=2.30, p>0.13, BF=1.70). Finally,
there were no reliable effects of Block Order for IRTs at any
level of number recalled (p’s>0.56). Because these early
analyses suggest that there are no effects of Block Order, all
subsequent analyses will be collapsed across this factor to
increase statistical power.

Stimuli Thirty-six word lists were randomly generated for
each participant from a list of 280 high-imagability (M =
577/700), high-concreteness (578/700), moderate-to-highfrequency (Kucera-Francis frequency = 54), single-syllable
nouns drawn from the MRC psycholinguistic database
(Wilson, 1988).
Procedure For both the open- and closed-interval blocks,
participants were given a total of 18 lists consisting of 2
practice trials followed by 16 test trials. During the list
presentation of each trial, words were presented sequentially
at a rate of 3 seconds per word. Following the list,
participants were given a distracter task that consisted of
two simple, timed math problems. Each problem contained

List Length We next examined the effect of list length on
number recalled. Replicating earlier work, we showed a
main effect of number recalled (F(3,291)=60.39, p<0.0001).

429

Scheffé post hoc analyses revealed that longer study lists
resulted in the retrieval of additional items (M5=4.14,
M7=4.75, M9=5.16, M11=5.92; p’s<0.05). Thus, all
subsequent analyses will be collapsed across list length.

report IRT averages when at least 15 subjects contributed
data to both open- and closed-intervals.

A

Number Recalled There was not a significant difference in
the number of items retrieved between the closed- (M=5.11)
and open-interval trials (M=4.89; t(48)=0.947, p>0.33,
BF=5.78), indicating that people’s decisions to terminate
retrieval did not impact recall rates. Analyses of intrusion
and repetition errors are also consistent with this conclusion:
The average number of intrusions did not differ as a
function of Block Type (Mclosed=0.351; Mopen=0.441;
t(48)=-0.972, p>0.33, BF=5.64). An effect of Block Type
did not emerge when intrusions were split into 3 types: a)
repetitions (t(48)=0.467, p>0.64, BF=8.04); b) extra-list
false alarms, or items recalled that were not presented in any
prior study lists (t(48)=0.502, p>0.61, BF=7.91); and, c)
intra-list false alarms, or items that were incorrectly output
that occurred on previous lists (t(48)=1.642, p>0.10,
BF=2.47). Also, intrusion rates did not change as a function
of time spent in the experiment (p>0.47, but see Unsworth
et al., 2011). Given these results, we are comfortable
concluding that the open-interval design does not differ
from the closed-interval design in terms of number and type
recalled.

B

Exit Latency and Total Time We found that the current
exit latency and total time data were consistent with
previous results using an open-interval paradigm. Exit
latency decreased as a function of number recalled
(Dougherty & Harbison, 2007): Mean within-subject
gamma (γ) correlation coefficients for exit latency and
number recalled (mean γ = -0.139) indicate that participants
spend more time deciding to terminate search after the final
item is recalled when fewer words are output in a trial (onesample t-test of γ: t(48)=-3.719, p<0.001). Also consistent
with previous data, the total time spent in search was
positively correlated with the number recalled (mean γ =
0.268; t(48)=5.775, p<0.0001).

Figure 4. Mean IRTs as a function of Number Recalled
for (A) Closed- and (B) Open-interval retrieval trials.
Figure 4 illustrates the 1/IRTs for open- and closed blocks
as a function of Number Recalled. Closed-interval intercepts
were less than the open-interval intercepts for 6 of the 7
different total number of items retrieved. Especially
important to this functional relationship is the final, or K,
IRT (see Figure 5); there was a main effect of Block Type
on the K IRT (F(1,47)=28.48, p<0.0001, BF=1.53x10-4),
such that closed-interval trials (M=4.462s) led to longer
final IRTs than open-interval trials (M=2.792s). In fact, the
mean K IRT on closed-interval trials was significantly
larger than that on open trials for all but two levels of
Number Recalled (i.e., 3 and 8, p’s > 0.38). A sign test of
the binomial relationships for the number recalled of all
final IRTs reveals that six of the six comparisons favor
closed-retrieval intervals to have longer IRTs than openinterval intervals; a one-tailed test assessing the probability
of this pattern occurring yielded a p-value of 0.016. Thus,
despite the fact that there were no significant differences in
overall number recalled, there do appear to be differences in
the temporal dynamics between open- and closed-interval
results.

Inter-Retrieval Times IRTs were computed by taking the
difference between the verbal onset times for each
subsequent item recalled in a trial. We conducted these
irrespective of the identity of the item recalled (i.e., IRTs
were computed to incorporate trials containing intrusions).
We first examined IRTs as a function of Block Type (openvs. closed-interval) for each level of Number Recalled for
each participant. Since many participants did not output a
full range of Number Recalled levels across both open- and
closed-interval blocks, pairwise comparisons were only
conducted for subjects that could contribute data to both
levels of Block Type for a given Number Recalled level. For
example, it was possible that a participant recalled three
items in two separate trials of the open-interval block and
never recalled three items in any trials of the closed-interval
block. Because of this variation in observations, we only

General Discussion
The present experiment directly compared the closedinterval design, in which the experimenter determines the
length of the retrieval interval, to the open-interval design,
in which participants are allowed to terminate their own

430

memory search. The IRT functions differed between these
designs: Compared to their closed-interval counterparts,
open-interval trials resulted in overall shorter final average
IRTs.

5

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge NSF (grant BCS-1030831) for
support of this research.

Closed

4
IRT

method to measure not only how memory is searched, but
also how efficiently memory can be searched.

References

Open

3

Davelaar, E. J., Yu, E., Harbison, J. I., Hussey, E., &
Dougherty, M. R. (2012). A rational analysis of memory
search termination. Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling.
Dougherty, M. R., & Harbison, J. I. (2007). Motivated to
retrieve: how often are you willing to go back to the well
when the well is dry? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 11081117.
Harbison, J. I., Dougherty, M. R., Davelaar, E. J., &
Fayyad, B. (2009). On the lawfulness of the decision to
terminate memory search. Cognition, 111, 146-421.
Murdock, B. B. & Okada, R. (1970). Inter-response times in
single-trial free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 86, 263-267.
Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). A
context maintenance and retrieval model of organizational
processes in free recall. Psychological Review, 116, 129156.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 93-134.
Rohrer, D. (1996). On the relative and absolute strength of a
memory trace. Memory & Cognition, 24, 188-201.
Rohrer, D. & Wixted, J. T. (1994). An analysis of latency
and inter-response time in free recall. Memory &
Cognition, 22, 511-524.
Rouder, J. N., Speckman, P., Sun, D., Morey, R., & Iverson,
G. J. (2009). Bayesian t tests for accepting and rejecting
the null hypothesis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16,
225-237.
Unsworth, N., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, G. J. (2011).
Factors that influence search termination decision in free
recall: an examination of response type and confidence.
Acta Psychologica, 138, 19-29.
Wilson, M. D. (1988). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine readable dictionary, Version 2. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 20, 6-11.
Wixted, J. T. & Rohrer, D. (1994). Analyzing the dynamics
of free recall: An integrative review of the empirical
literature. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1, 89-106.

2
1
0
K

K-1

K-2

K-3

Retrieval Interval
Figure 5. Mean retrieval times for the final (K) IRT,
second-to-last (K-1) IRT, third-to-last (K-2) IRT, and
fourth-to-last (K-3) IRT.
What do these differences in the IRTs mean? According
to the present simulations, these results suggest a difference
in the stopping threshold between open- and closed-interval
retrieval. As shown in Figure 3B, the relative-strength
model, when equipped with the stopping rule supported by
the existing data (Harbison et al, 2009), predicts a positive
correlation between the final IRT and the stopping
threshold. When the stopping threshold is sufficiently large,
the final IRT is also large and the IRT predictions are
consistent with Equation 1; specifically, the intercept of the
inverse of the IRTs is 0 when plotted in reverse order
(Rohrer, 1996). However, when the stopping threshold is set
to smaller values, the final IRT is also smaller. This
decreases the predicted slope (or mean retrieval latency, τ)
and increases the intercept, producing results similar to
those observed under the open-interval design and
inconsistent with Equation 1.
The present research finds systematic differences in the
temporal characteristics of memory retrieval between openand closed-interval designs. These differences are predicted
by the relative strength sampling model when equipped with
a memory search stopping rule if it can be assumed that the
type of retrieval interval influences memory search stopping
decisions. In the terms of the model, participants appear to
use the same stopping rule but set a higher stopping
threshold for closed-interval retrieval than for open-interval
retrieval. Participants persist in search longer; however, they
do not retrieve more items in the closed-interval design than
in the open-interval design. The temporal differences were
predicted by the model and observed in the data despite no
appreciable differences in the number of items retrieved.
These results indicate that participants do not in fact
terminate search over-quickly in open- relative to closedinterval designs. Furthermore, as participants were able to
retrieve the same amount of items in less time, the results
suggest that the open-interval design might provide a

431

