UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Co-ordination in Music Tuition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wk3f624

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Duffy, Sam
Healey, Patrick G.T.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Co-ordination in Music Tuition
Sam Duffy & Patrick G. T. Healey
Queen Mary University of London
Media and Arts Technology Programme
Interaction Media and Communication Group
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
London, E1 4NS, United Kingdom
s.duffy@eecs.qmul.ac.uk, ph@eecs.qmul.ac.uk
Abstract
Playing an instrument is a physical skill learned through observation, repetition and rehearsal. Students of orchestral instruments seek one-to-one tuition from expert musicians. However
as they become more accomplished, the number of suitable tutors becomes more concentrated, especially for less common
instruments. Often a tutor-student relationship develops over
several years and temporary separation due to overseas performing, auditioning and teaching commitments is problematic. Some music education organisations use video conferencing as a solution to these problems, however it has long been
recognised that interaction mediated by video conferencing is
not analogous to a co-present experience. In this paper, ethnographic video analysis is used to study the interactions in copresent and separated instrumental music lessons. We find that
the musical score represents more than a physical embodiment
of the music - it plays an important role in coordinating activity and interaction. In video mediated lessons a single physical
score can no longer be shared and interaction is changed as a
result.
Keywords: video conference; interaction; ethnography.

Introduction
A recognised method for learning to play an orchestral musical instrument is through regular one-to-one lessons with
an experienced tutor. Playing an instrument is a physical practice requiring dextrous manipulation of a complex
tool. Marchand (2010) proposes that the interpretation, understanding, and realisation of practice is based in motor cognition. As the student watches the tutor, visually processed
signals are paired with observed actions, gestures, and postures. These may be co-ordinated with verbal instruction and
commands from the tutor. However learning a musical instrument cannot be achieved purely by verbal description or
observation, students learn a practice by ‘doing’. Through
observation followed by repetition and rehearsal, with iterative feedback from the tutor, the student develops motor and
kinaesthetic cognition of how to play their instrument. This
is a collaborative process, involving the co-ordination of understanding (Clark & Brennan, 1991).
At an undergraduate level of study, music students seek
professionally recognised performers as tutors and their
choice of where to study could be influenced by resident
tutors and professors at an institute. The number of qualified professional tutors in any particular field is finite, but
becomes more limited the more accomplished a student becomes, especially for less common instruments. Once a
teaching relationship has been established, musicians tour

and travel frequently, so temporary separation of tutor and
student can occur at critical times, such as prior to an important audition or performance. One solution to these problems is video conferencing. This is popular in geographically
remote areas such as Australia (Lancaster, 2007) but is also
part of urban mainstream conservatoires such as The Manhattan School of Music in New York. However interaction
when video is the medium of communication is not analogous to the co-present experience. The belief at the inception of video conferencing that technology which replicated
face-to-face interaction, simply at a distance, would enhance
communication, contained a fundamental misunderstanding
about how people interact when working collaboratively to
achieve a task (Whittaker, 2003; Edigo, 1988; Hollan & Stornetta, 1992). Heath et al (1997) found that the visual focus of
collaborative work is likely to be aligned to the focal point of
the activity, such as a document or object, rather than face-toface.
Existing research concerning separated musicians has focused on collaborative performance, the impact of latency and
delays and tools to enable distributed ensembles to perform,
improvise and compose (Chew et al., 2004; Sarkar & Vercoe,
2007; Hamilton, Iyer, Chafe, & Wang, 2008; Barbosa, 2003;
Bryan-Kinns & Healey, 2006). However the activity taking
place during music tuition is not the same as performance due
to the educational frame of reference.

The Use of Shared Space
Individuals in shared space coordinate their actions through
spatial awareness, peripheral monitoring of non-verbal signals and the ability to joint reference; where gaze and gesture
around a shared point coordinates the attention of participants
(Whittaker, 2003). They use their position relative to each
other to create mutually recognised shared space. Kendon
(1990) describes how two or more people can organise themselves to create and sustain a shared space, called ‘o-space’,
to maintain a common focus of attention. He goes on to describe sustained clusters and patterns as formations, an ‘F
formation’ being where participants have equal, direct and
exclusive access to their o-space. When two people are performing a collaborative task through the medium of video,
they no longer have a concept of negotiated mutual distance
(Sellen, 1992) and they cannot easily manage their position
relative to each other or objects in their environment, there-

1512

Figure 1: The layout for video lessons.
fore participants cannot use formations to create an o-space.
Gestures and gaze are also shown to be less efficient in video
mediated communication (Heath & Luff, 1991b). There is
a body of work investigating the importance of gestures and
non-verbal communication to teaching (Roth, 2001), to performing musicians (Vines, Wanderley, Krumhansl, Nuzzo,
& Levitin, 2004; Wanderley, Vines, Middleton, McKay, &
Hatch, 2005; Broughton & Stevens, 2009) and even specifically to instrumental music tuition (Kurkul, 2007; West &
L. Rostvall, 2003). In this paper we analyse the interactions
of co-present musicians in a learning environment and compare them to the interactions seen when student and tutor interact through the medium of video.

Methodology
Ethnography requires a researcher to participate in people’s
daily lives, watching what happens, listening to what is
said and gathering data to understand the issues emerging
(Hammersley & Atkinson, 2007). It can offer fine-grained,
detailed qualitative insight into how users interact with technology (Whittaker, 2003) and is often used as a tool to assess
HCI and CSCW systems, for example the studies by Heath et
al (1997; 1991a; 2005). It is the only way to study embodied
social practice as it naturally occurs, rather than in conditions
created by the researcher.
Co-present Studies We observed co-present music lessons
taking place at the educational establishments where the students would normally have their weekly lessons. Three thirtyminute lessons were observed and filmed, two clarinet lessons
and a trumpet lesson. The students observed were preparing
for Grade 7 or 8 exams1 . A researcher was present since it
was not possible to know in advance how much the participants would move around the room, necessitating repositioning of the camera (see researcher position R1 and R2 in Fig1 Grade 8 from a recognised exam board such as the Associated
Board of the Royal Schools of Music is often an entry requirement
for music performance undergraduate degrees

ure 2), however the researcher took no part in the lessons.
The footage was analysed using ELAN and a detailed transcript produced for each class.
Video Mediated Studies The video conference data was
obtained from a study run by British Telecom Research and
Development2 to evaluate a video conference prototype, designed specifically to support instrumental music tuition. We
were invited to observe tests which involved students and visiting tutors at Aldeburgh Music in Suffolk. Six one-hour
lessons using the prototype were observed and filmed over
three days, including harp, cello, violin, oboe and french
horn. The tutors had a photocopy of the student’s music, or
their own editions of the score to be worked on. Some of
the tutors had previous experience of teaching via video conference and some of the student-tutor pairings had worked
together previously. A researcher observed from the tutor
room, there already being an observer from the prototype
team in the student room. Video footage was obtained from
both rooms (see camera positions in Figure 1) and analysed
synchronously.

Results and Discussion
Professional musicians interviewed as part of this work believed latency to be the biggest barrier to teaching via video
conference, as the delay makes it very difficult to play together (Chew et al., 2004). However analysis of the three
co-present lessons showed that synchronous activity (singing
or playing together, accompanied playing, the tutor conducting) made up only 11 percent of the lesson on average. This
activity was used largely to resolve specific rhythmic problems. Where video conference is used to manage temporary
separation of a student-tutor pair, many normal lesson activities can still take place, synchronous tools being saved for the
next co-present lesson. The impact of the medium on interaction seemed to be a more significant problem as this affected
2 As part of the EU FP7 project Together Anywhere Together
Anytime (“TA2”) http://www.ta2-project.eu/Pages/overview.html

1513

all lesson activities.

Co-present Lesson Interactions
The rooms where lessons took place were small, the space
constrained by the piano and the music stand. Nonetheless, in
each case, tutors used their position relative to the student and
the music stand to communicate their intention to act. This
led to the establishment of specific zones within the space,
which both participants could be seen to observe. To illustrate
this we present vignettes illustrating examples of the use of
these zones.

Figure 3: Moving out of the work zone.

Figure 4: The tutor signals ‘back to work’.

The Listening Zone In each case, the tutor defined a listening zone (for example T1 in Figure 2). When the tutor occupied this zone, the student understood that they could play
without immediate interruption as the tutor wanted to hear
a longer section. The tutor also defined a listening position
within the listening zone, for example one tutor stood with
feet slightly apart, hands loosely folded in front of her body,
shoulders relaxed; attending to, but not bidding for, the floor.
Figure 2: The work zone and listening zone.
The Work Zone The music stand became the focal point
of a side-by-side F-formation (Kendon, 1990) as participants
shared the student’s score, the o-space created between them
being designated as a ‘work zone’ (Figure 2). In one example,
towards the end of the lesson the student and tutor briefly relax into social conversation. The student moves back slightly
and moves her upper body to face the tutor, rather than the
music (position S2 Figure 2). The tutor moves her upper body
to face the student, the stand no longer the focus of their ospace. The student rubs her shoulder and moves about, relaxing her muscles (Figure 3). The tutor then puts her left hand
on the music stand, between two short utterances, whilst still
maintaining eye contact with the student. In this way the tutor
holds both the stand and the student, triangulating her position (Healey & Battersby, 2009) as she begins the transition
back to the work zone. Finally, the tutor turns her head back
towards the music stand, pulling her body round, facing back
into the work zone (Figure 4). The student also turns back to
the stand (position S1 Figure 2), and swings her clarinet up
towards her face, having understood the signal that they are
going to go back to work.

Transitions Between the Zones When a tutor wanted to
give detailed feedback on a passage, they moved forward into
the work zone (position T2 Figure 2). When they stepped
backwards into the listening zone again, the student understood that the specific topic of detailed work was finished and
they should play a longer passage again, for the tutor to listen
to and assess.
The transition from listening position to interruption could
be sudden or more gradual. In some cases, the first indication
that a tutor had diagnosed a problem from their listening position was when they lifted their gaze from the score to look at
the student’s face or instrument. Sometimes the student had
already looked up, aware of their error, to see if it had been
detected. In other cases the student demonstrated peripheral
awareness; looking up in response to the tutor’s movement,
returning their gaze, and sometimes even stopping playing.
The intent to make a more significant interruption could be
indicated in advance by the tutor leaning into the piano to
pick up a pencil whilst still in the listening zone, signalling
intention to write on the score; or picking up their own instrument, indicating that they wished to demonstrate something
the student had played incorrectly.
The duration of the tutor’s planned interruption was indicated through the extent of her movement into the work zone.

1514

When the tutor intended only a brief interruption she leaned
forward into the work zone, without moving her feet, and
pointed to the score whilst giving feedback. Then leaned back
into her ‘home position’ having used body torsion to indicate
a temporary movement into the work zone, the lower body
remaining in the listening zone or ‘base position’ (Schegloff,
1998).

Control of Musical Turns
When a student is playing, they are emotionally engaged with
their performance and concentrating on the score. However
the tutor frequently interrupts to provide immediate feedback
on an identified problem. Frequent, unexpected interruptions
could become frustrating, however student-tutor pairs managed interruptions in order to reduce the impact. In a music lesson, where a verbal utterance is often followed by a
musical response, it is reasonable to assume that a musical
phrase is analogous to a conversational turn and we should
therefore be able to see the characteristics of turn management (Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974) such as transitionrelevant places for a new turn, back-channelling (Moran,
2011), turn breakdown and repair.
We could see evidence of musical turn management whilst
the student was playing. Musicians have been shown to have
awareness of anticipation of other musician’s intentions with
respect to musical structure (Moran, 2011) and the position
between two adjacent musical phrases or ideas was observed
to be preferred by the tutor as a transition-relevant place to interrupt. Even if a change in the tutor’s posture indicated that
they had diagnosed a problem earlier in a phrase, they would
often wait for the long note at the end of the phrase before
initiating interruption of the student’s performance. This provided an ideal opportunity for the tutor to speak, whilst the
student had a natural point to finish, before moving on to the
next musical idea.
The transition from verbal instruction, to visual observation, to motor cognition (Marchand, 2010) was observed. After verbally explaining a point, in some cases the clarinet tutor
then demonstrated it for the student on her own instrument.
The student was asked to imitate. If the tutor was not satisfied with the performance she played the phrase again, exaggerating the aspect not yet corrected. The alternating musical
turns increased in intensity, the student’s technique converging over time with that of the tutor’s. In one example a student
impatiently copied the tutor’s demonstration, starting to play
before she had finished demonstrating. The tutor did not detect any noticeable improvement and musically admonished
him, interrupting his performance and playing it again herself, taking back the turn.

The Shared Score
The score played a much greater role in the lesson than a
physical embodiment of the music, also providing a shared
reference to coordinate joint attention (Whittaker, 2003). In
co-present lessons the participants shared a score, usually that
which belonged to the student, and both pointed to parts of the

score as they spoke as a convenient way to reference without
having to mention bar numbers specifically. Tutors gestured
over the score as they talked, linking their comments to specific notes and putting phrases into context of the whole piece.
For example, in one lesson the tutor pointed to the music 32
times, half of the instances for navigation purposes such as
“from here” and half to reference feedback against musical
notation.
Direct eye contact was shared for less than 5 percent of the
time, and was made up of brief glances (for example one lesson contained 112 instances of shared gaze, the average duration being less than one second). More often both looked at
the score, even when in conversation together, whilst exhibiting a high level of peripheral awareness. For example, when
one student performed for the tutor and stumbled over a note,
the tutor immediately moved in towards the score with her
pencil, starting to speak. However the student interrupted before her pencil reached the score saying “change my right?”,
his gaze not having moved from the music. The tutor stopped
moving, looked up at him nodding and said “you read my
mind, yeah” then moved back to her listening position.
Whilst the students had all made pencil annotations on
their music outside of the lesson, such as marking fingerings,
phrase marks, accents and breathing; during the lesson it was
the tutor who annotated the score. For example the clarinet
tutor used the character ‘O’, writing it on specific notes to
indicate the ’open throat’ required to control tone in some
registers or ‘X’ to signify a particular spacing of fingers on
the keys. Through annotation, the student’s score built into a
permanent and cumulative record of the learning imparted by
the tutor; a record of how they had developed.

Video Mediated Lesson Interactions
In the video mediated lessons, students demonstrated awareness of their need to monitor both their music and the tutor at
the same time, by initially positioning themselves directly in
front of their screen so that they could see both the tutor, and
their music, without significantly moving their head. However the score and music stand obstructed the main camera
view (Figure 5) and in all cases tutors asked the students to
turn around so that they could see their hands on the instrument. The students were then turned between 45 and 90 degrees away from their screen (position S in Figure 1) and no
longer had peripheral awareness of the tutor when performing.

The Divided Score
Now that the student’s gaze was divided between their score
and the screen, there was a dramatic impact on turn control.
With a separate music stand and score in each room, a shared
work zone could no longer be established, and the tutor could
not create a listening zone, removing communication through
spatiality. Whilst some tutors still adopted a listening position (for example one tutor formally placed her folded hands
in her lap - see Figure 6) they now used exaggerated gestures such as a raised arm or a wave to indicate when they

1515

Student: from the, sorry? From the?
Tutor: from the beginning of the bar.
[the tutor starts playing the phrase that she wants to hear,
the student is looking hesitant]
Tutor: can you play it from the beginning of the bar and
stop on the B and the E?
Student: OK [with instrument raised to playing position]
Tutor: Do you see where I mean?
[the student looks at the music intensely, wiggling her
fingers on the fret board]
Student: “uh hum” [hesitantly]

Figure 5: The score obstructs the camera view.
wanted the student to stop playing, and when these were also
unseen, resorted to a vocal request. This was sometimes not
heard by the student who was absorbed in their playing and
not facing the video conference system speakers, and the tutor
had to raise their voice. Even when they were able to rapidly
switch their attention, students missed cues through looking
in the wrong place at the wrong time. From their perspective,
they were continually being stopped unexpectedly by a raised
voice, requiring a significant twist of their upper body to see
the screen (Figure 7) and this quickly led to frustration.

The tutor could no longer directly annotate the student’s
score and it was noted that, in comparison to the co-present
lessons, notes and annotations were not frequently made by
either participant. One tutor made reference to a student’s
annotations where they were available on their photocopy of
the student’s music, confirming their value.

Figure 7: The student must switch gaze from score to screen.

Conclusions and Further Work
Figure 6: Tutor’s gaze divided between screen and score.
Tutors also struggled with dividing their gaze between the
screen and the score (Figure 6). Often they would discuss a
phrase looking down at their score, as the student looked at
their own separate score. Neither party could monitor their
video screen at the same time. Previously the tutor could
use peripheral awareness of the student’s gaze as evidence of
continued attention and the student could use indicative gestures to confirm their understanding of the feedback and it’s
relation to the score (Clark & Brennan, 1991). Navigation
became problematic as a result, requiring detailed reference
to page and bar numbers to establish precisely where in the
score feedback related to, or for the tutor to establish where
they would like the student to play from. For example, as
shown in the following extract of dialogue.
Tutor: that wasn’t quite right, let’s try it again...
[the student starts to play]
Tutor: ...from the beginning of the bar.
[student stops, looks up]

Ethnographic analysis of co-present lessons provided a useful
framework to assess the effectiveness of video mediated communication to teach a practice based skill. The importance
of the shared score to lesson interaction was evidenced by
problems managing interaction such as turn control when participants were separated and could no longer share the same
physical representation of the music.
A further study is planned where the instrument class will
be confined to woodwind (for example clarinet or oboe) and
an additional camera will be placed behind the participants
to capture gesturing over the score in more detail. The score
will be photographed and the annotations discussed with participants during post-observation interviews. Technological
solutions to the problem of interaction lost through the divided score will be suggested. These are likely to involve an
interactive visual layer over a digitised representation of the
physical score, which shows the separated participants where
each person is gesturing on the music. Ideally both participants should be able to mark their layer in a way which allows the student to take an annotated copy away, and return
with it for the next lesson. There should be a way for the tutor
to communicate intent to interrupt the student’s performance
through visualisation of gestures on the music. In this way

1516

some of the functions of the shared score can be introduced
to the separated lesson.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Doug Williams at British
Telecom Research and Technology Future Content Group;
Jonathan Reekie, Bill Lloyd and Marie Bennell at Aldeburgh
Music; Ruth Aldred at Manchester Grammar School and
Nicola Baigent at Trinity School of Music. Thank you to all
of the students and tutors who kindly allowed their lessons
to be filmed and the reviewers for their helpful feedback.
The Media and Arts Technology programme is supported by
an EPSRC Doctoral Training Centre EP/G03723X/1. Arts
Council England supported Aldeburgh Music’s purchase of
equipment.

References
Barbosa, A. (2003, December). Displaced Soundscapes: A
Survey of Network Systems for Music and Sonic Art Creation. Leonardo Music Journal, 13, 53–59.
Broughton, M., & Stevens, C. (2009, April). Music, movement and marimba: an investigation of the role of movement and gesture in communicating musical expression to
an audience. Psychology of Music, 37(2), 137–153.
Bryan-Kinns, N., & Healey, P. (2006). Decay in collaborative
music making. In Proceedings of the 2006 conference on
new interfaces for musical expression (pp. 114–117). Paris:
NIME.
Chew, E., Zimmermann, R., Sawchuk, A. A., Kyriakakis, C.,
Papadopoulos, C., François, A. R. J., et al. (2004). Musical interaction at a distance: Distributed immersive performance. In Music network 2004 (pp. 1–10). Barcelona: DIP
Publications.
Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. Perspectives on socially shared cognition, 13(1991).
Edigo, C. (1988). Videoconferencing as a technology to support group work: A review of its failure. In Proceedings
of the 1988 conference on computer-supported cooperative
work (pp. 13–24). Portland, Oregon: ACM.
Hamilton, R., Iyer, D., Chafe, C., & Wang, G. (2008). To the
Edge with China : Explorations in Network Performance.
Computer, 7–8.
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (2007). Ethnography: Principles in practice (Third ed.). London: Routledge.
Healey, P., & Battersby, S. (2009). The interactional geometry of a three-way conversation. In Proceedings of the
31st annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp.
785–790). Amsterdam: COGSCI.
Heath, C., & Lehn, D. (2005). Interaction and interactives: collaboration and participation with computer-based
exhibits. Public Understanding of Science, 1–23.
Heath, C., & Luff, P. (1991a). Collaborative activity and
technological design: Task coordination in London Underground control rooms. In Proceedings of the second conference on european conference on computer-supported coop-

erative work (pp. 65–80). Amsterdam: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Heath, C., & Luff, P. (1991b). Disembodied conduct: communication through video in a multi-media office environment. Proceedings of ACM CHI 91 Human Factors in
Computing, 99–103.
Heath, C., Luff, P., & Sellen, A. (1997). Reconfiguring Media
Space. Video-mediated communication, 323–347.
Hollan, J., & Stornetta, S. (1992). Beyond being there. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems - CHI ’92, 119–125.
Kendon, A. (1990). Conducting Interaction: Patterns of behavior in focused encounters. Cambridge: CUP.
Kurkul, W. W. (2007, February). Nonverbal communication
in one-to-one music performance instruction. Psychology
of Music, 35(2), 327–362.
Lancaster, H. (2007). Are we (virtually) there yet? Face-toface v. virtual learning landscapes in musical instrumental
teaching. CAUCE 2007, 1–16.
Marchand, T. H. (2010, May). Embodied cognition and communication: studies with British fine woodworkers. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 16, S100–S120.
Moran, N. (2011, May). Music, bodies and relationships: An
ethnographic contribution to embodied cognition studies.
Psychology of Music.
Roth, W.-M. (2001, January). Gestures: Their Role in Teaching and Learning. Review of Educational Research, 71(3),
365–392.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest
systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conversation. Language, 696–735.
Sarkar, M., & Vercoe, B. (2007). Recognition and prediction
in a network music performance system for Indian percussion. In Proceedings of the 7th international conference
on new interfaces for musical expression (Vol. 2, pp. 317–
320). New York, New York, USA: ACM.
Schegloff, E. (1998). Body torque. Social Research, 65(3).
Sellen, A. (1992). Speech patterns in video-mediated conversations. In (pp. 49–59). Monterey: ACM.
Vines, B., Wanderley, M., Krumhansl, C., Nuzzo, R., &
Levitin, D. (2004). Performance gestures of musicians:
What structural and emotional information do they convey? Gesture-based communication in human-computer
interaction.
Wanderley, M., Vines, B., Middleton, N., McKay, C., &
Hatch, W. (2005, June). The Musical Significance of Clarinetists’ Ancillary Gestures: An Exploration of the Field.
Journal of New Music Research, 34(1), 97–113.
West, T., & L. Rostvall a. (2003, May). A Study of Interaction and Learning in Instrumental Teaching. International
Journal of Music Education, 40(1), 16–27.
Whittaker, S. (2003). Theories and Methods in Mediated Communication. The handbook of discourse processes(973), 243–286.

1517

