UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Strength of Perceptual Experience Predicts Word Processing Performance Better than
Concreteness or Imageability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01b1f668

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Connell, Louise
Lynott, Dermot

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Strength of Perceptual Experience Predicts Word Processing Performance
Better than Concreteness or Imageability
Louise Connell (louise.connell@manchester.ac.uk)
School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK

Dermot Lynott (dermot.lynott@manchester.ac.uk)
Decision and Cognitive Sciences Research Centre, Manchester Business School, University of Manchester
Booth Street West, Manchester M15 6PB, UK
Abstract
Abstract concepts are traditionally thought to differ from
concrete concepts by their lack of perceptual information,
which causes them to be processed more slowly and
inaccurately than perceptually-based concrete concepts. We
examined this assumption by comparing concreteness and
imageability norms to a set of perceptual strength norms in
five separate modalities: sound, taste, touch, smell and vision.
Results showed that that concreteness and imageability do not
actually reflect the perceptual basis of concepts: concreteness
ratings appear to be based on two different intersecting
decision criteria, and imageability ratings are visually biased.
Analysis of lexical decision and word naming performance
showed that maximum perceptual strength (i.e., strength in
the dominant perceptual modality) consistently outperformed
both concreteness and imageability in accounting for variance
in response latency and accuracy. We conclude that so-called
concreteness effects in word processing emerge from the
perceptual strength of a concept’s representation and discuss
the implications for theories of conceptual representation.
Keywords: abstract concepts; imageability; concreteness
effects; perceptual strength; lexical decision; word naming

Introduction
What exactly constitutes an abstract concept? Traditionally,
abstract words such as truth or impossible are assumed to
refer to things that are not perceptually experienced, while
concrete words such as chair or turquoise are assumed to
refer to perceptible, material entities. A long history of
research has examined processing differences between such
abstract and concrete concepts. In particular, concreteness
effects refer to a behavioral advantage for words that refer to
concrete concepts, which are processed more quickly and
accurately than abstract concepts in tasks such as lexical
decision and word naming (e.g., Binder et al., 2005; James,
1975; Kroll & Merves, 1986; Schwanenflugel, Harnishfeger
& Stowe, 1988; Schwanenflugel & Stowe, 1989).
A number of different theories have been proposed to
account for concreteness effects in word processing
performance. Dual coding theory (Paivio, 1986, 2007)
holds that both concrete and abstract concepts have a verbal
code representation, but that concrete concepts alone also
have a nonverbal, perceptual code that “gives rise to
conscious (reportable) imagery when activated” (Paivio,
2007, p. 39). Abstract words are slower to process because
they can only be imaged indirectly, via related concrete
words. Context availability theory (Schwanenflugel &

Shoben, 1983; Schwanenflugel et al., 1988) instead argues
that the type of information is less important than the
quantity, and that concrete concepts are strongly linked to a
narrow range of supporting contexts in memory whereas
abstract concepts are weakly linked to a wide range. People
are slower to process abstract words because they find it
more difficult to retrieve associated contextual information.
More recently, situated simulation views of conceptual
representation (Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings, 2005;
Barsalou, Santos, Simmons & Wilson, 2008; see also
Kousta, Vigliocco, Campo, Vinson & Andrews, 2011) have
drawn together several aspects of both dual coding and
context availability theories.
Concrete concepts are
represented in a narrow range of situations that focus on
perceptual and motor information, while abstract concepts
have a wide range of situations that focus on social,
introspective and affective information. Abstract words are
slower to process because people find it more difficult to
access their situations.
However, despite their reputation as a textbook effect,
concreteness effects do not always reliably emerge in
semantic processing. Null effects are rarely publishable, but
lack of concreteness effects in response times and error rates
are not uncommon in cognitive neuroscience studies where
significant findings on other measures are reported
alongside null behavioral results (e.g., Fiebach & Friederici,
2003; Papagno, Fogliata, Catricala & Miniussi, 2009;
Sabsevitz, Medler, Seidenberg & Binder, 2005; Tyler,
Russell, Fadili, Moss, 2001).
Furthermore, reverse
concreteness effects – a processing advantage for abstract
concepts rather than concrete – have also been found in
studies of healthy adult participants (e.g., Adelman, Brown
& Quesada, 2006; Kousta et al., 2011). Such null and
reversed concreteness effects are problematic for theories
that claim fundamental representational differences between
concrete and abstract concepts.
One reason for inconsistencies in empirical tests of
concreteness effects may be that the intuitive and theoretical
assumption is valid (i.e., that concepts with perceptual
information are faster to process), but that the typical basis
for selecting experimental items (i.e., concreteness or
imageability ratings) does not offer an accurate measure of
the perceptual basis of concepts. Most researchers select
items from published norms such as the MRC
psycholinguistic
database
(available
online
at
http://www.psy.uwa.edu.au/MRCDataBase/uwa_mrc.htm).

1428

However, when we examined the original norming
instructions used to collect these norms, we found it
questionable that participants would have simultaneously
considered their sensory experience across all modalities
and then managed to aggregate this experience into a single,
composite rating per word. Instructions for concreteness
ratings, for example, define concrete words as referring to
“objects, materials, or persons” and abstract words as
referring to something that “ cannot be experienced by the
senses” (Paivio, Yuille & Madigan, 1968, p. 5). The
resulting ratings, therefore, may reflect different decision
criteria at the concrete and abstract ends of the scale, which
is consistent with previous observations that the
concreteness ratings scale has a bimodal distribution (e.g.,
Kousta et al., 2011). Imageability ratings are frequently
used interchangeably with concreteness ratings (e.g., Binder
et al., 2005; Sabsevitz et al., 2005) because of their high
correlation and theoretical relationship in dual coding
theory. Instructions for imageability ratings repeatedly refer
to arousing a “mental image” (Paivio et al., 1968, p. 4),
which is likely to lead naïve participants to focus on vision
at the expense of other modalities. Both concreteness and
imageability ratings could therefore add considerable noise
to any dataset that assumed the ratings reflected a smooth
continuum of perceptual experience across all modalities.
Our goals in the present paper were twofold. First, we
aimed to establish whether concreteness and imageability
norms actually reflect the degree with which concepts are
perceptually experienced, as is commonly assumed. Second,
we examined whether so-called concreteness effects in word
processing are better predicted by concreteness/imageability
ratings or by strength of perceptual experience. If the
former, then forty years of empirical methodology have
been validated but the reasons for null and reverse
concreteness effects remain unclear.
If the latter, then
concreteness and imageability ratings are unsuitable for the
tasks in which they are employed, and null and reverse
concreteness effects are due to the unreliability of perceptual
information in these ratings.

& Connell, 2011).
If concreteness and imageability are a fair reflection of the
degree of perceptual information in a concept, then ratings
of perceptual strength in all five modalities should be
positively related to concreteness and imageability ratings,
and these relationships should remain consistent across the
rating scale. On the other hand, if we were correct in our
hypothesis to the contrary, then we would expect some
perceptual modalities to be neglected (i.e., no relationship)
or even misinterpreted (i.e., negative relationship) in
concreteness and imageability ratings. Specifically,
concreteness norming instructions may have led to different
decision criteria and therefore distinctly different modality
profiles at each end of scale, whereas imageability
instructions may have led to a predominantly visual bias.

Method

Experiment 1

Materials A total of 592 words were collated that
represented the overlap of the relevant sets of norms, so
each word had ratings of perceptual strength on five
modalities as well as concreteness and imageability (see
Table 1 for sample items). Perceptual strength norms came
from Lynott and Connell (2009, in prep.), in which
participants were asked to rate “to what extent do you
experience WORD” (for nouns) or “to what extent do you
experience something being WORD” (for adjectives)
through each of the five senses (i.e., “by hearing”, “by
tasting”, “by feeling through touch”, “by smelling” and “by
seeing”), using separate rating scales for each modality.
Perceptual strength ratings therefore took the form of a 5value vector per word, ranging from 0 (low strength) to 5
(high strength). Concreteness ratings were taken from the
MRC psycholinguistic database for 522 words, with ratings
for the remaining 70 words coming from Nelson, McEvoy
and Schreiber (2004). Imageability ratings for 524 words
also came from the MRC database, and were supplemented
with ratings for a further 68 words from Clark and Paivio
(2004). All concreteness and imageability ratings emerged
from the same instructions as Paivio et al.'s (1968) original
norms, and ranged from 100 (abstract or low-imageability)
to 700 (concrete or high-imageability).

Rather than ask participants to condense their estimations of
sensory experience into a single concreteness or
imageability rating, modality-specific norming asks people
to rate how strongly they experience a variety of concepts
using each perceptual modality in turn (i.e., auditory,
gustatory, haptic, olfactory or visual: Lynott & Connell,
2009, in prep.; see also Connell & Lynott, 2010; Louwerse

Design & Analysis We ran stepwise regression analyses
with either concreteness or imageability rating as the
dependent variable, and ratings of auditory, gustatory,
haptic, olfactory and visual strength as competing
predictors. For analysis of consistency across the scales,
each dependent variable was split at its midpoint before

Table 1: Sample words, used in Experiments 1 and 2, for which perceptual strength ratings [0-5] match or mismatch ratings
of concreteness and imageability [100-700].
Word
soap
noisy
atom
republic

Perceptual strength
Auditory
Gustatory
0.35
1.29
4.95
0.05
1.00
0.63
0.53
0.67

Haptic
4.12
0.29
0.94
0.27

Olfactory
4.00
0.05
0.50
0.07

1429

Visual
4.06
1.67
1.38
1.79

Concreteness
589
293
481
376

Imageability
600
138
499
356

regression: concreteness ratings formed abstract (rating
[100-400], N = 294) and concrete ([401-700], N = 298)
groups, whereas imageability ratings formed low ([100400], N = 167) and high ([401-700], N = 425) groups. A
priori sensitivity analysis confirmed that the sample size of
the smallest group (low-imageability words) was still large
enough to capture even a low degree of fit (minimum R2 = .
074) in a five-predictor regression model at power of 0.8.

Results & Discussion
Concreteness Analysis showed clear dissociations between
concreteness and modality-specific perceptual experience.,
with little consistency across abstract and concrete groups
(see Figure 1). Abstract words' ratings were predicted by
three of the five modalities, F(3, 290) = 8.64, p < .0001, R2
= .082, but with a low degree of fit and inconsistency in the
direction of the relationship: positively related to vision, and
negatively to auditory and olfactory strength. In contrast,
concrete words' ratings were predicted positively by
olfactory and visual strength, F(2, 295) = 33.52, p < .0001,
R2 = .185, but these two perceptual modalities offered a
higher degree of fit than the model for abstract words.
Most perceptual modalities therefore failed to retain a
consistent relationship with concreteness across the scale
(auditory, olfactory) or had no predictive value at all
(gustatory, haptic). However, the most serious conflict
concerned the inversion of the olfactory effect: more
olfactory meant more abstract, but more olfactory also
meant more concrete. Such inconsistency in behavior poses
serious problems for the assumption that abstractness and
concreteness represent two ends of the same continuum, and
rather indicates that participants applied different decision
criteria at the concrete and abstract ends of the norming
scale. While perceptual strength can explain more than
twice the concreteness variance in concrete words (19%)
than it did in abstract words (8%), participants are clearly
basing their concreteness rating on non-perceptual
information. It therefore appears that participants in
concreteness norming studies treated the scale as two
intersecting continua, neither of which reliably reflects the
extent of sensory experience.
Imageability Analysis of imageability showed a clear
visual bias at the expense of other perceptual modalities (see
Figure 2).
Ratings of low-imageability words were
predicted by two perceptual modalities: visual strength
(positively) and olfactory strength (negatively), F(2, 164) =
16.42, p < .0001, R2 = .167. High-imageability ratings, on
the other hand, were related to three perceptual modalities
with a similar degree of fit, F(3, 421) = 36.32, p < .0001, R2
= .206: positively for both visual and olfactory information,
and negatively for gustatory.
Participants therefore tend to rely on visual experience
when generating imageability ratings: visible things are
highly imageable and invisible things are not. However, this
focus on vision led other modalities to be neglected or
misinterpreted. Neither auditory nor haptic experience was
reflected at either end of the scale, and people tended to

Figure 1: Modality predictors of concreteness ratings in
Experiment 1 (* p < .05, ** p < .01).

Figure 2: Modality predictors of imageability ratings in
Experiment 1 (* p < .05, ** p < .01).
misconstrue olfactory information and ignore gustatory
information for low-imageability concepts, yet follow
olfactory strength while misinterpreting gustatory strength
for high-imageability concepts. Results indicate that people
do not find it equally easy to generate imagery across the
range of modalities that constitute perceptual experience.
Participants in imageability norming studies seem to have
had difficulty in extending the meaning of “image” beyond
its conventional interpretation as a visual impression.

Experiment 2
Since neither concreteness nor imageability ratings reflect
the full range of sensory experience, it raises the question of
whether textbook concreteness effects in word processing
are actually due to (a) the degree of perceptual information
in each referent concept's representation, or (b) some other
conceptually meaningful information that makes up most of

1430

the variance in concreteness and imageability ratings. The
present experiment aimed to resolve this question by
comparing the unique predictive abilities of concreteness
ratings, imageability ratings and perceptual strength in
lexical decision and word naming performance.
If concreteness effects are due to the degree of perceptual
information in each referent concept's representation, then
perceptual strength should outperform concreteness and
imageability in predicting latency and accuracy in word
processing. In this case, we would expect perceptual
strength to exhibit an independent effect in the presence of
concreteness / imageability predictors, but not vice versa,
because most of the variance in concreteness and
imageability ratings reflects decision criteria that are
unrelated to processing performance. On the other hand, if
concreteness effects are actually due to some other nonperceptual representation that is captured by concreteness
and imageability ratings, then they would maintain an
independent effect even when perceptual strength has
already been partialled out. In this sense, concreteness
effects would subsume perceptibility effects, because the
variance in concreteness and imageability ratings would
reflect conceptually meaningful information in addition to
perceptual differences.

Method
Materials The same set of 592 words from Experiment 1
was used in this study, along with lexical decision and
naming data from the Elexicon database (Balota et al., 2007;
available online at http://elexicon.wustl.edu), which also
provided lexical characteristics for each word to act as
independent regression variables (see below).
Design & Analysis
Hierarchical regression analyses
determined the proportion of variance each candidate rating
could explain. The dependent variables were mean lexical
decision and naming times for each word (M = 633 ms, SD
= 64 ms; M = 622 ms, SD = 53 ms; respectively), and their
accompanying mean accuracy rates (M = 96.6%, SD =
5.4%; M = 98.9%, SD = 3.3%). As well as raw RT in ms,
we also analysed standardized RT based on the mean zscores of the original participants in the Elexicon data,
which offers a more reliable measure of latency by
partialing out individual differences in overall speed and
variability (Balota et al., 2007). As independent variables in
all regressions, we used a basic model found by Brysbaert
and New (2009) to provide the best fit for RT and accuracy:
log contextual diversity, log2 contextual diversity, number of
letters in the word, and number of syllables in the word.
The independent (unique) effects of concreteness (M =
427, SD = 107) and imageability (M = 461, SD = 92) were
ascertained by adding the relevant predictor to a model
containing maximum perceptual strength1 and examining
1
Maximum perceptual strength represents the highest rating in
the concept's dominant modality, which analysis showed was the
best method of compressing the five-value vector of perceptual
strength into a single variable (necessary for equitable comparison
with concreteness and imageability).

whether it led to an increase in fit. The independent effect
of perceptual strength (M = 3.78, SD = 0.75) was calculated
twice: once by entering it in a model that already contained
concreteness, and once by adding it to a model that
contained
imageability.
The
correlation
between
imageability and concreteness was high, r (590) = .828, p < .
0001, and comparable to previous studies (e.g., r = .83 in
Paivio et al., 1968). Maximum perceptual strength had a
much weaker relationship with both concreteness, r(590) = .
429, p < .0001, and imageability, r(590) = .502, p < .0001.

Results & Discussion
Only perceptual strength emerged as a unique predictor of
variance in word processing (see Figure 3 and Table 2).
When either concreteness or imageability had already been
included in the model, perceptual strength still accounted for
an extra proportion of variance in all measures except
naming accuracy. Critically, the inverse was not true. When
maximum perceptual strength was included as a predictor,
there was no model where the addition of concreteness or
imageability produced an increase in fit 2. It is important to
note that perceptual strength was in all cases acting in the
expected direction (see Table 2): RT decreased and accuracy
increased with higher perceptual strength. In other words,
the independent predictive ability of perceptual strength
never counteracted any facilitation by concreteness or
imageability. Maximum perceptual strength thus captures
meaningful information about conceptual structure that
other ratings do not, and this information impacts directly
on word processing performance.
One other striking difference emerged. Previous research
has found that contextual diversity is inversely correlated
with concreteness and imageability (i.e., abstract words
appear in more diverse contexts than do concrete words:
Schwanenflugel & Shoben, 1983; Schwanenflugel et al.,
1988). Our data was consistent with this established
pattern: zero-order correlations showed that concreteness
was negatively related to log contextual diversity, r(590) =
–.108, p = .009, though the weaker trend for imageability
was not significant, r(590) = –.024, p = .560. Yet, in sharp
contrast, perceptual strength was positively correlated with
contextual diversity, r(590) = .117, p < .0001. That is,
although concrete-rated words have a narrower variety of
contexts than abstract-rated words, perceptually strong
words have a wider variety than perceptually weak words.
We return to this issue in the general discussion.

General Discussion
In the present paper, we show that concreteness and
2

Our approach and findings thus differ considerably from those
of Juhasz et al., (2011), who found that a sensory experience rating
predicted lexical decision times after imageability was partialled
out. However, they did not examine concreteness ratings or word
naming times, their rating asked people to aggregate all sensory
experience on a single scale (which our Experiment 1 indicates that
people find very difficult) rather than collecting ratings on separate
modalities, and they did not show which of imageability and their
own rating had better predictive power.

1431

Figure 3: Independent (unique) effects of each predictor in Experiment 2, showing proportion of explained variance (R2
change in %) of Elexicon reaction time and accuracy data, over and above that of perceptual strength, concreteness (c) or
imageability (i) († p < .1, * p < .05, ** p < .01).
Table 2: Standardized regression coefficients for independent effects of each predictor over and above that of perceptual
strength, concreteness (c) or imageability (i), in models of Elexicon reaction time and accuracy data in Experiment 2.
Predictor

Lexical
Decision RT
Concreteness
– 0.016
Imageability
– 0.023
Perceptual strength (c) – 0.132**
Perceptual strength (i) – 0.127**
† p < .1, * p < .05, ** p < .01

Lexical
Decision zRT
– 0.004
– 0.018
– 0.091**
– 0.080*

Lexical
Decision Acc
– 0.031
+ 0.036
+ 0.097**
+ 0.067†

imageability ratings do not accurately reflect the perceptual
basis of concepts, and that concreteness effects in lexical
decision and naming are better predicted by perceptual
strength ratings than by concreteness or imageability
ratings. These findings support the intuition that perceptual
concepts are faster to process, and show that textbook
concreteness effects in word processing are actually a
function of the degree of perceptual information in each
referent concept's representation. However, our results also
suggest that concreteness and imageability ratings are
unsuitable for the tasks in which they are employed, because
most of their variance comes from non-perceptual decision
criteria that is unrelated to word processing performance.
Concreteness effects could therefore be better characterized
as perceptibility effects, which can be sometimes nullified
or inverted (e.g., Kousta et al., 2011; Papagno et al., 2009)
when elicited from relatively noisy concreteness or
imageability ratings.
While the connection between concreteness effects and
perceptual information might at first glance seem like old
news (e.g., Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings, 2005; Paivio,
1986, 2007), the present findings have some important
ramifications for how such effects should be interpreted.
Concreteness effects, by their very name, are assumed to
result from an ontological difference between concrete and
abstract concepts carrying through to a representational
difference that affects speed and accuracy of processing.
Labeling a word as “concrete” or “abstract” has an intuitive
appeal, but we would argue that these terms lacked proper
operationalization during norming and hence it is unclear
exactly what information is captured by concreteness

Word Naming
RT
+ 0.025
– 0.013
– 0.089*
– 0.072†

Word Naming
zRT
+ 0.002
– 0.024
– 0.095*
– 0.082*

Word Naming
Acc
– 0.023
+ 0.045
+ 0.038
+ 0.006

ratings. Of course, any set of ratings can only ever be an
approximation of an underlying representation, and we are
not suggesting that one should expect a perfect fit between
concreteness ratings and behavioral effects. That said, the
poor performance of concreteness ratings in the current data
lies in sharp contrast to the robust performance of perceptual
strength ratings. We suggest that the concrete / abstract
ontological distinction must be disentangled from
concreteness / imageability norms because empirical
concreteness effects are not in themselves well predicted by
concreteness / imageability.
Theoretically, the present results poses some problems for
dual coding, context availability, and situated simulation
explanations of concreteness effects. It is a central tenet of
dual coding theory that highly perceptual concepts are those
with the most direct connections between the verbal and
nonverbal imagery codes, and people therefore find it
difficult to generate perceptual imagery for words that lack
these direct connections (Paivio, 1986, 2007). However,
imageability (i.e., the ease of consciously generating
imagery) is not well related to perceptual experience
(Experiment 1), and its effects were entirely subsumed by
larger effects of perceptual strength (Experiment 2). In
other words, it is the extent of perceptual information in a
concept's representation that matters to word processing, not
the ease of generating imagery, which casts some doubt on
the idea that processing delays for abstract concepts emerge
from their lack of direct inter-system connections. Both
context availability (Schwanenflugel & Shoben, 1983;
Schwanenflugel et al., 1988) and situated simulation
(Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings, 2005; Barsalou et al., 2008)

1432

views share the idea that abstract concepts are slowed in
processing because they have a wider variety of potential
situational contexts. This idea, however, is not borne out
by our data. Strongly perceptual concepts (i.e., those that
are generally assumed to be concrete, regardless of what
concreteness ratings say) actually have greater contextual
diversity than weakly perceptual concepts.
In sum, we believe that the operationalisation of abstract
and concrete concepts deserves much closer scrutiny than it
has received to date.
Whether researchers want to
investigate the ontological distinction between abstract and
concrete concepts, or the variables that affect latency and
accuracy in word processing, then they should reconsider
the automatic tendency to reach for concreteness and
imageability ratings that have little to do with the perceptual
basis of concepts. Strength of perceptual experience has a
powerful bearing on how people represent concepts during
word processing, and these perceptibility effects are stronger
than those elicited by concreteness or imageability.

References
Adelman, J. S., Brown, G. D. A., & Quesada, J. F. (2006).
Contextual diversity, not word frequency, determines
word-naming and lexical decision times. Psychological
Science, 17, 814-823.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. I.,
Kessler, B., Loftis, B., … Treiman, R. (2007). The
English Lexicon Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39,
445–459.
Barsalou, L. W., & Wiemer-Hastings, K. (2005). Situating
abstract concepts. In D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan,
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory, language, and thinking (pp. 129– 163).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L. W., Santos, A., Simmons, W. K., & Wilson, C.
D. (2008). Language and simulation in conceptual
processing. In M. De Vega, A. M. Glenberg, & A. C.
Graesser, A. (Eds.). Symbols, embodiment, and meaning
(pp. 245-283). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Binder, J. R., Westbury, C. F., McKiernan, K. A., Possing,
E. T., & Medler, D. A. (2005). Distinct brain systems for
processing concrete and abstract words. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 905–917.
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Ku era
and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word
frequency norms and the introduction of a new and
improved word frequency measure for American English.
Behavior Research Methods, 41, 977-990.
Clark, J. M., & Paivio, A. (2004). Extensions of the Paivio,
Yuille, and Madigan (1968) norms. Behavior Research
Methods, 36, 371–383.
Connell, L., & Lynott, D. (2010). Look but don't touch:
tactile disadvantage in processing modality-specific
words. Cognition, 115, 1-9.
Fiebach, C. J., & Friederici, A. D. (2004). Processing
concrete words: fMRI evidence against a specific righthemisphere involvement. Neuropsychologia, 42, 62–70.
James, C. T. (1975). The role of semantic information in

lexical decisions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 1, 130–136.
Juhasz, B. J., Yap, M. J. Dicke, J., Taylor, S. C., & Gullick,
M. M. (2011). Tangible words are recognized faster: The
grounding of meaning in sensory and perceptual systems.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64, 16831691.
Kousta, S. T., Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Andrews, M, &
Del Campo, E. (2011). The representation of abstract
words: Why emotion matters. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 140, 14-34.
Kroll, J., & Merves, J. S. (1986). Lexical access for concrete
and abstract words. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 92–107.
Louwerse, M. M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35, 381-398.
Lynott, D., & Connell, L. (2009). Modality exclusivity
norms for 423 object properties. Behavior Research
Methods, 41, 558-564.
Lynott, D., & Connell, L. (in prep.). Why noun concepts are
more multimodal than adjective concepts: Modality
exclusivity norms for objects. Manuscript in preparation.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (2004).
The University of South Florida word association, rhyme,
and word fragment norms. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36, 402–407.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding
approach. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding
theoretical approach. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Paivio, A., Yuille, J. C., & Madigan, S. A. (1968).
Concreteness, imagery, and meaningfulness values for
925 nouns. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76(1, Pt.
2), 1-25.
Papagno, C., Capasso, R., Zerboni, H., & Miceli, G. (2007).
A reverse concreteness effect in a subject with semantic
dementia. Brain and Language, 103, 90–91.
Sabsevitz, D. S., Medler, D. A., Seidenberg, M., & Binder,
J. R. (2005). Modulation of the semantic system by word
imageability. Neuroimage, 27, 188–200.
Schwanenflugel, P. J., Harnishfeger, K. K., & Stowe, R. W.
(1988). Context availability and lexical decisions for
abstract and concrete words. Journal of Memory and
Language, 27, 499–520.
Schwanenflugel, P. J., & Shoben, E. J. (1983). Differential
context effects in the comprehension of abstract and
concrete verbal materials. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9, 82–
102.
Schwanenflugel, P. J., & Stowe, R. W. (1989). Context
availability and the processing of abstract and concrete
words in sentences. Reading Research Quarterly, 24,
114–126.
Tyler, L. K., Russell, R., Fadili, J., & Moss, H. E. (2001).
The neural representation of nouns and verbs: PET
studies. Brain, 124, 1619 –1634.

1433

