UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Stress assignment in the development of reading aloud: Nonword priming effects on Italian
children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hm0c0fn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sulpizio, Simone
Boureux, Magali
Burani, Cristina
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Stress assignment in the development of reading aloud:
Nonword priming effects on Italian children
Simone Sulpizio (simone.sulpizio@unitn.it)
Fondazione De Vincenzi ONLUS
Department of Cognitive Science and Education, University of Trento, corso Bettini 31
38068 Rovereto (Tn), Italy

Magali Boureux (magali.boureux@univr.it)
Department of Philosophy, Pedagogy and Psychology, University of Verona, Lungadige Porta Vittoria 17,
37129 Verona, Italy

Cristina Burani (cristina.burani@istc.cnr.it)
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, CNR, Via S. Martino della Battaglia 44,
00185 Roma, Italy

Chizuru Deguchi (chizuru.deguchi@unitn.it)
Department of Cognitive Science and Education, University of Trento, corso Bettini 31
38068 Rovereto (Tn), Italy

Lucia Colombo (lucia.colombo@unipd.it)
Department of General Psychology, University of Padua, Via Venezia 8
35131 Padua, Italy

Abstract
Two experiments investigated the development of two aspects
related to stress assignment in reading. First, we tested
whether the role of distributional knowledge concerning stress
changes with the development of the reading system; second,
we tested whether stress information is computed
independently of phonemic information since the first stages
of reading acquisition. We ran two identical experiments in
Italian, one with children of two age levels (second and fourth
grades) and one with adults. Results showed that older
children behave similarly to adults, but younger children do
not. Differently from the advanced readers, younger children
use more general distributional knowledge about stress and
are not able to compute stress information apart from
phonemes. Taken together, our results suggest that the stress
subsystem, and in particular the mechanisms working at the
level of the phonological buffer are not fully developed
during the first stages of reading.
Keywords: lexical stress; stress neighborhood; reading
development; pathway priming.

Introduction
The process of stress assignment has recently become a
central issue in the reading aloud literature. In languages
like English, Dutch, or Italian, with a lexicon composed of
polysyllabic words and with unpredictable stress,
understanding how people read words aloud implies, among
other things, understanding how readers assign stress.
Research on stress assignment in reading has mainly
focused on two issues: First, how readers assign stress to
words and nonwords (e.g., Colombo, 1992; Rastle &

Coltheart, 2000); Second, how suprasegmental information
is represented in the reading system (Colombo & Zevin,
2009; Sulpizio, Job & Burani, in press b).
Let us consider the mechanisms for stress assignment
first. Although stress assignment may not cause problems in
reading words – readers may retrieve stress information as
part of their lexical knowledge – it causes difficulties when
stimuli are unknown words or nonwords. Thus, one issue is
how readers are able to assign stress with no reference to
lexically-stored information (Sulpizio, Arduino, Paizi, &
Burani, in press a). Within a connectionist view of reading,
studies in English and Italian have highlighted that two
different types of distributional knowledge drive readers in
stress assignment to unknown stimuli. First, the distribution
of the stress patterns in the lexicon – e.g., in Italian, 80% of
three-syllabic words bear penultimate stress (maTIta1,
pencil), while 18% bear antepenultimate stress (BIbita
‘drink’) (Thornton, Iacobini, & Burani, 1997)2. This may
induce readers, following a default stress bias, to assign the
most common pattern to unknown words (Colombo, 1992;
Rastle
&
Coltheart,
2000).
Second,
some
orthographic/phonological units work as cues for stress
assignment, with word ending being a strong predictor of
the stress pattern (e.g., Arciuli, Monaghan, & Ševa, 2010;
Kelly, Morris, & Verrekia, 1998). Consider Italian as an
1

Capital letters indicate stressed syllable.
The remaining 2% of three-syllabic words bear stress on the
final syllable, and in this case stress is graphically marked (e.g.,
colibrì ‘hummingbird’)
2

2369

example: Most of the words ending in -ola bear
antepenultimate stress (PENtola, ‘pot’; BAMbola, ‘doll’
etc.), that is, -ola has a stress neighborhood composed of
many antepenultimate stress friends. Following this
statistical tendency, when readers see an unknown word or a
nonword ending in -ola, they will be prone to assign
antepenultimate stress according to its stress neighborhood
(Burani & Arduino, 2004; Colombo, 1992; Sulpizio et al.,
in press a). Thus, readers have two sources of information to
assign stress, i.e., the lexical knowledge and the
distributional information driven by their implicitly acquired
statistical knowledge.
The representation of stress within the reading system has
been investigated only recently. Two studies on Italian have
shown that suprasegmental information may be partially
independent from segmental information: Using a priming
methodology, both studies found that the word’s stress
pattern can be primed independently of its segmental level
(Colombo & Zevin, 2009, Sulpizio et al., in press b). This
finding is in line with the word production literature (Levelt,
Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999) – where stress is part of an
abstract metrical representation including the number of
syllables and stress position – and with the view that speech
production and reading aloud may share, at least in part, the
last stages of processing, i.e., phonological and phonetic
word encoding (Roelofs, 2004). Thus, stress information
would be partially independent of phonemic information
and readers could compute the former independently from
the latter.
But what about young readers? When a child starts to
read, her/his reading system is not fully developed, her/ his
lexicon may be relatively small, and her/his knowledge of
the statistical properties of the language may be relatively
limited. How can the development of the stress system be
characterized? Does knowledge of stress properties and its
application to reading require time to develop? The issue
concerning the development of distributional knowledge for
stress has received little attention (but see Arciuli et al.,
2010, discussed below). To our knowledge, few studies
investigated how a metrical representation, autonomous
from segmental information, develops in young readers.
Colombo, Deguchi and Boureux (submitted) found that
young (7-years old) children were little affected by the
stress pattern of the priming context nonwords in reading
nonword targets, while priming was significant in older
children.
In the present paper we further investigated the issue of
whether children, when starting to read, are able to use the
autonomous representation of stress as adult readers and
thus may show stress priming effects. Differently from
Colombo et al. (submitted), we used real words as targets.
Words have a lexical representation which includes stress
position. Consequently, if the words’ stress pattern is
retrieved from lexical memory, this information may be
automatically available before information from the prime
has any effect, particularly in children whose reading
processes are relatively slow. On the other hand, Sulpizio et

al. (in press b) found significant stress priming for words in
adults. Thus the question of whether and in which
conditions we may find stress priming for words in adults
and children is still open.
We ran two identical experiments, one with children of
two age levels (II and IV grade) and one with adults. We
adopted the “pathway priming” paradigm (Colombo &
Zevin, 2009; Zevin & Balota, 2000) to test the possibility of
inducing stress priming not only in adults, but also in young
readers. In this paradigm, each target is preceded by five
nonword primes with the same stress pattern that act as a
small list context for the target. These micro-lists were
included in a larger list in which all primes were
homogeneous for stress. Participants have to read all stimuli
aloud and they are not aware that some stimuli are primes
and others are targets. By manipulating the congruency
between primes’ stress and target’s stress – the target could
have the same stress as the five preceding primes or a
different one – we investigated whether a priming effect
would occur, with participants being facilitated when
reading a target in the congruent stress condition (when the
target had the same stress as its five preceding primes),
compared to the incongruent stress condition (when the
target had a different stress than its five preceding primes).
We expected that the stress priming effect would be stronger
in adult readers and (perhaps) in older children, than in
younger children.
Colombo and Zevin (2009) showed that stress priming
effects are stronger within a sub-lexical context.
Consequently, we only used nonwords as primes. In this
way, participants were strongly encouraged to rely on sublexical reading. The use of nonword stimuli allowed us to
further test the second issue: How readers develop
distributional knowledge for stress assignment. Arciuli and
colleagues (2010) ran a nonword reading experiment with
English-speaking children. They found that younger (5/6year-old) children were more affected by the main
distribution of stress patterns in English – they assigned
stress to the initial syllable more frequently – and were not
affected by the final part of the nonwords. By contrast, in
older children (7/8-year-old) the bias toward initial stress
became weaker and children were influenced by specific
orthographic cues, such as the nonwords’ ending. A similar
pattern of results was found in Italian. While young children
were more prone to assign dominant stress to nonwords and
less affected by orthographic neighborhood than older
children and adults (Colombo et al., submitted), Italian
adults and older children (11 years old) assigned stress to
nonwords and low-frequency words on the basis of stress
neighborhood, showing very weak evidence for a bias
toward the penultimate (dominant) stress in reading words
aloud (see also Burani & Arduino, 2004; Colombo & Zevin,
2009; Paizi, Zoccolotti, & Burani, 2011). If these findings
reflect cognitive constraints holding for different languages,
we might expect similar trajectories in the development of
distributional knowledge for stress in English and Italian:
Older children and adults should be more affected by stress

2370

neighborhood, while younger children might be more
influenced by the distributional bias toward the dominant
stress.
In summary, the present study investigated two issues
related to the development of stress assignment in reading.
First, we investigated whether stress assignment is fully
developed already in young readers so that, when reading a
word aloud, they are able to exploit the prosodic
information available from the context. Second, we
investigated whether the trajectory of the development of
stress assignment in Italian is similar to what Arciuli et al.
(2010) found for English, i.e., that distributional knowledge
of stress moves from a general distributional bias to more
subtle statistical properties, such as stress neighborhood. To
test these issues we ran two reading experiments in Italian, a
language in which stress is not predictable by rule (Krämer,
2009) and there are two main stress patterns asymmetrically
distributed, i.e., penultimate stress – which is the dominant
pattern and appears in 80% of words – and antepenultimate
stress – which appears only in 18% of words. The two
experiments were identical, except that one was run with
children of different grades and one with adults.

Methods
Experiment 1 - Children
Participants. Two groups of elementary school children
took part in the experiment: The first group included 20
second graders (13 males, mean age: 7.1, sd: 0.3); the
second group included 18 fourth grade children (10 males,
mean age: 9.2, sd: 0.4). All participants were native Italian
speakers, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Materials
&
Method.
Thirty
three-syllabic
antepenultimate-stress words were used as target stimuli.
All words had a low frequency (mean frequency: 15.93, sd:
27.96, out of 1.5 million occurrences, Barcelona Corpus,
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, 1989, unpublished
manuscript). The phonological lexical representation of low
frequency words is less likely to be automatically retrieved,
and thus priming should be easier to obtain. Two sets of
three-syllabic phonologically legal Italian nonwords were
used in order to create two stress priming contexts. They
were constructed in such a way that one set should receive
penultimate stress and the other one should receive
antepenultimate stress according to the stress neighborhood
consistency. Thus, nonwords having the nucleus of the
penultimate syllable and the last syllable typical of words
stressed with the penultimate (dominant) stress pattern (e.g.,
-ato in geLAto, “ice cream”) were defined as penultimatestress primes, whereas nonwords having the nucleus of the
penultimate syllable and the last syllable typical of words
stressed on the antepenultimate syllable (e.g., -olo in
TAvolo “table”) were defined as penultimate-stress primes.
To examine the efficacy of stress neighborhood consistency
based on word-ending, we carried out a pre-test, by
presenting to adult readers the nonwords in a random order

in a word naming paradigm. The pre-test showed that stress
was assigned to the nonwords according to their ending:
72% of nonwords with penultimate-stress neighborhood
received penultimate stress and 78% of nonwords with
antepenultimate-stress
neighborhood
received
antepenultimate stress. Penultimate- and antepenultimatestress nonwords were matched on: Length in letters (mean:
6.2 [sd: 0.5] vs. 6.3 [sd: 0.6]); number of consonant clusters
(mean 0.3 [sd: 0.4] vs. 0.4 [sd: 0.5]) and initial phonemes.
Fifty penultimate- and 50 antepenultimate-stress nonwords
were selected as primes. Target words were divided into 3
sets (10 each). Ten targets were assigned to the penultimate
prime list, 10 targets to the antepenultimate prime list, and
10 targets were paired with a set of two simple geometric
figures, square and triangle, each repeated 5 times. The
latter condition was included to preserve interest and
attention to the reading task in children, and was kept
similar in the experiment with adults to have a perfectly
matched control experiment. Stimuli preceded by figure
primes were considered fillers, and not analyzed. Each
target was preceded by 5 primes, as in Colombo & Zevin
(2009; cf. Zevin & Balota, 2000). All target words had
antepenultimate stress and they were congruent with the
antepenultimate prime list, whereas they were incongruent
with the penultimate prime list. The three different target
lists were presented between-participants.
Apparatus & Procedure. The monitor was in VGA color.
A voice key connected to the PC’s real-time clock collected
response latencies. The experiment was run using E-Prime
software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).
Participants were tested individually. They were instructed
to read aloud each stimulus as fast and as accurately as
possible. Stimuli were presented on the computer screen. In
each trial, a fixation point was presented for 300 ms,
followed by the stimulus in black color. At the start of
articulation the letter string turned in red when the voice key
responded. Response time was measured from the onset of
the stimulus to the onset of articulation. The stimulus
remained on the screen until the experimenter coded each
trial as correct or as an error (stress or phonemic error) by
pressing one of the keys of the keyboard. Advancement of
trials was made by the experimenter, as soon as response
coding was done. When the letter string disappeared, the
next trial started immediately. Participants were audiorecorded to allow a further verification of experimenter’s
evaluation. Each participant received the two priming lists
in separate blocks in a counterbalanced order; half of the
participants received the penultimate-stress prime list first,
while the other half was presented the antepenultimatestress prime list first. The experimental blocks were
preceded by a practice session with stimuli not included in
the experimental trial.

2371

Experiment 2 – Adults
Participants. Twenty-four participants (6 males, mean age:
22.6 sd: 1.3) took part in the experiment. They were all
Italian native speakers and had normal or corrected-tonormal vision.
Materials, Method, Apparatus & Procedure. The same as
in Experiment 1.

Results
Experiment 1 - Children
Prime analysis. Overall nonword primes were read
consistently with their stress neighborhood and this was true
for both second graders and fourth graders (Table 1).
However, younger children assigned penultimate
(dominant) stress significantly more often than older
children, especially when reading nonwords with
antepenultimate-stress neighborhood (younger children
assigned penultimate stress to 56% of the nonwords whereas
older children assigned penultimate stress to 52% of the
nonwords) and the difference was significant (χ 2 = 4.16, p
<.05).

Penultimate stress
neighborhood
Antepenultimate
stress neighborhood

37%

63%

IV grade
Penult. Antepen.
stress
stress
79%
21%
23%

Table 2: Children. Mean error percentages for the targets in
the two stress-prime conditions.
Stress errors
II
IV
grade
grade
28%
13%
29%
31%

Congruent stress prime
Incongruent stress prime

Phonemic errors
II
IV
grade
grade
16%
17%
25%
18%

Experiment 2 – Adults
Prime analysis. Participants read nonword primes
according to their stress neighborhood, with no tendency to
overuse the penultimate stress (penultimate and
antepenultimate stress were assigned 53% and 47% of the
times, respectively).

Table 1: Children. Percentages of nonwords read with each
stress pattern for each class.
II grade
Penult. Antepen.
stress
stress
74%
26%

variable and class and stress congruency as predictors.
When considering stress errors, the mixed-effects model
showed a significant interaction between class and stress
congruency (β = 1.36, st. err. = 0.4, z = 3.39, p < .01), with
the effect of stress congruency being significant only for
fourth graders. No other effect reached significance (both z s
<1). Differently, when considering phonemic errors, only
the effect of stress congruency approached significance (β =
0.57, st. err. = 0.3, z = 1.89 p < .1), with more errors in the
incongruent stress condition. No other effect reached
significance (class: z = 1.3, p > .1; class x prime interaction:
z = -1.4, p > .1). Inspection of means shows that the
congruency effect was mainly due to second-graders (Table
2).

77%

Target analysis.
Responses shorter than 250 ms or longer than 3500 ms
(5.8% of all data points) were excluded from the analyses.
Naming times and errors were both analyzed using mixedeffects models, with class (II grade vs. IV grade) and stress
congruency (primes and target sharing the same stress vs.
primes and target with different stress) as fixed factors.
Participants and items were treated as random factors. The
models were fitted using the lmer function (languageR
package, Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008) in R software
(version 2.11). Results for errors are reported in Table 2.
Naming times. The mixed-effects model was run with
naming latencies as dependent variable and class and stress
congruency as predictors. The model showed a main effect
of class (β = -0.33, st. err. = 0.11, t = -2.89, p <.01), with
fourth graders faster than second graders. No other effect
reached significance (stress congruency: t = 1.5, p > .1;
class by stress congruency interaction: t < 1, p > .5).
Errors. Two analyses were run, one considering stress
errors and the other one considering phonemic errors. Both
analyses were performed with accuracy as dependent

Target analysis.
Responses shorter than 250 ms or longer than 1500 ms
(4.1% of all data points) were excluded from the analyses.
Naming times and errors were both analyzed using mixedeffects models, with stress congruency (primes and target
sharing the same stress vs. primes and target with different
stress) as fixed factor. Participants and items were treated as
random factors.
Naming times. The mixed-effects model was run with
naming latencies as dependent variable and stress
congruency as predictor. The effect was not significant (t = 1.1, p > .1).
Errors. Stress errors were few. consequently they were
analyzed together with phonemic errors. A mixed-effects
model was performed with response accuracy as dependent
variable and stress congruency as predictor. The effect of
stress congruency (congruent stress prime = 4% errors;
incongruent stress prime =10% errors), was significant (β =
1.38, st. err. = 0.50, z = 2.76, p <.01): Readers were more
accurate when primes and target shared the same stress than
when primes and target had a different stress.

Discussion
In two reading experiments, we tested what kind of
distributional information younger and older children use

2372

for stress assignment, and whether stress priming affects
both children and adults in reading Italian aloud. The results
show two main findings: First, while both adults and older
children assign stress to non-words (prime stimuli)
according to their stress neighborhood, younger children do
exploit stress neighborhood, but they also show a tendency
to overgeneralize penultimate (dominant) stress in assigning
stress. Second, participants were more accurate to read a
target when it was preceded by a set of primes with the
same stress (both primes and target received
antepenultimate stress), than when it was preceded by a set
of primes with a different stress (primes received
penultimate stress and target antepenultimate stress). This
pattern was found with older children and adult readers, but
not with younger children. One might argue that reading is a
very different task for younger and older children and that
this fact might be sufficient to explain the data. Although
we do not exclude any effect of task familiarity, we believe
that a better explanation may refer to how the reading
system develops and what lexical/sub-lexical strategies
children adopt (cf. Peressotti, Mulatti, & Job, 2010).
In interpreting this pattern of results, we should consider
the development of distributional knowledge first. Previous
research has shown that stress neighborhood can be
considered the main factor able to drive stress assignment in
adult readers (Arciuli et al., 2010; Burani & Arduino, 2004;
Kelly et al., 1998; Protopapas, Gerakaki, & Alexandri,
2006) and in connectionist simulations of Italian (Pagliuca
& Monaghan, 2010). Some studies have suggested that also
the bias toward the dominant stress pattern in the language
might play a role in stress assignment, but only when
readers heavily rely on a sub-lexical procedure (Colombo &
Zevin, 2009; but see also Protopapas et al., 2006, for a
different perspective in languages other than Italian).
Similar to what was found by Arciuli et al. (2010) with
English-speaking children, our study suggests that readers
may use two types of information for stress assignment, but
their relative employment changes during the acquisition of
reading. Differently from older children and adults, who
assign stress on the basis of stress neighborhood alone,
Italian young children assign stress to nonwords not only on
the basis of stress neighborhood, but also of the
distributional bias toward the dominant (penultimate) stress
in their native language. This might be due to at least two
reasons: First, children are more prone to use sub-lexical
reading (Ziegler & Goswami, 2005), thus increasing the
chance to apply the distributional general bias. Second, in
developing their lexicon and the ability to analyze
orthographic and phonological information, children might
develop their distributional knowledge by discovering more
subtle correspondences between word orthography and
stress pattern. Thus, the development of distributional
knowledge would follow a trajectory that goes from the
more general bias toward the dominant stress to the more
specific stress neighborhood, which may require time to
develop.

Let us now consider the stress priming effect. Our results
are in line with previous research that found stress priming
effects in reading (Colombo & Zevin, 2009; Sulpizio et al.,
in press b). The fact that the stress pattern of a word can be
primed confirms the idea suggested in word production
models that, when reading a word aloud, participants
compute suprasegmental information independently of
segmental information (Levelt et al., 1999) instead of
retrieving the word’s prosodic information from the lexicon.
Accordingly, we can assume that these two types of
information are first computed separately by means of
specific mechanisms, and then assembled together prior to
word articulation. However, while both older children and
adults show stress priming effects, younger children do not.
This difference could be explained by assuming that,
although the prosodic system of younger readers is fully
developed (Jusczyk, Houston, & Newsome, 1999), it is not
yet able to exploit prosodic information from the context,
namely, from the primes’ stress pattern. A similar
interpretation is supported by the pattern of phonemic errors
made by young readers, which decrease in the congruent
prime condition: This pattern suggests that the prime affects
the target’s computation, but only at the segmental level;
differently, younger readers are not able to use stress
information driven by the primes, as no effect of the primes'
congruency emerged at the level of stress errors.
The CDP++ model of reading aloud (for English words;
Perry, Ziegler, & Zorzi, 2010) can account for our data
fairly easily . The model assumes that stress information can
be both lexically retrieved and sub-lexically computed. At
the sub-lexical level a connectionist network maps
graphemes onto phonemes and the orthographic input onto a
stress pattern. Moreover, the model assumes that the
phonological output buffer includes two different
components, namely the stress output nodes and the
phonemic output nodes: The former are responsible for
stress assignment and the latter for phoneme activation.
During training the network may learn to associate specific
orthographic cues with a specific stress (e.g., the final
sequence -ola with antepenultimate stress). Thus, the
probability that a pseudoword will receive a certain stress
depends on the strength of the connections established
between the orthographic cues and stress position: The more
frequent the association between an orthographic cue and a
stress pattern, the stronger the connection between stress
and orthography.
The assignment of stress according to stress neighborhood
may emerge at the sub-lexical level, with the word final
sequence driving stress assignment. This mechanism might
work less efficiently in young children who are learning to
read, because they have to learn which orthographic
sequences may work as a strong cue for stress. Thus, young
children might assign stress to nonwords on the basis of a
more general distributional tendency such as the bias toward
the dominant stress pattern in the language. The stress
priming effect may occur at the level of the stress output
nodes: When planning the target’s articulation, readers

2373

might be affected by the repeated pre-activation of the
primes’ metrical structure, which can be congruent or
incongruent with the target. Thus, stress may be primed at
the level of the phonological output buffer, when readers
assemble the phonological unit that has to be articulated.
Finally, the absence of a stress priming effect in younger
children might be due to the absence of a fully developed
stress system in the first stages of reading.
To conclude, the present study has shown two important
aspects of the developmental trajectory of stress assignment
in reading. First, when reading a stimulus aloud, readers
make use of their distributional knowledge to assign stress
and they do it since the first stages of reading development.
However, the type of distributional knowledge exploited by
readers changes developmentally: While younger readers
are more prone to use general knowledge about the
dominant stress pattern in the language, older readers are
more affected by more specific distributional knowledge,
namely stress neighborhood. Second, and more important,
stress information can be computed separately from
phonemic information, but young children are more likely
to use information that has been extensively acquired - (i.e.,
the dominant pattern in the language), rather than
information gathered from the context (i.e., the priming list).
Taken together, the present findings suggest a final
conclusion: At the early stages of reading, the word stress
assignment subsystem appears partially underdeveloped.

Acknowledgments
The study was carried out with the support of grant PRIN
2009 from the Italian Ministry of Education and Research,
and grant “Progetti di Ateneo Bando 2007” to L. Colombo.
We thank Josephine Trippi for running the experiments.

References
Arciuli, J., Monaghan, P., & Ševa, N. (2010). Learning to
assign lexical stress during reading aloud: Corpus,
behavioral, and computational investigations. Journal of
Memory and Language, 63, 180-196.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390-412.
Burani, C., & Arduino, L. S. (2004). Stress regularity or
consistency? Reading aloud Italian polysyllables with
different stress patterns. Brain and Language, 90, 318325.
Colombo, L. (1992). Lexical stress effect and its interaction
with frequency in word pronunciation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18, 987-1003.
Colombo, L., Deguchi, C., & Boureux, M. (submitted).
Stress priming in Italian nonword reading.
Colombo, L., & Zevin, J. (2009). Stress Priming in Reading
and the Selective Modulation of Lexical and Sub-Lexical
Pathways. PLoS ONE, 4, e7219.

Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa, Italy
(1989). Corpus di Italiano scritto contemporaneo.
Unpublished manuscript.
Jusczyk, P. W., Houston, D., & Newsome, M. (1999). The
beginning of word segmentation in English-learning
infants. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 159-207.
Kelly, M. H., Morris, J., & Verrekia, L. (1998).
Orthographic cues to lexical stress: Effects on naming and
lexical decision. Memory and Cognition, 26, 822-32.
Krämer, M. (2009). The phonology of Italian. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-75.
Paizi, D., Zoccolotti, P., & Burani, C. (2011). Lexical stress
assignment in Italian developmental dyslexia. Reading &
Writing, 24, 443-461.
Pagliuca, G., & Monaghan, P. (2010). Discovering large
grain-sizes in a transparent orthography: Insight from a
connectionist model of reading aloud for Italian. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 22, 813-835.
Peressotti, F., Mulatti, C., & Job, R. (2010). The
development of lexical representations: Evidence from the
position of diverging letter effect. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 106, 177-183.
Perry, C., Ziegler, J. C., & Zorzi, M. (2010). Beyond single
syllables: Large-scale modeling of reading aloud with the
Connectionist Dual Process (CDP++) model. Cognitive
Psycology, 61, 106-151.
Protopapas, A., Gerakaki, S., & Alexandri, S. (2006).
Lexical and default stress assignment in reading Greek.
Journal of Research in Reading 29, 418–432.
Rastle, K., & Coltheart, M. (2000). Lexical and nonlexical
print-to-sound translation of disyllabic words and
nonwords. Journal of Memory and Language, 42,342-364.
Roelofs, A. (2004). Seriality of phonological encoding in
naming objects and reading their names. Memory &
Cognition, 32, 212-222.
Sulpizio, S., Arduino, L. S., Paizi, D., & Burani, C. (in press
a). Stress assignment in reading Italian polysyllabic
pseudowords. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Sulpizio, S., Job, R., & Burani, C. (in press b). Priming
lexical stress in reading Italian aloud. Language and
Cognitive Processes.
Thornton, A. M., Iacobini, C., & Burani, C. (1997).
BDVDB. Una base di dati sul vocabolario di base della
lingua italiana. Roma: Bulzoni.
Zevin, J. D., Balota, D. A. (2000). Priming and attentional
control of lexical and sublexical pathways during naming.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 26,121–135.
Ziegler, J. C., & Goswami, U. (2005). Reading acquisition,
developmental dyslexia and skilled reading across
languages: A psycholinguistic grain size theory.
Psychological Bulletin, 131, 3–29.

2374

