UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Subject Relative Production in SLI Children during Syntactic Priming and Sentence
Repetition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/18v6z9x1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Coco, Moreno
Garraffa, Maria
Branigan, Holly

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Subject Relative Production in SLI Children
during Syntactic Priming and Sentence Repetition
Moreno I. Coco
(mcoco@staffmail.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics (ILCC)
University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street
Edinburgh, EH8 9AB

Maria Garraffa
(mgarraff@staffmail.ed.ac.uk)
School of Psychology
University of Edinburgh
7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ

Abstract

Holly P. Branigan
(holly.branigan@ed.ac.uk)
School of Psychology,
University of Edinburgh
7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ

memory demands. We investigate this hypothesis by comparing SLIC’s and TDC’s production of SRCs in tasks where
they are explicitly elicited (in a sentence repetition task) and
when they are implicitly elicited (in a picture-description syntactic priming paradigm). We use Bayesian Data Analysis to
investigate our hypothesis, and design a series of Bayesian
models to tackle it.

Children with Specific Language Impairment (SLIC) experience difficulties in processing Subject relative clauses (SRC).
This has been interpreted as evidence that they lack syntactic representations for SRC. Our study investigates the spontaneous production of SRC in typically developing children
(TDC) and SLIC in a structural priming paradigm, and compares their performance in a sentence repetition task. We
demonstrate that SLIC are much more likely to produce SRC
during priming than in sentence repetition; moreover, when
primed, their performance matches TDC’s baseline (unprimed)
performance. Furthermore, we design two simple unsupervised Bayesian models, and predict the developmental group
(SLI, TD) and priming condition (Primed, Non-Primed). Overall, this study shows that SLIC can spontaneously produce
SRC when primed, suggesting their impairment is related to
working memory, rather than a deficit in syntactic knowledge.

Experiment
Substantial research has used a syntactic priming paradigm
to demonstrate that people use abstract syntactic representations to process language (Bock, 1986; Pickering & Branigan,
1998). In such research, speakers show an increased tendency
to use a particular structure after previously encountering the
same structure (even with different lexical content). These effects have been have been argued to provide evidence about
syntactic representation (Branigan et al., 1995). Recent research on TDC has therefore used syntactic priming to provide evidence for the early acquisition of TDC’s syntactic
representations, e.g., passive constructions (e.g., Bencini &
Valian 2008): If children are more likely to produce a particular structure after previous exposure to it, it implies that they
have an abstract representation for that structure, which can
be facilitated through residual activation or implicit learning
(Chang et al., 2006; Pickering & Branigan, 1998). The former may explain short term priming effects; the latter may
explain long term and cumulative priming effects. We argue
that a syntactic priming paradigm can similarly be used to
examine whether SLIC have access to an abstract representation of SRC, whose availability can be incremented through
priming.
To do this, we used a Snap priming paradigm (Branigan
et al., 2005), in which SLIC and TDC engaged in a card game
that involved three elements: 1) listening to the experimenter
describe a picture (using either a simple noun or an SRC), 2)
describing their own picture, 3) and deciding whether or not
the two pictures matched 1 .
In the analysis, we assess whether the two groups (TDC,
SLIC) differ in their production of SRC (Model 1); and
test if any difference depends on the priming condition (i.e.,
whether the experimenter’s description involved a simple
noun or an SRC; Model 2). We expect TDC to have a higher
production of SRC than SLIC. However, we expect SLIC to
perform better in the primed than in the non-primed condi-

Keywords: specific language impairment; language development; syntactic priming; sentence repetition; Bayesian data
analysis.

Introduction
Subject relative clauses (SRC) such as the cat that’s on the table are generally early acquired, at around 3 years in typically
developing children (TDC; e.g., Crain et al. 1990). However,
children with Specific Language Impairment (SLIC) display
difficulties in producing subject (and object) relative clauses
(Novogrodsky & Friedmann, 2006). Preschool SLIC show
a delayed onset of relative clause production, and frequent
omission of the complementizer in both elicitation and spontaneous production (Contemori & Garraffa, 2010). This difficulty extends to repetition of sentences involving SRCs. This
is particularly interesting, because recent research has suggested that in TDC, prior exposure to even difficult structures can facilitate their subsequent production (e.g., Bencini
& Valian 2008). Such effects have been identified as manifestations of syntactic priming, whereby an abstract syntactic
representation is facilitated (Bock, 1986). In adults, syntactic
priming appears to be implicated in sentence repetition (Potter & Lombardi, 1998). It is therefore striking that SLIC do
not show facilitated production of SRC in sentence repetition,
as we would expect a benefit from a syntactic priming effect,
enhanced by lexical repetition.
Previous research has therefore proposed that SLIC do not
have a syntactic representation of SRC (Conti-Ramsden et al.,
2001). In this paper, we consider an alternative hypothesis,
namely that SLIC’s poor performance in sentence repetition
does not reflect a lack of syntactic knowledge, but rather
a task-specific difficulty, which may be related to working

1 On three quarters of trials, the pictures did not match, and on
one quarter - Snap trials - they did match

228

tion. If so, this would provide evidence that SLIC have a
syntactic representation of SRCs, whose retrieval is facilitated by prior exposure. This in turn would imply that SLIC’s
observed impairments in SRC production have a different
source than lack of syntactic knowledge of SRCs.
We then compare the two groups’ performance on Snap
trials only (i.e., where the child’s picture matched the experimenter’s picture, and hence the child could repeat the experimenter’s description verbatim), with their performance
in a task where they were explicitly asked to repeat the experimenter’s sentence 2 (Model 3). Thus we compare children’s production of SRC sentences, when the children produce those sentences freely in response to a picture stimulus
(priming) and when they produce them as part of an explicit
repetition task (repetition). If their impairment is fundamentally syntactic, then SLIC are expected to be equally bad on
both tasks, and the TDC equally good on both tasks. If instead
the impairment has a non-syntactic source, then children may
show differential performance on the two tasks. In particular,
if SLIC have a working memory impairment, they may find
it difficult to produce SRC in a task where they must retain in
working memory the meaning to be communicated (as well
as its syntactic form).
We then investigate cumulative priming, i.e., whether the
likelihood of producing an SRC increases as a function of
priming instances (Kaschak et al., 2011), which is assumed to
reflect implicit learning. Given previous evidence that SLIC
have impairments in implicit learning (Tomblin et al., 2007),
we should observe no such cumulative effect benefit in SLIC.
Finally, we move on to possible applications of our study,
and investigate the problem of classification, and the related
issue of diagnostic statistics to assess impairment (here, SLI).
We use Bayesian inference to built two classifiers: in the
first (Model 5), we categorize the development group (SLI,
TD) based on the number of SR produced; and in the second
(Model 6), we use the same measure to categorize development group and priming (Primed, Non-Primed). The retrieval
performance of the two Bayesian models is compared with
logistic regression classifiers, binomial (Model 5), and multinomial (Model 6) on F-score, an aggregate measure of precision and recall.

their descriptions, were different), and 8 ’snap’ pairs (where
the experimenter’s and child’s pictures were identical, and
they could therefore use identical descriptions).
The same groups of children took also part in a sentence
repetition task, where they had to repeat, verbatim, 10 SRC
sentences produced by the experimenter. We compare their
performance in this task with their performance on the ’snap’
trials (8 per participant), in which they described the same
picture as the experimenter had just described (and hence
could repeat the experimenter’s utterance verbatim).

Data Analysis
We adopt a Bayesian approach for the analysis of this study,
with the aim of uncovering the parameters responsible for
generating the observed data, (e.g., the performance of the
two populations of children), infer their distribution, and have
an estimate of the uncertainty in our hypothesis (Kruschke,
2010).
In the next sections, we describe four Bayesian models
used to test our hypotheses. Then, we apply Bayesian analysis on a classification task and infer, in an unsupervised way,
developmental group (SLIC, TDC) and priming condition
(Primed, Non Primed) using the number of produced SRC
as our dependent measure. We compare the performance of
these two Bayesian classifiers with logistic regression models, which are trained on the same set of data. We report Fscores to assess the overall performance of the models, and
precision and recall for the different classes to evaluate more
in depth the classification performance.

Models
All Bayesian analyses presented here are performed using
OpenBugs as implemented by the R packages BRugs and
R2WinBugs (Sturtz et al., 2009; Kruschke, 2011).
Model 1: Group analysis The first model estimates how
different the two groups of children (TDC, SLIC) are in producing SRC. We model the occurrence of an SRC production through a Bernoulli process (e.g., coin toss) with a given
probability of success, whereby the total number of occurrences in a series of trials follows a binomial distribution. For
each group of children, the number of SRC produced is denoted by the vectors x and y, which represent independent
samples from two different binomial distributions, in a total
of N trials (N = 24), with respective probabilities p and q
underlying SR production. Each group consists of S observations, equal to the number of children in that group. The index
i in xi and yi refers to subject i in each group. The likelihoods
of the data are given by:

Method
We compared SLICs (and control TDCs) production in a syntactic priming paradigm using a picture description SNAP
task. Thirty-eight (19 SLI, 19 TD) pre-school monolingual
Italian children participated ( mean = 5.4 years, Non-verbal
IQ > 92). SLIC were selected on the basis of their general
comprehension and expressive abilities, measured on MLU
and on performance on standardized language tests (expressive abilities: Frog story; receptive lexicon: PPVT; receptive
grammar: TCGB).
Children described target pictures after hearing the experimenter describe a prime picture with an SRC (a cat that’s on
a wall) or a simple noun (a cat in a within-participants manipulation (priming). There were 24 prime/target pairs (where
the experimenter’s and child’s pictures, and hence necessarily
2 Conducted

S

 
N xi
P(x1 , x2 , ..., xS |p) = ∏
p (1 − p)N−xi ,
i=1 xi

(1)

in the case of the TDC group, and an analogous equation
for the SLI group by replacing p by q. As prior knowledge,
we assume that both p and q are independently drawn from
∼ Beta [1, 1]. This allows us to independently estimate the underlying production rate for TDC and SLIC.

on the same groups of children.

229

Model 2: Effects of priming In the second model, we compare the effect of priming on the production of SRC for the
two groups of children. Here, our dependent measure is the
number of SRC produced for each trial, i.e., we aggregated
over participants. Every trial can belong to one of the two
Priming states (Primed, Not Primed). So, each observation
nt , (t = 1, ..., N) is the number of SRC produced in trial t, to
which a particular state of priming ct is associated: ct = 1
refers to a Non-Primed trial, and ct = 2 to a Primed one.
Since trials are independent, and we know their priming status, given by the vector c, the likelihood of the performance
of a group can be computed as a product over trials:
 

S−nt
S
nt
P(n1 , n2 , ...nN |p, c) = ∏
p(ct ) 1 − p(ct )
t=1 nt

Table 1: Observed production performances (in percentage)
for the two groups on the repetition and priming task (also
divided by Priming condition)
Group
TDC
SLIC

(2)

We assume a uniform prior for p(1), and the relation
p(2) = p(1) + θ, where the difference parameter θ, is also
given a uniform prior, θ ∼ Uniform[0, (1 − p(1))]. We apply
this model, independently to SLIC and TDC. In the former
case, n is calculated from the performance of the SLIC; in
the latter case, n is obtained from the TDC group. This model
allows us to infer 4 parameters.

Non-Primed
19%
0.9%

Before going into the modeling results, we report the observed performance on the priming task, as well as on the
repetition task for the two groups (refer to Table 1).
It is clear that during the repetition task SLIC are much
more impaired than TDC in producing SRC. However, their
production rates improves when we look at repetition during
the priming (SNAP task) trials, where SLIC are twice as good
compared to the sentence repetition result. When looking at
the performance within the Priming task, we see an effect of
priming on both TDC and SLIC. The production rate of SRC
is more than doubled in Priming trials compared to the NonPrimed condition. These results are largely confirmed in our
inferential analysis.
As expected, in Model 1 we find that p > q: TDC are more
likely to produce SRC than SLIC (refer to Table 2). This result indicates that SLIC experience more difficulties, in fact
twice more so (p/q ≈ 2), in producing SRC than TDC. However, in order to understand whether structural priming is actually increasing the production rate of SRC in SLIC, and
quantify any difference with TDC, we included the priming
variable in Model 2.
Here, we find that TDC are more likely to produce SRC,
especially in Primed trials. Crucially, however, we also find
a strong effect of Priming in SLIC. In fact, we observe that
SLIC are 20% more likely to produce an SRC when primed
than when not primed. Moreover, we see that the probability of producing an SRC by a SLIC who is primed becomes
indistinguishable, if not higher, than that of a TDC who is
not primed. This result demonstrates that the impairment displayed by SLIC cannot be attributed to a lack of syntactic
knowledge, but rather to some other aspect of cognition. In
fact, when the relevant structural representations are facilitated through syntactic priming, SLIC can spontaneously pro-

Model 4: Cumulative priming Finally, in our fourth
model, we quantify the rate at which cumulative priming occurs for the two groups of children. For this model, we represent the data as two matrices XSxN (TDC) and YSxN (SLI),
where each entry, for example xit ∈ {0, 1} is a Bernoulli random variable denoting production or not of a relative clause
for each subject (i = 1, ..S), in each particular trial (t = 1, ..N).
We can calculate the likelihood of the data from each group,
by using the following expression:

1−xit
P(X|p0 , a, k) = ∏ ∏ p(t)
1 − p(t)

Primed
57%
24%

Results

Model 3: Sentence Repetition vs Priming In this third
model, adapted from Model 2, we explore more closely the
role of working memory on the production of SRC by comparing SRC repetition on SNAP trials in the priming task 3 ,
where participants could repeat the experimenter’s sentence,
with SRC elicited through sentence repetition.
Every trial can belong to one of the two tasks (Repetition,
Priming). So, each observation nt , (t = 1, ..., N) is the number
of SRC produced in trial t in Repetition (ct = 1, N = 10) or
Priming (ct = 2, N = 8). As for Model 2, we assume a uniform prior for p(1), and the relation p(2) = p(1) + θ, where
the difference parameter θ, is also given a uniform prior,
θ ∼ Uniform[0, (1 − p(1))]. This model is applied independently to SLIC and TDC.

N

xit

Priming SNAP
56%
39%

In analogy, for the SLI group we have q(t) = q0 + bk(t).
We must estimate 4 parameters: p0 , a, q0 , b. As priors, we
use non-informative uniform priors for the intercepts, e.g.
p0 ∼ Uniform (0, 1), and normal distributions for the slopes,
e.g., a ∼ Normal (0, 1). We expect to find a lower rate of cumulative priming for SLIC than for TDC (a > b), due to their
impairment of implicit learning.
All models are run for 50000 iterations with a thinning of
10. If the chains have not converged, and are highly autocorrelated, we keep updating until convergence. We discard
the first 5000 iterations of the Monte Carlo Markov Chains
(MCMC) sample as burn-in, to calculate the posterior distribution of the parameter values. A summary of the results is
reported in Table 2.

N

S

Repetition
90%
16%

(3)

i=1 t=1

In this model, the probability of producing an SRC is given
by p(t) = p0 + ak(t), and it increases linearly with the number of priming trials k(t) that have occurred up to trial t.
3 Note that we exclude this data from any other model of priming.

230

duce relatively complex structures such as SRC. To examine
the possible role that working memory might play in SLIC’s
previously observed impairment in SRC production, in Model
3, we compared syntactic priming with a task that explicitly
taps working memory, namely sentence repetition.
The result of Model 3 clearly shows that the SLIC perform very differently in the two tasks, Snap and repetition
(see Table 2). This is especially evident when looking at the
difference in probability between the two tasks: SLIC are
much more likely to produce an SRC during the Snap task
than during the repetition task, whilst for TDC, the difference
p(2) − p(1) is almost negligible.
This result is intriguing as it implies that given a task in
which the child has to actively retrieve syntactic material to
communicate a contextually supported proposition (provided
by the visual stimulus), their impairment is much less pronounced. This pattern is consistent with a working memory
impairment in which SLIC children have difficulty in building, maintaining, and retrieving a representation of an entire
sentence. In order to better explore the role of working memory on the production rate, we turn to cumulative priming. If
implicit learning, which is hypothesized to underlie long term
and cumulative priming effects, is impaired in SLIC, then we
might observe a weaker, or almost null, effect of cumulative
priming in that group.
Interestingly, the results of Model 4 show that the intercept parameter p0 , which indicates the baseline probability
for TDC to produce an SRC, is markedly lower than the value
observed in the previous model (refer to Table 2 for the list
of models). The intercept q0 , instead, is reasonably similar in
value across the two models. When we look at the slope parameters (a, b), we observe a different rate for the two groups
of children. In particular, TDC experience more cumulative
priming in producing SRC, compared to SLI children. This
result indicates that although cumulative priming occurs in
both groups, this effect is more prominent in TDC. Moreover, it seems that cumulative priming plays a crucial role on
the likelihood of producing SRC, as it emerges when comparing the estimates of this model with Model 1. The diminished
effect of cumulative priming in SLIC is in keeping with evidence that SLIC have impaired implicit learning. At the intercepts, in fact, the two groups display a similar probability of
producing SRC, and the difference becomes more prominent
when previous exposure to SRC increases.
In the next section, we shift the focus from quantification to prediction, and apply Bayesian analysis to make inferences about our data. In particular, we implement two
Bayesian classifiers to predict development group and priming in an unsupervised way, i.e., we assume there is no prior
knowledge about such classification, and we want to infer it
from the data. In order to validate the performance of such
models, we compare the classification performance of the
two Bayesian models with the output of logistic classifiers.
We report the F-score, which is a measure of test’s accuracy based on the weighted average of precision and recall:
precision·recall
F = 2 · precision+recall
. Precision is the fraction of retrieved instances that are relevant, e.g., the number of correctly categorized children in a certain group, t p+tpf p , and recall is the

Table 2: Mean and 95% Highest Density Intervals for the posterior distributions of parameters for the different models.
Parameter
pTD
qSLI
Parameter
pTDPrimed
pTDNotPrimed
qSLIPrimed
qSLINotPrimed
Parameter
pTDSnap
pTDRepetition
qSLISnap
qSLIRepetition
Parameter
p0InterceptTD
q0InterceptSLI
aSlopeTD
bSlopeSLI
Parameter
pTD
qSLI

Parameter
pTDPrimed
pTDNotPrimed
qSLIPrimed
qSLINotPrimed

Model 1: Groups
Mean
95%HDI
0.4655
(0.4195, 0.5116)
0.2490
(0.2104, 0.2900)
Model 2: Priming
Mean
95%HDI
0.6392
(0.5747, 0.7018)
0.2961
(0.2397, 0.3577)
0.3521
(0.2924, 0.4153)
0.1479
(0.1052, 0.1958)
Model 3: Task Comparison
Mean
95%HDI
0.7639
(0.7165, 0.8086)
0.7575
(0.7086, 0.8021)
0.4020
(0.3216, 0.4844)
0.1672
(0.1052, 0.1958)
Model 4: Cumulative Priming
Mean
95%HDI
0.2702
(0.1926, 0.3566)
0.2085
(0.1344, 0.2870)
0.0357
(0.0226, 0.048)
0.0035
(−0.0049, 0.0199)
Model 5: Group Inference
Mean
95%HDI
0.4494
(0.4030, 0.5060)
0.2034
(0.1429, 0.2743)
Model 6: Group and Priming
Inference
Mean
95%HDI
0.2707
(0.2274, 0.3216)
0.2143
(0.1467, 0.2828)
0.1549
(0.1019, 0.2316)
0.1130
(0.084, 0.1413)

tp
fraction of relevant instances that have been retrieved, t p+
fn,
e.g., the correctly categorized children off the total number of
possible children in that group; where t p (true positive) is the
number of instances correctly retrieved, f p (false positive)
are the instances wrongly retrieved and f n those instances
which should have also been retrieved. We report precision
and recall for each category to distinguish what the model
found easier to classify, from what found it more difficult.

Inference of developmental categories and priming
In the first Bayesian classifier (Model 5), our goal is to predict the development group of a child (SLI, TD) by considering blindly their SR production scores. Therefore, we don’t
assume a-priori that there is a division between TD and SLI,
and mix the data between the two different groups. Our task
is to infer correctly which data belongs to each category. We
implement an extension of Model 1 as follows.
To each observation zi , (i = 1, ..., 2S), corresponding to the

231

number of SR clauses produced by all subjects of the experiment, we assign a hidden state ci ∈ {1, 2}, which refers to the
subject being an SLI (1) or a TD (2). If the hidden state of
each subject is known, the total likelihood of the data can be
computed as:

Table 3: Classification Performance of the Bayesian Models
and the Logistic classifiers: F-scores, precision (left value)
and recall (right value) for the different categories (TD and
SLI): where P (Primed) and N-P (Non Primed)
(a) Model 5 vs Binomial Classifier

 

1−zi
N
p(ci )zi 1 − p(ci )
i=1 zi

Categories

2S

P(z1 , z2 , ...|c1 , c2 , ...) = ∏

(4)

Model

where p(1) is the probability of producing a relative clause
in the SLI group, and p(2) of the TD group. This corresponds to a mixture model, where we infer the two distributions present in the data set (estimate p) and the probabilities
πi (1) and πi (2) that each observation zi belongs to distribution 1 or 2 (estimate c). We assume a Dirichlet prior for the
category assignment and a uniform distribution for p, similar
to previous models.
The final model (Model 6) is an extension of Model 5,
where, beside the development group, we want to infer also
the priming condition (Primed, Non Primed). So, the only real
difference is that we assume four categories ci ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}
where 1 is SLI-Non priming, 2 is SLI-Priming, 3 is TD-Non
Priming and 4 is TD-Priming. Again, the model is blind
to these categories, and our goal is to infer them from the
data. We proceed as in Model 5 and we obtain a posterior
(discrete) distribution for the categorical classification of
each observation, namely what is the probability that an
observation comes from category 1, 2, 3 or 4. The most likely
category for each observation can be obtained by considering
the median of such a posterior distribution, i.e. the category
that obtains a probability higher than 1/2 for that observation.

F-score

TD

SLI

Model 5

0.85

(0.8, 0.84)

(0.83, 0.78)

BL

0.85

(0.8, 0.84)

(0.83, 0.78)

(b) Model 6 vs Multinomial Classifier
SLI N-P

SLI P

TD N-P

TD P

Model 6

0.55

(0.76, 0.88)

(0.42, 0.15)

(0.35, 0.26)

(0.53, 0.94)

ML

0.56

(0.65, 0.78)

(0.36, 0.47)

(0.4, 0.21)

(0.83, 0.78)

Model 1 and Model 5; whereas there is a more marked difference between Model 2 and Model 6. As the number of categories to be inferred from the data increases, the task becomes
more challenging.
When comparing the classification performance, we find
that Model 5 and BL are perfectly equivalent, both in terms
of F-score, and on the precision and recall of the group category. Obviously, the main outstanding difference is that the
Bayesian model is unsupervised, while the logistic classifier is fully supervised. Moreover, it is interesting to notice
that SLIC and TDC are recognizable as separate populations,
rather than being outliers of the same distribution.
On the multi-class task, in contrast, we find that ML is
slightly better than Model 6 on the F-score. When looking
at precision and recall for the different classes, we find both
models achieving higher classification performances on the
two most extreme classes (SLI Non Primed and TD Primed),
with Model 6 having a better recall than ML, which instead
has a better precision. It is interesting to notice that both models fail to account for the two categories SLI Primed and
TD Non Primed. The reason is that SLIC Primed perform
as as well as TDC Non primed. This result confirms further
our main hypothesis that SLIC have syntactic knowledge of
SRC, and can achieve performance comparable to TDC when
the relevant representations are facilitated through syntactic
priming.

Model performance We compare the categorization performance of these two unsupervised models against two fully
supervised logistic classifiers, Binomial (BL) for Model 5,
and multinomial (ML) for model 6. The logistic classifiers
are built using the R libraries glm and mlogit. We first fit
a generalized linear model, binomial with logit link, and a
multinomial regression to obtain the regression coefficients.
Our dependent measure is the number of SRC produced and
the independent predictor is the category: group for the binomial logistic classifier, group and priming for the multinomial
classifier.
From the regression coefficients, we derive the logits,
which exponentiated give us the unscaled probabilities of observing a certain category, e.g., SLI, associated to a certain SR
production score. The unscaled probabilities are normalized
to range between 0 and 1 4 .
For the sake of completeness, we compare the estimates of
the parameters for these two models, where categories have
to be inferred, with those where such information was explicitly modeled (Model 1 and Model 2); see Table 2 for the actual values. We observe that the estimates are close between

General Discussion
Typically developing children are able to process SRC around
the age of 3 years (Crain et al., 1990). Yet children with
SLI show difficulties with these structures at the same age
(Novogrodsky & Friedmann, 2006). In particular, the finding
that SLIC cannot repeat verbatim SRC sentences produced
by an experimenter has been taken as evidence that SLIC do
not have a syntactic representation of relative clauses (ContiRamsden et al., 2001). To challenge this claim, we compared
SLIC and TDC’s production of SRCs in two different tasks,
one of which implicitly elicited repetition of SRC sentences
(syntactic priming in a ’Snap’ task) and one of which explic-

4 More details can be found on the online tutorial
provided by UCLA: Academic Technology Services,
http://www.ats.ucla.edu/stat/r/dae/mlogit.htm

232

References

itly elicited repetition of SRC sentences (sentence repetition
task), in a series of Bayesian Models. We then used such models to infer developmental group and priming condition on
a trial-by-trial basis by looking at the number of SRCs produced.

Bencini, G. M. L. & Valian, V. (2008). Abstract sentence
representation in 3-year-olds: Evidence from comprehension and production. Journal of Memory and Language,
59, 97–113.
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355–387.
Branigan, H., McLean, J., & Jones, M. (2005). A blue cat
or a cat that is blue? Evidence for abstract syntax in young
childrens noun phrases. In Brugos, A., Clark-Cotton, M.,
& Ha, S. (Eds.), The proceedings of the 29th annual Boston
University conference on language development, (pp. 109–
121).
Branigan, H., Pickering, M., Liversedge, S., Stewart, A., &
Urbach, T. (1995). Syntactic priming: Investigating the
mental representation of language. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 489–506.
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming syntactic. Psychological Review, 113, 234–272.
Contemori, C. & Garraffa, M. (2010). Comparison of modalities in SLI syntax: A study on the comprehension and production of non-canonical sentences. Lingua, 120, 1940–
1955.
Conti-Ramsden, G., Botting, N., & Faragher, B. (2001). Psycholinguistic markers for SLI. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 42, 741–748.
Crain, S., McKee, C., & Emiliani, M. (1990). Visiting relatives in italy. In J. deVilliers & L. Frazier (Eds.), Language
Processing and Language Acquisition (pp. 335–356). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Kaschak, M., Kutta, T., & Jones, J. (2011). Structural priming
as implicit learning: Cumulative priming effects and individual differences. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 18,
1133–1139.
Kruschke, J. (2010). What to believe: Bayesian methods for
data analysis. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 293–300.
Kruschke, J. (2011). Doing Bayesian Data Analysis: A Tutorial with R and BUGS. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Academic
Press: Elsevier.
Novogrodsky, R. & Friedmann, N. (2006). The production
of relative clauses in SLI: A window to the nature of the
impairment. Advances in Speech-Language pathology, 8,
364–375.
Pickering, M. J. & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The representation
of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming in language production. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 633–651.
Potter, M. C. & Lombardi, L. (1998). Syntactic priming in
immediate recall of sentences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 38, 265–282.
Sturtz, S., Ligges, U., & Gelman, A. (2009). R2WinBUGS:
A package for running WinBUGS from R. Journal of Statistical Software, 12, 1–16.
Tomblin, J. B., Mainela-Arnold, E., & Zhang, X. (2007). Procedural learning in adolescents with and without specific
language impairment. Language Learning and Development, 3, 269–293.

We found that although TDC display a higher production
of SRC than SLIC (Model 1), SLIC nevertheless are more
likely to produce an SRC when primed, i.e., after hearing an
SRC (with different lexical content) than after hearing a simple noun (Model 2). This suggests that SLIC have an abstract
representation of SRC that they can recruit during production,
when it has been facilitated through previous use. Crucially,
however, SLIC performed worse in a sentence repetition task
than in ’snap’ priming trials in which they could repeat verbatim the experimenter’s sentence(Model 3). In other words,
the same children who performed poorly in a task that required explicit repetition of sentences performed significantly
better in a priming task, where implicit repetition could be
realized through incremental production of a sentence and
did not require the (meaning and structure of the) entire sentence to be maintained in working memory. This suggests that
SLIC’s impairment on these structures is related to working
memory. Furthermore, we found that whereas TDC showed a
large cumulative priming effect (i.e., were much more likely
to produce an SRC after several exposures), SLIC showed a
markedly reduced, if not negligible, cumulative effect (Model
4).
Taken together, our results suggest that SLIC’s poor performance on SRCs may reflect a working memory impairment
that affects on-line processing, rather than the absence of a
syntactic representation for SRCs (i.e., a deficit in syntactic
knowledge). In a task that implicates all stages of language
production, and in which production can occur incrementally
without the necessity of retaining in working memory a representation of the entire sentence, SLIC are able to spontaneously produce SRCs after being exposed to them; furthermore, their spontaneous production of SRCs in this context is
less impaired than their elicited repetition of SRCs, relative
to TDC. However, the finding that SLIC show reduced cumulative priming suggests that they may also have impaired
implicit learning, which may have far-reaching implications
for their acquisition of language. The classification performance of our Bayesian models demonstrates moreover that
we can infer the developmental group of a child very accurately (Model 5) with the same accuracy as a Binomial Logistic Classifier, with the clear advantage that the Bayesian
model is unsupervised. Crucially, our classification performance degrades when trying to infer the group and the Priming condition (Model 6), because SLIC Primed perform as
well as TDC Non-Primed.
In conclusion, we suggest that modeling differences in syntactic performance in syntactic priming and other experimental paradigms has great potential for investigating the nature
of impairments in syntactic representations versus other aspects of cognition in SLIC and other atypical populations.

233

