UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tangent Point Orientation and Anticipated Trajectory Curvature – A Field Study on the Visual
Control of High Speed Steering

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/08s3t4kw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Lappi, Otto
Lehtonen, Esko

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Tangent Point Orientation and Anticipated Trajectory Curvature
- A Field Study on the Visual Control of High Speed Steering
Otto Lappi (otto.lappi@helsinki.fi)
Cognitive Science, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, PO Box 9
00014 University of Helsinki

Esko Lehtonen (esko.lehtonen@helsinki.fi)
Traffic Research Unit, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, PO Box 9
00014 University of Helsinki
Abstract
An important visual strategy in the visual control of driving
during curve negotiation is tangent point orientation – directing
gaze to the inside road edge in the area of interest (AOI) around
the tangent point. Yet, while the phenomenon has been
replicated in many studies at a qualitative level, and several
computational models have been proposed to explain it, there is
no consensus on whether the actual gaze target is the tangent
point itself – or some other road point in its vicinity- and what
the functional significance TP targeting (looking at the tangent
point) or TP orientation (looking at a point in the TP AOI, but
not necessarily the tangent point) might be. We report here a
previously unobserved dependence between gaze distribution on
road curvature: gaze concentrates on the part of the road where
the vehicle yaw rate (local curvature) will be highest. We
therefore suggest this geometric property of the future path may
act as a functionally salient visual reference for the driver, and
that the oft-reported “tangent point orientation” may in some
cases be a side-effect caused by the spatial contiguity of the
tangent point and the point of maximal path curvature.
Keywords: visually guided behavior, driving,
movements, field studies, tangent point, optic flow.

eye-

Introduction
One of the ultimate goals in modeling eye-movements
during natural behavior would be to be able to predict the
whole sequences of eye movements executed during the
performance of a naturalistic task, such as reading, car driving or preparing a meal (Kowler, 2011; Land 2006, 2007).
This goal may not be as far off as it may seem, for as
research on eye movements in naturalistic tasks during the
past two decades has shown, in naturalistic tasks (as
opposed to many artificial laboratory tasks) eye-movements
present a picture of surprisingly stereotypical patterns,
where the subjects’ gaze behavior is closely bound to the
task conditions, both in spatial terms (gaze is concentrated
only on task-relevant gaze targets) and in temporal terms
(gaze target selection is closely coupled to the execution of
different phases of a complex task, picking out targets “just
in time” – i.e. selecting targets whose state needs to be
verified, or which are about to be manipulated in 1-2s, so
that the use of short term visual memory can be minimized).
(Ballard et al., 1995). Successful modeling would thus entail
(i) identifying the relevant gaze targets, (ii) specifying their
relevance to the task (phases) in terms of the cognitive com-

putations the information provided by these targets could
support, and (iii) testing the differential predictions of
models against data collected from participants performing
actual naturalistic tasks.
In the domain of car driving, one pattern in particular has
been the subject of continuous research and theoretical
debate, namely, tangent point oriented curve negotiation
(Land & Lee, 1994): directing gaze in the direction of inside
road edge during curve driving (Figure 1). Yet, while the
basic phenomenon has been replicated in many studies
(Underwood et al, 1999; Land & Tatler, 2001; Chattington
et al., 2007; Kandil et al., 2009, 2010), and several
computational models have been proposed to explain it
(Land & Lee, 1994; Boer, 1996; Wann & Swapp, 2000;
Wann & Land, 2000; Wann & Wilkie, 2004), there is no
consensus on whether the gaze target is the tangent point
itself – or some other road point in its vicinity- or the
functional significance of this gaze pattern.
There are several models that account for the basic pattern
(see Table 1). Some assume that the tangent point itself is
the relevant gaze target for visually controlled steering (its
eccentricity acting as a feedback control parameter), others
that it is points on the forward-planned future trajectory
which the driver looks at (only falling near the tangent point
due to geometric reasons).
As the models are all compatible with the general observation of “tangent point orientation”, but make subtly
different predictions concerning the precise spatial and temporal dynamics of gaze, more detailed on-road data is required to arbitrate between the various models. We report here
a previously unobserved dependence between gaze distribution on road curvature: gaze concentrates on the part of the
road where the vehicle yaw rate (local curvature) will be
highest.
We therefore suggest this geometric property of the future
path may act as a functionally salient visual reference for
the driver, and that “tangent point orientation” may in fact –
at least in some cases - be a side-effect caused by the spatial
contiguity of the tangent point and this other gaze target.
(This highlights the inherent problems of using AOI based
measures in naturalistic environments where the
experimenter has no control over the overlap of the AOI’s
of different gaze targets).

1846

Table 1: “Tangent point orientation” models of visual control of steering.
i. Land & Lee (1994)
ii. Land & Lee (1994),
Wann & Land (2000)
iii.Wann & Land (2000),
Wann & Wilkie (2004)
iv. Boer (1996)

v. Kim & Turvey (1996),
Wann & Swapp (2000)

Drivers fixate the tangent point and use the visual angle of tangent point (or gaze) relative to the
locomotor axis to judge the curvature of the bend. (This model makes no specific prediction
about steering).
Drivers fixate the tangent point and actively steer so as to keep the visual angle of the tangent
point (and gaze) at a constant horizontal direction.
The driver fixates a target point on their future path (i.e. a point they wish to pass through)
which is near the tangent point not necessarily the tangent point, and then steers so that the
fixated point sweeps from its initial offset to directly in front of the locomotor axis at a constant
rate..
A reference point (“next to the tangent point but slightly into the road”) is chosen, although not
necessarily fixated directly. Steering and speed are controlled in the following manner: The
driver observes the visual angle between the vehicle’s heading and the target point, estimates
the vehicle’s speed and the geometric distance to the target point, and adjusts steering and speed
so that the following constraints are satisfied (1) the visual angle to the target point shall reach
zero in less time than it will take to traverse the distance to the target point (2) the trajectory
minimizes the maximum required lateral acceleration (i.e. minimizes the maximum steering
input), and (3) the furthest deviation from the road edge remains within lane boundaries. (Active
model).
Visual flow is used to steer the car on a linear or locally circular trajectory: the driver fixates a
target point on the road she wishes to pass through - a reference point on the future trajectory
that is at rest in the allocentric reference frame, but moves in the egocentric frames of reference
due to optic flow – and steers so that the visual flow lines are straight rather than curved. What
is more, all those flow lines that fall on the observer's future path will now be be vertical

Subjects
Nineteen subjects participated in the experiment (11 male, 8
female, age range 23-52 years, mean 30, s.d. 7 years. All
had held a valid driving license, and could be considered
experienced drivers. Participants were recruited through
university e-mail lists, some through personal contacts
among students and staff. Condition for inclusion in the
experiment was normal uncorrected vision (qualified to
drive a car without correction) and sufficient driving
experience (>20 000km). All participants were naïve to the
purpose of the study (the tangent point hypothesis) and were
given two cinema tickets as compensation for participating.
All participants gave written informed consent, and the
study was approved by the local ethics committee.

Procedure
The test road was a 3.9 km low-standard two-lane rural road
with a low traffic density and no lane markings (5.4 m
pavement width). All drives were carried out in daylight.
Participants drove the car to the test route, which was
located 34 km from the campus. A few kilometers before
arriving at the test road, the instrument panel was occluded.
This was in done to reduce downwards glances to the
speedometer during the test run, giving us the best
opportunity to record road-directed gaze patterns. The
participants did not express discomfort at having to drive
without a speedometer. In addition to the participant who
drove the car, a member of university staff acted as driving
instructor on the front seat, giving route directions and
ensuring safety.

Figure 1: Illustration of some possible gaze targets in curve
driving, discussed in the text. The future path of the vehicle
is indicated by dotted line TP = tangent point; OP =
occlusion point; point of maximum yaw rate is the point
where the driver can begin to unwind the steering and
accelerate out of the turn.

1847

A research assistant acted as experiment instructor on the
back seat on the driver’s side. She was there to administer a
cognitive secondary task on a different road section, the
results of which are reported in Lehtonen, Lappi &
Summala (2011). During the recording segments from
which data is reported here the driver and the other persons
in the car avoided any interaction. The participants drove
the test route at their own pace. The driver was simply
instructed to (i) drive as they normally would, but (ii)
observe traffic laws and safety - in particular, they were
explicitly instructed not to cut onto the lane of oncoming
traffic in left-hand turns, if this was what they would do in
normal driving. (This was deemed a necessary precaution
because of the relatively high speed limit – 80 km/h – and
the fact that many of the turns had a blind entry).

Equipment and data preparation
The instrumented car was a model year 2007 Toyota Corolla
1.6 compact sedan with a manual transmission. The
passenger side was equipped with brake pedals and extra
mirrors for the driving instructor, as well as a computer
display that allowed him to monitor vehicle speed, as well
as the operation of the eye-tracker and the data-logging
systems. The car was equipped with a two-camera (Smart
Eye Pro versions 5.1 and 5.5 www.smarteye.se) eye tracker
operating at 60 Hz, a forward looking VGA scene camera, a
GPS-receiver, as well as a forward looking infrared
rangefinder (IBEO, www.ibeoa-as.com). Vehicle speed, the
vehicle control signals (steering, throttle and brakes), as
well as vehicle yaw rate were recorded directly from CANbus (all oversampled at 100 Hz). All signals were
synchronized and time stamped on-line, and stored on a
computer running custom MATLAB software, located in
the rear luggage compartment. All subsequent data
preparation, visualization and analysis was done with
custom-made Python scripts, except for the final statistical
analyses which were done with SPSS 18.
The data was segmented based on the time stamps
corresponding to the GPS coordinates of the test route. To
render different trials (drives) comparable, the data was
given a distance-based representation. One trial, with no
traffic or other “incidents” was chosen as a reference. The
vehicle trajectory in an allocentric xy plane was computed
by interpolating the GPS signal. This interpolated trajectory
would then be used as the basis of a route-distance value.
All participants’ trials were then mapped onto this frame of
reference, by first best-matching the observed GPS values to
the reference trajectory, and then associating the rest of the
data, with time-stamps matching the relevant GPS location.
The trajectory of the vehicle was also computed for
individual trials by starting from point of gaze observation
on the trajectory, and integrating the vehicle yaw rate and
speed over time. This was used to estimate the point of gaze
landing on the future trajectory, by finding first the point on
the trajectory where the eccentricity of a point on the pathintegrated trajectory corresponded with the visual eccentricity of gaze at the initial point – i.e. the point where the

line of sight would intersect the path-integrated trajectory.
This gaze-landing point could then be assigned a route
distance value based on the mapping of time stamps to route
distances1
Tangent points were manually identified from still video
frames from SmartEye’s Scene camera (5 Hz frame rate),
and the image coordinates of the mouse pointer and the eyetracker coordinates were physically calibrated, using a calibration grid visible in the scene camera and the infrared
rangefinder (whose coordinates were used as the native coordinate system for the car). The scene images were then
associated with the rest of the data based on the time stamp
of the video frame. If there was oncoming traffic in a turn
(any vehicles or pedestrians visible in the forward-looking
video camera), data for that turn was excluded from gaze-direction analyses (but included in the driving speed analyses). This was done in order to eliminate the effect of these
potentially confounding visual targets in the road scene.

Results
Four turns from the test route were selected for detailed analysis. The turns were chosen so that we would have two
pairs of roughly similar turns, this way we could check
whether any pattern of visual behaviour seen in a turn would
also be seen in the other, similar, turn. The analysed turns
comprised of two long left hand turns (hereafter denoted by
T1 & T4), and two blind right-left sequences (T2/3 &
T5/6)2. The blind sequences T2/3 and T5/6 probably
resembled the roads used in Land and Lee (1994), while the
faster turns T1 and T3, with a sighted approach phase, were
probably more similar to the curves in Kandil et al. (2010).

Driver Gaze Behaviour in Relation to the Tangent
Point (Tangent Point Orientation)
We first set out to replicate the commonly observed tangent
point orientation. Based on the previous research reviewed
above, we expected the drivers to direct their gaze towards
the tangent point region, especially during the approach and
1

Note that the gaze-landing point, as defined here, may not in
all cases perfectly coincide with the driver’s true gaze target,
because it does not use pitch-information and effectively projects
the trajectory and gaze directions onto a two-dimensional plane; it
does, however, provide a good estimate when the road is flat –as in
the present experiment. The reason we did not use the pitch
information is the difficulty of measuring it reliably in the noisy
environment.
2
We refer to a turn as blind when both of the following
conditions are met: (i) At no point during the approach phase – i.e.
before the driver steers into the turn - is the exit of the turn or the
exit of the entire sequence in the case of connected curves visible
to the driver, and (ii) During the entire approach phase, the
occlusion point falls within some angular threshold of the tangent
point (the threshold used here was 10o). The occlusion point is
defined the furthermost part of the desired trajectory to which a
continuous line of passage is visible, i.e. the point on the road
where the driving line first disappears from view (Fig. 1, see
Lehtonen, Lappi & Summala, 2011). Turns that are not blind by
these criteria are said to be sighted.

1848

turn entry phases. As table 2 shows, we could demonstrate a
consistent pattern of tangent point orientation during curve
approach and turn entry. This establishes for the curves
analysed the basic pattern observed in many previous
studies, which have reported drivers to direct their gaze into
the tangent point region 60-70% of the time, when entering
a bend (Land & Lee, 1994; Kandil et al., 2010).
Table 2: Estimated relative frequency or tangent point
oriented gazes (% of all valid observations, mean and
standard deviation) falling within three degrees horizontal of
the tangent point during turn approach (before the driver
turns the wheel) and entry into the turn (after the driver
turns the vehicle). In connected curve sequences only the
first turn of the sequence for which an approach phase can
be defined is listed.
Approach

Entry

T1

52 (23)

41 (28)

T2/3

72 (24)

67 (22)

T4

50 (25)

58 (24)

T5/6

71 (25)

60 (22)

Figure 2: Tangent point and gaze in vehicle coordinates for
the right-left turn sequence 5/6. The solid red line indicates
the eccentricity of the tangent point (averaged across
subjects), and the dotted line indicates the road centerline.
Right is negative. Note that the tangent point (and gaze) are
neither constant, nor do they sweep towards the vehicle
centerline (zero eccentricity).
.

Tangent Point and Gaze Behavior in Relation to
the Vehicle Frame of Reference

Table 3: Average displacement of the tangent point in the
entry phase of each turn. Negative is to the right.

We next set out to investigate further the behaviour of the
tangent point and the driver’s gaze in vehicle coordinates.
The Land & Lee (1994) model which predicts that the
drivers steer so as to maintain the tangent point a t a
constant bearing angle. The Wann and Land (2000) model,
in turn, predicts that tangent point eccentricity should
decrease during turn entry (from a relatively eccentric
value) when the driver begins to rotate the vehicle and to
orient it towards a reference point (close to the tangent
point) which he wishes to travel through.
Neither pattern was observed. Instead, as illustrated in
figure 2, the observed horizontal positions of gaze and the
eccentricity of the tangent point become progressively more
eccentric during the turn-in phase of this right-left turn. The
first vertical green line indicates the average point where the
vehicle rotation rate exceeds one degree per second, the
second indicates the point where the vehicle reaches its
maximum rotation rate (the driver begins to turn the wheel
back to the left) and the third green line indicates the point
of maximum rotation-rate in the left hand turn (after which
the driver begins to ea. reaching a maximum at towards the
end of the turn-in phase.
Table 3 gives the values for tangent point displacement
from the turn-in to the end of the entry phase. Although
during the entry phase gaze is relatively concentrated in the
TP region, the drivers nevertheless do not appear to be
steering to compensate for the outward movement of the
tangent point (and gaze) due to visual flow.

	  T1 entry
T2 entry
T3 entry
T4 entry
T5 entry
T6 entry

N
16
17
16
16
15
15

mean
3.58
-8.68
25.1
0.66
-6.4
25.5

We could see the tangent point eccentricity (and gaze)
was not constant through the turns but instead increased
steadily, in step with the increase in vehicle yaw-rate as the
car was entering the curve. As can be seen in Figure 2, the
highest tangent point and gaze eccentricities appear occur
systematically in the steepest parts of the turn (the green
vertical lines indicating the parts of the trajectory where the
yaw-rate values reach their maxima). This suggested that a
possible relation might exist between the driver’s gaze and
the vehicle yaw-rate. We decided to investigate this
relationship by looking at the estimated fixation density on
the road, i.e. the distribution of gaze landing points where
the line of sight would intersect the vehicle trajectory.
The relative frequency of gaze landings in each 10 m road
segment through each curve was computed as the percenttage of all gaze landings falling within the segment. This
was computed first individually, and then averaged across

1849

subjects. This distribution is shown by the histogram in
figure 3 (bottom), and shows that gaze is not equally distributed on the road surface. This would happen if the drivers
were, for example, fixating a point on their trajectory that
would be some constant distance ahead. Instead, as shown
in the top half of figure 3, while they are approaching a turn
the drivers are looking further ahead – 100-150 meters up
the road in this instance – but as they enter the turn, the gaze
falls closer to the car. Also, when in a connected sequence
of turns, the gaze moves discontinuously on the road. Here,
the gaze is seen to jump further up the road (from right to
left) just before the vehicle yaw rate has reached its peak
and the left-hand part of the turn begins.
An unexpected pattern became evident when the relative
frequency of estimated gaze landings in a specific part of
the curve was compared with yaw rate at that part of the
road (histogram in fig.3, bottom shows data for one curve).
Gaze landings appeared to be concentrating those parts of
the road where the vehicle yaw rate (and thus the road
curvature as well) would be highest. I.e. there is a high
correlation between the vehicle yaw rate (local road
curvature) and the frequency of gaze landings. This
correlation is shown graphically in figure 4, and the
numerical values of the correlations are given in Table 4,
showing that drivers preferentially look at segments of the
road where they are going experience a high yaw rate, i.e.
parts of the road with high curvature.

Figure 3: Horizontal axis location on the road (m from
beginning of the route) Top: Estimated look-ahead distances
through T5/6, i.e. distance of estimated gaze landing point
from the current location, measured along the future path
Bottom: Absolute value of vehicle yaw rate (continuous
line) and the frequency histogram of gaze landings on each
part of the curve (both variables scaled to sum to 100%
within the analysed road section).

Table 4: Correlation (Spearman’s Rho) between the median
relative frequency (within a turn) with which a particular
10m road estimated as a potential gaze target, and the
measured average yaw rate in that segment.

n

Spearman’s Rho

T1

41

0.811

T2/3

46

0.565

T4

53

0.717

T5/6

43

0.795

Discussion
There are many different steering models available and all
predict the same qualitative pattern of tangent point orientation (i.e. orienting gaze in the general direction of the tangent point, the TP AOI), but different predictions
concerning the details of the gaze distribution pattern.

Figure 4: Top: Scatterplot of vehicle yaw rate and gaze
landing density in the analysed turns. Each datapoint
represents the across-subjects average for one 10m segment
of all the curves analysed.

1850

One model (Land & Lee 1994 / Wann & Land, 2000)
would predict a constant value for gaze and tangent point
eccentricity throughout a turn since, according to the model,
the driver would make compensating steering movements
(induce vehicle yaw) to cancel out the apparent horizontal
motion of the tangent point due to optic flow. The
prediction of the Wann and Land (2000) / Wann & Wilkie
(2004) visual sweep model is that tangent point - and gaze eccentricity should decrease during turn entry as the driver
rotates the vehicle towards the reference point on the future
path near the tangent point. Instead, we find that the tangent
point - and gaze - become progressively more eccentric
during the turn-in phase, without compensation or any apparent adverse effects to steering. We therefore conclude that
these two steering models which are based on the idea of
using the tangent point as a visual target point which acts
control parameter in set-point feedback loop do not offer a
general account for gaze/ steering behavior, at least on the
kinds of turns analysed here (variable-radius curves on rural
roads).
The differences of the remaining models - not based on
simple negative feedback but on an active trajectory
planning strategy because they involve a predictive model of
future path – cannot be judged on the present data. It is thus
not possible to pick one that would be the clear best fit for
our data. However, the surprising finding that gaze was
heavily concentrated on a few parts of the turn – namely, the
locations where the vehicle achieved highest yaw-rate –
offers some interesting possibilities. Prima facie none of the
steering models appear to predict this high correlation
between the yaw rate and probability of being selected as a
gaze target, but we would consider that this pattern may be
best interpreted as complementing the Wann & Swapp
(2000) model or the Boer (1996) model. Both models
predict that the driver should fixate some part of the road
which he wishes to pass through, but neither specifies which
part of the future trajectory the driver would or should look
at. The location of highest anticipated trajectory curvature
(max. yaw-dot) could perhaps serve as such a salient point
of reference. (Note that is also behaviourally meaningful in
terms of the sequencing of the driving task: this is the point
where the curve/trajectory “opens up”, and the drive may
begin to accelerate and unwind the steering).
There clearly exists a need for new and such accurate data
on visual behaviour in curve driving – i.e. data that could
speak the issue of which model or models offer the best fit
to driver behavior. This study takes one steps in this
direction, by presenting data that speaks directly to the
differential predictions the models make beyond the
common prediction of tangent point orientation (which was
observed in all turns analysed). We also observed a
surprising correlation between gaze landings on the road
and measured vehicle rotation at that point, not predicted by
any of the existing models.
It is suggested that the next generation of models be
developed and empirically tested based on such detailed

quantitative basis - not only for the qualitative pattern of
tangent point orientation.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Mr. Juha Vepsäläinen for programming
the annotation tool, and Mr. Henri Kotkanen and Mr. Harri
Hiltunen for assistance in data collection.

References
Ballard D, M Hayhoe & J Pelz (1995). Memory
representations in natural tasks. J cogn neurosci 7: 66-80.
Boer E R (1996) Tangent point oriented curve negotiation.
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 1996, Proceedings of the
1996 IEEE: 7-12.
Chattington M, M Wilson, et al. (2007) Eye–steering
coordination in natural driving. Exp Brain Res,180: 1-14.
Kandil F I, A Rotter, et al. (2009) Driving is smoother and
more stable when using the tangent point. J Vis 9: 1-11.
http://www.journalofvision.org/content/9/1/11
doi:10.1167/9.1.11
Kandil F I, A Rotter, et al. (2010) Car drivers attend to
different gaze targets when negotiating closed vs . open
bends. J Vis 10: 1-11.
Kowler, E. (2011). Eye movements: the past 25 years. Vis
Res 51: 1457-1483.
Land, M F (2006) Eye movements and the control of actions
in everyday life. Prog Ret Eye Res 25: 296-324.
Land M F (2007) Fixation Strategies During Active
Behaviour: A Brief History. In: R P G Gompel, M H
Fishcer, W S Murray and R L Hill (eds) Eye Movements:
A Window on Mind and Brain. Elsevier. Pp. 77-95.
Land M F and D N Lee (1994) Where we look when we
steer. Nature 369: 742-744.
Land M F and B W Tatler (2001) Steering with the head:
The visual strategy of a racing driver. Curr Biol 11: 12151220.
Lehtonen E, Lappi O & Summala H (2011) Anticipatory
eye movements when approaching a curve on a rural road
depend on working memory load. Trans Res Part F
Traffic Psychol (2011).
Underwood G, P Chapman, et al. (1999) The visual control
of steering and driving: Where do we look when
negotiating curves? In:
A.G.Gale, I.D.Brown,
C.M.Haslegrave and S.P.Taylor (eds) Vision in Vehicles VII. Amsterdam, Elsevier.
Wann J and M Land (2000) Steering with or without the
flow: is the retrieval of heading necessary? Trends Cogn
Sci 4: 319-324.
Wann J P and D K Swapp (2000) Why you should look
where you are going. Nat Neuroci 3: 647.
Wann J P and R M Wilkie (2004) How do we control high
speed steering? In: L M Vaina, S A Beardsley, S K
Rushton (eds.): Optic flow and beyond. Kluwer Academic
Publishers. Norwell, MA, USA. pp. 371-389.

1851

