UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Task switching without knowledge of the tasks.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cr8r1c6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Forrest, Charlotte
Elchlepp, Heike
Monsell, Stephen
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Task switching without knowledge of the tasks.
C.L. Forrest (clf206@exeter.ac.uk)
H. Elchlepp (H.Elchlepp@exeter.ac.uk)
S. Monsell (S.Monsell@exeter.ac.uk)
I.P.L. McLaren (I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.
Abstract

CSR

Task-cuing paradigms are typically taken to explore control of
task-set. However, they can be construed as requiring not selection
of a task-set, just retrieval of a cue+stimulus-->response (CSR)
mapping. In this paper we considered performance in a task-cuing
paradigm in which participants saw a color cue that indicated
whether they should classify a digit as odd/even or high/low using
one of two responses. Half the participants were instructed in
terms of tasks (Task group) whilst the others were required to learn
the CSR mappings without mention of tasks (CSR group).
Predicted performance under CSR conditions was modeled using
an APECS connectionist network. Both the model and CSR group
produced small switch costs, mostly due to incongruent stimuli,
and large congruency effects that reduced with practice. In
contrast, the Task group produced a larger switch-cost and a
smaller, stable congruency effect.

Figure 1 on the left shows the way in which the
experiment was presented in the CSR condition and on
the right in the Task condition.

Keywords: task-switching, connectionist modeling, conditional
discriminations, associative learning

Introduction
We often think of our behaviour as being governed by
both higher-level cognitive control processes and lowerlevel associative processes (McLaren, Green & Mackintosh,
1994). Typically these processes are thought to operate
simultaneously but with a degree of independence. This
paper takes a task-cuing paradigm, typically taken as
measuring the higher level cognitive control processes
involved in changing between tasks (Monsell, 2003), and
asks if the performance typically seen could instead be
accounted for by lower level associative processes. This
paradigm has been used widely to measure control
processes in areas as diverse as aging (Mayr, 2001) and
schizophrenia (Meiran, 2000) It is also commonly included
in brain training packages as a way to improve your ability
to multitask and pay attention. Given such widespread use,
it is important to assess if the paradigm actually measures
control processes at all; it has been argued that it does not
(Logan and Bundesen, 2003; Schneider and Logan, 2005).
The response contingencies in many task-cuing
experiments can be construed without any reference to
tasks. This paper examines what happens when participants
approach such an experiment without knowledge of the
task-sets. Data and simulation suggest that they can learn
the statistical structure of the experiment through the use of

Task

associative learning mechanisms, but their performance
differs from that of participants construing the situation as
one requiring task-selection and switching.
To clarify this, let us consider the task-cuing paradigm
that we used. Under standard instructions in this paradigm
participants are told, for example, that if the background
circle is blue or green then they should classify the digit
they then see as odd/even, where odd requires a response
with the left key and even with the right. However, if the
background circle is red or yellow they should classify the
digit as higher/lower than 5, with a right response for high,
and a left response for low. This is the "task-set" construal
of what is required, as illustrated on the right of Figure 1.
Yet participants do not need knowledge of these tasks to
know how to respond, as the color and the number
combination is completely predictive of the required
response, e.g. a 4 on yellow will always require a left
response. Hence, especially with small stimulus set, it is
entirely possible for participants in a task cuing experiment
not to use the task-sets at all, in which case the experiment
is not measuring task-based control processes.
In the experiment reported here we compare a group who
are explicitly instructed to use the task-sets with one that has
no knowledge of the underlying task-set structure. In order
to examine whether, and in what ways, performance differs

1548

between the two conditions we will consider three of the
common effects found within the task-switching literature:
the switch cost, the reduction in the switch cost with time to
prepare (RISC effect) and the congruency effect (Monsell,
2003, Kiesel et al, 2011).
It is typically found that when participants change from
performing one task to performing another task there is a
switch cost; participants are generally slower and less
accurate on a task-switch trial than a task-repeat trial.
Participants are also able to reduce this switch cost when
they are given more time to prepare the task set, i.e. when
there is a longer time between the cue (colored circle),
which indicates the task-set, appearing and the stimulus
(number) appearing the switch cost declines. Explanations
of these effects have appealed to task set inertia (Allport,
Styles & Hsieh 1994) —conflict due to residual activation
of the previous task set - and/or the need to perform a task
set reconfiguration process (Rogers & Monsell, 1995) which
reduces conflict if performed before the stimulus appears.
But, according to the compound-cuing model of Logan and
colleagues (Logan & Bundesen, 2003; Schneider & Logan,
2005) participants simply retrieve the response associated
with the combination of cue and stimulus, so these effects
cannot be taken as hallmarks of control.
In the task-cuing experiment already described, the
responses for the two tasks are mapped onto the same keys,
i.e. the left key represents odd and high, whilst the right key
represents even and low. Hence for some numbers the
response is always the same regardless of the task cued, e.g.
1 always requires a left response; these are called congruent
stimuli. For other numbers the response changes with the
task cued, e.g. 4 requires a left response if the task is
high/low but a right response if the task is odd/even; these
are incongruent stimuli.
Typically, it is found that
participants are faster and more accurate for congruent than
incongruent stimuli. As with the switch cost and reduction
in switch cost (RISC) effect there have been both task-set
based and non-task-set based explanations of this
congruency effect. Some researchers have argued that the
congruency effect is due to response conflict from the
currently irrelevant task-set (Kiesel et al, 2011). Other
researchers have argued that it is caused by associative
interference, as the incongruent stimuli are linked to both
responses whilst the congruent stimuli are only linked to
one (Kiesel, Wendt & Peters, 2007).
In this experiment we asked whether the switch cost, the
RISC effect and the congruency effect depend on how the
participants construe the experiment, i.e. whether in terms of
tasks or cue + stimulus to response (CSR) mappings.
In addition to considering these standard task switching
effects we also considered the effect of introducing novel
stimuli (cf. Rogers & Monsell, 1995). This is particularly
relevant for assaying the difference between switching
among stimulus-classification task rules versus applying a
single set of learned CSR rules. For participants using tasks
there should be little impact of introducing new stimuli.
There might be a slight novelty effect, but they should be

able to treat the new stimuli in the same way as the old,
continuing to apply the same classification rules. However,
participants with no knowledge of the task-sets have no way
of knowing how to respond to the novel numbers; they
should be reduced to learning how to respond by trial and
error, and one would expect performance on the new
numbers to be dramatically worse than performance on the
old numbers.
Modeling
As summarized above there is plenty of evidence to
suggest how participants typically perform in a task-cuing
paradigm with knowledge of the tasks (Monsell, 2003,
Kiesel et al, 2010). In order to attempt to predict how
participants would perform in the task-cuing experiment
described above without knowledge of the task-sets we
simulated performance using an associative model. The
mappings for the congruent stimuli are shown in outline in
Table 1. It is immediately evident that they should be easily
captured by an associative model, as the stimuli in isolation
predict the correct response.
Cues (Color)
W
(blue)

X
(green)

Y
(red)

Z
(yellow)

A (1)

L

L

L

L

Stimuli

B (3)

L

L

L

L

(Digit)

C (6)

R

R

R

R

D (8)

R

R

R

R

Table 1 The associative structure of the congruent trials.
L indicates a left R a right response. Boldface rows indicate
example initially trained stimuli; the others introduced later
The incongruent stimuli, shown in Table 2, are more of a
challenge for an associative model. There is evidence from
rabbits (Saavedra, 1975) and humans (Livesey et al, 2011)
that, although these stimuli are harder to learn than the
congruent stimuli, they can be learned. However, a single
layer error-correcting model, e.g. Rescorla-Wagner (1972)
would be unable to learn this structure.
Cues (Color)
W
(blue)

X
(green)

Y
(red)

Z
(yellow)

E (2)

R

R

L

L

Stimuli

F (4)

R

R

L

L

(Digit)

G (7)

L

L

R

R

H (9)

L

L

R

R

Table 2 shows the associative structure of the incongruent
trials using the conventions employed in Table 1.
In addition to the difference in performance on
incongruent and congruent trials, one might also expect
effects of cue equivalence (Honey & Ward-Robinson, 2002;
Hodder, George, Kilcross & Honey, 2003). These studies

1549

trained rats or humans (respectively) with the same
contingencies as the incongruent trials. They found that
cues that indicated the same outcome from stimuli became
equivalent e.g. here W and X would become equivalent as
would Y and Z, in that there would be a greater degree of
generalization between W and X than W and Y. Honey and
Ward-Robinson (2002) found that a modified connectionist
model was able to account for their data by allowing the
same hidden unit to carry the mappings for equivalent cues.
We used a model from the same class as their chosen model.
The model is known as APECS (McLaren, 1994, 2011;
LePelley & McLaren, 2001) and has a good record in
modeling human learning and memory. APECS has the
basic characteristics of a back-propagation network
(Rumelhart, Hinton and Williams, 1986), i.e. it is a standard
feedforward error correcting system with input, hidden and
output layers that has been modified in two key ways:
Learning algorithm and rates The APECS learning
algorithm allows the learning rates to change in an adaptive
manner. On each trial, the hidden unit with the largest error
receives a higher learning rate than the other hidden units.
This effectively means that one (or a few) hidden unit(s) is
(are) selected to carry each mapping from input to output.
Bias The APECS group of models also includes an
adaptive bias whose learning rate is varied to prevent
catastrophic interference to old learning occurring when
new information is learnt (McCloskey and Cohen, 1989).
The adaptive bias lowers the chances of the same hidden
unit being used by a different mapping and hence prevents
the previous learning being over-written.
Modeling Method
Sequencing As in the experiment below, one third of trials
were "switch" trials (defined with respect to the task-set
representation). The cue changed color on every trial, and
either of two colors signaled each task. The number of times
a given stimulus appeared in a given task on a repeat or
switch trial was constrained. There were 14 blocks of 49
trials in total. For the first 10 blocks only 4 stimuli were
possible, whilst for the last 4 blocks 8 stimuli were possible.
Representation and Architecture The 4 cues and 8 digit
stimuli were represented discretely with one input unit
coding for each. The responses were also represented
discretely, and the model was trained to 0.9 for the correct
response and 0.5 for the wrong one. It was trained to autoassociate the input with the output, with certain output units
active only if a specific input unit was active. The network
had three layers: 16 input units, 14 hidden units and 18
output units.
Learning parameters The fast learning rate was set to 0.8
whilst the slow learning rate for the unselected units was
0.0005. For the bias the learning rate for selected hidden
units was 0.5 and for others was 0.005.
Output The output of the model was assessed by
subtracting the difference between the actual activations of
the two response output units (desired response – undesired
response) from the target difference (0.4). On this measure
larger scores mean worse performance.

Modeling Results

Figure 2 shows the performance of the model plotted as
the difference between the desired output difference (0.90.5) and the actual output difference – hence 0.4
represents no learning whilst 0 represents perfect
learning. The points are plotted by block pair, congruency,
switch and new stimuli.
Darker lines represent
incongruent stimuli (IC) with diamonds representing the
originally trained stimuli and triangles the transfer stimuli
(New). Lighter lines represent congruent stimuli, with
squares representing the originally trained stimuli and
circles the transfer stimuli (New). Dotted lines represent
switch trials (Sw) and solid lines repeat trials (Rep).
The results were analyzed across block pairs 2-5 (as block
pair 1 was a practice block) using an ANOVA with the
factors, block pair, congruency, and switch.
Task switches There was a small but significant effect of
"task switch"; the model's performance was worse on switch
than repeat trials (switch: 0.075, repeat: 0.055),
F(1,31)=49.5, p<0.001 — see Figure 2.
Congruency There was a large and significant effect of
congruency; the model's performance was worse on
incongruent than congruent trials (congruent: 0.095,
incongruent: 0.035), F(1,31)=168.5, p<0.001.
Switch by congruency. The switch cost was significantly
larger for incongruent trials (0.04) than the congruent trials
(-0.002), F(1,30)= 10.4, p<0.01.
Acquisition effects. Overall performance reliably
improved from block pair 2 to 5 (Figure 2), F(3, 93)= 44.3,
p<0.001. The two-way interaction between block pair and
congruency was significant F(3, 93)= 43.3 ,p<0.001 This
interaction can be seen in Figure 2 which shows the
congruent stimuli being learnt quickly whilst the
incongruent stimuli take longer to learn.
Transfer to new stimuli The effect of transfer was
analyzed by comparing the performance on the newly
introduced stimuli with that on the old stimuli in block pairs
6 and 7. As expected, the model found the novel stimuli

1550

(0.189) much harder than the previous stimuli (0.089),
F(1,31)=509, p<0.001.
Modeling Discussion
The model predicts a large congruency effect which
varies over blocks, a small switch cost which is only present
in the incongruent trials and a significant disadvantage for
newly introduced stimuli. This gives a clear indication what
we might expect from participants if they were performing
on an associative basis. It is also different from the typical
task-cuing results where the switch cost is usually larger
than the congruency effect. We now consider the empirical
data obtained from participants trained on this task under
Task or CSR instructions.
Behavioral Method
Participants The participants were 35 psychology
undergraduates (mean age = 20.3 years, 7 males) at the
University of Exeter. Participants took part for course credit
and a bonus payment, which was contingent on their
performance (average payment £2.04, range £1.50-£2.50).
Stimuli The task cues were circles (6.7º of visual angle),
filled with: blue (RGB: 0, 0, 255), red (RGB: 255, 0, 0),
green (RGB: 0, 255, 0) or yellow (RGB: 255, 255, 0); in the
center of the cue, the digit stimulus was then displayed in
60-pt Courier bold font (1.3º of visual angle). The two sets
of digits used were 1,4,7,8 and 2,3,6,9 – these sets were
used as on average the values are the same distance from 5
(the criterion value for 'high'/'low'. An iMac was used to
display the stimuli using Matlab 2008a with Psychtoolbox.
Design and procedure The sequencing was constrained in
the same way as for the model, with the addition of a
variable CSI that was alternated by blocks to give a long
CSI of 1200 ms and a short CSI of 100 ms. For the first
block pair, participants were given a piece of paper with
correct responses in the format of the relevant Task or CSR
diagram (as in Figure 1); in addition participants in the Task
condition were given standard task-set instructions verbally
and on-screen, whereas participants in the CSR condition
were directed to learn cue+stimulus  response mappings
on the basis of trial by trial feedback.
After 5 block pairs the second set of four stimuli was
introduced in addition to the set already in use. No mention
of the new numbers was made prior to their appearance.
Participants were debriefed using a structured questionnaire,
and replaced if their reported strategy differed from that
instructed, i.e. if they induced the tasks in the CSR group, or
failed to use the tasks as instructed in the Tasks group. Two
participants in the Task group (who did not mention using
tasks) and one participant in the CSR group (who induced
one of the tasks) were replaced in this way.
Behavioral Results
The results were analyzed using an ANOVA as for the
model, with the additional between-subjects variable of
instructions and within subjects variable of CSI.
Task switches and instruction. There was a much larger
switch cost in the Task group (160 ms) than in the CSR
group (18.6ms), F(1,30)=16.0, p<0.001 — see Figure 3. The
switch costs were reliable for the Task group, F(1,15) =

22.4, p<0.001, and nearly reliable for the CSR group,
F(1,15) = 3.24, p=0.092. For errors, there was a near reliable
interaction between instruction group and task
switch/repeat, F(1,30)=3.13, p=0.087: the switch cost for the
Task group was a reliable 2.9%, F(1,15)= 11.9, p<0.01, and
for the CSR group 1.2%,also reliable, F(1,15)=5.46, p<0.05.
Preparation and instruction. As Figure 3 shows,
preparation reduced the RT switch cost in the Task group
from 213 ms (4.5%) in the short-CSI blocks to 107 ms
(1.4%) in the long CSI blocks, this was significant in the
RTs, F(1,15)=6.23, p<0.05 and nearly so in the errors,
F(1,15)=3.96, p=0.065. There was no such effect in the
CSR group, for whom the switch cost was 16 ms (0.9%) in
the short-CSI blocks and 21 ms (1.5%) in the long-CSI
blocks F<1. The interaction was reliable in the RTs,
F(1,30)= 5.67, p<0.05 and nearly significant in the errors,
F(1,30)=3.91, p=0.057. Participants in the Task condition
also showed a general preparation effect, whereby if only
the task-repeat trials are considered they were faster with a
long-CSI (611ms) than with a short-CSI (853ms), F(1,15) =
63.8, p<0.001. For the same contrast the CSR group was
slightly, but not reliably, slower in the long-CSI (776ms)
than at the short-CSI (745ms) condition, , F(1,15) = 2.55.
Congruency and instruction. RT and error rate showed
(Figure 3) a much larger effect of congruency in the CSR
group (346 ms, 7.4%) than in the Task group (91 ms, 6.1%);
the interaction was highly reliable for RTs, F(1,30)=23.9,
p<0.001, but not for error rate, F<1. In separate analyses,
the congruence effect was reliable for both the Task group,
F(1, 15) =6.26, p<0.05, for RTs, and F(1,15)=33.8, p<0.001,
for errors, and the CSR group, F(1,15) = 84.5, p<0.001, for
RT, and F(1,15)=11.3, p<0.01, for errors.
Switch by congruency. In agreement with the model the
switch cost was larger for incongruent trials for the CSR
group (30ms, 2%) than congruent trials (7ms, 0.4%).
Similarly for the Task group the switch cost was larger for
incongruent trials (161ms, 4.8%) than congruent trials
(69ms, 1.1%). There was an overall significant interaction
between task switch and congruency in the errors, F(1,30)=
10.4, p<0.01, but not in the RTs. This effect did not differ
between the two experimental conditions in the error data or
RTs.
Acquisition. Overall performance improved from block
pair 2 to 5 (Figure 4), and this was reliable in RTs and
errors, F(2.7,79.6)=43.3, p<0.001, F(2.7, 79.6)=4.60,
p<0.05. The three-way interaction between block pair,
congruency and instructions was significant in the RTs only,
F(2.7, 79.6)= 7.35 ,p<0.01 and marginally so in the errors,
F(2.7, 79.6), 2.23, p=0.095. Separate analyses revealed a
highly significant block pair by congruency interaction in
the CSR condition, RT: F(2.3,34.6)= 9.40, p<0.001, errors:
F(2.3,34.6)=6.94, p<0.05, but not in the Task group, F<1.
This interaction can be seen in Figure 4 which shows the
congruent trials being learnt quickly by the CSR group
whilst the incongruent trials took longer to learn, a pattern
similar to the predictions made by the model.

1551

Figure 3 shows switch cost reductions in switch cost and the congruency effect, for the Task and CSR groups.
Introduction of new stimuli. Figure 4 also illustrates that
the two groups were differentially affected by the
introduction of novel stimuli at block pair 6. The new
stimuli seem to be accommodated with ease by the Task
group, but for the CSR group they clearly cause problems,
especially incongruent stimuli. As for the model, the effect
of new stimuli was analyzed by comparing the performance
on the novel stimuli with that on the old. As expected, the
CSR group was more affected by the introduction of new
stimuli; their RT (error rate) was much larger for the new
stimuli 1201 ms (21.7%) than the old stimuli 946 ms
(4.1%), whereas in the Task group performance on the new
stimuli, at 780ms (7.5%) was more equivalent to that of the
old stimuli, 731 ms (4.8%). This difference was supported
by a significant interaction in both the RTs, F(1,25)=23.8,
p<0.001 and errors, F(1,30)=37.7.

Discussion
There was a clear difference in the performance of the
two groups. The Task group exhibited a large switch cost,
which was substantially reduced by the opportunity to
prepare. In contrast, the CSR group had a smaller switch
cost, which derived largely from the incongruent stimuli
and was unaffected by CSI. The CSR group had a much
larger congruency effect, which was modulated with
practice because congruent stimuli were learnt much faster
than incongruent stimuli. In contrast the Task group
exhibited a smaller congruency effect which was much
more stable over practice.
These differences in the performance of participants with

and without knowledge of the task-sets suggest that there is
merit in theories of performance in task-cuing paradigms
that appeal to task-set. However, given that participants who
had no knowledge of the tasks showed significant "switch
costs" and congruency effects also indicates that these
phenomena are not per se indices of top-down control of
task-set (as Logan & Bundesen, 2003, have also argued, for
different reasons). Hence, part of the switch cost seen in the
Tasks group might have the same source as for the CSR
group, and the congruency effect in the Task group might be
an ameliorated version of that seen in the CSR group, with
top down task-set control helping to shield against
associative interference (Dreisbach & Haider, 2009).
However, the marked differences in performance between
the groups — the much larger switch cost and its reduction
with preparation in the Tasks group, and the much larger
congruence effects in the CSR group — clearly suggested a
qualitative difference in processing strategy between them.
The effects of practice and transfer, with the CSR group's
rapid learning of the congruent stimuli and difficulty with
the transfer test contrasting with the relatively stable switch
costs over practice, and good transfer for the Tasks group,
also pointed to a substantial difference in processing
strategy between groups, and highlights one of the
advantages of a task-set strategy – the ability to generalize
to novel cases.
Moreover, the data of the CSR group seem in agreement
with the behavior of an associative learning network. All of
the effects predicted by the model were present in the CSR

1552

Figure 4 shows the performance over block pairs in the
same way as Figure 2.
group: a large congruency effect and its modulation by
practice, a modest "switch cost" due mostly to the
incongruent stimuli, and a marked disadvantage in coping
with new stimuli. This is certainly consistent with the
suggestion that this group's performance was dependent on
associative learning. We conclude that there is evidence to
suggest that when participants perform in a task-cuing
paradigm without knowledge of the tasks, they produce a
distinctive pattern of results which is in line with the
predictions of an associative model. If one is interested in
using task-cuing to measure control processes, it may be
wise to check for use of a CSR strategy, and to use
conditions (e.g. larger stimulus sets) that discourage it.
REFERENCES
Allport, D. A., Styles, E. A., & Hsieh, S. (1994). Shifting
intentional set: Exploring the dynamic control of tasks. In C.
Umilta, & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Conscious and
Nonconscious Information Processing: Attention and
Performance XV (pp. 421-52).Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreisbach, G., & Haider, H. (2009) How task
representations guide attention: Further evidence for the
shielding function of task sets. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 477-86.
K. I. Hodder, D. N. George, A. S. Killcross & R. C.
Honey (2003): Representational blending in human
conditional learning: Implications for associative theory,
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section
B,56:2, 223-28.
Honey, R. C., & Ward-Robinson, J. (2002). Acquired
equivalence and distinctiveness of cues: I. Exploring a
neural network approach. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 28, 378–87.
Kiesel, A., Wendt, M., & Peters, A. (2007). Task
switching: on the origin of response congruency effects.
Psychological Research 71, 117–25.
Kiesel, A., Steinhauser, M., Wendt, M., Falkenstein, M.,
Jost, K., Philipp, A.M. & Koch, I. (2011) Control and

Interference in Task Switching—A Review. Psychological
Bulletin.
Le Pelley, M.E. and McLaren, I.P.L. (2003) Retrospective
revaluation in humans: Learning or memory? The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54B, 311-52.
Livesey, E.J., Thorwart, A., De Fina, N.L. & Harris, J.A.
(2011) Comparing Learned Predictiveness Effects Within
and Across Compound Discriminations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology Animal Behavior Processes, 37,
446–65.
Logan, G. D., &Bundesen, C. (2003). Clever homunculus:
Is there an endogenous act of control in the explicit taskcuing procedure? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 29, 575-99.
Mayr, U. (2001). Age differences in the selection of
mental sets: The role of inhibition, stimulus ambiguity, and
response-set overlap. Psychology and Aging, 16, 96 –109.
Meiran, N., Levine, J., Meiran, N. & Henik, A. (2000).
Task-set switching in schizophrenia. Neuropsychology, 14,
471-82.
McLaren, I.P.L. (1994). Representation development in
associative systems. In J.A. Hogan & J.J. Bolhuis (Eds.),
Causal Mechanisms of Behavioural Development (pp. 377–
402). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
McLaren, I.P.L., Green, R.E.A. & Mackintosh, N.J.
(1994) Animal Learning and the Explicit/Implicit
Distinction. In N.C. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and Explicit
Learning of Languages. London: Academic Press.
McLaren, I.P.L. (2011). APECS: An adaptively
parameterised model of associative learning and memory. In
Alonso, E. &Mondragón, E. (Eds.). Computational
Neuroscience for Advancing Artificial Intelligence: Models,
Methods and Applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Monsell, S. (2003) Task switching. Trends in Cognitive.
Science 7, 134–40.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a
predictable switch between simple cognitive tasks. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 207-231.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W.
F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current
research and theory (pp. 64–99). New York, NY: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E., and Williams, R.J. (1986).
Learning internal representations by error propagation. In
D.E. Rumelhart and J.L.McClelland (Eds.) Parallel
Distributed Processing. Vol.1. Cambridge. Mass. Bradford
Books.
Saavedra, M. A. (1975). Pavlovian compound
conditioning in the rabbit. Learning and Motivation, 6, 314–
26.
Schneider, D. W., & Logan, G. D. (2005) Modeling task
switching without switching tasks: A short-term priming
account of explicitly cued performance, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 343-367.

1553

