UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The semantic structure of sensory vocabulary in an African language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6684b4zd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Dingemanse, Mark
Majid, Asifa

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The semantic structure of sensory vocabulary in an African language
Mark Dingemanse1 (mark.dingemanse@mpi.nl) and Asifa Majid1,2 (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 6500AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL

Previous semantic classifications of ideophones fail to
answer such questions because they usually do not represent
native speaker knowledge but reproduce the linguistic
categories of the analyst. An example is Alexandre (1966),
who classified ideophones in Bulu (a Bantu language from
Cameroon) into the five-senses folk model of his own native
language: “auditive, visual, tactile, gustative, and olfactive”.
However, since sensory science shows a larger taxonomy of
the senses (Moller, 2002) — including not just the external
senses but also interoception (sensitivity to inner
physiological conditions) and proprioception (sense of
balance and body posture) — we cannot assume the
universal relevance of a Western folk model of perception to
the classification of ideophones. Other studies of the
semantic structure of ideophones have used evidence from
lexical collocations, inferring for instance the sensory
modes of ideophones from the verbs with which they cooccur (Diffloth, 1976; Awoyale, 1983). Such methods are
likely to provide more insight than classifications based on
analysts’ intuitions, but since the verbs may underspecify
the semantic space and since not all ideophones appear in
regular collocation with verbs, they may provide an
incomplete picture.
Recently, some studies have begun to investigate the
semantic structure and sound-symbolic nature of ideophones
in Japanese. In a learning study with infants, Imai et al.
(2008) built novel words on the template of Japanese
ideophones (‘mimetics’) for manners of motion, and found
that these sound-symbolic forms facilitate early verb
learning. Osaka (1990) investigated Japanese ideophones of
crying, laughing, and talking using a similarity judgment
task and found they could be arranged on sensory scales of
intensity. In a follow-up study, Osaka and Osaka (2005)
focused on laughter ideophones using fMRI, and found they
activated striatal reward areas, which they connect to the
image-evoking qualities of ideophones. Although interesting
in their own right, none of these studies address the domain
of ideophones as a whole, nor do they articulate what the
principles of organization within this domain might be. Here
we study a representative set of ideophones from Siwu, a
Kwa language spoken in Ghana, West Africa — a linguistic
region known for its extensive ideophone systems (Blench,
2010). The aim was to explore the semantic structure of the
domain by capturing native speakers’ intuitions.
How might ideophones be organized in the mental
lexicon? One possibility is that ideophones are organized in
terms of sensory perception (Kita, 1997). Another
possibility is that they are organized in terms of semantic
dimensions like activity, potency and evaluation, factors

Abstract
The widespread occurrence of ideophones, large classes of
words specialized in evoking sensory imagery, is little known
outside linguistics and anthropology. Ideophones are a
common feature in many of the world’s languages but are
underdeveloped in English and other Indo-European
languages. Here we study the meanings of ideophones in
Siwu (a Kwa language from Ghana) using a pile-sorting task.
The goal was to uncover the underlying structure of the
lexical space and to examine the claimed link between
ideophones and perception. We found that Siwu ideophones
are principally organized around fine-grained aspects of
sensory perception, and map onto salient psychophysical
dimensions identified in sensory science. The results ratify
ideophones as dedicated sensory vocabulary and underline the
relevance of ideophones for research on language and
perception.
Keywords: semantics; sensory vocabulary; ideophones;
sensory perception; mental lexicon

Introduction
Ideophones are marked words that depict sensory imagery,
like sinisinisini ‘closely woven’ and saaa ‘cool sensation’ in
Siwu, a language of Ghana (Dingemanse, 2011a), or
gorogoro ‘rolling’ and pikapika ‘shiny’ in Japanese (Kita,
1997). These highly specific renditions of sensory
perceptions — the precise texture of an object felt, the
manner of motion of a figure, the visual appearance of a
surface — are a common feature of many of the world’s
languages, with some languages having ideophone
inventories numbering into the thousands
(Doke &
Vilakazi, 1953; Kakehi, Tamori, & Schourup, 1996); but
they are underdeveloped in English and other IndoEuropean languages (Nuckolls, 2004).
The widespread occurrence in natural languages of large
classes of words specialized for depicting sensory
perception is of significance to research examining the
relation between language and perception. Yet, so far,
ideophones have been a secret well-kept from cognitive
science, studied mostly in lesser known languages by field
linguists and anthropologists (Nuckolls, 1996; Voeltz &
Kilian-Hatz, 2001). Although the tight link between
language and perception in ideophones has long been
recognized (Westermann, 1927), the study of their semantic
structure has lagged and important questions remain
unanswered. What is the link between ideophones and
sensory imagery? How should native speakers’ knowledge
of these sensory words be characterized? What aspects of
sensory perception are involved in their representation in the
mental lexicon?

300

commonly found in multidimensional scaling analyses of
affective vocabulary (Osgood, Suci, & Tannenbaum, 1957;
Osaka, 1990). A third possibility is that both principles
operate, with dimensional and categorical properties
working in parallel, perhaps at different levels of
granularity. In order to test these hypotheses, we obtained
similarity judgments of ideophones using a pile-sorting task.
Another matter of investigation concerns the nature of
ideophones as sensory vocabulary. Work in the domain of
touch for instance has identified psychophysical dimensions
such as rough-smooth, hard-soft, springiness, and firmness
(Yoshida, 1968). We considered how the distinctions
encoded by ideophones map onto these dimensions, and
what this may reveal about ideophones as sensory words
and about the construction of sensory vocabularies in
general.

Procedure
The cards were presented to participants in a 6x10 array
arranged according to a fixed random order. While laying
the cards out, the ideophones were read out-loud to make
sure they were familiar to participants. Three items, belele,
lelele, and mɛlɛmɛlɛ, were not always recognized
immediately. When this happened, the ideophones were
presented in an example sentence from the conversational
corpus. Participants were always able to recognize the
words in context.
Instructions were given in Siwu: participants were asked
to arrange the cards into groups of similar items. The
instruction was to “place together words that belong
together, words that are akin” (atɔ̃mɛ wa lòkote, wa lòɖe
manyibi). Participants were given no explicit criteria for
judging similarity and were told they could create as many
piles as they liked with as many items per pile as they
wished. For three participants who asked for clarification,
the sorting procedure was demonstrated using ideophones
not included in the set.
Cards were not literally piled but grouped together on a
flat surface so all items were kept in view. Participants took
between 30 and 70 minutes to group all 58 ideophones.
Once participants had completed their groupings, they were
debriefed and asked to describe each group.

Methods
We used a pile-sorting task (Bernard, 2006; Weller &
Romney, 1988) to collect similarity data for a frequencybased selection of 58 ideophones. Sorting tasks have been
conducted with a wide variety of items, from English nouns
(Miller, 1969) and texture words (Bhushan, Rao, & Lohse,
1997) to Navaho food concepts (Perchonock & Werner,
1969). Hierarchical clustering and multidimensional scaling
were used to analyze the similarity data to uncover the
underlying dimensions used to categorize the items.

Table 1: Siwu ideophones used in the sorting task

Participants

sinisini closely woven (01), pɛpɛɛpɛ precisely (02),
nyanyarĩĩ dirty (03), nyagbalaa pungent/sour (04),
wɔ̃rãwɔ̃rã spotted (05), mɛ̃rɛ̃mɛ̃rɛ̃ tasty (06), yululu cold
(07), pɔtɔpɔtɔ dirty/muddy (08), pɔkɔsɔɔ slow (09),
minimini round (10), gbiim sound of explosion (11),
tagbaraa long (12), gbegbe tough (13), ɖɔbɔrɔɔ soft
(14), belele broad and extended (15), shu sound of
ignition (16), tititi big and wide (17), saaa cool sensation
(18), dzoroo far (19), wosoroo rough (21), gɔdɔrɔ
crooked (21), gbidii excessive activity (22), bebrebee
many (23), mɛlɛmɛlɛ talkative (24), pɔlɔpɔlɔ smooth
(25), pelee completely (26), lelele full to the brim (27),
safaraa rough/coarse-grained (28), gelegele shiny (29),
ɖɛkpɛrɛɛ fine-grained (30), kpɔ sound of impact (31),
kunukunu completely empty (32), wĩrĩwĩrĩ small things
dispersed (33), tsuru sound of sth. rapidly passing by
(34), teteree loud (35), kpãũ big, enormous (36), waa
sound of water gushing (37), fiɛfiɛ silky (38), buaa
tasteless (39), mlamla quickly (40), kananaa silent (41),
krɔ̃krɔ̃ pleasantly smelling (42), kpɔlɔkpɔlɔ slippery (43),
gbugburu tough (44), gbogboro tough (45), kɛkɛi small
(46), kpinakpina black (47), sɔdzɔlɔɔ oblong (48),
giligili round (49), kpokporo hard (50), fututu pure white
(51), miɔmiɔ pointy (52), kpoo silent (53), wurufuu
fluffy (54), kpu sound of impact (55), yuayua burning
sensation (56), nyɛ̃kɛ̃nyɛ̃kɛ̃ very sweet (57), fũɛ̃fũɛ̃ softmalleable (58)

Fourteen participants (ten men), with a mean age of 37.1
years, took part in the sorting task. All were native speakers
of Siwu. All were literate in Siwu and in Ewe, a regional
language of wider communication.

Materials and design
Ideophones are a class of words distinct from nouns and
verbs in the Siwu language. They are formally identifiable
in terms of phonotactics, word forms, expressive
morphology, syntax, and prosody (Dingemanse, 2011b, pp.
133–160). There are at least 400 ideophones in Siwu. It
would clearly be difficult to investigate all ideophones in a
single sorting task. A selection of ideophones was therefore
made using frequency as a criterion, since this is one
measure of the representativeness of the ideophone
inventory.
A total of 58 ideophones were selected as follows: a first
selection included all ideophones which occurred at least
twice in a corpus of five hours of naturally occurring
conversations recorded in informal situations (Dingemanse,
2011b). There were 38 such ideophones. A second selection
included ideophones which occurred more than three times
in responses to elicitation tasks probing different perceptual
domains (Majid & Levinson, 2007, 2011). There were 26
such ideophones. Discounting overlaps between the two sets
left 20 new ideophones, bringing the total at 58 (Table 1).
Each of the 58 ideophones was printed on a 105x35mm card
in Siwu orthography.

301

and SMALL. Many of these clusters also join to form
coherent higher-order groups. Such higher-order clusters
(distances of 20 or lower) include MOUTH-FEEL (merging
SWEET and TASTE), SOUND, STRENGTH, HAPTIC TOUCH
(merging GRAININESS, SURFACE TEXTURE, and MALLEABLE),
SHAPE (merging ROUND and SPATIAL EXTENT), and four
clusters that are extended with one member each: WET
CONSISTENCY, QUIET, QUANTITY, and SIZE. There is a small
residue of words that were rarely grouped with other words,
or grouped in very different ways by participants.
The cluster analysis showed two main things. First, it
showed that sensory perception is the most salient
organizing principle in the domain. This is confirmed by the
descriptions given by participants in the debriefing;
participants explained their groupings in terms of sensory
modalities or acts of sensory perception. Second, it
identified a number of coherent sensory categories (and
interrelations between categories) at a finer grain than
traditional five-senses classifications, providing insight into
the different kinds of sensory imagery encoded by
ideophones.
MANY

Results
Dissimilarity matrices were created for each participant and
then summed to create the equivalence matrix used for
statistical analysis.

Cluster analysis
Hierarchical cluster analysis of the data was performed
using the average-linkage-between-groups method, which
does not presuppose a particular type of structure in the
data. Figure 1 below shows the dendrogram for the cluster
analysis.
0
mɛ̃rɛ̃mɛ̃rɛ̃ ‘tasty’
nyɛ̃kɛ̃nyɛ̃kɛ̃ ‘sweet’
nyagbalaa ‘sour’
buaa ‘tasteless’
saaa ‘cool’
yuayua ‘hot’
kpinakpina ‘black’
fututu ‘pure white’
wɔ̃rãwɔ̃rã ‘spotted’
gelegele ‘shiny’
kpɔ ‘sound of impact’
kpu ‘sound of impact’
gbiim ‘sound of explosion’
tsuru ‘tear drop’
gbugburu ‘tough’
gbogboro ‘tough’
kpokporo ‘hard’
gbegbe ‘strong’
teteree ‘high intensity’
wosoroo ‘rough’
safaraa ‘coarse-grained’
ɖɛkpɛrɛɛ ‘fine-grained’
pɔlɔpɔlɔ ‘smooth’
fiɛfiɛ ‘silky’
sinisini ‘closely woven’
ɖɔbɔrɔɔ ‘soft’
fũɛf̃ ũɛ̃ ‘malleable’
wurufuu ‘fluffy’
minimini ‘spherical’
giligili ‘circular’
sɔdzɔlɔɔ ‘oblong’
miɔmiɔ ‘pointed’
tagbaraa ‘long’
belele ‘long (robe)’
gɔdɔrɔ ‘crooked’
pɔtɔpɔtɔ ‘mushy/soggy’
kpɔlɔkpɔlɔ ‘wet slippery’
nyanyarĩĩ ‘dirty/muddy’
kananaa ‘silent’
kpoo ‘silent’
pɔkɔsɔɔ ‘quiet’
yululu ‘cold’
dzoroo ‘far’
gbidii ‘excessive activity’
mɛlɛmɛlɛ ‘quick to talk’
malamala ‘quick’
pɛpɛɛpɛ ‘precisely’
pelee ‘completely’
kunukunu ‘empty container’
shu ‘sound of ignition’
waa ‘sound of water boiling’
krɔ̃krɔ̃ ‘pleasant smell’
tititi ‘many’
bebrebee ‘many’
lelele ‘much (liquid)’
wĩrĩwĩrĩ ‘small things dispersed’
kɛkɛi ‘small’
kpau ‘big’

5

10

15

20

25

SWEET
MOUTH-FEEL
TASTE
MOUTH-FEEL

COLOUR
SURFACE APPEARANCE

COLLISION
VIOLENT IMPACT
SOUND
TOUGHNESS

Multidimensional scaling
FIRMNESS

Multidimensional scaling was used to test whether
similarity judgments from ideophones were organized in
terms of the three well-known dimensions of affective
meaning: activity, evaluation and potency (Osgood et al.,
1957; Osaka, 1990). A three-dimensional MDS solution
showed an RSQ of .80 and a Kruskal stress value of .21 (for
2 dimensions stress was .27, while for 4 dimensions it was
only slightly lower at .20). Within the MDS analysis, the
major groups identified by the cluster analysis remain
largely intact. This lends additional credibility to the sensory
categories identified there and to the interpretation that
aspects of sensory perception are an important organizing
principle in the domain of ideophones.
Does the MDS analysis additionally support a
dimensional interpretation? Dimension 1 features TASTE and
SHAPE on opposite poles, reinforcing the strong internal
coherence of these clusters and their mutual incompatibility
in terms of sorting decisions. It does not easily yield a
simple dimensional interpretation. Dimension 2 pulls apart a
cluster of SOUND ideophones on one side with SURFACE
APPEARANCE on the other. While this might be construed as
an opposition of events versus states, suggestive of the
dimension of activity, it is more plausible that, just as in
Dimension 1, these particular clusters are pulled apart
simply as a result of their high internal coherence coupled
with their semantic incompatibility. The cluster analysis
supports this interpretation.
The connotative dimensions of evaluation (good/bad) and
potency (strong/weak) do not seem to play a role either. For
instance, if evaluation were relevant, we might expect
ideophones like buàà ‘tasteless’ and nyanyarĩĩ ‘dirty’ to
cluster together, and to be far apart (on one dimension) from
ideophones like mɛ̃rɛ̃mɛ̃rɛ̃ ‘ delicious’ and nyɛ̃kɛ̃nyɛ̃kɛ̃
‘intensely sweet’, but this is not the case. If potency were

STRENGTH
ROUGH
GRAININESS
SMOOTH

HAPTIC TOUCH
SURFACE TEXTURE
TOUCH
SOFT
MALLEABLE

ROUND
SHAPE

ELONGATED
LONG

SPATIAL EXTENT
WET CONSISTENCY
WET CONSISTENCY
SILENCE
QUIET
TEMPERATE?
EXTENT
QUICK
ADVERBIAL

SOUND

MANY
QUANTITY
SMALL
SIZE

Figure 1: Dendrogram using average linkage
All clusters with a relatively high internal similarity
(distances of 10 or lower) can be identified in terms of
aspects of sensory perception: SWEET, TASTE, SURFACE
APPEARANCE (including COLOUR), VIOLENT IMPACT
(including COLLISION), TOUGHNESS, ROUGH, SMOOTH, SOFT,
ROUND, ELONGATED, WET CONSISTENCY, SILENCE, EXTENT,

302

relevant we might expect ideophones that differ mainly in
terms of intensity to be distant from one another, but they
are not.
The nature of the clusters identified both in the cluster
analysis and the MDS analysis provides a likely explanation
of why the generic connotative dimensions may be absent.
The clusters concern aspects of sensory experience from a
diverse range of modalities. The sensory modalities differ in
discrete, qualitative ways, and this appears to be reflected in
our findings.

Sorting task reproduces psychophysical dimensions
The clusters related to haptic touch provide a useful
illustration of the nature of ideophones as sensory
vocabulary. Ideophones encoding haptic touch sensations
are common in Siwu (Dingemanse, 2011a), and are
accordingly well-represented in the frequency-based
selection of ideophones used in the sorting task.
Independently, we know that Siwu speakers describe tactile
stimuli predominantly with ideophones (Dingemanse,
2011b).
Psychophysical research in the domain of haptics has
identified a number of salient dimensions of touch
perception: rough-smooth, hard-soft, springiness, stickyslipperiness, and firmness (Yoshida, 1968; Guest et al.,
2010; Klatzky, Lederman, & Reed, 1987). The clusters
identified through the cluster analysis correspond to these
dimensions quite closely: we find ROUGHNESS,
SMOOTHNESS, SOFTNESS, MALLEABILITY (the equivalent of
springiness), and FIRMNESS. So the distinctions encoded by
texture ideophones appear to map well onto the
psychophysical properties of the domain.
What is it that makes ideophones good at encoding fine
semantic distinctions in ways that reproduce psychophysical
dimensions? One reason may be the nature of ideophones as
a form class in natural languages. Guest et al. (2010) studied
English texture words in order to develop a touch lexicon.
They considered a mix of adjectives (rough, soft), verbs
(burning, vibrating), terms derived from verbs (sticky,
prickly), and source-based adverbs that use simile (sandy,
woolly, furry). They found that when the set of words was
systematically narrowed to improve the coverage of the
touch lexicon, many of the source-based terms were
removed, suggesting that abstract (i.e. non-source-based)
terms and uniformity in linguistic resources may lead to a
better coverage of the semantic-perceptual space. These two
features, abstractness of meaning and uniformity of
linguistic form, are precisely characteristic of ideophones.
Another reason may be that ideophones are special in
their mode of signification. Across languages, ideophones
tend to be produced with prosodic foregrounding and
expressive features like reduplication and lengthening: signs
of the fact that they are depictions, as opposed to
descriptions, of sensory imagery (Kunene, 1965; Nuckolls,
1996; Dingemanse, 2011a). Being depictions, ideophones
often employ several forms of sound-symbolism or iconicity
(Westermann, 1927; Diffloth, 1972; Awoyale, 1983). The
iconic use of verbal material, more gradient and less
arbitrary than ordinary words, may make ideophones
especially fit for representing sensory imagery. Three broad
types of iconic mappings have been identified in Siwu
ideophones (Dingemanse, 2011c), and similar mappings are
found in other ideophone inventories (Tufvesson, 2011).
Such iconic mappings allow ideophones to move beyond the
imitation of singular events towards perceptual analogies
and generalizations of event structure.

Discussion
Ideophones as dedicated sensory words
Our results suggest that sensory perception is the main
organizing principle in the lexical domain of ideophones,
despite other plausible organizing principles. As noted, one
might expect generic dimensions commonly found in
semantic differential studies to be apparent in this domain.
Alternatively, sorting could be done on the basis of other
principles, such as word length (grouping saaa ‘cool
sensation’ with kpoo ‘silence’ or tagbaraa ‘long’ with
pɔkɔsɔɔ ‘slow’) or similarity in sound or spelling (gìlìgìlì
‘circular’ with gelegele ‘shiny’). Neither the generic
dimensions nor the non-semantic features play an
appreciable role in the similarity data. This provides
independent confirmation of claims made in the
anthropological and linguistic literature that ideophones are
dedicated sensory words. It also meshes well with empirical
findings on the use of ideophones. Data from a corpus of
everyday conversations shows that Siwu speakers use
ideophones to demonstrate expertise (communicating very
precisely about perceptual qualities) and also to share in
sensory spectacles in storytelling (Dingemanse, 2011b, pp.
251–300). Both uses rely on the nature of ideophones as
marked words that depict sensory imagery.
Previous explorations of the semantic domain of
ideophones have mostly relied on informal judgments by the
analyst. There is a danger that they do little more than
reproduce folk models of the analysts’ metalanguage. In
contrast, the sorting task allows us to capture a semanticperceptual space based on native speaker judgments. The
fine-grained categories that emerged from the cluster
analysis (for instance FIRMNESS, SMOOTHNESS, or SURFACE
APPEARANCE) are anchored in the data and agree with
speakers’ own explanations of their groupings. Therefore
they have a different ontological status than coarse-grained
labels like Alexandre’s (1966) five-sense classification of
ideophones. Moreover, the cluster analysis brings to light
structures that do not easily fit into such broad
classifications: categories that may combine content from
multiple modalities (e.g. WET CONSISTENCY, which may
combine vision and touch), or categories at a finer grain (as
in the subcategories of HAPTIC TOUCH, which include
SURFACE TEXTURE, MALLEABILITY and GRAININESS).

303

Our findings set the scene for cross-linguistic studies of
ideophones in the future. Are the same aspects of sensory
perception reproduced across languages, suggesting a shared
semantic-perceptual space? Do languages impose their own
organization on the domain? Does the finer organization of
ideophones in specific sensory modalities match relevant
psychophysical dimensions, as we see in Siwu ideophones
for haptic touch? What are the cognitive consequences of
having such dedicated sensory words in terms of mental
representation, production and comprehension? And how do
the design principles of ideophones relate to their fitness to
evoke sensory imagery? The domain of ideophones is ripe
for cross-linguistic investigation of these questions.
Ideophones are an example of the kind of linguistic
structure that is in danger of being overlooked if the
cognitive sciences keep focusing on the very thin slice of
human behavior exhibited by Western populations (Henrich,
Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010; Majid & Levinson, 2010).
Here we hope to have shown that they provide a fruitful
avenue to explore how languages can encode sensory
perception, and that they are a powerful reminder of the fact
that cross-linguistic diversity is an asset rather than an
obstacle in the study of language and mind.

The close link between the structural properties of
ideophones and the deeply sensory nature of their meanings
suggests that ideophones constitute a promising area for
research in embodied cognition and sensory science
(Barsalou, 1999; Kita, 1997; Akita, 2010).

Organizing principles and level of granularity
Earlier, we mentioned three hypotheses about the
organization of ideophones in the mental lexicon: they may
be organized in terms of aspects of sensory perception, in
terms of generic connotative dimensions, or in terms of a
combination of both. Analysis of the similarity judgment
data revealed an array of fine-grained sensory categories,
suggesting that for this set of ideophones, sensory
perception is the most salient organizing principle.
Connotative dimensions like activity, potency and
evaluation, on the other hand, appear to play no role in the
organization of the domain at this level of granularity.
Level of granularity may be a key concept here. The
present study took a selection of high frequency ideophones
across subdomains. Earlier studies, in contrast, have tended
to focus on small subsets of ideophones from circumscribed
semantic domains. Osaka (1990) for instance collected
similarity data for Japanese ideophones in the semantic
domains of talking, crying, and laughing, and found that in
each of these domains it was possible to place the
ideophones on sensory scales of intensity. This is not
surprising: within any sufficiently semantically homogenous
cluster of words, the broad connotative dimensions
identified by Osgood et al. (1957) will likely play some role
(Boster, 2005). This suggests that the third hypothesis,
which holds that ideophones are organized by a combination
of sensory aspects and generic connotative dimensions, is
the most plausible one.
Combining the results from earlier studies and the
findings of the present study, we suggest that the word class
of ideophones as a whole is organized in terms of aspects of
sensory perception, broadly construed; that the semantic
distinctions made by ideophones in specific sensory
domains may closely follow psychophysical properties; and
that connotative dimensions like activity, potency and
evaluation may play a role in the internal organization of
subsets of sensory words that are sufficiently semantically
homogenous.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Mawu people of Akpafu and Lolobi for
supporting research on the Siwu language, and we are
especially grateful to all participants in Mempeasem, Todzi
and Adɔkɔ for their involvement. Mi ndo karabra lo! We
also thank two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.
This work was funded by the Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics.

References
Akita, K. (2010). An embodied semantic analysis of
psychological mimetics in Japanese. Linguistics,
48, 1195–1220. doi:10.1515/LING.2010.039
Alexandre, P. (1966). Préliminaire à une présentation des
idéophones Bulu. In J. Lukas (Ed.), Neue
Afrikanische Studien, Hamburger Beiträge zur
Afrika-Kunde (pp. 9–28). Hamburg: Deutsches
Institut für Afrika-Forschung.
Awoyale, Y. (1983). On the semantic fields of Yoruba
ideophones. Journal of the Linguistic Association
of Nigeria, 2, 11–22.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(04), 577–660.
Bernard, H. R. (2006). Research methods in anthropology.
Rowman Altamira.
Bhushan, N., Rao, A. R., & Lohse, G. L. (1997). The texture
lexicon: Understanding the categorization of visual
texture terms and their relationship to texture
images. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 219–246.
doi:10.1016/S0364-0213(99)80023-8
Blench, R. (2010). The sensory world: ideophones in Africa
and elsewhere. In A. Storch (Ed.), Perception of

Conclusions
We have shown that the lexical space of ideophones is
organized around aspects of sensory perception. The
sensory categories identified through hierarchical cluster
analysis are more fine-grained than previous classifications,
demonstrating the utility of sorting tasks to capture native
speaker intuitions and to map out semantic structures in the
mental lexicon. In addition, several of the clusters that
emerge from the analysis appear to map neatly onto
psychophysical dimensions identified in other research,
suggesting that ideophones constitute a sophisticated
sensory vocabulary.

304

Majid, A., & Levinson, S. C. (2007). Language of
perception: overview of field tasks. In A. Majid
(Ed.), Field Manual Volume 10 (pp. 8–9).
Nijmegen:
Max
Planck
Institute
for
Psycholinguistics.
Retrieved
from
http://fieldmanuals.mpi.nl/volumes/2007/languageof-perception-overview/
Majid, A., & Levinson, S. C. (2010). WEIRD languages
have misled us too. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Majid, A., & Levinson, S. C. (2011). The Senses in
Language and Culture. The Senses and Society,
6(1), 5–18.
Miller, G. A. (1969). A psychological method to investigate
verbal concepts. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 6(2), 169–191. doi:10.1016/00222496(69)90001-7
Moller, A. R. (2002). Sensory systems : anatomy and
physiology. San Diego, Calif.; London: Academic.
Nuckolls, J. B. (1996). Sounds Like Life: Sound-Symbolic
Grammar, Performance, and Cognition in Pastaza
Quechua. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nuckolls, J. B. (2004). To be or to be not ideophonically
impoverished. In Wai Fong Chiang, E. Chun, L.
Mahalingappa, & S. Mehus (Eds.), SALSA XI:
Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Symposium
about Language and Society, Texas Linguistic
Forum (pp. 131–142). Austin.
Osaka, N. (1990). Multidimensional analysis of
onomatopoeia: A note to make sensory scale from
words. Studia phonologica, 24, 25–33.
Osaka, N., & Osaka, M. (2005). Striatal reward areas
activated by implicit laughter induced by mimic
words in humans: a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study. Neuroreport, 16(15), 1621–1624.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957).
The Measurement of Meaning. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
Perchonock, N., & Werner, O. (1969). Navaho systems of
classification: some implications for ethnoscience.
Ethnology, 8(3), 229–242.
Tufvesson, S. (2011). Analogy-making in the Semai
Sensory World. The Senses and Society, 6(1), 86–
95. doi:10.2752/174589311X12893982233876
Voeltz, F. K. E., & Kilian-Hatz, C. (Eds.). (2001).
Ideophones. Typological Studies in Language.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Weller, S. C., & Romney, A. K. (1988). Systematic data
collection. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Westermann, D. H. (1927). Laut, Ton und Sinn in
westafrikanischen Sudansprachen. In F. Boas (Ed.),
Festschrift Meinhof (pp. 315–328). Hamburg: L.
Friederichsen.
Yoshida, M. (1968). Dimensions of tactual impressions (1).
Japanese Psychological Research, 10(4), 123–137.

the Invisible: Religion, Historical Semantics and
the Role of Perceptive Verbs, Sprache und
Geschichte in Afrika (pp. 275–296). Cologne:
Köppe.
Boster, J. S. (2005). Emotion categories across languages.
In C. Lefebvre & H. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of
Categorization in the Cognitive Sciences (pp. 187–
223). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Diffloth, G. (1972). Notes on expressive meaning. Chicago
Linguistic Society, 8, 440–447.
Diffloth, G. (1976). Expressives in Semai. Oceanic
Linguistics Special Publications, (13), 249–264.
Dingemanse, M. (2011a). Ideophones and the aesthetics of
everyday language in a West-African society. The
Senses
and
Society,
6(1),
77–85.
doi:10.2752/174589311X12893982233830
Dingemanse, M. (2011b). The Meaning and Use of
Ideophones in Siwu (PhD dissertation). Radboud
University,
Nijmegen.
Retrieved
from
http://thesis.ideophone.org/
Dingemanse, M. (2011c). Ezra Pound among the Mawu:
Ideophones and Iconicity in Siwu. In P.
Michelucci, O. Fischer, & C. Ljungberg (Eds.),
Semblance and Signification, Iconicity in
Language and Literature (pp. 39–54). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Doke, C. M., & Vilakazi, B. W. (1953). Zulu-English
Dictionary (2d ed.). Johannesburg: Witwatersrand
University Press.
Guest, S., Dessirier, J. M., Mehrabyan, A., McGlone, F.,
Essick, G., Gescheider, G., Fontana, A., et al.
(2010). The development and validation of sensory
and emotional scales of touch perception.
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 73(2),
531–550. doi:10.3758/s13414-010-0037-y
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The
Weirdest People in the World? Behavioral and
Brain
Sciences,
33(2-3),
61–83.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999152X
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning.
Cognition,
109(1),
54–65.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2008.07.015
Kakehi, H., Tamori, I., & Schourup, L. (1996). Dictionary
of Iconic Expressions in Japanese. Berlin/New
York: Mouton.
Kita, S. (1997). Two-dimensional semantic analysis of
Japanese mimetics. Linguistics, 35, 379–415.
Klatzky, R. L., Lederman, S. J., & Reed, C. (1987). There’s
more to touch than meets the eye: The salience of
object attributes for haptics with and without
vision. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 116, 356–369. doi:10.1037/00963445.116.4.356
Kunene, D. P. (1965). The ideophone in Southern Sotho.
Journal of African Languages, 4, 19–39.

305

