UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Comprehension of Adjective Metaphors Is Selectively Affected By Negative Meanings
Associated With Adjectives As Vehicles

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59v7n5cm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sakamoto, Maki
Sumihisa, Miho
Matsumoto, Takuya
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Comprehension of Adjective Metaphors Is Selectively Affected
By Negative Meanings Associated With Adjectives As Vehicles
Maki Sakamoto (sakamoto@inf.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Miho Sumihisa (m_sumihisa@edu.hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Takuya Matsumoto (matsumoto@edu.hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Human Communication, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Akira Utsumi (utsumi@inf.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Abstract
Previous metaphor studies have paid much attention to
nominal metaphors and predicative metaphors and little
attention has been given to adjective metaphors. The most
adjective metaphor studies have only examined how the
acceptability of adjective metaphors can be explained by
the pairing of adjective modifier’s and head noun’s
modalities. Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009) showed that
adjective metaphors, especially those modified by color
adjectives, tend to evoke negative meanings. Sumihisa et al
(2011) examined whether evoking negative meanings is the
unique feature of adjective metaphors through comparison
among nominal metaphors and predicative metaphors for
the Japanese language and revealed that meanings of
metaphors are basically affected by meanings of vehicles,
but when vehicles themselves had neutral meanings,
negative meanings were evoked more frequently for
adjective metaphors among the other types of metaphors.
The purpose of this study, therefore, explores the reason
why adjective metaphors evoke negative meanings more
frequently than the other types of metaphors. For this
purpose, we examined what kind of meanings associated
with topics or vehicles affect the comprehension of
metaphors. Our psychological experiments revealed that
meanings associated from vehicles affect the
comprehension of metaphors. And when metaphorical
expressions have vehicles with positive or negative
meanings, metaphorical expressions show
the same
meanings as the vehicles. On the other hand, when
metaphorical expressions have vehicles with neutral
meaning, only adjective metaphors evoke negative
meanings. Our results suggest that the comprehension of
adjective metaphors is selectively affected by the negative
meanings associated with adjectives as vehicles.
Keywords: adjective metaphors; nominal metaphors;
predicative metaphors; Japanese language; negative
meanings.

Introduction
Metaphor studies in the domain of cognitive science have
paid much attention to nominal metaphors such as “My
job is a jail” (e.g., Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Glucksberg,
2001) and predicative metaphors such as “He shot down
all of my arguments” (e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).

Previous metaphor studies, however, have paid little
attention to adjective metaphors such as “sweet touch”
and how they are comprehended. Some models have been
proposed to explain the mechanism of metaphor
comprehension in cognitive science. Glucksberg and his
colleagues (Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990) propose
categorization theory. This theory addresses mainly
nominal metaphors and argues that people understand
nominal metaphors by seeing the target concept as
belonging to the superordinate metaphorical category
exemplified by the source concept. As for the mechanism
of adjective metaphors, Utsumi & Sakamoto (2007)
propose a two-stage categorization theory and argue that
the comprehension process of adjective metaphors could
be explained as a two-stage categorization process.
Many studies focusing on adjective metaphors have
examined how the acceptability of adjective metaphors
can be explained by the pairing of adjective modifier’s
and head noun’s modalities. Ullmann (1951), in a very
early study on adjective metaphors, proposes a certain
hierarchy of lower and higher perceptual modalities. His
thesis of directionality asserts that a metaphor with a
source domain lower in the hierarchy of sense modalities
than the target domain should tend to be cognitively more
accessible than a metaphor with the reverse direction of
domains. Williams (1976) makes a more differentiated
claim of directionality, in which a similar order of sense
modalities is proposed. Recently, Yu (2003) highlights
cross-linguistic differences when he makes different
directionality claims for different languages (English as
compared to Chinese). Werning, Fleischhauer, &
Beşeoğlu (2006) explore the factors that enhance the
cognitive accessibility of adjective metaphors for German.
Very few studies, however, have attempted to explore
meanings evoked by adjective metaphors.
Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009) is one of the few studies
which have explored meanings evoked by adjective
metaphors. They compare the actual semantic changes
observed through their psychological experiments with
the semantic changes predicted by Abstract Performance
Grammar (APG) model. APG proposed by Osgood
(1980) states the crucial rules to evoke semantic changes
through fine semantic interactions in the processing of
linguistic expressions.
158 Japanese adjective metaphors were used for their
psychological experiment. Participants were asked to rate

2270

the assigned expressions against 15 SD scales such as
“uncomfortable – comfortable” and “dark – light”. The
ratings were made on a 7-point scale ranging from -3
through 0 to +3. The value -3 was regarded as the
negative semantic pole and the value +3 as the positive
semantic pole. All the mean values of vehicles and topics
rated on the 15 SD scales were classified into T=V, T<V,
T>V (T : topics, V : vehicles). Using t-test (two-tailed, the
alpha level .05), the cases which have no significant
difference between the mean value of T and V were
regarded as T=V.
The other codes such as T<V and T>V fall to the cases
which have significant differences between the mean
values of T and V. In order to compare the actual semantic
changes resulting from their experiment with the semantic
changes predicted by APG model, Sakamoto & Utsumi
(2009) classified the actual semantic changes resulting
from their experiment as show in Table 1. Using t-test
(two-tailed, the alpha level .05), they regarded the cases
which have no significant difference between the mean
values of T and metaphors as ‘no change’ (0) and the
cases which have significant differences between them as
changes either to the negative pole (-) or to the positive
pole (+). Table 1 shows the comparison between the
predicted semantic changes and the actual semantic
changes observed through their experiment.
Table 1:Comparison between predicted semantic changes
and actual semantic changes
actual change
Sum
semantic
predicted
intensity
change
0
+
T=V
0
331 17 261 609
T<V
+
366 230 76
672
T>V
119 9
961 1089
Sum
816 256 1298 2370
numbers = cases of SD scales
In order to see the tendency for adjective metaphors to
evoke positive or negative meanings, Sakamoto &
Utsumi (2009) classified all the cases showing different
changes from the APG prediction either into positive
meaning or negative meaning. The cases showing no
change as against the prediction of changing to - were
regarded as evoking a weakly positive meaning, and were
classified into the positive meaning category in the same
way as those which changed to + against the prediction of
changing to -. The cases showing no change against the
prediction of changing to + were regarded as evoking
weakly negative meaning, and were classified into the
negative meaning category in the same way as those
which changed to – against the prediction of changing to
+. As a result, 848 cases which showed changes different
from the APG prediction were classified into 145 positive
meanings and 703 negative meanings. A Chi-square test
showed that the cases showing negative meanings were
significantly more frequent than those showing positive
meanings, χ2 (1, N=848) = 367.175, p < .001. Based on
this result, Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009) suggest that
adjective metaphors tend to evoke negative meanings.
Sumihisa et al. (2011) examined whether evoking
negative meanings is the unique feature of adjective
metaphors. In the experiments, Sumihisa et al. (2011) first
selected nouns as topics to make Japanese metaphorical
expressions. They selected four nouns (e.g. smell (‘nioi’),
moment (‘genzai’), footstep (‘ashioto’), and pose
(‘shisei’)) with neutral meanings among 54 nouns by
psychological experiment. They also conducted another
psychological experiment in which participants were
asked to rate meanings of vehicles only. Verbs, nouns and

adjectives were selected respectively as vehicles with
positive meanings, neutral meanings and negative
meanings. They combined the topics and the vehicles and
made metaphorical expressions.
Sumihisa et al. (2011) conducted a psychological
experiment in which participants evaluate the meanings
of metaphors. Participants were asked to rate the assigned
expressions against 9 SD scales (7 SD scales given in
Table 2 and additional scales “difficult – easy” and
“unfamiliar – familiar”). The ratings were made on a
7-point scale ranging from -3 through 0 to +3. They
regarded the value -3 as the negative semantic pole and
the value +3 as the positive semantic pole.
Table 2: List of SD scales used for the experiment
dislike – like
inelegant - elegant
ugly - beautiful
uncomfortable - comfortable
dark - light
bad - good
sad - glad
Sumihisa et al. (2011) focused on the metaphorical
meanings evoked by the semantic interaction between
topics and vehicles. They classified metaphorical
expressions into the cases showing no semantic change,
those showing the change to the positive semantic pole or
those showing the change to the negative semantic pole.
They conducted t-test (two-tailed, the alpha level .05) to
see semantic changes evoked by the semantic interaction
between topics and vehicles. Since only the topics with
neutral meanings were selected through the
pre-experiment, metaphorical expressions which have no
significant difference between their mean value and value
0 were regarded as metaphors showing no semantic
change (0). And metaphorical expressions which have
significant difference between their mean values and
value 0 were classified into either metaphors showing the
change to the positive semantic pole or those showing the
change to the negative semantic pole.
As a result, when vehicles have positive or negative
meanings, all types of metaphors tend to evoke positive
or negative meanings. However, when vehicles have
neutral meanings, although nominal metaphors tend to
evoke neutral meanings, predicative metaphors and
adjective metaphors tend to evoke negative meanings.
Especially adjective metaphors tend to evoke negative
meanings more frequently. They also classified the
metaphors either into metaphors showing negative
meanings or the others and compared among the three
types of metaphors as shown as Table 3.
Table 3: Number of expressions showing negative
meanings and the other meanings
nominal metaphors
predicative metaphors
adjective metaphors
sum

7
8
17
32

+ or 0
19
19
11
49

sum
26
27
28
81

They revealed that adjective metaphors evoke
significantly more frequently negative meanings than the
other two types of metaphors, χ² = (1, N = 54) = 6.234, p
< .05 for adjective metaphors vs. nominal metaphors, χ² =
(1, N = 55) = 5.357, p < .05 for adjective metaphors vs.
predicative metaphors.
Based on this result, Sumihisa et al. (2011) suggest that
nominal metaphors and predicative metaphors basically
tend to show neutral meanings, while adjective metaphors
tend to show negative meanings.

2271

This study explores the reason why adjective metaphors
evoke negative meanings more frequently than the other
types of metaphors. Utsumi & Sakamoto (2007) argue
that the comprehension process of adjective metaphors
can be explained as a two-stage categorization process.
They speculate the comprehension process of “red voice”
created from the neutral vehicle “red” as follows: the
adjective “red” first evokes an intermediate category “red
things” to which “blood”, “fire”, “passion”, “apple” and
“danger” typically belong. Then exemplars relevant to the
noun “voice” are selected and they evoke a final abstract
category of property like “scary”, “screaming” and
“dangerous”. In this way, adjective metaphors are
understood by not be directly mapped onto the topics
from ad hoc category of vehicles but mediating to an
intermediate category. When meanings of adjective
metaphors were processed in the two-stage categorization
process, exemplars with negative meanings might be
selected among various exemplars belonging to the
intermediate category evoked by adjectives as vehicles.
In this study, therefore, we conducted a psychological
experiment in which participants were asked to choose
words related to meanings of adjective metaphors among
those associated from vehicles and topics. We
hypothesize that even if there were negative and positive
exemplars in an intermediate category, exemplars with
negative meanings tend to be selected to process
meanings of adjective metaphors. As for nominal
metaphors, on the other hand, prototypical exemplars
associated with vehicles tend to be selected since the
people understand nominal metaphors via the
categorization process, namely by seeing the target
concept as belonging to the superordinate metaphorical
category exemplified by the source concept.

Pre-experiment
Topics and Vehicles
We decided to use 4 nouns as topics which were tested as
having neutral meanings by Sumihisa et al. (2011); smell
(“nioi”), moment (“genzai”), footstep (“ashioto”), and
pose (“shisei”).
Candidates of vehicles of nominal, predicative and
adjective metaphors were selected from the Japanese
thesaurus (yamaguchi, 2003). We selected 50 adjectives,
50 nouns and 50 verbs to be used as vehicles.
In order to see the meanings of vehicles we conducted a
psychological experiment. In the experiment, 15 Japanese
males and females, aged 20 – 25, were asked to rate 150
words (50 adjectives, 50 nouns and 50 verbs) against the
9 SD scales; dark-light, dislike-like, inelegant-elegant,
sad-glad, ugly-beautiful, uncomfortable-comfortable,
bad-good, difficult-easy and unfamiliar-familiar. These
SD scales were selected by a psychological experiment
(Sumihisa et al., 2011) in which participants were asked
to choose SD scales for which they can easily see one of
semantic pole as positive and the other semantic pole as
negative.
The ratings were made on a 7-point scale ranging from
-3 through 0 to +3. We regarded the value -3 as the
negative semantic pole and the value +3 as the positive
semantic pole. We conducted t-tests (two-tailed, the alpha
level .05) and regarded the words which have no
significant difference between the mean semantic values
of the words and “0” as words with neutral meanings.
And the words which have significant difference between
their mean value and value 0 were classified into either
words with the positive meaning or those with the
negative meaning.
We selected 5 vehicles with positive meaning, 5 vehicles
with negative meaning and 5 vehicles with neutral

meaning to make nominal, predicative and adjective
metaphors respectively.
As for nominal metaphors, nouns such as fortune
(“kouun”), freedom (“jiyuu”), justice (“seigi”), life
(“inochi”) and dream (“yume”) were selected as vehicles
with positive meaning. Nouns such as faith (“shinkou”),
joke (“joudan”), patience (“nintai”), transient (“mujou”)
and philosophy (“tetsugaku”) were selected as vehicles
with neutral meaning. And nouns such as evil (“aku”),
hell (“jigoku”), dissatisfied (“fuman”), self-preservation
(“hoshin”) and downfall (“metsubou”) were selected as
vehicles with negative meaning.
As for predicative metaphors, verbs such as appear
(“arawareru”), believe (“shinjiru”), flutter (“tokimeku”),
clear (“hareru”) and laugh (“warau”) were selected as
vehicles with positive meaning. Verbs such as make
merry (“ukareru”), dry (“kawaku”), cut fine (“kizamu”)
and cry (“naku”) were selected as vehicles with neutral
meaning. And verbs such as be irritated (“iradatsu”),
doubt (“utagau”), remain (“todomaru”), betray
(“negaeru”) and warp (“yugamu”) were selected as
vehicles with negative meaning.
As for adjective metaphors, adjectives such as new
(“atarashii”), sweet (“airashii”), cool (“kakkoii”), white
(“shiroi”) and equal (“hitoshii”) were selected as vehicles
with positive meaning. Adjectives such as black (“kuroi”),
hard (“katai”), fine (“komakai”), long (“nagai”) and deep
(“fukai”) were selected as vehicles with neutral meaning.
And adjectives such as stinking (“kusai”), dull (“nibui”),
worn-out (“boroi”), shabby (“misuborashii”) and
disgraceful (“mittomonai”) were selected as vehicles with
negative meaning.

Words associated from vehicles and topics

We examine what kind of meanings associated with
topics or vehicles affect the comprehension of metaphors.
In order to research the words associated from vehicles
and topics, we conducted a pre-experiment. 30 Japanese
males and females, aged 20 – 24, were asked to answer 3
or more words associated from 45 vehicles and 4 topics.
We decided to use for the later experiment the words
associated from vehicles and topics chosen by 2 or more
participants. Then we conducted another pre-experiment
to evaluate the meaning of the words associated from
vehicles and topics. 60 Japanese males and females, aged
20 – 26, were classified into 2 groups. 107 or 108 words
assigned to each group and participants were asked to rate
the assigned words against 7 SD scales (in table 2). Based
on the result of this experiment, we classified the words
into the words with positive meaning, the words with
negative meaning and the words with neutral meaning.
We conducted t-tests (two-tailed, the alpha level .05) and
regarded the words which have no significant difference
between the mean semantic values of the words and “0”
as words with neutral meanings. And the words which
have significant difference between their mean value and
value 0 were classified into either words with the positive
meaning or those with the negative meaning.

Experiment
Metaphorical expressions
We combined vehicles and topics which were selected by
pre-experiments and made nominal, predicative and
adjective metaphors. Then we conducted a psychological
experiment in order to see what kind of meanings
associated with topics or vehicles affect the
comprehension of metaphors. In the experiment, 60
Japanese males and females, aged 20 - 26, were assigned
to 180 metaphorical expressions and were asked to
choose words which they believe to be related to the

2272

meaning of each metaphorical expression among those
associated from vehicles and topics. Participants were
also asked to rate meanings of the 180 metaphorical
expressions respectively against 9 SD scales (7 SD scales
given in table 2 and additional scales “difficult – easy”
and “unfamiliar – familiar”).

Results and Discussion

meanings and negative meanings, (χ2(1)=6.231,p<.05 (+
vs. -) ). However, there was no significant difference
between the number of metaphorical expressions which
showed neutral meanings and negative meanings,
( χ2(1)=.889,p>.05 (0 vs. -)).
These results show that nominal metaphors are basically
affected by the meaning of vehicles and tend to show
neutral meanings. Adjective metaphors show negative
meanings, although meanings of vehicles are neutral.

Meanings evoked by metaphors
We classified metaphorical expressions into the
metaphorical expressions which have vehicles with
neutral meaning, positive meaning and negative meaning.
Then, we analyzed the meaning of metaphorical
expressions and the words associated from vehicles and
topics. We conducted t-test (two-tailed, the alpha
level .05) to see semantic changes evoked by the semantic
interaction between topics and vehicles. Since only the
topics with neutral meanings were selected through the
pre-experiment, metaphorical expressions which have no
significant difference between their mean value and value
0 were regarded as metaphors showing no semantic
change (0). And metaphorical expressions which have
significant difference between their mean values and
value 0 were classified into either metaphors showing the
change to the positive semantic pole or those showing the
change to the negative semantic pole.

Metaphors using vehicles with positive meanings
Table 5 shows the number of metaphors which show the
positive, negative and neutral meanings when vehicles are
positive. As for the metaphors in which vehicles of their
own have positive meanings, the proportion of the
metaphors showing positive meanings was the highest. As
for the total number, Chi-square tests were conducted
among the expressions showing positive (+), negative (-),
and neutral (0) meanings. As a result, there was no
significant difference between nominal metaphors,
predicative metaphors and adjective metaphors, (χ2(4，
N=60)=4.034,p>.05). The result shows that, as for
vehicles with positive meanings, the three types of
metaphors tend to show positive meanings.
Table 5: Number of metaphors showing positive, negative
and neutral meanings when vehicles are positive

Metaphors using vehicles with neutral meanings
Table 4 shows the number of 3 types of metaphors which
show the positive, negative or neutral meanings when
vehicles are neutral.
Table 4: Number of metaphors showing positive, negative
and neutral meanings when vehicles are neutral

Metaphors using vehicles with negative meanings

Table 6 shows the number of metaphors which show the
positive, negative and neutral meanings when vehicles are
negative. As for the metaphors in which vehicles of their
own have negative meanings, all the metaphors showed
negative meanings.

As for the metaphors in which vehicles of their own have
neutral meanings, the proportion of the metaphors
showing the neutral meanings was the highest.
As for the total number, a Chi-square test was conducted
among the expressions showing positive (+), negative (-),
and neutral (0) meanings. As a result, there were
significant differences between the number of nominal
metaphors and that of predicative metaphors (χ2(1 ，
N=40)=8.533,p<.05) and also between the number of
nominal metaphors and that of adjective metaphors, (χ2(1，
N=40)=11.905,p<.05). However, there was no significant
difference between the number of predicative metaphors
and that of adjective metaphors, (χ2(1，N=40)=0.400,
p>.05).
As for nominal metaphors, the result of Chi-square tests
showed that the metaphorical expressions with neutral
meaning were significantly more than the other
expressions, (χ2(1)=15.211,p<.05(+ vs. 0),χ2(1)=15.211,
p<.05 (- vs. 0)). As for predicative metaphors, there was
no significant difference among the number of
metaphorical expressions which showed positive meaning,
negative
meaning
and
neutral
meaning,
(χ2(1)=.181,p>.05(+ vs. 0), χ2(1)=.250,p>.05(0 vs. -) ,
χ2(1)=1.923,p>.05(+ vs. -) ). As for the adjective
metaphors, there was significant difference among the
number of metaphorical expressions which showed
positive
meanings
and
neutral
meanings
(χ2(1)=2.778,p<.05 (+ vs. 0)), and the number of
metaphorical expressions which showed positive

Table 6: Number of metaphors showing positive, negative
and neutral meanings when vehicles are negative

Words associated with metaphors

The results described so far showed that negative
meanings were evoked more frequently for adjective
metaphors among the other types of metaphors when
vehicles were neutral. This section discusses the results of
the psychological experiment in which participants were
asked to choose words related to meanings of
metaphorical expressions among those associated from
vehicles and topics. We want to see, even if negative and
positive exemplars were associated with vehicles or
topics, exemplars with negative meanings tend to be
selected to process meanings of adjective metaphors.

Nominal metaphors

The second left column of Table 7 shows the total number
of the words associated from vehicles or topics and the
second right column the number of words which
participants selected as those related to meanings of
nominal metaphors.

2273

Table 7: the number of the words which were associated
from vehicles or topics

A Chi-square test was conducted among the words
which were associated from vehicles and topics. The
result showed that words associated with vehicles were
selected significantly more frequently than those with
topics, (χ2(1，N=1545)=381.063，p<.05).
We examined the frequency in which positive, neutral or
negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected by participants when they process the meanings
of nominal metaphors created from vehicles with positive
meaning. Table 8 shows the results. The result of
Chi-square tests showed that the associative words with
positive meaning were significantly more frequently
selected than the others, (χ2(1，N=436)=76.926,p<.05 (+
vs. 0), χ2(1，N=431)=104.972,p<.05 (+ vs. -)).
Table 8: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have positive meaning

The second left column of Table 11 shows the total
number of the words associated from vehicles or topics
and the second right column the number of words which
participants selected as those related to meanings of
predicative metaphors.
Table 11: the number of the words which were associated
from vehicles or topics

The result of Chi-square tests showed that words
associated with vehicles were selected more frequently
than those with topics. (χ2(1，N=1450)=224.275，p<.05)
We examined the frequency in which positive, neutral or
negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected by participants in the same way as nominal
metaphors. Table 12 shows that in the comprehension of
predicative metaphors created from vehicles with positive
meaning words with positive meanings were significantly
more frequently selected than the others, (χ2(1 ，
N=409)=44.675,p<.05
(+
vs.
0),
χ2(1 ，
N=412)=69.834,p<.05 (+ vs. -)).
Table 12: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have positive meaning

Table 9 shows the frequency in which positive, neutral
or negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected by participants when they process meanings of
nominal metaphors created from vehicles with neutral
meaning.
Table 9: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have neutral meaning

As for the number of the associative words when
vehicles have neutral meaning, there was no significant
difference among each number of the associative words
with positive, neutral and negative meaning, (χ2(1 ，
N=361)=1.175,p>.05 (+ vs. 0)，χ2(1，N=249)=2.292,p>.05
(0 vs. -)，χ2(1，N=372)=8.598,p=.05 (+ vs. -)).
When the vehicles have negative meaning, table 10
shows the result of the number of the associative words.
The results of Chi-square tests showed that the
associative words with negative meaning were
significantly more frequently selected than the others, (χ2
(1,N=348)=29.264,p<.05(0 vs. -), χ2(1,N=392)=106.940,
p<.05 (+ vs. -)).
Table 10: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have negative meaning

Table 13 shows the frequency in which positive, neutral
or negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected by participants when they process meanings of
predicative metaphors created from vehicles with neutral
meaning. The results of Chi-square tests showed that
there was no significant difference among each number of
the associative words with positive, neutral and negative
meaning,(χ2(1,N=387)=.000,p>.05(+vs.0),χ2(1,N=233)=.1
04,p>.05(0 vs.-),χ2(1，N=384)=.131,p>.05 (+ vs. -)).
Table 13: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have neutral meaning

Table 14 shows the frequency in which positive, neutral
or negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected by participants when they process meanings of
predicative metaphors created from vehicles with
negative meanings. The results of Chi-square tests
showed that words with negative meaning were selected
significantly more frequently than the others, (χ2(1，
N=245)=25.136,p<.05(0 vs. -),χ2(1N=352)=40.022,p<.05
(+ vs. -)).
Table 14: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have negative meaning

The results so far suggest that the comprehension of
nominal metaphors is basically affected by the
prototypical exemplars associated with vehicles.

Predicative metaphors

These results for predicative metaphors suggest that the

2274

Table 18: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have negative meaning

comprehension of predicative metaphors is basically
affected by the exemplars associated with vehicles.

Adjective metaphors

Table 15 shows the total number of the words associated
from vehicles or topics and the number of words which
participants selected as those related to meanings of
adjective metaphors.
Table 15: the number of the words which were associated
from vehicles or topics

The result of Chi-square tests showed that words
associated with vehicles were selected more frequently
than those with topics, (χ2(1,N=1459)=128.193，p<.05).
Table 16 shows the frequency in which positive, neutral
or negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected by participants when they process meanings of
adjective metaphors created from vehicles with positive
meanings. Chi-square tests showed that words with
positive meaning were selected significantly more
frequently than the others,(χ2(1,N=400)=32.967,p<.05 (+
vs. 0)，χ2(1，N=408)=141.638,p<.05 (+ vs. -)).
Table 16: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have positive meaning

Conclusion
This study explored the reason why adjective metaphors
evoke negative meanings more frequently than the other
types of metaphors. The results showed that exemplars
with negative meanings among various exemplars tend to
be selected to process meanings of adjective metaphors,
This result suggests that, unlike nominal metaphors
processed by the categorization theory, adjective
metaphors are processed by the two-stage categorization
theory (Utsumi & Sakamoto, 2007), in which exemplars
with negative meanings are selected among various
exemplars belonging to the intermediate category evoked
by adjectives as vehicles. We still do not know why
exemplars with negative meanings are used to process
meanings of adjective metaphors.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research B (No.23300098) from the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.

References

Table 17 shows the frequency in which positive, neutral
or negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected when participants process meanings of adjective
metaphors created from vehicles with neutral meanings.
Although vehicles were neutral, words with negative
meaning were selected significantly more frequently than
the others, (χ2(1,N=262)=7.162,p<.05(0 vs. -), χ2(1 ，
N=360)=9.089,p<.05 (+ vs. -)).
Table 17: the number of the associative words when
vehicles have neutral meaning

Table 18 shows the frequency in which positive, neutral
or negative words associated with vehicles or topics were
selected by participants when they process meanings of
adjective metaphors created from vehicles with negative
meanings. Chi-square tests showed that words with
negative meaning were selected significantly more
frequently than the others, (χ2(1, N=277)=27.380, p<.05
(0 vs. - ), χ2(1，N=378)=30.959,p<.05 (+ vs. - )).
Chi-square tests showed that words with negative
meaning were selected significantly more frequently than
the others,(χ2(1, N=277)=27.380, p<.05 (0 vs. - ), χ2(1，
N=378)=30.959,p<.05 (+ vs. - )).
These results suggest that adjective metaphors are
different from nominal and predicative metaphors in the
comprehension where words with negative meanings tend
to be selected although vehicles themselves are neutral.

Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of
metaphor. Psychological Review, 112(1), 193-216.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative
language: From metaphors to idioms. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical
comparisons:
Beyond
similarity.
Psychological Review, 97, 3-18.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Osgood, C. E. (1980). The cognitive dynamics of
synesthesia and metaphor. In R. P. Honeck & R. R.
Hoffman (Eds.), Cognition and figurative language (pp.
203-238). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sakamoto, M., & Utsumi, A. (2009). Cognitive effects of
synesthetic metaphors evoked by the semantic
interaction. In Proceeding of the 31st Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, 1593-1598.
Sumihisa, M., Tsukurimichi, H., Utsumi, A., & Sakamoto,
M. (2011). Is Evoking Negative meanings the Unique
Feature of Adjective metaphors?. In Proceedings of the
33 rd Annual Meeting of Cognitive Science Society,
2655-2660.
Ullmann, S. (1951). The principles of semantics. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Utsumi, A., Sakamoto, M. (2007). Computational
evidence for two-stage categorization as a process of
adjective metaphor comprehension. In Proceeding of
the 2nd European Cognitive Science Conference, 77-82.
Werning, M., Fleischhauer, J., & Beşeoğlu, H. (2006).
The cognitive accessibility of synaesthetic metaphors.
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2365-2370.
Yamaguchi, T. (2003). Nihongo Dai-Thesaurus (Japanese
Thesaurus), Tokyo: Taishukan Shoten. (in Japanese).
Yu, N. (2003). Synesthetic metaphor: A cognitive
perspective.Journal of Literary Semantics,32(1), 19-34.

2275

