UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The persisting benefits of using multiple-choice tests as learning events

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/50d9x93k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Little, Jeri
Ligon Bjork, Elizabeth

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Persisting Benefits of Using Multiple-Choice Tests as Learning Events
Jeri L. Little (jerilittle@wustl.edu)
Department of Psychology, Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1125, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO 63130-4899

Elizabeth Ligon Bjork (elbjork@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
1285 Franz Hall, Box 951563, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563

research has indicated that multiple-choice testing may have
a benefit for later overall performance that is not produced
by the taking of prior cued-recall tests: namely, not only
improving the retention of the information tested but also
that of non-tested, but related, information—an outcome
that would seem to be particularly desirable in educational
contexts. When, for example, instructors give quizzes or
practice tests to be followed later in the course by a more
comprehensive exam, they are likely to ask questions about
related information instead of (or in addition to) questions
about the specific information tested earlier. Thus, it seems
critical that the use of prior testing in educational contexts
should help to improve the retention of both types of
information.
With respect to the question of how retrieving some
information affects the later retention of non-tested related
information, previous research has demonstrated that the
effects can be negative—that is, answering a cued-recall
question can lead to impaired recall of competitive related
information on a later test, a finding referred to as retrievalinduced forgetting (Anderson, Bjork, & Bjork, 1994). Even
in cases in which retrieval-induced forgetting does not
occur, however, the retention of non-tested related
information is rarely facilitated as a consequence of a cuedrecall test, especially when such non-tested information has
a competitive relationship with the tested information. (For
exceptions to this finding when tested and non-tested related
questions were created to be facilitative, see Chan,
McDermott, & Roediger, 2006, and Chan, 2009.)
In contrast to such findings for cued-recall tests, however,
Little, Bjork, Bjork, and Angello (in press) recently
demonstrated that—in addition to improving retention of
previously tested information—taking an initial multiplechoice test, as compared to taking an initial cued-recall test,
can improve retention of related information when the
answers to the competitive related questions have occurred
as incorrect alternatives in the initial multiple-choice test.
Although these findings have clear implications for
educational practice, particularly how an instructor might
construct a practice exam, the procedure used by Little et al.
employed a delay that is considered to lack educational
realism (e.g., 5 min). Thus, a primary goal of the present
research was to assess whether the demonstrated retention
benefits (particularly for competitive related information)
occurring as a consequence of taking multiple-choice

Abstract
Taking a test tends to improve the retention of the tested
information. Additionally, taking a test often influences the
later retention of non-tested information, provided such
information is related to the tested information in a specific
manner. To illustrate, recent research has demonstrated that
multiple-choice tests containing competitive alternatives can
improve retention of both tested and non-tested information
pertaining to such incorrect alternatives at least over a short
delay. The present research investigated whether such
improvements in retention would persist with a delay more
likely to occur in educational contexts (i.e., 48 hr). Taking an
initial multiple-choice test improved retention more than a
comparable cued-recall test—for both previously tested and
related information—and over both short and long delays.
Moreover, misinformation effects seen for the multiple-choice
test at the short delay were reduced. These results thus have
important implications for the use of multiple-choice tests as
learning opportunities.
Keywords: Testing; test effects; multiple-choice; retrievalinduced forgetting, retrieval-induced facilitation

Introduction
Taking a test does more than assess one’s knowledge: It can
also improve one’s long-term retention of the tested
information. Not all tests, however, are equally beneficial
in this manner. For example, more open-ended tests (e.g.,
cued-recall), in general, have been shown to improve longterm retention more than multiple-choice tests (see metaanalyses by Anderson & Biddle, 1975; Hamaker, 1986).
Moreover, some research has shown that taking multiplechoice tests can actually harm later performance on openended tests by exposing the test takers to misinformation in
the form of incorrect, but plausible, answer choices, with the
consequence of such information sometimes being intruded
as incorrect responses to later cued-recall questions—
findings referred to as misinformation effects (e.g.,
Roediger & Marsh, 2005). Thus, multiple-choice tests are
often accused of not only being less effective for learning
than are more open-ended types of tests, but also to risk
negative misinformation effects, bringing their use as
learning tools in educational contexts into question.
Although, as indicated, multiple-choice tests can produce
misinformation effects on later open-ended tests, research,
in general, has shown that the positive effects of multiplechoice testing (as compared to no testing) outweigh any
such negative effects they engender. Furthermore, recent

683

tests—compared to cued-recall tests—would persist at more
educationally realistic delays.

Although one might wonder if the facilitated retention of
related information observed by Little et al. (in press) might
have occurred owing simply to the exposure of those
answers as incorrect alternatives during the initial multiplechoice test, a study by Little and Bjork (2010) provides
evidence that the benefit for the retention of related
information would not have occurred for this reason. Little
and Bjork manipulated whether the incorrect alternatives
were competitive or non-competitive for a given question,
with the expectation that alternatives would need to be
competitive for facilitation to occur. To illustrate, students
answered questions (e.g., Which outer planet was
discovered by mathematical predictions rather than direct
observation? Answer: Neptune) with competitive
alternatives (e.g., Neptune, Uranus, Saturn) or with noncompetitive alternatives (e.g., Neptune, Mercury, Mars), and
they were better able to answer a later related question (for
which Uranus or Mercury, respectively, were the correct
answers) when the answer to that related question had
served as a competitive alternative versus as a noncompetitive alternative on the initial multiple-choice test.
Thus, simple prior exposure to the incorrect alternatives
cannot explain the observed results: Competitive
alternatives seem to trigger the retrieval processes that
support the improved retention of information pertaining to
those incorrect alternatives.
The results of the experiment by Little and Bjork (2010),
although theoretically informative, do not address the
question of concern in the present research: namely, whether
such effects persist over educationally realistic durations.
On the one hand, the pattern of their results suggests that the
presence of competitive alternatives on the initial multiplechoice test induces learners to engage in both deep
processing of the choices and spontaneous recall of
information pertaining to those choices, both of which
might promote long-term retention. On the other hand, the
pattern of results observed by Little et al. (in press, Exp. 1)
might not persist. Their observation of a benefit of multiplechoice testing over cued-recall testing might reflect, in part,
a temporary impairment in the recall of information related
to the cued-recall questions, as other research has suggested
that such retrieval-induced forgetting does not persist (Chan,
2009; MacLeod & Macrae, 2001). Chan, for example,
found that although forgetting occurred as a consequence of
an initial cued-recall test when the retention interval was
short (i.e., 20 min), forgetting was not observed when the
interval was long (i.e., 24 hrs). Furthermore, when
forgetting did not occur at a short delay, facilitation
emerged at a longer delay. Thus, it is possible that Little et
al.’s observed pattern of a benefit of multiple-choice testing
over cued-recall testing would be eliminated when retention
is assessed at a delay longer than 5-20 minutes.

Retention of Non-tested Related Information
Although the effect of testing on the retention of both tested
and related information was thoroughly explored in the
1960s and 70s (e.g., see literature on the use of adjunct
questions, Anderson & Biddle, 1975; Frase, 1971; Hamaker,
1986; Rothkopf, 1970), interest in this topic has recently
been renewed, not only because of the implications for
educational practice, but also, in light of the finding of
retrieval-induced forgetting (Anderson et al., 1994), to gain
a better understanding of the circumstances under which an
initial test might improve or impair retention of related
information (e.g., Carroll, Campbell-Ratcliffe, Murnane, &
Perfect, 2007; Chan et al., 2006; Chan, 2009; Little, Storm,
& Bjork, 2011).
The research by Little et al. (in press), in which they
directly compared the effects on later recall of taking an
initial cued-recall test versus a multiple-choice test
following study of a passage, provides some insight into this
issue. Because retrieval-induced forgetting seems to depend
upon the occurrence of a competitive relationship between
tested and non-tested related information (see, e.g., Storm,
2010), Little et al. specifically constructed related question
pairs so that one question in the pair would have a
competitive relationship with the other question in the pair.
For example, given a passage about Saturn, one question
would ask the participant “how long it takes Saturn to
revolve around the Sun” to which the correct answer is “30
Earth years,” and the other question would ask “how long it
takes Saturn to rotate on its axis” to which the correct
answer is “10 Earth hours.” On the initial multiple-choice
tests, the answer to the related question appeared as one of
the incorrect alternatives (e.g., How long does it take Saturn
to rotate on its axis? a. 10 Earth hours, b. 88 Earth days, c.
176 Earth days, d. 30 Earth years).
Little et al. hypothesized that the presence of competitive
alternatives as answer choices on the multiple-choice
question would induce students to think deeply about the
question and alternatives—perhaps not only recalling
information about why the correct alternative is right, but
also why the incorrect alternatives are wrong—with this
spontaneous recall of information pertaining to incorrect
alternatives serving as a learning event for that information
and potentially improving its future recall. In contrast, they
hypothesized that a cued-recall test would not afford the
opportunity for such beneficial processing of related
competitive information; thereby, perhaps making it subject
to retrieval-induced forgetting. And, indeed, their findings
supported this type of analysis: Whereas the taking of an
initial cued-recall test following study of the passage led to
impaired later recall of non-tested competitive information
(Exp. 1), the taking of a multiple-choice test after reading
the passage not only spared such information from
forgetting (Exp. 1), but facilitated its retention (Exp. 2).

Retention of Previously Tested Information
In addition to assessing the effect of initial testing on the
later recall of related information, we were also interested in
its effect on previously tested information. Specifically, we

684

also wanted to assess whether the benefit of multiple-choice
testing compared to cued-recall testing observed by Little et
al. (Exp. 1) would persist over a long delay. If, as has been
suggested (e.g., Foos & Fischer, 1988), cued-recall tests
involve deeper processing than do multiple-choice tests,
then such an outcome would seem unlikely; that is,
improved retention of the tested information would seem
more likely to persist as a consequence of a cued-recall test
than as a consequence of a multiple-choice test (see, e.g.,
Roediger & Karpicke, 2006), which might lead to a reversal
in the direction of the effect.

same topic (e.g., geysers) and had the same four alternatives
(e.g., Old Faithful, Steamboat Geyser, Castle Geyser, and
Daisy Geyser), but different correct answers (e.g., What is
the tallest geyser in Yellowstone National Park? Answer:
Steamboat Geyser; and, What is the oldest geyser in
Yellowstone National Park? Answer: Castle Geyser). For
each passage, the questions in each pair were randomly
assigned to a different 10-item set. Cued-recall questions
were the same as the multiple-choice ones, but without
alternatives provided.

Procedure
Misinformation: A Negative Consequence of
Multiple-choice Testing

All participants were given 6 min to read each of the three
passages in immediate succession, being told to spend the
full time reading and studying. After this initial study
phase, they were given a 10-item multiple-choice test for
one passage and a 10-item cued-recall test for another
passage (with each test containing all the items in one of the
question sets for that passage). Questions were shown on
the computer screen one at a time for 24 s, and participants
typed in their responses, being instructed to spend the full
time thinking about the question and their answer. Each
question was answered twice (as is common in studies of
retrieval-induced forgetting) such that participants answered
each of the ten questions once, and then answered each
question again, but in a different order.
After taking the initial multiple-choice and cued-recall
tests, all participants engaged in a non-verbal 5-min
distractor task of maze completion. Then, participants
randomly assigned to the 5-min delay condition
immediately took the final test; those randomly assigned to
the 48-hr delay condition were excused, with the instruction
to return 48 hrs later.
On the final test, participants answered 60 cued-recall
questions, with the questions presented one at a time on the
computer screen. Of the 20 final-test questions associated
with the passage that received an initial cued-recall test, half
were identical to the 10 cued-recall questions initially asked
about that tested passage, while the other half consisted of
the related questions that had not been presented on the
initial cued-recall test (i.e., the remaining questions from the
set of 10-paired questions constructed for that passage). Of
the 20 final-test questions associated with the passage that
received an initial multiple-choice test, half were identical to
the 10 multiple-choice questions initially asked about the
tested passage (except they were now asked as cued-recall
questions without alternatives presented), while the other
half consisted of the related questions that had not been
presented on the initial multiple-choice test (i.e., the
remaining questions from the set of 10-paired questions
constructed for that passage). Of the 20 final-test questions
related to the non-tested passage, all were previously nontested and served as baseline control items.
As the later recall of non-tested related information was
most crucial to our research questions, the non-tested
questions from the tested passages were tested in the first
half of the test, along with half of the non-tested control

Finally, multiple-choice tests can result in misinformation
effects (Roediger & Marsh, 2005) and seem particularly
prone to do so when feedback is not provided (Butler &
Roediger, 2008). Thus, another goal of the present research
was to assess the influence of a longer retention interval on
the prevalence of misinformation effects.

The Present Experiment
In summary, Little et al. (in press) claimed that multiplechoice tests should be exonerated—at least from the
criticisms involving their use in learning, but they used a
retention interval that has limited application for educational
purposes. In the present experiment, we assessed whether
their observed benefits of taking a multiple-choice test over
taking a cued-recall test or no test at all would persist over a
longer retention interval. Additionally, we assessed the
occurrence of misinformation at these two retention
intervals.

Method
Participants and Design
Seventy-two undergraduates at the University of California,
Los Angeles, who were all recruited for a two-session study,
participated for either partial course credit or payment.
Each participant read three passages, followed immediately
by two initial tests: a cued-recall test for one passage and a
multiple-choice test for another passage (the remaining
passage was not tested initially and served as the control
condition). After a delay (either 5-min or 48-hr), all
participants took a final test that included previously tested
questions and previously non-tested related questions
(pertaining to multiple-choice questions for one passage and
cued-recall questions for another passage), and non-tested
questions from the non-tested passage.

Materials
The same materials as used by Little and Bjork (2011, Exp.
3) were employed: Three passages of approximately 800
words each about Saturn, Yellowstone National Park, and
stimulant drugs with ten pairs of multiple-choice questions
for each passage. The two multiple-choice questions in
each pair were semantically related in that both tested the

685

questions, to which their performance would be compared.
Previously tested questions were tested in the second half of
the test, along with the remaining non-tested control
questions, to which their performance would be compared.
The order in which the passages were studied, the passages
assigned to the different testing conditions, the order in
which the tests were administered, and which 10-item
question set was presented during the initial tests were
counterbalanced across participants.

ANOVA, however, did not reveal this apparent interaction
between testing condition (cued-recall vs. multiple-choice
vs. control) and delay (5 min vs. 48 hr), to be reliable, F(2,
69) = 1.97, p > .05. A significant main effect of testing
condition, however, was obtained, F(2, 69) = 43.73, ηp² =
0.56, p < .01. Most importantly, taking a multiple-choice
test was better for retention of previously tested information
than was taking a cued-recall test, t(71) = 4.32, d = 0.51, p <
.01.
That performance for questions previously tested with a
cued-recall test did not appear to differ when assessed at a
5-min delay versus a 48-hr delay is noteworthy, indicating
the effectiveness of cued-recall tests for the retention of
tested information and consistent with findings that items
successfully retrieved at short delays tend to remain
accessible at longer delays (e.g., Halamish & Bjork, 2011;
Kornell, Bjork, & Garcia, 2011).

Results
Initial Test Performance
Participants in the 5-min and 48-hr delay conditions
correctly answered 63% (SD = 18%) and 66% (SD = 19%)
of the questions on the initial multiple-choice test,
respectively. Participants in the 5-min and 48-hr delay
conditions correctly answered 40% (SD = 21%) and 39%
(SD = 18%) of the questions on the initial cued-recall test,
respectively. As would be expected, initial test performance
did not differ between the two retention-interval conditions.

Final Test Performance for Non-tested Related
Information
Results relevant to our primary objective of testing whether
the finding that taking a multiple-choice test improves
retention of non-tested information more than does taking a
cued-recall test with a short retention interval between
initial and final tests would replicate, and, if so, to assess
whether such benefits would persist with a longer retention
interval are shown in Figure 2. As can be seen there,
information that was related to questions on an initial
multiple-choice test appeared to be better recalled than was
information related to questions on an initial cued-recall test
or information from the non-tested control passage, both at a
5-min delay and at a 48-hr delay.

Final Test Performance for Previously Tested
Information

Correct Performance
Percentages

Final-test performance for previously tested information and
comparable control information is presented in Figure 1. As
indicated there, taking an initial test improved performance
for those previously tested items on the later test, as
compared to not taking an initial test, regardless of the type
of initial test taken (cued-recall or multiple-choice) or the
delay from initial test to the final test (5 min or 48 hr).
Interestingly, although performance appeared to be lower
at a 48-hr delay than at a 5-min delay for questions initially
presented in a multiple-choice test and for control questions
(i.e., questions not previously tested), no forgetting appeared
to occur for those items initially presented in a cued-recall
test, suggesting a possible interaction. A 3 × 2 mixed-model

Correct Performance
Percentages

60
50
40

10
0

40
30
20
10
0

cued-recall
multiple-choice
control (no initial test)

5 min
48 hr
Retention Interval

30
20

50

cued-recall
multiple-choice
control (no initial test)

Figure 2: Correct performance percentages for non-tested
related information (and comparable non-tested control
information) as a consequence of the testing condition
(cued-recall, multiple-choice, or no-test control) and the
retention interval between the initial and final tests (5 min or
48 hours). Error bars represent +/- 1 SE.

5 min
48 hr
Retention Interval

Figure 1: Correct performance percentages for previously
tested information (and comparable non-tested control
information) as a consequence of the testing condition
(cued-recall, multiple-choice, or no-test control) and the
retention interval between initial and final test (5 min or 48
hr). Error bars represent +/- 1 SE.

Again, a 3 × 2 mixed-model ANOVA did not reveal an
interaction between testing condition and delay, F(2, 69) =
0.12, p > .05, but did reveal a main effect of testing
condition, F(2, 69) = 5.04, ηp² = 0.13, p < .01. Overall,
taking a multiple-choice test was better for the retention of

686

related information than was either taking a cued-recall test
or not taking a test (control condition), t(71) = 2.72, d =
0.33, p < .01 and t(71) = 2.82, d = 0.33, p < .01,
respectively.
Importantly, however, no difference in
performance for the cued-recall condition versus the control
condition was observed, indicating that although taking a
cued-recall test did not impair the later recall of related
information in the present study, neither did it help it
compared to not taking a test at all. Taking a multiplechoice test did, however, and this benefit occurred
regardless of the retention interval.

retention interval that is, by most standards, considered
educationally realistic. In the present study, we also found
that even misinformation effects, a frequently cited negative
consequence of taking a multiple-choice test, become less of
a problem at a longer retention interval. Thus, at a longer
delay from initial to final test, multiple-choice testing still
had the benefits seen at a shorter delay, but with less cost.
The present results can be contrasted with much past
research demonstrating that cued-recall tests are better for
retention than multiple-choice tests (e.g., Hamaker, 1986).
Our finding of a greater benefit for multiple-choice testing
than cued-recall testing might have occurred owing to the
relatively low performance for cued-recall questions on our
initial test: Although participants were unlikely to forget
answers to questions that they answered correctly on the
initial cued-recall test, the majority of responses on the
initial test were incorrect and thus unlikely to be answered
correctly later. In contrast, more of the multiple-choice
questions were answered correctly on the initial test. Thus,
although answering a given multiple-choice question might
be less powerful for long-term retention than answering a
given cued-recall question (Foos & Fisher, 1988), the
greater number of correct responses on the initial multiplechoice test would result in more items having the potential
to be recalled correctly later. It should be noted, however,
that our use of highly competitive alternatives might also
have resulted in our multiple-choice questions being more
powerful for retention than those typically used in past
research. Even so, perhaps providing feedback, a common
practice in educational contexts, would lead to a reversal in
our observed effect because feedback provides a second
opportunity for the correct answers to incorrectly answered
cued-recall questions to be learned (e.g., Kang, McDermott,
& Roediger, 2007). Importantly, however, Little et al. (in
press) also demonstrated that—although providing feedback
did improve performance for information initially tested
with a cued-recall test more than for information initially
tested with a multiple-choice test, a reversal in final test
performance was not realized. Furthermore, performance
for related information was not affected as a consequence of
whether or not feedback was provided.
Additionally, in the present study, we did not find
evidence of retrieval-induced forgetting in the cued-recall
condition, which is interesting, particularly at the short
delay and given the competitive nature of our question pairs.
Although
retrieval-induced
forgetting
has
been
demonstrated with a variety of materials (see, e.g., Bjork,
Bjork, & MacLeod, 2006; Storm, 2011), its occurrence with
educational text materials is less consistent, with some
studies observing retrieval-induced forgetting (e.g., Carroll
et al., 2007; Little et al., 2011) and others not (e.g., Chan et
al., 2006). Competition during the initial test, coherence of
the to-be-learned materials, and the delay between initial
and final tests have been pointed to as predictors of whether
or not the effect will occur, but the exact specifications of
the boundary conditions for the occurrence, or lack thereof,
of retrieval-induced forgetting remain to be determined.

Intrusions of Incorrect Information
As previously mentioned, multiple-choice tests can result in
misinformation effects (Roediger & Marsh, 2005; Marsh,
Roediger, Bjork, & Bjork, 2007) thought to be a drawback
to multiple choice testing as compared to more open-ended
types of testing, and, indeed, participants in the present
study made such intrusions on the final test in the multiplechoice condition. Because, however, all of the alternatives
had appeared in the passages, participants also made such
intrusions in the control and cued-recall conditions.
In the present study, there appeared to be more intrusions
as a consequence of taking a multiple-choice test (M = 24%,
SE = 3%) than as a consequence of taking a cued-recall test
(M = 12%, SE = 2%) or having no initial test (M = 14%, SE
= 2%) when the final test occurred at a 5-min delay. At the
48-hr delay, however, intrusions as a consequence of taking
a multiple-choice test (M = 17%, SE = 2%) appeared to be
reduced while intrusions occurring as a consequence of
taking a cued-recall test (M = 13%, SE = 2%) or having no
test (M = 14%, SE = 2%) did not. Looking specifically at
the interaction between the two test types and the delay, a 2
× 2 mixed-model ANOVA revealed an interaction, F(1, 70)
= 4.24, p < .05, with an independent samples t-test
demonstrating that multiple-choice alterative intrusions
were significantly lower at the 48-hr delay than at the 5-min
delay, t(70) = 2.14, d = 0.50, p < .05. In considering these
results, one should note that while correct performance in
the control condition was lower at the 48-hr delay than at
the 5-min delay, intrusion rates at the two delays were not
different, suggesting that forgetting rates of correct and
incorrect responses are not necessarily related. For the
multiple-choice condition, however, both correct responses
and intrusions were reduced at the 48-hr delay compared to
the 5-min delay. Interestingly, in the multiple-choice
condition, correct responses and intrusions were negatively
correlated, r(72) = -.30, p < .05, suggesting that the more
correct answers one recalled, the fewer intrusions one made,
in both delay conditions.

Discussion
Taking a multiple-choice test shortly after study appears to
have some particularly positive consequences for learning.
Doing so not only increases retention of both tested and
non-tested related information compared to taking a cuedrecall test or no test, but such benefits also persist over a

687

Halamish, V., & Bjork, R. A. (2011). When does testing
enhance retention? A distribution-based interpretation of
retrieval as a memory modifier. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37, 801812.
Hamaker, C. (1986). The effects of adjunct questions on
prose learning. Review of Educational Research, 56, 212242.
Kang, S. H. K., McDermott, K. B., & Roediger, H. L.
(2007). Test format and corrective feedback modify the
effect of testing on long-term retention. European Journal
of Cognitive Psychology, 19, 528-558.
Kornell, N., Bjork, R. A., & Garcia, M. A. (2011). Why
tests appear to prevent forgetting: A distribution-based
bifurcation model. Journal of Memory and Language,
65,85–97.
Little, J. L., & Bjork, E. L. (2010). Multiple-choice testing
can improve the retention of non-tested related
information. In S. Ohisson & R. Catrabone (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1535-1540). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Little, J. L., & Bjork, E. L. (2011). Pretesting with multiplechoice questions facilitates learning. In L. Carlson, C.
Hőlscher & T. F. Shipley. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
294-296). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Little, J. L., Bjork, E. L., Bjork, R. A., & Angello, G. (in
press). Multiple-choice tests exonerated, at least of some
charges: Fostering test-induced learning and avoiding
test-induced forgetting. Psychological Science.
Little, J. L., Storm, B. C., Bjork, E. L. (2011). The Costs
and Benefits of Testing Text Materials. Memory, 19, 346359
Marsh, E. J., Roediger, H. L., Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L.
(2007). The memorial consequences of multiple-choice
testing. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 194-199.
MacLeod, M. D., & Macrae, C. N. (2001). Gone but not
forgotten: The transient nature of retrieval induced
forgetting. Psychological Science, 18, 29-34.
Roediger , H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). The power of
testing memory: Basic research and implications for
educational practice. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1, 181-210.
Roediger, H. L., & Marsh, E. J. (2005). The positive and
negative consequences of multiple-choice testing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 31, 1155-1159.
Rothkopf, E. Z. (1970). The concept of mathemagenic
activities. Review of Educational Research, 40, 325-336.
Storm, B.C. (2011). Retrieval-induced forgetting and the
resolution of competition. In A. S. Benjamin (Ed.),
Successful Remembering and Successful Forgetting: A
Festschrift in honor of Robert A. Bjork. New York, NY:
Psychology Press.

Concluding Comments
Multiple-choice tests are widely used in educational
contexts and elsewhere, but their use—either as instruments
of assessment or learning—is frequently disparaged.
Although the present research does not directly speak to
their potential value as tools of assessment, it does speak to
their use as tools for learning. And, in that respect, as tools
to reinforce knowledge, for the long as well as the short
term, they seem quite useful when constructed with
competitive alternatives and, perhaps, uniquely so with
respect to the increased learning of competitive related as
well as actually tested information.

Acknowledgments
A collaborative research grant from the James S. McDonnell
Foundation supported this research.

References
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, R. A., Bjork, E. L. (1994).
Remembering can cause forgetting: Retrieval dynamics in
long-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1063-1087.
Anderson, R. C., & Biddle, W. B. (1975). On asking people
questions about what they are reading. In G. H. Bower
(Ed). The Psychology of Learning and Motivation (Vol.9).
New York, NY, US: Academic Press.
Bjork, E. L., Bjork, R. A., & MacLeod, M. D. (2006). Types
and consequences of forgetting: Intended and unintended.
In L-G Nillson and N. Ohta (Eds.), Memory and Society:
Psychological Perspectives. Psychology Press: Hove and
New York.
Butler, A. C., & Roediger, H. L (2008). Feedback enhances
the positive effects and reduces the negative effects of
multiple-choice testing. Memory & Cognition, 36, 604616.
Carroll, M., Campbell-Ratcliffe, J., Murnane, H., & Perfect
T. (2007). Retrieval-induced forgetting in educational
contexts: Monitoring, expertise, text integration, and test
format. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 19,
580-606.
Chan, J. C. K. (2009). When does retrieval induce forgetting
and when does it induce faciliation? Implications for
retrieval inhibition, testing effect, and text processing.
Journal of Memory and Language, 61, 153-170.
Chan, J. C. K., McDermott, K. B., & Roediger, H. L.
(2006). Retrieval-induced facilitation: Initially nontested
material can benefit from prior testing of related material.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135, 553571.
Foos, P. W., & Fisher, R. P. (1988). Using tests as learning
opportunities. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80,
179-183.
Frase, L. T. (1971). Effect of incentive variables and type of
adjunct questions upon text learning. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 62, 371-375.

688

