UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Imagination in Augmenting Perceptual Representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0rh3783v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kang, Seokmin
Hallman Jr., Gregory
Black, John

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Imagination in Augmenting Perceptual Representation
Seokmin Kang (sk2587@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Gregory L. Hallman Jr. (glh2103@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

John B. Black (jbb21@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Abstract
Knowledge construction requires both perceptual information
from external sources and our active interpretation of that
information. Thirty one 5th grade elementary school students
were asked to move plates in a Tower of Hanoi (TOH) task,
which was displayed on a screen monitor. When the students
were asked to respond to the weight of the plates, both
imagination and non-imagination groups reported that they
felt weight of the plates which actually had no weight. Also,
students in imagination group reported that they felt the plates
heavier than did those in non-imagination group. The result
shows that haptic information can be created without
providing any information through haptic channel. In
addition, the result implies how knowledge is constructed
based on previous knowledge and suggests that children
create their own imaginary world even at a perceptual level.
Also, it was discussed why imagination experience can
maximize and help learning in embodiment activities.
Keywords: Imaginary world; Haptic illusion; Embodied
cognition.

In Buddhism, it is said that “Everything depends on our
mind.” This sentence can be interpreted as humans’
perceiving an object, or a given environment, depending on
what we expect to perceive or interpret. According to
Ungerleider and Pasternak (2004), when constructing
knowledge we not only accept spatial and visually-guided
action information (dorsal process stream), but process
information of shape, form, and object identity (ventral
process stream). This insight has been scientifically tried in
studies about illusion in perception (Lee & van Donkelaar,
2002) and in memory (Roediger, 1996; Roediger &
McDermot, 1995). Also, especially according to optical
illusion studies, what we see does not always match what is
actually visible. Our visual perception is influenced by our
past experience and current expectations (Gregory, 1997;
Gregory, 1998; Pendlebury, 1996).
According to Kant (1965), our knowledge is elicited from
two fundamental sources of the mind: the capacity of
receiving representations and the power of knowing an
object through these representations. Intuition and concepts
constitute the elements of all our knowledge, so that neither
concepts without an intuition in some way corresponding to

them, nor intuition without concepts, can yield knowledge
(Kant, p.92). Also, Kant mentioned that “…all perceptions
are grounded a priori in pure intuition, association in pure
synthesis of imagination, and empirical consciousness in
pure apperception…” (Kant, p.141). This also can be
interpreted as that perceptual information received via
different modalities, becomes knowledge by our active
cognitive process. This can be called knowledge
construction. Therefore, by using this nature of human
perception, it is possible to create perceptual illusions. In
terms of knowledge construction from perceptual
information, while previous studies have dealt with people’s
creation of additional perceptual information or distortion
based on what was given (Day, 1990; Ellis & Lederman,
1993; Fermüller & Malmb, 2004; Mack, Heurer, Villardi, &
Chambers, 1985; Suzuki & Arashida, 1992; Otto-de Haart,
Carey, & Milne, 1999), this study seeks to investigate
knowledge construction from a certain activity which
enriches memory representation. In other words, we argue
that perceptual knowledge can still be created through
another perceptual channel even if no perceptual
information has been delivered.
While many studies have explored visual illusion, what
has rarely been investigated is how perceptual information
from other modalities is created. Furthermore, while the
literature offers a handful of studies about haptic illusion
(Gentaz, Camos, Hatwell, & Jacquet, 2004; Robles-De-LaTorre & Hayward, 2001), these studies have limitation that
they were administered under situations where haptic
information was already provided to participants.

Knowledge construction by imagination
It is assumed that when we process information from text,
we go through a perceptual process where spoken or written
messages are originally encoded (Golden, 1986; Hubel &
Wiesel, 1977; Kuffler, 1953; McClelland, 1976; Syrdal &
Gopal, 1986). Then the words in the message are
transformed into a mental representation of the combined
meaning of the words (Graf & Torrey, 1966). At higher
level of comprehending of a text, readers use the mental
representation of the sentence’s meaning. According to

1756

Kintsch (1998), this level of understanding adds inferences
made from the reader’s knowledge and these inferences
come from semantic memory, knowledge about objects,
events, people, goals, beliefs, etc. However, Black and
Bower (1980) argued that there is another level of text
comprehension, which they called the Story World because
they were only discussing stories. This level of
comprehension requires a representation of the world being
referred to in a story, how it is laid out visually and
spatially, and how it functions. We can generalize this
beyond stories by calling this level of comprehension and
representation an Imaginary World. For example, after
reading one or more Harry Potter fantasy books, if one has
reached this “imaginary world” level of comprehension, one
would have some ideas about Harry Potter’s world, such as
how it looks, how it is laid out, and how it functions
(information which actually may not be provided in the
books). Then, when seeing a Harry Potter movie, one can
judge to what extent it matches this Imaginary World.
Black, Turner, and Bower (1979) already showed evidence
of readers creating their own imaginary world when reading
a story. In their study, when people read sentences like John
was working in the front yard, then he went inside, they read
them faster than when they read John was working in the
front yard, then he came inside. The ‘came’ in the second
sentence creates a switch in point of view and causes a
longer reading time (and change in memory and change in
comprehensibility ratings) because the reader has to switch
the perspective from which they are watching the action in
the imaginary world.
In imaginary world, people make plausible inferences or
create a story that was not actually given. This is further
activated when a goal is added, which results in a more
coherent, interesting and memorable text. For example,
Owens, Bower and Black (1979) had one group read an
unsurprising script-based story just containing the expected
actions of scripts, while another group had an introductory
sentence that introduced a goal structure (the girl in the
story wondering if she were pregnant). Adding this
introduction, which allowed the readers to infer a goal
structure with many linked story statements, leads to better
recall of the story. Black (2008) took this a step further
when he mentioned that learners can construct elaborate
mental representations of Imaginary Worlds with minimal
input such as text plus a floor plan. This implies that
learners create imaginary worlds based on given
information, place themselves into that situation, and
retrieve a plausible story by filling out story gaps that are
not given to them.
These findings can be linked to research on embodied
cognition. Barsalou (1999) supports the idea that thoughts
stem from dynamic interactions between the physical world
and the body. These interactions, described as part of
“grounded cognition,” are not limited to bodily states, but
are also found in situated action, social interactions,
emotional states, the environment, and perceptual
simulations. In this sense, active interaction can also be

realized in imaginary world, since one can situate himself in
a given situation and enact what is given in that imaginary
world. According to proponents of embodied cognition,
acknowledging these interactions is the first step towards
understanding human cognition.
Research on embodied cognition reveals that when people
place their bodies and move around in physical space, they
create references for understanding concepts. This is evident
in a study by Glenberg and Kaschak (2002). The authors
found that subjects, after hearing the command “open the
drawer”, responded faster when the response action was a
pulling motion instead of a pushing one. Likewise, work by
Spivey et al. revealed that during an experiment that
measured eye movement, participants were more likely to
look up upon hearing a description about the top of a
building (Spivey, Tyler, Richardson, & Young, 2000).
These discoveries about human cognition and space are
complimented by the seminal research of Shepard and
Metzler on mental rotation and imagery in the 1970s. The
researchers showed participants images of 3-D geometric
figures. The participants were later shown similar yet
rotated images and were asked to interpret the uniformity, or
lack thereof, of the two images. Results revealed that
participants rotated visual mental images in much the same
way that the actual objects would be manipulated in an
actual physical space. The research also revealed a
proportional relationship between the degree of the rotation
and the time it took participants to mentally rotate and
respond (Shepard & Metzler, 1971).
Glenberg and colleagues have found that physical
manipulation and imagined manipulation help children learn
(Glenberg, Gutierrez, Levin, Japuntich, & Kaschak, 2004).
Specifically these researchers have conducted experiments
using a narrative of a farmer and his farm animals. The
narrative is accompanied by a set of toys in the likeness of
the story’s characters. Participants (1st and 2nd graders) were
asked to use the toys to re-enact the sentences they read.
The children are then asked to imagine manipulating the
toys. What resulted was an increase in reading
comprehension and a more positive attitude about reading
(Glenberg et al., 2004).
In the same vein, researchers on grounded cognition
suggest that how people act influences how they think by
grounding perception, affect, and even language
comprehension in the sensorimotor systems used to interact
with the surrounding world (Beilock, Lyons, MattarellaMicke, Nusbaum, & Small, 2008; Glenberg & Robertson,
2000; Niedenthal, 2007; Zwaan, 1999). For example,
learning to produce specific walking movements (without
visual feedback) aids one’s ability to later visually
discriminate these movements, presumably because
discrimination becomes tied to the sensorimotor systems
used in moving (Casile & Giese, 2006). Therefore,
perception and action lead to conceptual understanding. In
addition, this process requires a representation of what is
being referred to, how it is laid out visually and spatially,

1757

which finally leads to the creation of “Imaginary Worlds”
(Black, 2008).
Based on this “Imaginary World” concept, this study
starts with a question about if learners can create their own
imaginary world on a perceptual level. For example, readers
develop their own mental images of a story while reading
the story (Black et al., 1979) and learners can also build
their own mental representation while learning from either a
text, a text with floor plans plus static pictures, or a text with
floor plans accompanied by a virtual tour picture (van
Esselstyn & Black, 2001). In this study, we try to test that
creating an imaginary world is possible on a perceptual
level, which, in turn, enables us to see why imagination
activity helps children more involved in embodiment
activity.
So far, few empirical studies have been done to test the
role of imagination in children’s perception and knowledge
construction. Being that this study seeks to encourage
children to create perceptual information which was not
initially given to them, this study is different from previous
perceptual illusion studies that showed how perceptual
information is distorted or how illusion is created by
sensory information which is transmitted via the same
modality. Throughout this study, we try to observe how
children, while in the process of constructing knowledge,
represent knowledge which does not exist through modality
and synthesize it into knowledge.

applications. The toolkit relies on software from OpenNI
and PrimeSense to track the user's motion using the
PrimeSensor or the Microsoft Kinect sensors. FAAST
includes a custom VRPN server to stream the user's skeleton
over a network, allowing VR applications to read the
skeletal joints as trackers using any VRPN client.
Additionally, the toolkit can also emulate keyboard input
triggered by body posture and specific gestures. This allows
the user add custom body-based control mechanisms to
existing off-the-shelf games that do not provide official
support for depth sensors (Suma, Lange, Rizzo, Krum, &
Bolas, 2011). Also, the interface of the TOH game was
programmed using Scratch. Scratch is a programming
language developed by the MIT Media Lab Lifelong
Kindergarten Group.
Experimental Design and Procedure The experiment was
administered in a quiet classroom with one student at a time.
A student was guided and asked to stand in front of the
Kinect and a screen monitor that was connected to a laptop
computer. Firstly, the experimenter verbally explained how
to move the plates in the TOH problem set on the screen.
The children were told: “Your job is to move two plates
from the first pole to the third pole. You can move only one
plate at a time. Also, while moving the plate, you can put
the small plate on top of the large one, but you cannot put a
large plate on top of the small one.” The plates in TOH were
created to look like real steel (Figure 1).

Method
Participants Thirty-one (18 boys and 13 girls) 5th grade
elementary school students from the New York City public
schools district participated in this study and were divided
into two groups: imagination group (n = 15) and nonimagination (control) group (n = 16). The study was IRB
approved.
Children of this age were chosen because they were almost
at the end of concrete operational stage. Therefore, they are
expected to use the appropriate level of inductive logic, such
as transitivity, decentering, ability to eliminate egocentrism,
and etc. (Piaget, 1977).
Apparatus The Kinect sensor for the Microsoft Xbox 360
video game console (hereafter referred to as Kinect) was
connected to an HP laptop through which an interactive
Tower of Hanoi problem was displayed onto a Dell 19 inch
LCD monitor with speakers attached. Kinect is a motion
sensing input device by Microsoft for the Xbox 360 video
game console. Based around a webcam-style add-on
peripheral for the Xbox 360 console, it enables users to
control and interact with the Xbox 360 without the need to
touch a game controller, through an infrared natural user
interface using gestures and spoken commands. However, in
this study, we manipulated Kinect without Xbox 360. As a
way of communicating with the Kinect, FAAST (Flexible
Action and Articulated Skeleton Toolkit, version 0.07)
software was used. FAAST is middleware which facilitates
integration of full-body control with games and VR

Figure 1. Snapshot of TOH problem used in the task
Afterwards, the experimenter demonstrated how to move
plates on the screen. The student was then allowed to
participate in a practice session of moving plates from one
pole to another until he/she felt comfortable controlling the
game using only hand gestures. Students were then given a
challenge of two plates for the TOH problem. Unlike the
practice session, in the experiment session, audio speakers
attached to the LCD monitor were turned on, so as to
provide students with the sound of plate being dropped (in
this case, the sound of a heavy metal plate dropping to the
ground).
Figure 2 shows a student moving a plate in the problemsolving task. All 31 students completed the given task.
During the experimental session, children completed the
TOH problem by carrying plates without touching any

1758

objects such as a monitor screen, a keyboard, or a laptop
computer. Immediately after they solved the problem, short
survey questions were given.
All the procedures were identical for both imagination
group and non-imagination group except that at this stage,
students in imagination group were prompted to imagine
how they moved the plates before answering how heavy the
plates were. Non-imagination group received exactly the
same survey except an imagination prompt, “Imagine how
you moved the plates.” in question 1.
As dependent measure variables, students’ responses to
the survey questions were compared. Students were asked to
choose a number that best described what they felt while
playing the game. The survey intended to measure the
perceived weight the participants felt from moving the
virtual plates, the level of interest in the activity, and the
amount of difficulty encountered in controlling this Kinectbased embodiment tool. As they answered the questions, the
experimenter read aloud each question and response options
(i.e., labels of a Likert-scale). After the survey, students
were sent back to their class. Totally participation time for
one student amounted to about 15 minutes for the entire
session.

addition, students in both groups showed strong interest in
the game task. All students in imagination group responded
that they enjoyed the game very much (M = 5.00, SD =
0.00). Similarly, average response in non-imagination group
was 4.94 (SD = 0.25).
In group comparison analysis, independent sample t-test
was administered. The students in imagination group felt the
plates significantly heavier than non-imagination group,
t(29) = 2.08, p < .05, d = 0.75. Figure 3 shows response
averages of feeling of plates’ weight in two groups.
In terms of students’ interest, there was no difference
between two groups (p = .34). Also, in a question of asking
how easy it was to use hands to carry the plates, there was
no group difference in difficulty of carrying the plates (p =
.27).

Figure 3. Response average of feeling of weight. Error bars
represent standard errors of the means.

Figure 2. A student solving Tower of Hanoi problem.

Results and Discussion
Students’ responses in two groups for plate weight, level
of motivation, and amount of difficulty in controlling the
plates were compared and analyzed.
First, to find out whether students in each group felt the
weight of the plate or not, one sample t-test was
administered for responses asking how heavy the plate felt.
In the analysis, it was found that students in both
imagination group (M = 2.87, SD = 1.36, t(14) = 5.33, p <
.01) and non-imagination group (M = 1.94, SD = 1.12, t(15)
= 3.34, p < .01) reported that the virtual plate they moved
indeed had a tangible weight.
Also, students in both groups reported that it was
relatively easy to use their hands to move the plates.
Average response was 2.27 (SD = 1.22) in imagination
group and 2.81 (SD = 1.47) in non-imagination group. In

This study shows how children develop and organize
perceptual information, and create their own imaginary
world based on an experience. Surprisingly, children in both
groups felt the weight of plates which actually had no
weight. In this case, it would be a haptic illusion that falls at
the intersection of perceiving and remembering.
It is even more surprising that children in imagination
group weighted the plates heavier than non-imagination
group. It is assumed that the memory of what plates would
feel like was drawn into the procedure as expectancies and
then affected performance, and the feeling of weight would
be augmented by the imagination employed during the
embodied activity. It may be like the case when someone
thinks he is about to pick up a heavy object (e.g., a brick)
but then he lifts it way too high too fast because it turns out
to be light (e.g., styrofoam). According to Winograd,
Peluso, and Glover (1998), self-reports of high degrees of
vivid mental imagery correlate with enhanced false recall
and false recognition. In our study, it is possible that, with a
prompt, “imagine,” students in imagination group further
developed haptic information than those in non-imagination
group. As a result, children in both groups reported the
weight of plates by activating what they expected to feel.
This is realistic when considering that upon judging a
situation, value, or an object, individuals rely more on

1759

reasoning, which, in turn, is based on their prior knowledge
or experience. Nonetheless, participants should not have
responded that the plate had a weight in this situation.
What is interesting is that, even though the activities in
this study were obvious and physically concrete, children in
this study reported their haptic experience which was not
provided to them. Based on our observations, it seems that
when it comes to deciding the characteristics of a given
object, children evolve into relying more on their own
representation of the concept which was created by
synthesizing subjective sensation and representation, rather
than relying on pure sensation.
Another plausible explanation is that children might
mistake a plate’s supposed weight with the feeling of
fatigue from arm movement caused by moving. Yet,
considering that controlling plates was relatively easy and
that activity was enjoyable, it is assumed that illusion of a
plate’s purported weight was created by the embodied
activity and it was further augmented by the participants’
imagination.
In our case, with imagination, children who acted out
using their body added new perceptual information, creating
their own representation of the TOH game and the plates in
the task. This also corresponds to grounded cognition
studies. It is maintained that new representation is based on
individual actions and action plays an important role in the
emergence of new representations (Beilock & GoldinMeadow, 2010; Boncoddo, Dixon, & Kelley, 2010).
Children used information available to fill the knowledge
gap with information that was not actually provided. In
other words, as Black and Bower (1980) mentioned,
children’s representation of an object when derived from an
imagined activity has information implicit in it beyond that
which is available in the propositional listing of the scene. It
is assumed that embodied cognition in a learning
environment must first be physically enacted. Then, the
learning activity is maintained through imagined
embodiment, and is finally used within a task where transfer
of learned content can occur.
Again, this study showed that by having children imagine,
unsupplied information can be derived not only in text
understanding, but also in perceiving an object’s property
which was not provided via any sensory channel. The study
result implies that having children imagine activities that
they involved or acted out can enrich their experience. The
phenomenon we observed here has many implications of
how teachers can use imagination in teaching concepts, such
as ones that have information which is implicit or hard to be
captured with a visually aided material.
Also, in our study, to observe how children construct
knowledge from perceptual information, interactive media
technology was used. Interactive media technology carries
with it the benefit of enhancing students’ comprehension
across several frames of reference because of its ability to
present information in varying ways. This ensures success
for all types of learners: visual, active, auditory, and tactile.
There are many technologies at use today that take

advantage of these varying styles of presentation and each
caters to one or several simultaneous types of learners at
once. With a help from these characters of technology, we
could capture the moment at which children construct
knowledge from perceptual information. The motivation
observed in this study is also unprecedented and will no
doubt enlighten pedagogical methods in future classrooms.
In future studies, by investigating how information in
other modalities affects level of embodiment, we will learn
more about the role of imagination and the interaction of
imagination and perceptual channel in knowledge
construction.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Beilock, S. L., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2010). Gesture
changes thought by grounding it in action. Psychological
Science, 21, 1605-1611.
Beilock, S. L., Lyons, I. M., Mattarella-Micke, A.,
Nusbaum, H. C., & Small, S. L. (2008). Sports experience
changes the neural processing of action language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
105, 13269-13273.
Black, J. B. (2008). Imaginary Worlds. In M. A. Gluck, J.
R. Anderson, & S. M. Kosslyn (Eds.), Memory and Mind:
A Festschrift for Gordon H. Bower (pp. 195-208).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Black, J. B., & Bower, G. H. (1980). Story understanding as
problem-solving. Poetics, 9, 223-250.
Black, J. B., Turner, T. J., & Bower, G. H. (1979). Point of
view in narrative comprehension, memory, and
production. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 18, 187-198.
Boncoddo, R., Dixon, J. A., & Kelley, E. (2010). The
emergence of a novel representation from action:
Evidence from preschoolers. Developmental Science, 13,
370-377.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Script in
memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177-220.
Casile, A., & Giese, M. A. (2006). Non-visual motor
learning influences the recognition of biological
motion. Current Biology, 16, 69-74.
Day, R. (1990). The bourdon illusion in haptic space.
Perception & Psychophysics, 47, 400-404.
Ellis, R. R., & Lederman, S. J. (1993). The role of haptic
versus visual volume cues in the size-weight illusion.
Perception and Psychophysics, 53, 315-324.
Fermüller, C., & Malmb, H. (2004). Uncertainty in visual
processes predicts geometrical optical illusions. Vision
Research, 44, 727-749.
Gentaz, E., Camos, V., Hatwell, Y., & Jacquet, A-Y. (2004).
The visual and the haptic Müller-Lyer illusions:
Correlation Study. Current Psychology Letters [Online],
13, URL:http://cpl.revues.org/index431.html
Glenberg, A. M., Gutierrez, T., Levin, J. R., Japuntich, S., &
Kaschak, M. P. (2004). Activity and imagined activity can

1760

enhance young children's reading comprehension. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 96, 424-436.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Glenberg, A. M., & Robertson, D. A. (2000). Symbol
grounding and meaning: A comparison of highdimensional and embodied theoriesof meaning. Journal of
Memory & Language, 43, 379-401.
Golden, R. (1986). A developmental neural model of visual
word perception. Cognitive Science, 10, 241-276.
Graf, P., & Torrey, J. W. (1966). Perception of phrase
structure in written language. American Psychological
Association Convention Proceedings, 83-88.
Gregory, R. L. (1997). Knowledge in perception and
illusion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London, 352, 1121-1128.
Gregory, R. L. (1998). Brainy mind. British Medical
Journal, 317, 1693-1695.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1977). Functional
architecture of macaque monkey visual cortex.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, 198, 1-59.
Kant, I. (1965). Critique of pure reason (N. K. Smith,
Trans.). New York: Macmillan. (Original work published
1781)
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kuffler, S. W. (1953). Discharge pattern and functional
organization of mammalian retina. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 16, 37-68.
Lee, J. H., & van Donkelaar, P. (2002). Dorsal and ventral
visual stream contributions to perception-action
interactions during pointing. Experimental Brain
Research, 143, 440-446.
McClelland, J. L. (1976). Preliminary letter identification in
the perception of words and nonwords. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 2, 80-91.
Mack, A., Heuer, F., Vilardi, K., & Chambers, D. (1985).
The dissociation of position and extent in Muller-Lyer
figures. Perception and Psychophysics, 37, 335-344.
Niedenthal, P. M. (2007). Embodying emotion. Science,
316, 1002-1005.
Otto-de Haart, E. G., Carey, D. P., & Milne, A. B. (1999).
More thoughts on perceiving and grasping the MüllerLyer illusion. Neuropsychologia, 37, 1437-1444.
Owens, J., Bower, G. H., & Black, J. B. (1979). The "soap
opera" effect in story recall. Memory and Cognition, 7,
185-191.
Pendlebury, M. (1996). The role of imagination in
perception. South African Journal of Philosophy, 15, 133138.
Reder, L. M. (1982). Plausible judgment versus fact
retrieval: Alternative strategies for sentence verification.
Psychological Review, 89, 250-280.

Robles-De-La-Torre, G., & Hayward. V. (2001). Force can
overcome object geometry in the perception of shape
through active touch. Nature, 412, 445-448.
Roediger, H. L. (1996). Memory illusions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 76-100.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Shepard, R. N., & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Spivey, M. J., Tyler, M. J., Richardson, D. C., & Young, E.
E. (2000). Eye movements during comprehension of
spoken scene descriptions. The Proceedings of the 22th
Annual Cognitive Science Society Meeting, 487-492.
Suma, E., Lange, B., Rizzo, A., Krum, D., & Bolas, M.
(2011). FAAST: The Flexible Action and Articulated
Skeleton Toolkit. Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality
2011.
Suzuki, K., & Arashida, R. (1992). Geometrical haptic
illusions revisited: Haptic illusions compared with visual
illusions. Perception and Psychophysics, 52, 329-335.
Syrdal, A. K., & Gopal, H. S. (1986). A perceptual model of
vowel recognition based on the auditory representation of
American English vowels. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 79, 1086–1100.
Ungerleider, L. G., & Pasternak, T. (2004). Ventral and
dorsal cortical processing streams. In L.M. Chalupa, & J.
S. Werner (Eds.), The Visual Neurosciences (pp. 541562). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
van Esselstyn, D., & Black, J. B. (2001). Learning through
interactive panoramic imagery. Proceedings of EDMEDIA. Norfolk, VA: AACE.
Winograd, E., Peluso, J. P., & Glover, T. A. (1998).
Individual differences in susceptibility to memory
illusions. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 12, S5-S27.
Zwaan, R.A. (1999). Situation models: the mental leap into
imagined worlds. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 8, 15-18.

1761

