UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Upbeat of Language: Linguistic Context and Embodiment Predict Processing Valence
Words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6fz8h013

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Hutchinson, Sterling
Lowerse, Max

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Upbeat of Language:
Linguistic Context and Embodiment Predict Processing Valence Words
Sterling Hutchinson (schtchns@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Max M. Louwerse (mlouwerse@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Abstract
Previous studies have demonstrated that comprehension of
conceptual metaphors elicits embodied representations. This
finding is non-trivial, but begets the question whether alternative
explanations are to be dismissed. The current paper shows how a
statistical linguistic approach of word co-occurrences can also
reliably predict metaphor comprehension. In two experiments
participants saw word pairs with positive (e.g. happy) and negative
(e.g. sad) connotations. The pairs were presented in either a
vertical configuration (Experiment 1) or a horizontal configuration
(Experiment 2). Results showed that response times could be
explained by both the statistical linguistic approach and the
embodied approach. However, embodied information was most
salient in the vertical configuration and statistical linguistic
information was most salient in the horizontal configuration.
Individual differences modulated these findings, with female
participants being most sensitive to the statistical linguistic
approach, and male participants being most sensitive to the
embodiment approach. These findings suggest that comprehension
of conceptual metaphors can be explained by both linguistic and
embodiment factors, but that their relative salience is modulated by
cognitive task and individual differences.
Keywords: embodied cognition; symbolic cognition;
linguistic context; valence words; gender differences; symbol
interdependency

Introduction
When we are happy, we are in high spirits; when we are sad,
we are down in the dumps. Our mood is lifted when we are
cheerful, but our enthusiasm drops when we are depressed.
We have our high times and our low times. We reach for the
sky, but sometimes our plans run into the ground. These are
some examples suggesting that conceptual metaphors
highlight associations between abstract concepts (e.g.,
happy, sad) and spatial properties (e.g., high, low). Lakoff
and Johnson (1981; 1999) suggest that metaphors like these
help automatically ground abstract concepts in bodily
experiences. In this sense, metaphors inform the language
user of the perceptual and biomechanical processes
underlying the representation of those concepts. Such
theories of embodied cognition have received an impetus in
the last decade (Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 1997; Prinz,
2004; Zwaan, 2004) with considerable empirical support
showing that cognitive processes are undoubtedly
influenced by perceptual and spatial information (De Vega,

Glenberg, & Graesser, 2008; Pecher & Zwaan, 2005; Semin
& Smith, 2008 for overviews). These findings allow for the
conclusion that linguistic symbols are grounded in modality
specific perceptual and motor systems.
If conceptual metaphors highlight associations between
abstract concepts and physical or spatial properties, it is
predicted that words with positive connotations are
processed faster when presented higher in space, and words
with negative connotations are processed faster when
presented lower in space. This is indeed what a number of
studies have shown, with participants being apt to process
and remember matches between location and words (i.e., joy
presented on the top of the screen) better than mismatches
(i.e., hate presented on the top of the screen) (Meier &
Robinson, 2004; Meier, Hauser, Robinson, Friesen, &
Schjeldahl, 2007; Pecher, van Dantzig, Boot, Zanzolie, &
Huber, 2010; Schnall & Clore, 2004; Schubert, 2005). More
recently, Santana and de Vega (2011) found that matches
facilitate comprehension of figurative language more so
than that of literal language, suggesting that positive and
negative metaphors are also processed through embodied
mechanisms. Similarly, when pictures are presented in their
expected spatial positions (i.e., an image of a positive
concept presented on the top of screen) comprehension of
such affectively salient pictures is facilitated (Crawford,
Margolies, Drake, & Murphy, 2006; Meier et al., 2007).
Furthermore, when participants are in a positive mood, they
are more likely to exhibit upwards biases during line
bisection tasks, with the opposite pattern holding true for
negative moods (Wapner & Werner, 1957). Subjects even
feel more successful (a positive feeling) when standing erect
(a high vertical position) and less successful (a negative
feeling) when slumped over (a low vertical position)
(Stepper & Strack, 1993). In a review of the literature,
Meier and Robinson (2008) summarized that affect is
indeed understood through embodied relations, including
vertical spatial representations.
However, such strong evidence supporting embodied
representations diverts our attention away from other
explanations for these findings. Paivio (1986) has
extensively shown that both verbal and non-verbal
representations play important roles in cognition. Barsalou,
Santos, Simmons, and Wilson (2008) and Louwerse (2007;
2008; 2011) have similarly argued that both statistical

1709

relationships
between
symbols
and
embodied
representations work together to represent conceptual
knowledge. Louwerse (2007; 2011) proposed the Symbol
Interdependency Hypothesis, arguing that language encodes
embodied representations. That is, embodied cues are
encoded linguistically, so that language users can rely on the
linguistic system as a shortcut to the perceptual system.
Consequently, comprehension can be explained both by a
statistical linguistic approach and an embodied approach, a
conclusion supported by an increasing amount of empirical
evidence (Louwerse, 2011).
Louwerse and Jeuniaux (2010) further argued that
language processing relies on both linguistic and
embodiment factors variably depending on the cognitive
task. They showed that linguistic factors best explained
response times (RTs) when participants made semantic
judgments about word pairs, but perceptual factors best
explained RTs when participants made iconicity judgments
about pictures. Importantly, both linguistic and perceptual
factors explained RTs in both semantic judgments and
iconicity judgments, for both linguistic stimuli and pictorial
stimuli, but their relative importance changed as a function
of the task and stimulus.
In addition, Louwerse and Connell (2011) have shown
that findings initially entirely attributed to embodied
representations, such as the increased processing times for
modality shifts, can in fact be attributed to statistical
linguistic frequencies. Interestingly, faster processing can be
best explained by the linguistic system, and slower
processing can best be explained by the perceptual system.
In addition to cognitive tasks modifying statistical
linguistic and embodiment effects on comprehension,
individual differences might also play a role in how we
represent information. Preexisting strategies or habits may
impact an individual’s propensity for processing
information in different ways. For example, because
embodied representations ground language through bodily
experiences we could predict that those individuals with
superior spatial ability are more likely to utilize such
simulations. Similarly, those with enhanced language skill
may show an inclination to process information in a
linguistic fashion. This possibility is easily explored through
gender differences, with males showing greater general
spatial ability (Kimura, 2000; Linn & Peterson, 1985) and
females showing greater general language ability (Kimura,
2000; Kramer, Delis, Kaplan, & O'Donnell, 1997). Based on
such tendencies, we hypothesized that because males may
have a greater affinity to encode information in an imagistic
format, embodiment factors should better predict RTs for
males. Likewise, females might be more likely to encode
information in a symbolic manner, thus linguistic factors
were hypothesized to better predict female RTs.
The current study had three goals. First, we aimed to
investigate the extent to which a statistical linguistic
approach and an embodied approach explained processing
of valence words. As in Louwerse and Jeuniaux (2010) we
identified embodied and linguistic factors and determined

how well each factor could explain RTs. Second, we aimed
to investigate whether the effect of a statistical linguistic
approach and an embodied approach is modified as a
function of the cognitive task. As demonstrated by the
aforementioned studies, presenting positive-negative word
pairs in a vertical orientation seems to encourage subjects to
perceptually simulate the words they are reading. However,
we also know that positive words usually occur before
negative words in texts (e.g., plus and minus, good and bad,
positive and negative), thus if we present words horizontally
(as we read them), we might expect subjects to instead rely
upon statistical linguistic features. We therefore
hypothesized that embodiment factors would be more
salient when words were presented vertically whereas
linguistic factors would be more salient when words were
presented horizontally. Thirdly, we aimed to investigate
whether the effect of a statistical linguistic approach and an
embodied approach is modified as a function of individual
differences, and more specifically as a function of
participant gender. We answered these questions in two
experiments whereby male and female participants
responded to positive and negative valence word pairs. In
Experiment 1 word pairs were presented in a vertical
configuration (e.g., happy above sad) to encourage subjects
to rely upon embodied features; in Experiment 2 word pairs
were presented in a horizontal configuration (e.g., happy
preceding sad) to encourage subjects to rely upon statistical
linguistic information.

Experiment 1
Participants
Thirty-four undergraduate native English speakers at the
University of Memphis (24 females) participated for extra
credit in a Psychology course.

Materials
The experiment consisted of 50 pairs of words that were
opposites on a valence dimension (e.g., positive-negative)
(see Table 1). One hundred filler items consisted of word
pairs without a positive-negative relation, with half of the
pairs having a high semantic association and half having a
low semantic association as determined by latent semantic
analysis (LSA), a computational linguistic technique that
measures the similarity in meaning between word pairs, but
ignores an order relation (Landauer, McNamara, Dennis, &
Kintsch, 2007) (high semantic association: cos =.44; low
semantic relation: cos = .18).

Procedure
Participants were asked to judge the semantic relatedness of
word pairs presented on an 800x600 computer screen
running E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools Inc.,
Pittsburgh, PA). Words were presented one above another,
in a vertical orientation. Upon presentation of a word pair,
participants indicated whether the pair was related in
meaning by pressing designated yes or no keys. All word

1710

pairs were randomly ordered for each participant to negate
any order effects. Each participant saw all word pairs, but
whether a participant saw a word pair in an iconic or a
reverse iconic order was counterbalanced between two
groups, such that all participants saw iconic and reverseiconic word pairs, but no participant saw a word pair both in
an iconic and a reverse-iconic order. To ensure participants
understood the task, participants completed five practice
trials before beginning the experimental task.
Table 1: Positive-Negative Critical Word Pairs
achievement – failure
angel – devil
appear – disappear
bright – dim
clean – dirty
day – night
dream – nightmare
fast – slow
friend – enemy
gain – loss
grow – shrink
happy – sad
heaven – hell
laugh – scream
love – hate
on – off
pass – fail
positive – negative
progress – stagnation
regular – irregular
safe – danger
strong – weak
true – false
victory – defeat
winner – loser

add – subtract
angels – demons
beautiful – ugly
birth – death
confident – arrogant
dead – alive
excitement – boredom
freedom – slavery
fun – boring
good – bad
handsome – ugly
healthy – sick
hero – villain
life – death
more – less
optimist – pessimist
plus – minus
pretty – ugly
protagonist – antagonist
right – wrong
smile – frown
sunshine – rain
unite – split
wealthy – poor
yes – no

Embodiment factor If conceptual metaphors are
understood through embodied representations and processes
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1981; 1999), then a concept must be
perceptually simulated in order to determine if it is positive
or negative. Therefore, we operationalized embodiment
factor as a rating of how positive or negative a concept was,
following previous studies (Louwerse, 2008; Louwerse &
Jeuniaux, 2010). Thirty-eight participants at the University
of Memphis were asked to what extent they agreed with the
statement: x is more positive than y (e.g., happy is more
positive than sad or sad is more positive than happy).
Ratings were made for all word pairs (in both orders) on a
scale of 1-6, with 1 being strongly disagree and 6 being
strongly agree.

Response Time Analyses
A mixed-effect regression model analysis was conducted on
RTs with linguistic and embodiment factors as the fixed
factors and participants and items as random factors
(Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). The model was fitted
using the restricted maximum likelihood estimation
(REML) for the continuous variable (RT). F-test
denominator degrees of freedom were estimated using the
Kenward-Roger’s degrees of freedom adjustment to reduce
the chances of Type I error (Littell, Stroup, & Freund,
2002).
The embodiment factor was significantly related to the
RTs, F (1, 86.93) = 10.40, p < .002, with higher ratings
yielding lower RTs. This finding supports an embodied
cognition account: the more a word pair marked a positivenegative relation, the stronger the effect on the RTs.
However, the linguistic factor also explained the RTs, F (1,
85.511) = 70.96, p < .001, with higher frequencies yielding
lower RTs. These findings show that the vertical
configuration of conceptual metaphors can be explained by
both the linguistic system and the embodied system,
confirming previous findings and the claim that language
processing is both linguistic and embodied.

Results and Discussion
Subjects whose RTs fell more than 2.5 SD from the mean
per condition, per subject were removed from the analysis,
affecting 3.7% of the data.

Linguistic and Embodiment Factors
We distinguished between a linguistic and an embodiment
factor in order to determine whether a statistical linguistic
approach or an embodiment approach would better explain
the processing of valence words.
Linguistic factor The statistical linguistic factor was
operationalized as the log frequency of a-b (e.g., happy-sad)
or b-a (e.g., sad-happy) order of word pairs. The order
frequency of all word pairs within 3-5 word grams was
obtained using the large Web 1T 5-gram corpus (Brants &
Franz, 2006).

Gender Effects
Next, we investigated whether the linguistic and
embodiment factors were modulated by individual
differences. To test whether embodiment factors better
predicted RTs for males, and linguistic factors better
predicted RTs for females, we conducted a mixed effects
analysis on RTs using the interaction between gender x
linguistic factor and gender x embodiment factor as fixed
factors and subject and item as random factors. The two
interactions on RTs were significant, for both gender x
linguistic factor, F (2, 113.86) = 38.68, p < .001, and gender
and embodiment factor, F(2, 210.99) = 8.23, p < .001.
Interestingly, and as predicted, the effect size was largest for
females x linguistic factor, and males x embodiment factor,
as shown in Figure 1.

1711

2

Figure 1. The effect sizes in R for the interaction of
participant gender x linguistic factor and the interaction of
participant gender x embodiment factor on RT in vertical
configuration of valence word pairs.
The results of Experiment 1 show that both linguistic and
embodiment factors explain processing of valence words.
The effects of either factor are modulated by individual
differences. Although both male and female participants
depended more upon the linguistic factor, females relied
more on the linguistic factor than males, and males relied
more on the embodiment factor than females.

Experiment 2
Participants
Forty undergraduate native English speakers at the
University of Memphis (29 females) participated for extra
credit in a Psychology course.

Materials
Materials were identical to those used in Experiment 1.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Experiment 1 except that
items were now presented next to each other (horizontal
configuration) rather than above each other (vertical
configuration).

Results and Discussion
Linguistic and Embodiment Factors
As in Experiment 1 a mixed effects regression model was
conducted with RT as the outcome variable, with the
linguistic and the embodiment factors as fixed predictor
factors, and with both participants and items as random
factors. Again, the embodiment factor was significantly
related to the RTs, F (1, 84.93) = 7.01, p = .01, with higher
embodiment ratings yielding lower RTs. The linguistic

Figure 2. The effect sizes in R2 for the interaction of
participant gender and the linguistic factor and the
embodiment factor on RT in horizontal configuration of
valence word pairs.
factor also explained RTs, F (1, 86.01) = 94.60, p < .001,
with higher frequencies yielding lower RTs. These findings
are similar to those obtained in Experiment 1, and support
the conclusion that language processing is both linguistic
and embodied.

Gender Effects
As before, to determine interactions between gender x
linguistic factor and gender x embodiment factor, we
conducted a mixed effects model using the two interactions
as fixed factors and subjects and items as random factors.
Both interactions reached significance, for gender x
linguistic factor, F(2, 142.89) = 48.12, p < .001, as well as
gender x embodiment factor F(2, 207.74) = 4.19, p = .02.
The effect size was again largest for female participants and
the linguistic factor (Figure 2). However, effect size was
now also larger for females and the embodiment factor. A
possible explanation for this finding is that the embodiment
factor may have played a lesser role in the horizontal
configuration than in the vertical configuration, an
explanation that fits the idea that cognitive task modulates
the relative importance of linguistic and embodiment
factors. This issue was investigated next.
Next, we were concerned with the relationship between
the prominence of a linguistic factor and a embodiment
factor during processing. To answer this question we
conducted an analysis using both the linguistic and
embodiment factor, comparing their relative importance in
the vertical (Experiment 1) versus horizontal (Experiment 2)
configurations. Again, both participants and items were used
as random factors in the mixed effects regression, and the
interaction of the linguistic factor x orientation (vertical
versus horizontal), and the interaction of the embodiment
factor x orientation were of interest. The interaction for both
orientation x linguistic factor and orientation x embodiment

1712

factor was significant, F (2, 133.13) = 53.75, p < .001 and F
(2, 163.86) = 6.32, p < .01 respectively. Furthermore, an
interaction between orientation x linguistic factor x
embodiment factor reached significance, F (2, 165.28) =
4.90, p < .01. Although the linguistic factor played a more
important role in both configurations, the linguistic factor
was more salient in the horizontal configuration than in the
vertical configuration, whereas the embodiment factor was
more salient in the vertical configuration than in the
horizontal condition (Figure 3). These results suggest that
the relative importance of linguistic and embodiment factors
is modulated by the cognitive task.

Semin & Smith, 2008; Zwaan, 2004), there is also an
increasing amount of evidence suggesting that other factors
can play an important role (Hutchinson, Johnson, &
Louwerse, 2011; Louwerse, 2008; Louwerse & Jeuniaux,
2010; Barsalou, Santos, Simmons, & Wilson, 2008). It is
important that researchers consider alternatives contributing
to metaphoric conceptual processing rather than fixating on
one explanation without leaving any room for alternative
explanations. Our findings do not dispute the necessity of
employing embodied representations but rather we call into
question their dominance during cognition. Comprehension
of conceptual metaphors can be explained by both linguistic
and embodiment factors, but their salience as predictors of
cognitive processing is modified by cognitive task and by
individual differences.

References

Figure 3. The effect sizes in R2 for both the linguistic factor
and the embodiment factor in vertical orientation of valence
word pairs (Experiment 1) and horizontal orientation of
valence word pairs (Experiment 2).

Discussion
Previous studies have shown that when comprehenders
process conceptual metaphors, they activate perceptual
simulations (Lakoff & Johnson, 1981; 1999). The notion
that metaphor comprehension is embodied is non-trivial.
However, it begets the question whether alternative
explanations are to be dismissed. The two experiments
reported here show that both linguistic and embodiment
factors explain the processing of valence words.
Furthermore, the dominance of one factor relative to the
other was modified differentially based on the experimental
task, such that linguistic factors better explained RTs for
horizontal presentations, with embodied features better
explaining RTs for vertical presentations. Moreover, we
found evidence suggesting that male participants typically
rely more on embodied representations, whereas female
participants typically rely more on statistical linguistic
patterns.
The findings reported in this paper are important for
theories of cognition. Although there is much evidence
supporting embodied accounts of mental representations
(Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 1997; Pecher & Zwaan, 2005;

Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects
and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390412.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Barsalou, L. W., Santos, A., Simmons, W. K., & Wilson, C.
D. (2008). Language and simulation in conceptual
processing. In M. de Vega, A. M. Glenberg, & A. C.
Graesser (Eds.), Symbols and embodiment: Debates on
meaning and cognition (pp. 245-283). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Brants, T., & Franz, A. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram version 1.
Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Crawford, E., Margolies, S., Drake, J., & Murphy, M.
(2006). Affect biases memory of location: Evidence for
the spatial representation of affect. Cognition & Emotion,
20, 1153-1169.
de Vega, M., Glenberg, A. M., & Graesser, A. C. (Eds.).
(2008). Symbols and embodiment: Debates on meaning
and cognition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for: Creating
meaning in the service of action. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 20, 1-55.
Hutchinson, S., Johnson, S., & Louwerse, M. M. (2011). A
linguistic remark on SNARC: Language and perceptual
processes in Spatial-Numerical Association. In L.
Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1313-1318). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Kimura, D. (2000). Sex and cognition. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Kramer, J. H., Delis, D. C., Kaplan, E., & O'Donnell, L.
(1997). Developmental sex differences in verbal learning.
Neuropsychology, 11, 577-584.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1981). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.

1713

New York, NY: Basic Books.
Landauer, T., McNamara, D., Dennis, S., & Kintsch, W.
(Eds.). (2007). Handbook of latent semantic analysis.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Linn, M. C., & Peterson, A. C. (1985). Emergence and
characterization of sex differences in spatial ability: A
meta-analysis. Child Development, 56, 1479-1498.
Littell, R. C., Stroup, W., & Freund, R. J. (2002). SAS
system for linear models. Cary, NC: SAS Publishing.
Louwerse, M. M. (2007). Symbolic or embodied
representations: A case for symbol interdependency. In T.
Landauer, D. McNamara, S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch (Eds.),
Handbook of latent semantic analysis (pp. 107-120).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Louwerse, M. M. (2008). Embodied relations are encoded in
language. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 15, 838-844.
Louwerse, M. M. (2011). Symbol interdependency in
symbolic and embodied cognition. TopiCS in Cognitive
Science, 3, 273-302.
Louwerse, M. M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35, 381-398.
Louwerse, M. M., & Jeuniaux, P. (2010). The linguistic and
embodied nature of conceptual processing. Cognition,
114, 96-104.
Meier, B., Hauser, D., Robinson, M., Friesen, C., &
Schjeldahl, K. (2007). What's "up" with god? Vertical
space as a representation of the divine. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 699-710.
Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2004). Why the sunny
side is up. Psychological Science, 15, 243-247.
Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2008). The metaphorical
representation of affect. Metaphor and Symbol, 20, 239257.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding
approach. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Pecher, D., van Dantzig, S., Boot, I., Zanzolie, K., & Huber,
D. E. (2010). Congruency between word position and
meaning is caused by task Induced spatial attention.
Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 1-8.
Pecher, D., & Zwaan, R. A., (Eds.). (2005). Grounding
cognition: The role of perception and action in
memory, language, and thinking. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Prinz, J. (2004). Furnishing the mind: Concepts and their
perceptual basis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Santana, E., & de Vega, M. (2011). Metaphors are
embodied, and so are their literal counterparts. Frontiers
in Psychology, 2, 1-12.
Schnall, S., & Clore, G. (2004). Emergent meaning in
affective space: Conceptual and spatial congruence
produces positive evaluations. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner,
& T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th annual
meeting of the cognitive science society (pp. 1209-1214).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbam.
Schubert, T. W. (2005). Your highness: Vertical positions as
perceptual symbols of power. Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology, 89, 1-21.
Semin, G., & Smith, E., (Eds.). (2008). Embodied
grounding: Social,
cognitive, affective,
and
neuroscientific approaches. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Stepper, S., & Strack, F. (1993). Proprioceptive
determinants of emotional and nonemotional feelings.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 211220.
Wapner, S., & Werner, H. (1957). The effect of success and
failure on space localization. Journal of Personality, 25,
752-756.
Zwaan, R. A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: Toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. Psychology
of Learning and Motivation, 44, 35-62.

1714

