UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of text continuity on spatial representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1br038p8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sugimoto, Masashi
Kusumi, Takashi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of text continuity on spatial representation
Masashi Sugimoto (sugimoto.masashi.85m@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive Psychology in Education,
Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University
Yoshida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501 Japan

Takashi Kusumi (kusumi@educ.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive Psychology in Education,
Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University
Yoshida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501 Japan

Abstract
Two experiments examined the hypothesis that constructing spatial
representation and making inference from it with route description
requires text continuity. Participants read the spatial text and
answered true/false questions about it. In Experiment 1, we
transposed sentences in a spatial text, and in Experiment 2, we
inserted irrelevant tasks into a spatial text. The results showed that
performance in a route perspective decreases when text has lost its
continuity. This decrease in performance was not found in a survey
perspective. These results indicate the continuous nature of route
perspective, not only at the surface level of description but also at
the level of cognitive processing.
Keywords: route perspective; survey perspective; spatial mental
models, spatial representation, text continuity

Introduction
When we think about a space or when we are trying to
follow directions, we construct spatial representations and
infer spatial information from them. Taylor & Tversky
(1992) defined two types of perspective in the input and
output of spatial representation—route perspective and
survey perspective. In route perspective, terms such as
“front,” “back,” “left,” and “right” are used to give
directions from the perspective of an imagined viewer (e.g.,
“When you get out of the building, you can see a
supermarket in front of you.”). Survey perspective, however,
includes terms such as “north,” “south,” “east,” and “west”
to give directions, taking a bird’s eye view (e.g., “The
building is north of the supermarket.”).
Many studies have pointed out the difference between
these two perspectives. Of specific importance to the present
investigation, some studies (Pazzaglia & Cornoldi, 1999;
Pazzaglia, Meneghetti, De Beni, & Gyselinck, 2010)
focused on the two components of visuo-spatial working
memory (VSWM) in route perspective. They divided
VSWM into two components: the spatial sequential process
and the spatial simultaneous process. Spatial sequential
tasks require participants to recall the order of the stimulus

presentation, while spatial simultaneous tasks require
participants to recall the visual configuration of the
presented stimulus (Pazzaglia et al., 2010). Their results
showed that the spatial sequential process is more involved
in processing route description, whereas the spatial
simultaneous process is more involved in processing survey
description. This implies that the ability to process
information sequentially is an essential factor for
descriptions in route perspective.
More support for this idea comes from a study using
children with learning disabilities (Mammarella, Meneghetti,
Pazzaglia, Gitti, Gomez, & Colnoldi, 2009). Children with
nonverbal (visuo-spatial) learning disability (NLD), reading
disability (RD), or no disability participated in the
experiment. They listened to route, survey, and non-spatial
descriptions. After that, they performed a verification task
and a location task. Although their performance was no
different in the verification task with the non-spatial
description, children with NLD showed decreased
performance on the verification task, especially with regard
to the survey description. In the location task, children with
NLD had decreased performance more on the survey than
on the route description (though this difference did not reach
significance). Mammarella et al. (2009) showed that NLD
children can form mental models from route description.
They indicated that this is due to the “serial nature of
language” involved in the route perspective.
Previous studies have shown the importance of spatialsequential ability in route perspective processing. This
ability belongs to the participants, and not to description
itself. Therefore, in this study, we focused on the nature of
description that whether each sentence had strong
connections between itself and the previous/following
sentence. There are two reasons why we emphasized
continuity of route description. First, in route description,
the directional terms are relative. Therefore, it is important
to be aware of where one has come from and which
direction he or she is facing. If no attention is given to it,
one can easily get lost because the directional terms must be
defined in relation with the imagined viewer. Second, the
subject of the route description is “you.” In addition to

2363

actually moving around, the subject of the description
cannot warp to a distant place. They must move step by step,
continuously.
In this study, we focused on the text continuity itself. Our
hypothesis was that effective route description requires text
continuity. If route perspective description is truly
continuous, sentence order (i.e., text continuity) is important
for it. In contrast, survey perspective does not need
continuity and sentence order is less important. We
manipulated the text continuity in two ways. In Experiment
1, we changed the order of sentences in a spatial text, while
in Experiment 2, we inserted an interference task into a
more complex spatial text. The novel point of this study is
that we focused not on the traits of participants (Brunyé &
Taylor, 2008b; Pazzaglia, et al., 2010), but on the traits of
the text.

and fourth sentences referred to the relationships between
landmarks B and C, and landmarks C and D, respectively.
In discontinuous condition, the order of the third and fourth
sentences was reversed. Therefore, he third and fourth
sentences referred to the relationships between landmarks C
and D, and landmarks B and C, respectively.
Each text had six verification tasks that asked about the
relationships between two landmarks. Half were correct
descriptions and the rest were incorrect.
Procedure We instructed participants to read the spatial text
as fast as possible. After participants had finished reading
the text, they answered true/false verification tasks about the
environment that they had just learned about. Continuous
and discontinuous texts were presented in random order.
Halfway between the trials, participants took a rest. All
stimuli were presented on a PC screen.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we tried to examine the effect of continuity
of sentence order on comprehension of route description.
Although previous studies (Pazzaglia & Cornoldi, 1999;
Pazzaglia, et al., 2010) have shown the importance of the
spatial-sequential ability of learners in processing route
description, the effect of the sentence itself has not
examined. If the processing of route perspective is actually
continuous, a sentence in the description must be connected
to the previous and following sentences. Therefore, when
this connection is broken, one faces considerable trouble
learning information from route descriptions. We did not
expect this effect in survey learning, because survey
perspective is simultaneous and not sequential (Pazzaglia et
al., 2010).

Method
Participants 35 Japanese graduates and undergraduates (19
males and 16 females) participated in Experiment 1 for a
monetary reward. Mean age was 22.5 (range 18-28, SD =
2.6). We excluded three males from the analysis for not
following instructions. Half of the participants studied all
descriptions in the survey perspective, and the rest in route
perspective.
Experiment design The design was 2 × 2 × 2 with learning
perspectives (survey vs. route) as a between subjects factor,
text continuity (continuous vs. discontinuous), and test
perspective (survey vs. route), as within subjects factors.
Materials Twenty-eight spatial texts were prepared. Each
text consisted of four sentences and described one
environment where four landmarks (landmarks A, B, C, and
D) appeared along a straight road. The first sentence
referred to the position of one landmark (landmark A) in
relation to the road. The second sentence referred to the
spatial relationship between landmarks A and B. The third

Results
Trials that included reading time beyond ±2 SD or under
one second were excluded from the analysis below.
According to this criterion, 77.7% of all trials were used.
Fig. 1 shows the accuracy of the verification question,
which asked about the spatial relationships between the
landmarks appearing in the third sentence. We chose only
the third sentence because it is the initial sentence that
differs according to the text continuity. In both continuous
and discontinuous condition, the first and the second
sentence are same.
The results of ANOVA showed a significant interaction (F
(1, 30) = 4.997, p = .03, ηp2 = .14) between text continuity
× test perspective. All other interactions did not reach
significance. In the survey test conditions, the accuracy did
not show a significant difference (F (1, 30) = 1.400, p = .25,
ηp2 = .05). In the route test conditions, however, the
accuracy was higher in the continuous condition than the
discontinuous condition (F (1, 30) = 4.608, p = .04, ηp2
= .13). In addition, the accuracy was higher in the route test
condition than in the survey test condition when text was
continuous (F (1, 30) = 10.343, p = .00, ηp2 = .26). This
difference, however, was not found in the discontinuous
condition (F (1, 30) = 0.146, p = .70, ηp2 = .00).

Discussion
As we predicted, the accuracy was higher in the continuous
condition than in the discontinuous condition when
participants used route perspective during the test. In
contrast, performance did not show significant difference
between continuous condition and discontinuous condition
when they used survey perspective during the test. These
results show that participants need text continuity when they
recall spatial representation in route perspective. When
participants recall the spatial relationships, they rely onto
spatial representations which they had constructed before.

2364

And whether the construction of the spatial representation
was continuous or discontinuous, affect the spatial

representation itself.

Fig. 1: Mean accuracy to the questions about the third sentence in Experiment 1 (bar means SD)
These differences however, appeared according to test
perspective but did not according to learning perspective.
This is not in line with our prediction. Although text
continuity was a factor in learning, the performance differed
according to the test perspective, rather than the learning
perspective. We can think, however, that learning
perspective has some effect on spatial representation. If
spatial representations were the same regardless of learning
perspectives, these differences would not appear because
text continuity affects before the construction of spatial
representation, not after. Therefore, constructed spatial
representations should differ by the time participants
construct it. One possible idea is that some factor lacks
when participants learned the text in discontinuous
conditions. They have to recall spatial information without
the factor. When they recall in route perspective, the lack of
the factor is make participants to have trouble in recall.
When participants recall in survey perspective, however, the
feature of survey perspective covers the lack of the factor. It
is possible the factor is continuity of spatial representation.
One puzzling result is that participants showed better
performance in route test than in the survey test when text
was continuous. Previous studies showed superiority of
survey perspective than route perspective in performance
(Brunyé & Taylor, 2008a; Brunyé & Taylor, 2008b, Shelton
& Gabrieli, 2002). We could not find this superiority of
survey perspective in Experiment 1. There are two
possibilities account for this tendency. One is that sentence
order continuity works as a facilitator for route perspective,
not that sentence order discontinuity works as an inference
for route perspective. The other is that the studied

environments were too simple. It is possible that in a simple
environment, participants need not to form abstract spatial
representations, and it covers up the difference in learning
perspective.
To solve these problems, in Experiment 2, participants
studied a more complex text than that of Experiment 1. A
complex text makes participants better infer spatial
relationships according to their spatial representations.
Therefore, the verification task would reflect their spatial
performance more accurately.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, as in Experiment 1, we examined the
hypothesis that effective route description requires sentence
continuity. We used the spatial texts used in Taylor &
Tversky (1992). These texts were more complex than those
used in Experiment 1, and participants had to make an
inference about the environment. We manipulated text
continuity by inserting irrelevant questions into the text. In
the continuous condition we inserted short tasks that did not
relate to the main text, yet still made participants conduct
spatial inferences (such as “How many windows do you
have in your room?” or “Which city is in the north, Kyoto or
Nagoya?”). In the discontinuous condition, we inserted a
simple counting task not to let participants rehearsal the text
(“200 – 7 =?” or “100 + 8 =?”).
We made two predictions about the results. First, when
participants learned the text from a survey perspective
where the text did not need to be continuous, recall
performance did not differ between the two conditions of

2365

text continuity. However, when participants learned text
from a route perspective where the text does need to be
continuous, performance did differ between the two
conditions.

Method
Participants 67 Japanese graduates and undergraduates (34
males and 33 females) participated to Experiment 2 for a
monetary reward. Mean age was 21.1 (range 18-25, SD =
1.8). 33 participants (17 males and 16 females) studied all
descriptions with a survey perspective, and 34 (17males and
17 females) studied all with a route perspective.
Experiment design The design was 2 × 2 × 2 mixed, with
learning perspectives (survey vs. route) as a between
subjects factor, with text continuity (continuous vs.
discontinuous) and test perspective (survey vs. route) as
within subjects factors.
Materials Three tasks were conducted. Spatial text learning,
Corsi blocks (Corsi, 1972) and the pathway span test
(Mammarella, Cornoldi, Pazzaglia, Toso, Grimoldi, Vio,
2006). All tasks are conducted on the PC screen.
We used two spatial texts (town and convention center)
from Taylor & Tversky (1992). Each text described an
environment from two perspectives—survey and route.
Each text had 28 True/False verifications: four questions
were non-locative recognition, four were non-locative
paraphrased, four were survey recognition, four were route
recognition (survey and route recognition questions required
inferences when study perspective and test perspective
differed), six were survey inference, and six were route
inference. In each category, three statements were true and
the rest were false.
When participants learned the text, we inserted irrelevant
tasks in every three sentences. In discontinuous condition as
an experimental condition, we inserted spatial questions
which are irrelevant to the main spatial text. Participants had
to infer spatial relationships or to recall spatial alignment of
objects which does not appear in the main text. We
instructed participants to answer in five seconds. After five
seconds passed, they return to the learning of the main text
independently of the fact they answered to the inference
questions or not, and the answer is correct or not.
In continuous condition as a control condition, we
inserted simple counting tasks. We used counting tasks to
prevent participants from rehearsal of the main spatial text.
We instructed participants to repeat answering by five
seconds passed (e.g. 93, 86, 79 …). After the five seconds
passed, they return to the learning of the main text.
In the Corsi blocks task, participants memorized the order
of the position where a dot appeared. The number of stimuli
in one trial was from four to seven, and there were twelve
trials. This task measured spatial-sequential ability. Studies

have found positive relationships between this task and
route perspective performance (Mammarella et al., 2006;
Pazzaglia & Cornoldi, 1999; Pazzaglia, et al., 2010).
In the pathway span task, participants were told to follow
movement in a five by five matrix according to the direction
instructions. The number of instructions in one trial ranged
from four to seven, with twelve trials in total. This task also
measured spatial-sequential ability.
Procedure
First, participants conducted the Corsi blocks task. Then
they were allocated to either the survey study condition or
the route study condition, as performance on the Corsi block
task did not differ between conditions. Next, participants
read two spatial texts. One text was read for the continuous
conditions and the other for the discontinuous conditions.
After they read one spatial text, they answered 28 true/false
questions about each text. Finally, they conducted the
pathway span test. All stimuli were presented on a PC
screen.

Results
One male was excluded from the analysis because he did
not follow instructions. Another male was excluded because
his verification performance in one condition was much
lower (19.4%), although chance level was 50%. Both of
them studied in the survey perspective. Verbatim questions
that included reaction times beyond ±2 SD were excluded
from the analysis. According to this criterion, 97.0% of all
trials were used.
Fig. 2 shows the accuracy of the verification task where
participants needed spatial inferences. The results of the
ANOVA showed a marginally significant interaction
between text continuity × test perspective (F (1, 65) =
3.769, p = .06, ηp2 = .05). In the continuous condition, the
accuracy in survey and route condition did not showed
significant difference (F (1, 65) = 0.219, p = .64, ηp2 = .00).
In the discontinuous condition, participants showed lower
accuracy in the route test than in the survey test (F (1, 65) =
5.614, p = .02, ηp2 = .08). In the survey test condition, the
accuracy in the continuous condition and discontinuous
condition did not showed significant difference (F (1, 65) =
0.663, p = .41, ηp2 = .01). In route test condition,
participants showed lower performance in the discontinuous
condition. The effect size of this difference is not small.
This difference, however, did not reach to significance (F (1,
65) = 2.428, p = .12, ηp2 = .04). We conducted ANCOVA
which controlled for the scores either Corsi blocks task or
pathway span test or both of them. Those analyses, however,
showed no statistical significance.

Discussion

2366

As predicted, when text lost its continuity, participants in
the route test condition decreased performance compared to

requires text continuity was partially supported in
Experiment 2. The discontinuous text lowered the accuracy

the survey condition. Our hypothesis that route description

when participants were tested in the route perspective. The

Fig. 2: Mean accuracy to the spatial inference questions in Experiment 2 (bar means SD)
effect was, however, limited and some predicted results did
not reach to significant level.
As in the Experiment 1, the effect of text continuity
appears according to the test perspective. We have a good
reason, however, to believe text continuity affect how we
learn the spatial information as we stated in the discussion
of Experiment 1.
Previous research (Pazzaglia & Cornoldi, 1999; Pazzaglia,
et al., 2010) has shown the importance of the spatialsequential ability of learners in processing route description.
This study shows that not only the spatial-sequential ability
of the readers but also the text continuity itself is important
to route description. This result reveals the more continuous
nature of the route perspective than the survey perspective.
In route description, it is clear that one must remember from
where he or she has come, and which direction he or she is
facing. The result of this study indicates that text continuity
is essential, not only to description itself but also to the
mental processing of route description.

General Discussion
We conducted two experiments and examined the effect of
text continuity in route perspective. In Experiment 1, we
manipulated text continuity by transposing the sentences. In
the test phase, text continuity increased performance of the
route perspective. In Experiment 2, we manipulated the
continuity by inserting irrelevant tasks into the more
complex spatial descriptions than Experiment 1.
Performance on the route test decreased in the discontinuous
condition where participants inferred spatially. These results

support our hypothesis that route perspective needs text
continuity.
Previous studies have found that spatial sequential ability
is necessary for learning route description (Pazzaglia &
Cornoldi, 1999; Pazzaglia, et al., 2010). In this study, we
found that not only spatial-sequential ability but also text
continuity is essential for understanding route descriptions.
This dependence on continuity seems to relate to the nature
of route description, as readers must continuously update
changes in their local environment (Shelton & Gabrieli,
2002).
This study revealed that text continuity affects the
retrieving of spatial information in route perspective. It
remains unrevealed, however, when text continuity affect
route perspective. There can be two possibilities about it.
There was a significant interactions between test perspective
× text continuity. There is no doubt, therefore, text
continuity affect at the test. In this case, spatial
representation formed in discontinuous condition lacks
continuity regardless of the learning perspective. When one
uses route perspective to retrieve information from that
discontinuous representation, a problem occurs. He or she
can’t rely onto continuity of the representation, has to
navigate in his/her spatial representation discontinuously
and the performance decreases. When one uses survey
perspective at the test, whether the spatial representation is
continuous or discontinuous does not matter. He or she can
successfully retrieve information from his/her spatial
representation even when it is discontinuous. Although the
interaction between study perspective and text continuity
was not statistically significant, this does not necessarily

2367

denies the possibility of the effect of text continuity at
learning. It is possible that the effect of text continuity at
learning exists, however, is too weak to affect at the
learning.
We refer to three remaining problems in this study. First,
we used spatial text to present stimuli to participants in this
study. Text and languages are naturally continuous and the
results of this study might appear only when one studies
one’s environment using language. Therefore, we must
confirm these results through other forms of studying, such
as navigation in reality or watching videos involving
specific locations. Second, we have to solve problems about
the types of two inference tasks in Experiment 2. We
regarded spatial question as an inference task and counting
tasks as a control one. This distinction, however, is
relatively arbitrary. It is possible that these tasks differed in
types of inference, not in continuity. To solve this problem,
we may need another control condition which is different
from ones in continuity. In addition to that, forming spatial
representation and extract information from that is quite
complex process and are thought to be affected by
individual difference. Participants take many strategies and
their abilities differ quite a large way (Kato & Takeuchi,
2003). Therefore, it is possible that individual difference
and strategy preference affect the results and covers up the
effects of some factors. In Experiment 2, almost all results
showed the same directions with the predictions. The
statistical analysis, however, showed only few of them.
Therefore, the next step is to take into account individual
difference and the strategy preference.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for JSPS
Fellows.

Reference

Brunyé, T. T., & Taylor, H. A. (2008a). Extended
experience benefits spatial mental model development
with route but not survey descriptions. Acta Psychologica,
127, 340-54.
Brunyé, T. T. Taylor, H. A. (2008b). Working memory in
developing and applying mental models from spatial
descriptions. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 701729.
Corsi, P. M. (1972). Human memory and the medial
temporal region of the brain. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, McGill University, Montreal.
Kato, Y., & Takeuchi, Y. (2003). Individual differences in
wayfinding strategies. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 23, 171-188.
Mammarella, I. C., Cornoldi, C., Pazzaglia, F., Toso, C.,
Grimoldi, M., & Vio, C. (2006). Evidence for a double
dissociation between spatial-simultaneous and spatialsequential working memory in visuospatial (nonverbal)
learning disabled children. Brain and Cognition, 62, 5867.
Mammarella, I. C., Meneghetti, C., Pazzaglia, F., Gitti, F.,
Gomez, C., & Cornoldi, C. (2009). Representation of
survey and route spatial descriptions in children with
nonverbal (visuospatial) learning disabilities. Brain and
Cognition, 71, 173-179.
Pazzaglia, F, & Cornoldi, C. (1999). The role of distinct
components of visuo-spatial working memory in the
processing of texts. Memory, 7, 19-41.
Pazzaglia, F., Meneghetti, C., De Beni, R., & Gyselinck, V.
(2010). Working memory components in survey and route
spatial text processing. Cognitive Processing, 11, 359-369.
Shelton, A. L., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2002). Neural correlates
of encoding space from route and survey perspectives.
The Journal of Neuroscience : the official journal of the
Society for Neuroscience, 22, 2711-2717.
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1992). Spatial Mental Models
Derived from Survey and Route Descriptions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 292, 261-292.

2368

