UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Vowel-Size Relationship Re-Examined Using Speeded Classification.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3280162v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ohtake, Yuka
Haryu, Etsuko

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Vowel-Size Relationship Re-Examined Using Speeded Classification
Yuka Ohtake (4588208926@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate school of Education, University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Etsuko Haryu (haryu@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate school of Education, University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Abstract
The vowel-size relationship has been repeatedly reported: the
vowels /a/ and /i/ elicit bigger/smaller images respectively.
Previous studies reporting this relationship have required
participants to make explicit decisions about the meaning of
the target words including these vowels. In the present study,
we attempted to re-examine the vowel-size relationship in
two experiments using speeded classification tasks. The
results of Experiment 1 indicate that participants associated
the vowels with a bigger/smaller image even when they were
not motivated to pronounce the vowels during the task. The
results of Experiment 2 indicate that the proprioception of the
absolute size of the mouth may not contribute to the
vowel-size relationship. The process underpinning the
vowel-size relationship is discussed.
Keywords: sound symbolism; vowel-size relationship;
speeded classification; kinesthetic experience

Introduction
The relationship between a word and its referent is said to
be arbitrary, but many studies have reported relationships
between them. This is referred to as “sound symbolism.”
Among these studies, the vowel-size relationship has been
repeatedly reported: the vowel /a/ is likely to make us
imagine objects of bigger size whereas the vowel /i/ elicits
images of smaller objects. Previous studies (e.g., Sapir,
1929; Newman, 1933; Tarte & Baritt, 1971) that reported
this relationship have required participants to make explicit
decisions about the meaning of target words including these
vowels. For example, Sapir (1929) asked participants which
table was bigger, /mal/ or /mil/, while Tarte & Baritt (1971)
required participants to match CVC trigrams (e.g., /was/ or
/wis/) with geometric figures of different sizes. However,
these studies suffer from a weakness in the way the process
underpinning the vowel-size relationship was investigated:
participants had enough time to pronounce or simulate the
target words during the task, which makes it difficult to
determine which of the following two factors contributed to
the vowel-size correspondence.
The first of these factors is the component formant
frequencies of the vowels (Tarte, 1982). The second and
third formants of the vowel /i/ are higher than those of the
vowel /a/. Given that higher frequency sounds correspond
to smaller images and lower frequency sounds correspond
to bigger images (Gallace & Spence, 2006), frequencies of

vowels may explain why the vowel /a/ is likely to elicit
bigger images and /i/ to elicit smaller images.
The second is the contribution of the kinesthetic
experience of pronunciation (e.g., Newman, 1933). The
vowel /a/ is pronounced with the mouth wide open and the
tongue positioned low in the mouth. In contrast, the vowel
/i/ is pronounced with the mouth slightly open, and the
tongue positioned high in the mouth. Since the oral cavity is
larger when pronouncing /a/ than when pronouncing /i/, the
vowel /a/ is likely to elicit bigger images than the vowel /i/.
In the present study, we attempted to investigate the
vowel-size relationship in a way that distinguished between
these two factors. More specifically, in Experiment 1, we
examined whether participants would associate the vowels
/a/ and /i/ with bigger and smaller images, respectively,
even when they were not motivated to pronounce the
vowels during the task. In Experiment 2, we examined
whether kinesthetic experience around the mouth (i.e.,
proprioception of the size of the oral cavity when
pronouncing the vowels) on its own and without auditory
experience could elicit bigger/smaller images.
To examine these problems, we used speeded
classification tasks, which have been widely used in studies
of cross-modal perception (e.g., Gallace & Spence, 2006).
In this kind of task, participants have to discriminate
between stimuli in one dimension while trying to ignore an
irrelevant dimension, which enables us to see whether their
response to the relevant dimension is influenced by the
variation of the irrelevant dimension.
In Experiment 1, to investigate whether the vowels /a/
and /i/ elicit bigger/smaller images without the kinesthetic
experience of pronunciation, we asked participants to judge
the relative size of the target disk, while an irrelevant sound
(the vowel /a/ or /i/) was presented simultaneously. If
reaction times for judging the size of the target disk were
influenced by the variation of the vowels, this would allow
us to conclude that the acoustical features of vowels /a/ and
/i/ elicit bigger/smaller images without kinesthetic
experience.
In Experiment 2, to investigate whether the
proprioception of the size of the oral cavity when
pronouncing /a/ and /i/ could elicit bigger/smaller images
on its own without the subject actually hearing any vowel
sounds, we asked participants to judge the relative size of
the target disk, while ensuring that they opened their
mouths in the same way they would if pronouncing each

2121

vowel. If reaction times for judging the size of the target
disk were influenced by the variation in the way the
participants opened their mouths, this would allow us to
conclude that the kinesthetic experience alone elicits
bigger/smaller images without auditory experience.
In the following, we will discuss the possible process
underpinning the vowel-size relationship, taking both the
above factors into account.

mean intensity was 48.79 dB (SD =2.48 dB). For the vowel
/i/, the mean fundamental frequency was 240.6 Hz (SD
=3.59 Hz), the mean first formant frequency was 416.5 Hz
(SD =20.9 Hz), the mean second formant frequency was
2712.3Hz (SD =67.6 Hz), the mean third formant frequency
was 3494.0 Hz (SD =75.3 Hz), and the mean intensity was
49.94 dB (SD =2.43 dB).
fixation point (300 ms)

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we attempted to investigate whether the
vowels /a/ and /i/ elicit bigger/smaller images without the
kinesthetic experience of pronunciation. In the experiment,
participants were asked to judge whether a target disk was
bigger or smaller than a standard disk. The target disk was
presented following the standard disk. It was 10% or 20%
shorter or longer in diameter compared to the standard disk.
A task-irrelevant sound (/a/ or /i/) was sometimes presented
simultaneously along with the presentation of the target
disk. If it is the case that the vowel sounds (/a/ and /i/) elicit
bigger/smaller images without the kinesthetic experience of
pronunciation, the reaction times should have been shorter
when the vowel-size relation is congruent (/a/ being
presented when the target disk was bigger and /i/ being
presented when it was smaller) than when it was
incongruent.

Method
Participants Thirty Japanese-speaking undergraduate
students (14 males, 16 females; mean age, 22.2 years; range
20-36 years) took part in the experiment.
Apparatus The visual stimuli were presented on a laptop
computer (Dell Inspiron 1526) with a 15.4-inch screen, or
on a desktop computer (VAIO VGC-RA72P) with a
17-inch screen. Auditory stimuli were presented through
headphones (Audio-Technica ATH-ANC7 or Sehnheiser
HDA200). The presentation of the stimuli and the recording
of the participants’ responses were controlled using Cedrus
Superlab 4.0 software.
Materials The visual stimuli were the standard disk, the
target disks, and the mask. The standard disk was gray and
3 cm in diameter, and the target disks were ±10% and
±20% of the diameter of the standard disk. The visual mask
was a light-gray screen with dark-gray spray. Four different
auditory stimuli were used for presentation of the vowels /a/
and /i/, respectively. The auditory stimuli were a recording
of a Japanese female who had been asked to pronounce
Japanese vowels. Her speech was recorded on a Roland
R-09. The duration of each vowel was 300 ms. For the
vowel /a/, the mean fundamental frequency was 240.3 Hz
(SD =2.16 Hz), the mean first formant frequency was
780.3Hz (SD =46.1 Hz), the mean second formant
frequency was 1374.8Hz (SD =57.6 Hz), the mean third
formant frequency was 3077.5 Hz (SD =241.7 Hz), and the

+

(300 ms)
standard disk (300 ms)
mask 1 (500 ms)
target disk (80 ms)

time
mask 2 (3 s or until
participant responded)

Figure 1: Illustration of the sequence of visual stimuli
presented in each trial in Experiment 1 and 2.
Procedure The participants sat at a desk, 45 cm from the
computer. It took about 10 minutes to complete the entire
experiment.
Figure 1 illustrates the sequence of events in each trial.
At the start of each trial, the word “Ready?” appeared at the
center of the screen, and the participants could choose when
to start by pressing the space key. At first, a fixation point
was presented in the middle of the screen for 300 ms,
followed by a blank white screen. After a 300-ms
presentation of the blank screen, the standard disk was
presented at the center for 300 ms, followed by the mask
screen. The mask screen was presented for 500 ms and was
followed by the target disk. The position of the target disk
varied randomly (by up to ±0.3 cm vertically and
horizontally from the center of the screen) to prevent the
participants from using superimposition cues to judge the
relative size of the target disk. At the same time the target
disk was presented, a vowel (/a/ or /i/) was presented in 20
trials for each vowel, and no sound was presented in the
remaining 20 trials. The target disk was presented for 80 ms,
followed by the mask screen. The mask screen stayed on
the screen until the participant responded or until 3 seconds
had elapsed, at which point the screen displaying the word
“Ready?” appeared and the next trial was ready to begin.
The participants were asked to judge whether the target
disk was bigger or smaller than the standard disk as rapidly
as possible. The participants were instructed to indicate the
relative size of the target disk by pushing “/” with the index
finger of the right hand, or “\” with the middle finger of the
right hand. Which key corresponded to “big” or “small”
was counterbalanced across the participants.

2122

Table 1: The means and standard errors of reaction times (in milliseconds) as a function
of condition and size of the target disk in Experiment 1 and 2.
Condition
congruent
RT
size
+10%
+20%
-10%
-20%
mean
+10%
+20%
-10%
-20%
mean

M
Experiment 1
408.7
375.6
469.8
387.5
410.4
Experiment 2
378.5
362.6
427.4
376.7
386.3

SE
29.6
18.2
29.4
18.6
21.8
18.0
12.2
20.8
18.5
15.5

The participants were informed that a task-irrelevant
sound would sometimes be presented, but they were
instructed to ignore it. The response times were calculated
from the beginning of the second mask screen to the time of
the decision. The participants completed 12 practice trials
before the experiment to ensure that they clearly understood
the task.
The experiment was composed of 60 trials, 15 trials for
each size of the target disk (±10%, ±20%). The order of
trials was randomized for each participant. For each size of
the target disk, five trials were presented with the vowel /a/,
five trials were presented with /i/, and the remaining five
trials were presented with no sound. Each of the trials was
classified into three conditions, with 20 trials each:
congruent condition (i.e., /a/ being presented when the
target disk is bigger and /i/ being presented when it is
smaller), incongruent condition (i.e., the opposite
combination to the congruent condition), and control
condition (i.e., no sound being presented along with the
target disk).

incongruent
RT
SE
M
423.9
410.2
492.8
423.1
437.5

25.8
20.2

387.3
369.8
411.8
367.7
384.1

18.5
19.8
16.8
16.0

41.0
26.7
26.0

15.2

control
RT
M

SE

397.9
381.3
482.3
397.5
414.7

23.7
21.9

385.1
367.0
421.2
370.5
385.9

15.0
12.2
22.0
15.1

36.6
21.6
23.4

14.6

effect of condition (F(2,58) = 7.08, p = .002), and a
significant main effect of size of the target disk (F(3,87) =
10.89, p = .001),1 but no significant interaction between
condition and size (F (6,174) =.484, p >.10).1
A post hoc Bonferroni test of condition revealed
significant differences between the congruent condition and
the incongruent condition and between the control condition
and the incongruent condition (all ps <.05), with the slowest
responses occurring in the incongruent condition. There
was no significant difference between the congruent
condition and the control condition. A post hoc Bonferroni
test of size revealed significant differences between -10%
and other sizes (all ps < .05), with the slowest responses
occurring in -10%. There were no significant differences
between any pair of the remaining sizes (+10%, +20%,
-20%).
In sum, reaction times were longer in the incongruent
condition than in the congruent condition or control
condition, and in -10% than in the other sizes.

Discussion
Results
The means and standard errors of reaction times as a
function of the condition and size of the target disk are
shown in Table 1. Because the error rate was quite low (M
= 3.1%, SD = 2.9%), subsequent analysis was only
performed on the reaction times.
Reaction times The reaction times for the wrong decision
(3.1%) and above +3SD from the mean reaction times of
each participant (1.2%) were excluded from the analysis.
We performed repeated measures of variance on the
reaction times as a function of condition (3) and size of the
target disk (4). The analysis revealed a significant main

In Experiment 1, we attempted to investigate whether
participants would associate the vowels /a/ and /i/ with
bigger and smaller images, respectively, without the
kinesthetic experience of pronunciation, using a speeded
classification task. The results indicate that they did. The
participants responded more slowly in the incongruent
condition than in the congruent condition or control
condition. The vowel /a/ elicited bigger images and the
vowel /i/ elicited smaller images without kinesthetic
experience, which could interfere with the response of “big”
1
A Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment was used to correct for
violations of sphericity.

2123

while hearing /i/ and with the response of “small” while
hearing /a/. As Tarte (1982) pointed out, the component
formant frequencies of vowels can explain the vowel-size
relationship.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we attempted to investigate whether
bigger/smaller images would be elicited only with the
kinesthetic experience around the mouth when pronouncing
the vowels /a/ and /i/ (i.e., the proprioception of the size of
the oral cavity), without the subject actually hearing any
vowel sounds, using the same task as Experiment 1. In the
experiment, the participants completed the same speeded
classification task with the kinesthetic experience of
pronouncing vowels. We ensured that the participants
opened their mouths in the same way they would if
pronouncing each vowel by asking them to hold either of
two types of solid object in their teeth: one was egg-shaped
and the other was board-shaped. In order to hold the
egg-shaped object with their teeth, participants had to open
their mouth widely, and the resultant lip shape was similar
to that when pronouncing the vowel /a/. On the other hand,
holding the board-shaped object required participants to
open their mouth slightly along the vertical axis and pull
their lips sideways. This shape mimicked the lip shape
when pronouncing the vowel /i/. If it is the case that the
proprioception of the size of oral cavity elicits images of
size without auditory experience, the reaction times should
have been shorter when the participants were holding the
egg-shaped object and the larger target disk was presented,
and they are holding the board-shaped object and the
smaller target disk was presented, compared with the
opposite combinations.

Method
Participants Twenty-four Japanese-speaking adults (13
males, 11 females; mean age, 26.8 years; range 22-42
years) took part in the experiment.
Apparatus and Materials The visual stimuli were
presented on a laptop computer (Dell Inspiron 1526) with a
15.4-inch screen, controlled by Cedrus SuperLab 4.0. The
visual stimuli were the same as Experiment 1. Two solid
objects (egg-shaped and board-shaped) made from
styrofoam were used to ensure the participants opened their
mouths in the same way they would if pronouncing each
vowel. The egg-shaped object was 5.5 cm in maximum
diameter and 8 cm long, and the board-shaped object was
7.5 cm by 15 cm long and 0.5 cm thick. Twenty-four sets of
the two objects were prepared so that each participant could
use a new one.
Procedure As in Experiment 1, participants sat at a desk,
and the experimenter instructed them to indicate the relative
size of the target disk as soon as possible by pressing the
keys. The sequence of the visual events in each trial was the
same as Experiment 1.

The participants completed 12 practice trials before the
experiment. The experiment was composed of six blocks of
72 trials, with a short break at the end of each block. Each
block had 12 trials, three trials for each size of the target
disk (±10%, ±20%), and the order of the trials was
randomized in each block for each participant. Six blocks
were divided into three phases, which had two blocks each.
In one phase, participants were instructed to open their
mouth naturally, and hold the smaller side of the
egg-shaped object in their teeth. In the other phase,
participants were instructed to open their mouth slightly
sideways, and hold the longer side of the board-shaped
object in their teeth. In the remaining phase, participants
were instructed to complete the task in the same way as the
practice trials, i.e., to hold no object in their mouth. The
order of the three phases was counterbalanced across
participants. Each of the trials was classified into three
conditions, 24 trials for each condition: congruent condition
(i.e., the participants are holding the egg-shaped object and
the larger target disk is presented, or they are holding the
board-shaped object and the smaller target disk is presented,
incongruent condition (i.e., the opposite combination to the
congruent condition), or control condition (i.e., the
participants are not holding anything when the target disk is
presented).

Results
The means and standard errors of reaction times and
number of wrong decisions as a function of condition and
size of the target disk are shown in Table 1. As in
Experiment 1, because the error rate was quite low (M =
3.1%, SD = 2.9%), subsequent analysis was performed only
on the reaction times.
Reaction times As in Experiment 1, the reaction times for
the wrong decision (3.1%) and above +3SD from the mean
reaction times of each participant (1.2%) were excluded
from the analysis.
We performed repeated measures of variance on the
reaction times as a function of condition (3) and size of the
target disk (4). The analysis revealed a significant main
effect of size of the target disk (F(3,69) = 14.8, p < .001),1
but no significant main effect of condition (F(2,46) = .05, p
> .10),1 and no significant interaction between condition
and size (F(6,138) = .438, p > .10),1 A post hoc Bonferroni
test of size revealed significant differences between -10%
and the other sizes (all ps < .01) with the slowest responses
occurring in -10%, and a marginally significant difference
between +10% and +20% with slower responses in +10%
(p = .08).
These results indicate that the condition did not affect the
reaction times, although the size of the target disk affected
them as in Experiment 1.

Discussion
In Experiment 2, we attempted to investigate whether the
proprioception of the size of the oral cavity could elicit

2124

bigger/smaller images on its own without the subject
actually hearing any vowel sounds, using the same task as
Experiment 1. The reaction times did not differ significantly
between in the congruent condition and in the incongruent
condition. The results indicate that the proprioception of the
size of oral cavity when pronouncing /a/ and /i/ may not, on
its own, elicit the image of bigger/smaller sizes. However, it
should be pointed out that in this experiment we controlled
the absolute size of the oral cavity, in other words, we
investigated the effect of the static kinesthetic experience of
pronunciation. It is possible that the dynamic kinesthetic
experience of pronunciation, that is, the temporal change of
the relative size of the mouth, plays an important role in
eliciting the image of bigger/smaller sizes.
It is also worth noting that the lack of uncertainty about
the variation of stimuli in the irrelevant dimension may
have weakened the effect of treatment (Gallace & Spence,
2006). In Experiment 1, there was an uncertainty about the
variation of stimuli in the irrelevant dimension, induced by
trial-by-trial variation. In contrast, in Experiment 2, the
stimuli in the irrelevant dimension were fixed during each
of the blocks.
In sum, the results in Experiment 2 indicate that the static
kinesthetic experience (i.e., the proprioception of the
absolute size of oral cavity) may not contribute to the
vowel-size relationship, although it is possible that the
dynamic kinesthetic experience could contribute to it. In
addition, the lack of uncertainty about the variation of the
irrelevant dimension may have weakened the effect of
treatment.

Taking the above into account, the vowel-size
relationship can be mainly explained by the component
formant frequencies and the static kinesthetic experience
may not contribute to it, but the dynamic kinesthetic
experience of pronunciation may play some role. Further
research is needed to evaluate the role of component
formant frequencies more exactly by controlling the
kinesthetic experience more rigidly, and to investigate the
role of the dynamic kinesthetic experience of pronunciation.

References
Gallace, A., & Spence, C. (2006). Multisensory synthetic
interactions in the speeded classification of visual size.
Perception & Psychophysics, 68(7), 1191-1203.
Liberman, A. M. & Mattingly, I. G. (1985). The motor
theory of speech perception revised. Cognition, 21, 1-36.
Newman, S. (1933). Further experiments in phonetic
symbolism. American Journal of Psychology, 45, 53-75.
Tarte, R. D., & Baritt, L. S. (1971). Phonetic symbolism in
adult native speakers of English: Three studies. Language
and Speech, 14, 158-168.
Tarte, R.D. (1982). The relationship between monosyllables
and pure tones: an investigation of phonetic symbolism.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21,
352-360.
Sapir, E. (1929). A study in phonetic symbolism. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 12, 225-239.

General Discussion
In the present study, we attempted to re-examine the
vowel-size relationship in a way that distinguished between
two possible factors, formant frequencies of the vowels
(Experiment 1) and kinesthetic experience while
pronouncing the vowels (Experiment 2), using the speeded
classification paradigm.
The results of Experiment 1 indicate that the component
formant frequencies of vowels on their own can explain the
vowel-size relationship, and the results of Experiment 2
indicate
that
the
static
kinesthetic
experience
(proprioception of the absolute size of oral cavity) may not
contribute to the vowel-size relationship.
However, in the results of Experiment 2, the possibility
remains that the dynamic kinesthetic experience (the
temporal change of the relative size of the mouth) might
have elicited bigger/smaller images and had an influence on
the results. Furthermore, we cannot completely eliminate
the possibility that the dynamic kinesthetic experience may
have affected the results of Experiment 1 from the
viewpoint of motor theory (e.g., Liberman & Mattingly,
1985), which understands the perception of speech as vocal
tract gestures. From this viewpoint, the dynamic kinesthetic
experience automatically generated from hearing vowels
may have affected the judgments of size, and supported the
results of Experiment 1.

2125

