UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of "Maverick": A study of Group Dynamics on Breakthrough in Collaborative
Problem solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9bw728nj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Hayashi, Yugo

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of "Maverick":
A study of Group Dynamics on Breakthrough in Collaborative Problem solving
Yugo Hayashi (yhayashi@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp)
College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University,
1-1-1 Nojihigashi, Kusatsu, Japan
during the task of collaborative problem solving among
several people. In the present study, the author will look into
the nature of such operation through an experimental set-up
where a different perspective is presented to illusionary
members of a conversational group.

Abstract
The presented study is concerned with one aspect of the effect
of a "whistleblower" or a person arousing or informing a
different perspective on a collaborative problem-solving task.
Its purpose is to find out, through an experiment, how a
whistle-blower (which we called "Maverick") affects the
facilitation of a breakthrough in a rule-discovery task. In the
experiment two hypotheses were tested: 1) Collaborative
problem-solving task is facilitated by contribution of member
with different perspective. 2) Problem-solving task is
facilitated more as the number of participant with a different
perspective increases. In the experiment, several sets of
figures were presented in three different settings (without a
different perspective, with Maverick, three members with a
different perspective), where a group of six members (one
human and five conversational agents) collaboratively
engaged in a rule-discovery task via a text-based chat system.
The experiment revealed an interesting result to the effect that
while a different perspective, overall, contributed to the
facilitation of problem-solving such contribution was not
statistically significant when it was presented by half of the
members. The implications of the result were discussed by
referring to the related literature in psychology.
Keywords: Collaborative Problem
Perspectives; Conversational Agent.

Solving;

Integrating different perspectives of others during
collaborative problem solving
Cognitive operations such as combing and integrating
different perspectives during problem solving are effective
strategies for generating new ideas (Finke, Ward, & Smith,
1992). They are also considered to play important roles in
several cognitive domains. In the model of Hegelian
dialectic thinking, different perspective is regarded as a key
concept for creativity. Also important in this model is a
process called the 'aufheben' whereby contradicting different
opinions are integrated and interpreted into a higher level of
concept (Hegel, 1874). In group problem solving, it is
assumed that this process of integrating different
perspectives can play an important role during collaborative
problem solving.
Hayashi & Miwa (2009) is one of the few experimental
studies that examined the effect of cognitive operations such
as combining and integrating different perspectives upon
collaborative problem solving. In that study, they
investigated the nature of such operations in a rulediscovery task where each of a pair had a different
perspective. Results of the experiment showed that
establishing a common ground between the two through
such operations is a key to success in problem solving.
It can be expected that such operations would become
more difficult when more than two people with different
perspectives engage in problem solving. The present study
will focus on the nature of group dynamics of collaborative
problem solving in a group, which very few studies have
investigated and still remains an unsolved issue in cognitive
science (see Figure 1 for an experimental set-up of this
study ).

Different

Introduction
In Cognitive Science, many studies have been conducted to
investigate what contributes most to collaborative problem
solving. Several of them found that different perspectives
promote an interaction between a pair and lead to
collaborative problem solving (Miyake, 1986; Shirouzu,
Miyake, & Masukawa, 2002; Hayashi, Miwa, & Morita,
2006). Others reported that asking reflective questions to
conversational partners is a useful interaction strategy for
gaining a deeper understanding about the problem (Okada &
Simon, 1997; Miwa, 2004). They argued that the use of
verbal probes such as providing clarification questions and
suggestions prompted the problem solvers' reflective
thinking and metacognition. A study by Shirouzu, Miyake,
& Masukawa (2002) also suggested that taking different
roles is an effective way to reconstruct the external
representation of problem solvers and stimulate creative
thinking.
Unfortunately, most of the findings on collaborative
problem solving in the past have been based on the
experimental data using a few participants such as a pair.
Only few studies investigated the interactional aspects of
collaborative process in a group of people and it remains
unknown what kind of group dynamics actually operates in
the perception and interpretation of different perspectives

I support
theory A

I ‘m on A
I stand
for A

I stand
for B
I ‘m on B
I support
theory B

People supporting theory A
People supporting theory B

Figure 1. An experimental setting.

444

Changing perspectives in group problem solving:
Participation of 'whistle blower'

1

2
3

One of the common phenomena observed in problemsolving task is that people are often fixated on or biased in
favor of a particular perspective. In such a situation, it is
vital that they take a different perspective, but an important
question is how we can make that happen.
In the field of organizational study, it has been found that
participation by so-called a 'whistle blower' often arouses a
different perspective among group members (Elliston,
Keenan, Lockhart, & Van Schaick, 1985; Near & Miceli,
1987). In general, a whistle blower is defined as the person
who dissents from the laws and systems of the organizations
to which she/he belongs. It is said that such person may be
perceived as a troublemaker that brings a confusing idea to a
group, or, sometimes as a reformer who brings an
innovative idea to a group. In either case, whistle blower is
known to become a potential provider of an 'anomaly cue'
that stimulates reflective thinking. We may predict that
participation of whistle blower with a different perspective
promote reflective process of collaborative problem solving.

5

4
6

2

Participants’ view

1
3
4

Aim of this study
Studies discussed above suggest that different perspective
provided by whistle blower may provide breakthrough and
facilitate their task in collaborative problem solving. The
group dynamics of incorporating different perspective may
also be affected by several factors such as the number of
whistle blower in a group. It may be natural to expect that
collaborative problem solving will be facilitated more when
a different perspective is suggested by more than one person.
The purpose of the present study is to examine these
assumptions, by testing the following hypotheses:
1) Collaborative problem-solving task is facilitated by
contribution of member with different perspective.
2) Problem-solving task is facilitated more as the number of
participant with a different perspective increases.

Experiment of design
In this study, we used a modified version of the
experimental design in Hayashi et al. (2006), where pairs of
participants with different perspectives engaged in a rulediscovery task. The design of the experiment was developed
based on the Gestalt theory.

Figure 2. Example of stimuli with ten components (six in
white and four in black).
Each set consists of several "objects" (or patterns) in black
or white color, each of which consists of a single block or
combined multiple blocks. In one example shown in Figure
2, one of the paired objects has a total of ten "components"
comprising four black components and six white
components. They were shown on a computer display
against either black or white background. When a
participant is focusing on white components inside a black
background, they becomes the figure and the six
components pop out; on the other hand, when a participant
is focusing on a black object, it becomes the ground. The
default setting was such that the participants easily see
figure component in white color (See Figure 2). The
alternative perspective is a perspective that suggests figure
component in black.
While only two members engaged in the task in Hayashi et
al. (2006), in the present study a group of six problem
solvers collaboratively worked on the problem solving task
through computer terminals connected via a local network.
The six members of the problem solvers consisted of one
human participant and five chat partners of computer gents.
In this study we call member with a different perspective
'maverick'. It is agent that plays the role of group member
and focuses on a background color which is different from
that the human participant does. Shown in Figure 3 is an
illustration of the setting where all six members except one
(or Maverick) see four white components against black
background.
Yes, Four
white.

Four in
white!

Partner 5

Participant

Four
white
objects

Controlling the participants’ perspective
In the experiment, several sets of random patterns of several
figures on a 6 x 6 grid base, each colored black or white,
were generated, (see Figure 2). In each set, a pattern
consisting of combined square blocks was shown against the
background of either black or white background colors. The
background color was controlled to derive, through Gestalt
effect, the change in problem-solver's perspective (Koffka,
1935).

Partner 2
Definitely
four white

Partner 3

I see four
white
objects

Partner 1
No No, six
black
objects!!
Partner 4
A maverick with different
perspective

Figure 3. Example of experimental situation.
In the experiment, several types of objects were presented
in sequence on a computer display (see Figure 4). For each

445

object, a square outer-box was shown on the display for one
second, which was followed by stimulus picture presented
inside the box frame. The number of white components and
black components was controlled and the total number of
the components presented to the participants was between
six and twelve. Sequential pattern of the sums of black
components and white components was repeatedly
presented (i.e. 6, 8, 10 / 6, 8, 10) (see Table 1).

Figure. 4. Series of presented stimuli.
Figure 5. Example of the interface.

Table 1. Example of sequences of the presented objects.

Conversational agents and the experimental system
White

4

6

4

7

2

4

6

5

3

Black
(maverick)

2

2

6

5

4

4

4

7

3

6

8

10

12

6

8

10

12

6

Sum of
Black
and
white

The system used in the experiment was designed by Java
(see Figure 6) and consists of four program modules: (1)
Server, (2) Client, (3) Agent, and (4) Problem Generator.
Multi-threads, which process all the messages
simultaneously, were used for the Server. When messages
are sent to the Server, they were re-distributed to all Clients
(Agents). The Problem Generator generates the objects that
were presented in sequence (see Table 1). This module
provided important information about the sequence of the
stimuli and the objects presented by GUI, which was used
by the agents to generate messages. A simple conversational
computer agent used in this study is a typical rule-based
system. Based on some pre-defined rules, it can respond
meaningfully to sentences that were input by the
participants (See Figure 7).
The Semantic Analyzer extracts keywords from input
messages and detects keywords relevant to the task.
Keywords collected from a previous study were used to
build the Dictionary which contained important keywords
for the task (Hayashi et al., 2009). Working Memory is
created by the Generator, and it consists of two associated
database: (a) presented objects (Picture Database), and (b)
detected key words (the Semantic Analyzer). Various types
of argument statements are stored in Rule Base in the form
of 'if-then' format. Definitions from Working Memory are
sent to Rule Base to search for matching statements. When
there are several overlapping statements, a simple conflictresolution strategy is utilized. When a matching process
ends, selected sentences are sent to the Generator. Then,
definitions in Working Memory are updated, and finally,
output messages are displayed.

In this experiment, the task of a participant is to discover a
rule concerning the regularity of the series of sums of the
components. If participants are preoccupied to focus on only
one of the two background colors, they cannot find a target
rule. To make a breakthrough in the task, problem solvers
have to take into consideration the number of components
that pop out as figure and that of components hidden in the
background. In order for a participant to find a rule, he/she
needs to focus on the components hidden in the background.
In a setting shown in Figure 3, for example, the maverick
(partner 4) keeps suggesting an alternative perspective to
call their attention to the presence of the black components.
The task required of the participants in the experiment was
to type in the chat exchange when engaging in the task. The
participants were assigned to always talk first during the
chat exchange. Shown in Figure 5 is an illustration of
interface record of a text-based exchange among a
participant and five other agents that are discussing the
problem. During the task, they were able to use buttons at
the bottom of the screen to change objects, send messages,
and to terminate the experiment. The participants were
allowed to write only one sentence of less than 30 characters
for each pair of components and were asked to finish the
task within 30 minutes.

446

they will start the task with someone inside the room. Those
participants who did not follow the instructions to answer
the final questions or who felt suspicious about their
partners were excluded from data. Participants who did not
begin the experiment by focusing on the objects by figure
color were also excluded. After this screening, the total
number of participants that provided to the data was 92 (31
participants each for the 6:0 and the 5:1 condition and 30
participants for the 3:3 condition.)

Server

Client

Client(Agent)

Client(Agent)

Client(Agent)

White object
figure

Black object
figure

6:0
condition
Problem
Generator

5:1
condition

Figure 6. The structure of the system.
3:3
condition

The conversational agent described above played the role
of partner and produced a virtual experimental environment.
The participants of the experiment were instructed that they
are interacting with real people, though they were actually
interacting with computer agents to solve the task.

Figure 8. Experimental conditions.

Dependant variables
After the task, each participant was asked to describe the
target rule on an answer sheet. If their answers were in some
ways related to the number of black or white components of
the objects, they were judged as 'integrated' (e.g. The sums
of the black and white components are 6,8,10 and the
sequence is repeated in the same order. The difference of the
number of the black and white components is between zero
to two.) If their answers did not include such information,
they were evaluated as 'not integrated'.
All of the answer sheets were also analyzed to evaluate
their cognitive process of perspective change. If the
conversation data included a description that referred to the
background color, it was counted as a token of 'a change of
perspective'. (e.g. "I was counting only the white objects,
but maybe the black objects have something to do with the
target rule…". If their data did not include such information,
it was counted as a token of 'no perspective change'. The
data was then statistically analyzed for (1) the number of
integrated answer, and (2) the process of change in
perspective.

Generator

input

Semantic
Analyzer

Dictionary

Text-only
output

Working
Memory

Picture
Database

Rule Base

Figure 7. Structure of the agent.

Experimental Setting
To test the hypotheses, the following three conditions were
set up: (1) 6:0 condition, (2) 5:1 condition, and (3) 3:3
condition. The third condition was included to test the
second hypothesis. In the first 6:0 condition, all of the
members had the same perspective; there were no members
with different perspectives in this condition. In the second
5:1 condition, one of the collaborating agents had a different
perspective. In the third 3:3 condition, half of the six
members had a different perspective. In all conditions, a
group of six members consisted of one human participant
and five computer agents and a different (or an alternative)
perspective based on black background color was provided
by computer agent to a human participant (See Figure
8).The participants engaged in the task, without being told
that they were interacting with computer agents.
101 undergraduate students participated in the experiment
(38 males and 63 females; the average age was 20.3). The
experiment took place in a computer room where maximum
capacity was 60 people. All participants were randomly
assigned to each condition and they were instructed that

Results
Problem Solving Performance
The results were analyzed using a 1 x 3 between-subjects
factorial design. Figure 9 shows the results of the
performance of problem solving. The vertical axis
represents the ratio of the problem solving performance, and
the horizontal axis represents the experimental condition.
The numerals shown on the cylindrical bars indicate the
number of participants in each condition.

447

A Chi square analysis was conducted to verify if the
difference of the number of problem solvers who used
perspectives of others was statistically significant. An overall analysis suggests that, a group which had a member with
a different perspective integrated its perspective into their
own perspective more frequently than a group which did not.
There were a significant difference among the three
conditions ( (2) = 7.189, p < .05). Next, a multiple
comparison was conducted on each two conditions using the
Fisher's exact test. There was a significant difference
between the 6:0 and the 5:1 condition (p < .05). On the other
hand, the differences between the 6:0 condition and the 3:3
condition were marginal (p < .10). There was no significant
difference between the conditions of 5:1 and 3:3 (p = .41).

90%

not integrated

80%
19

70%

23
28

integrated

50%

40%
30%
12

20%
10%

90%

70%
60%

no perspective
change

14

80%

22

28

perspective
change

50%
40%
17

30%
20%
10%

8

3

0%
6:0

5:1

3:3

Figure 10. Results of the problem solving process

The effect of 'Marverick 'and experimental
condition

100%

60%

100%

7
3

0%
6:0

5:1

3:3

Figure 9. Results of the problem solving performance

Perspective change process
Figure 10 shows the results of the performance of a change
of perspective. The vertical axis represents the ratio of the
change of perspective, and the horizontal axis represents the
experimental condition. The numerals shown on the
cylindrical bars indicate the number of participants in each
condition.
A Chi square analysis was conducted to check the
difference of the number of problem solvers who integrated
their perspectives during the task. Results indicate that there
were differences among the conditions (
) Next, a multiple comparison was conducted on
each two conditions using the Fisher’s exact test. There
were differences between the 6:0 and 5:1 condition (p < .01).
On the other hand, the differences between 6:0 and 3:3
conditions were marginal (p < .10). At last, differences were
found between the conditions of 5:1 and 3:3(p < .01).
Like the problem solving performance, an over-all analysis
suggests that a group which had members with different
perspectives were taking into consideration the perspectives
of others more frequently than a group which did not. More
importantly, the results showed that the problem solvers
were incorporating others' perspectives most when a
different perspective was proposed by a single partner; the
difference was greater than when different perspectives
were proposed by more than one person.

448

The statistical analyses above indicated that in both problem
solving performance and perspective change process, a
group which had member with a different perspective were
incorporating their alternative perspective more frequently
than a group which did not have such member. In other
words, the over-all analysis revealed the results that support
the first hypothesis.
Further analysis showed, however, that the participants
were not incorporating an alternative perspective when it
was proposed by three members; that is, different to the
expectation, the effect of an alternative perspective by a
single partner was greater than that by three partners (i.e.
half of group members). In other words the results of the
experiment did not support the second hypothesis;
Marverick outperformed the impact of its alternative
perspective than multiple members with an alternative
perspectives. In other words, it suggests that people are less
inclined to integrate a different perspective when it is
suggested from several people. Implications of this finding
will be presented below.

Discussion
It has been pointed out that a different perspective in a
group may be favored especially when people face a
situation which is comprehensible only vaguely or partially.
Though people tend to be influenced by a perspective that is
dominant in a group, a breakthrough can take place when a
member of a group presents a dissenting view. In
psychology this type of social influence is called the
"minority influence". In one of the classical studies on
'minority effects', Moscovici & Nemeth (1974) argued that a
minority of one is more influential than a minority of more
than one. They argued that if one person is consistent with
the minority view, over time, it may capture more attention
from the majority. In the 5:1 condition of the experiment,
suggestions of a different perspective from a single member
(i.e., Marverik) was not only consistent but persistent in that
it gave suggestions more frequently and over longer time
compared to those in the 3:3 condition. That may have
aroused the participants to think that the suggestion of

alternative perspective from that person must be very
helpful if he/she is so sure of it. One of the possible reasons
why the facilitation effect from Marverik was higher in the
experiment may have to do with the effect of attention and
its consistency. Other studies have shown that the influence
of a minority perspective is a desirable condition for
increasing the diversity of views, prompting reconsideration,
processing information and making a decision (Moscovici,
Lage & Naffrechoux, 1969; Nemeth, Brown, & Rogers,
2001). While the situations investigated in these studies are
somewhat different from the present study, the result of the
experiment showed that minority overall can exert a similar
desirable effect to the facilitation of the task of collaborative
problem solving where a breakthrough is needed.
The experiment also suggested that a different perspective
from a single member may be more easily incorporated to
facilitate cooperative problem-solving task than that from
multiple members. One of the factors that are involved in
the rejection of the second hypothesis may be related to the
notion called "groupthink". It is a psychological
phenomenon that often occurs when the desire for harmony
overrides critical evaluation of own perspective and serious
appraisal of alternatives. In a more realistic setting, social
influence may force people to adapt a perspective a majority
of others take. People may ignore the view of a minority,
favoring a certain perspective, whether that perspective is
ideal or not. This may take place in the process of decision
making in a group where its members want to minimize
conflict and reach a consensus decision without critical
evaluation. This is similar to a negative effect associated
with a whistle blower mentioned above. It may be that this
negative effect of groupthink was working for the
participants in 3:3 condition.
Also, a different perspective with people with the same
opposing perspective may have lead to confusion. This type
of confusion is pointed out in the literature of organizational
psychology (Pondy, 1967). To confirm why the point
investigated by the second hypothesis was rejected, these
and other factors may need to be taken into account in a
further experiment.

CONCLUSION
This study investigated the influence of different perspective
during collaborative problem solving. The results showed
that, while a different perspective is more likely to
contribute to problem solving, it was more effective when it
was presented by only one person than by several people.
The discussion suggested that further study is needed to
confirm the latter point.

Acknowledgments
I want to thank my student advisee Shin Takii (Ritsumeikan
University) for helping collect the experimental data. I am
deeply gratefully to Hitoshi Ogawa (Ritsumeikan
University) for giving me suggestions for the experiment
system. I appreciate Hajime Shirouzu (Chukyo University)
for mentoring me during the writing action. My deepest

449

application goes to Kazuhisa Miwa (Nagoya University)
who always gives me insightful comments.
This research was partially supported by the Grant-in-Aid
for Scientific Research (KAKENHI), The Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan
(MEXTGrant), Grant No. 23700325

References
Elliston, F., Keenan, J., Lockhart, P., & Van Schaick, J.,
(1985). Whistle-blowing Research : Methodological and
Moral Issues. New york: Praeger
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M., (1992). Creative
Cognition: Theory, Research, and Applications.
Cambridge: The MIT Press
Hayashi, Y., Miwa, K., & Morita, J., (2006) A laboratory
study on distributed problem solving by taking different
perspectives. In Proceedings of the 28th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 333-338).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hayashi, Y., Miwa, K., (2009) Prior experience and
communication media in establishing common ground
during collaboration. In Proceedings of the 31th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (528-531).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hegel, G. W. F., (1874) The Logic. Encyclopedia of the
Philosophical Sciences. 2nd Edition. London: Oxford
University Press
Koffka, K., (1935) Principles of gestalt psychology.
Routledge and Kegan Paul
Miwa, K., (2004) Collaborative discovery in a simple
reasoning task. Cognitive System Research, 5, 41-62.
Miyake, N., (1986) Constructive interaction and the
interactive process of understanding. Cognitive Science,
10, 151-177.
Moscovici, S., Lage, E., Naffrechoux, M., (1969) Influence
of a consistent minority on the response of a majority in a
color perception task, Sociometry, 32, 365-379.
Near, J. P., & Miceli, M. P., (1987) Whistle-blowers in
organizations: Dissidents or reformers?, Reserch in
Organizational Behavior, 9, 321-368.
Nemeth, C., Brown, K., & Rogers, J., (2001) Devil’s
advocate versus authentic dissent: stimulating quantity
and quality, European Journal of Social Psychology, 31,
707-720.
Okada, T., & Simon, H., (1997) Collaborative discovery in
a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 109-146.
Pondy, L. R., (1967), Organizational Conflict: Concepts and
models. Administrative Sicience Quarterly, 12, 296-320.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H., (2002)
Cognitively active externalization for situated reflection.
Cognitive Science, 26, 469-501.

