UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The use of ACT-R to develop an attention model for simple driving tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3z2025hs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Haring, Kerstin Sophie
Ragni, Marco
Konieczny, Lars
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The use of ACT-R to develop an attention model for simple driving tasks
Kerstin Sophie Haring (ksharing@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Katsumi Watanabe (kw@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
4-6-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8904, Japan

Marco Ragni (ragni@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

of these highly complex tasks. Vice versa, it also can
provide an indication for the future development of a
cognitive architecture by showing what cannot be realized
yet.

Abstract
Driving a car is obviously a complex task and the
construction of an ACT-R model of human attention while
performing this task is similarly complex along multiple
dimensions and presents a challenge to architecture and
modeler. This work is a first attempt to develop an integrated
driver model of attention in the cognitive architecture ACT-R.
The model is able to keep a traffic lane, identifies traffic signs
and crossroads in a sparse, simulated environment.
Keywords: Driver behavior model; cognitive architecture;
ACT-R; Attention

Introduction

Fig. 2: Screenshot of the environment interaction with
ACT-R. The red circle indicates the current visual focus of
attention of the model.

For most of us, driving a car is one of our everyday tasks.
But even for experienced drivers, just the task itself it is a
cognitive challenging task involving a big range of human
senses like sight, hearing, touch and acceleration. And this is
not yet considering secondary tasks like talking on the
phone or visual distractions like city illuminations. Luckily,
most driving task are not as challenging as the Traffic Light
Tree in Fig. 1, an artificial scenario by the French sculptor
Pierre Vivant.

The simulation environment for this model was restricted
to the components the cognitive architecture can recognize.
Nevertheless, basic driving scenarios simulating human
visual attention and driver behavior could be implemented.
The screenshot form the driving environment, which was
separately implemented in Lisp for this work, shows from
top-down another (blue) vehicle, the focus of attention (red
circle) and the navigation point (N) to keep the vehicle in
the center of the road. This model focuses on basic reference
points like the horizon, a leading car, the border and the
center line of the road, crossroads and traffic signs. For
example, the model of a driver in the screenshot in Fig. 2
sets the focus of visual attention on the outer border of the
road which enables it to reevaluate the center for the N point.
In the next step, it will shift the focus of attention to the
front and (hopefully) detect the car in front. If so, possible
next steps could be the comparison of the distance to a (here
fixed) safety distance or an overtaking procedure.
The here presented cognitive model should simulates
through ACT-R human attention while driving in a
simplified environment and produces the behavior for
scenarios with other cars, crossroads and traffic signs.

Fig. 1: The (thankfully not on a crossroad) installed traffic
light sculpture by Pierre Vivant.

The cognitive architecture

Current attempts to model human attention while driving
a car are realized in a quite more simple environment, yet
they are quite an important first step towards the modeling

The ACT-R (Anderson, 1993; Anderson 2007) cognitive
architecture proposes artificial, computational processes that
aim to act like a human cognitive system. Most of its basic

432

assumptions are inspired by the progress of cognitive
neuroscience. The tasks that humans can perform should, in
theory, consist of a series of discrete operations. ACT-R is
primarily used to model experimental psychological data.
ACT-R compromises theories about the operation mode of
human information processing and describes a
comprehensive computer model of human cognition. The
architecture is not only a proposed unified theory of
cognition, it is also a programming environment, a
production system with a development environment where it
is for example possible to set parameters or run simulations.
ACT-R is a framework in which the researcher can create
models (programs) for different tasks. Running this model
produces a simulation of human behavior.
As many cognitive architectures, ACT-R contains a
number of modules which can be accessed through their
limited-size buffers. For each module, a dedicated buffer
serves as an interface with that module. The state of ACT-R
at a given time is the content of the buffers at that time.
Buffers are connected to the modules and are changed by
production rules. Every buffer and (nearly) every module
can be allocated to a cortex region. This enables an
interesting mapping between buffers and neural processes
(Anderson
2007).

We decided to choose ACT-R for this task because it has a
visual search, is a well-accepted cognitive architecture, and
was already used in the past to evaluate the attention during
a driving task. A crucial advantage of the ACT-R
architecture is that the three main components used in this
model (control, monitoring and decision-making) can be
implemented directly. This takes into account human
constraints and results in a cognitive adequate model of
human attention.

Previous work

Fig. 3: ACT-R system diagram (Byrne, 2001). The
Cognitive Layer and each of the Perceptual-Motor modules
run in parallel, but each component is itself serial.
The main assumption of ACT-R is the representation of
knowledge as either declarative or procedural knowledge.
Declarative knowledge, consisting of facts, is represented in
form of chunks, or small logical units which encode simple
facts (e.g. the fact: “Sapporo is in Japan”). Procedural
knowledge, representing knowledge about how we do things,
is represented in form of production rules, condition-action
rules that generate a specific action (e.g. manipulate
declarative knowledge) if the conditions of this rule are
fulfilled. In other words, ACT-R’s knowledge representation
is split in two kind of memory modules, perceptual-motor
modules and memory modules.
The diagram in Fig. 3 shows the ACT-R in action. For the
visual attention, the environment provides screen objects to
the vision module. The target of attention is put into the
declarative memory in form of a chunk.

433

Most developed approaches can be distinguished into two
categories: task specific and generic approaches. Task
specific approaches such as Cosmodrive (Bellet et al., 2007)
and Pelops (Benmimoun, 2004) reproduce the cognitive
functions of a car driver. In contrast to task specific
approaches, generic approaches can model various aspects
of human behavior. Therefore, it is necessary for these
architectures to include a theory of human information
processing. Examples for such architectures in which driver
models have been implemented are ACT-R (Anderson,
1993; Salvucci, 2006), SOAR (Aasman,1995) and QN-MHP
(Liu et al., 2006).
Driver models were described by Aasman (1995) in the
cognitive architecture SOAR and by Liu (1996) in Queuing
Network-Model Human Processor (QN-MHP). Although
these models already exist in other cognitive architectures
and the central ideas remain the same in any architecture,
the ACT-R model of a driver shows a broader spectrum of
application (Salvucci 2001; 2006).
Salvucci (2006) developed a first integrated cognitive
model of human driving behavior in ACT-R. He showed in
his work the generality and the applicability using the
cognitive architecture ACT-R for the specific task of driving.
His model is designed to keep a standard vehicle on a multilane highway with moderate traffic. The model is also able
to recognize the distance to a vehicle ahead and to make the
decision for overtaking. As driving is a highly complex task
and not readily implementable, this model has some
limitations. The model solely was meant to interact with a
highway environment without recognition of traffic signs,
crossings or slip roads. An implementation limitation was
the use of the previous version ACT-R 5.0 and its
incompatibility to newer versions. It was also not possible to
make the ACT-R model interact directly with a driving
simulator.
Regardless the challenges, Salvucci proposed to develop a
driver model in the context of embodied cognition, task and
artifact (ETA) framework (Byrne, 2001), an idea which was
adopted in this work.

Cognitive model
A driver model can be a powerful instrument with several
possible fields of application, such as the development of
intelligent driver assistant systems. Our model is
implemented the newest version ACT-R 6 (Anderson, 2007)
and using the standard ACT-R development environment

running on an open source LISP, which not only guarantees
support and accountability, but also enables the research
community to use the developed model for further research.

make the simulation environment interact with the ACT- R
system, it was directly implemented in LISP with simple
graphics and the extension with the LTK Lisp Toolkit. As it
was not possible to make ACT-R directly interact with a
driving simulator, we decided to use a Lisp-implementation
of a driving environment.

Driver Modeling
We introduce a computational model of human attention in a
car driving task implemented in the ACT-R architecture. As
described previously, this model aims to account for the
embodied cognition, task and artifact (ETA) framework.
The complex task of driving a car can be divided into
basic subtasks. These must be integrated and interleaved to
achieve the continuously changing parent task. Michon
(1985) identified three levels of skills and control for the
driving task: operational (control), tactical (maneuvering),
and strategical (planning). He claims that a comprehensive
model should take into account the various levels.

Model Specification
As mentioned earlier, human attention during a driving task
is quite complex along multiple dimensions. It is not yet
possible to model every aspect of human attention within a
cognitive architecture for such a complex task. To limit the
scope of the project, model is hold quite simple. The model
focusses on simple visual perception and attention shifts
how they might occur in a sparse, artificial environment.
The first issue to address was to implement the three
components control, monitoring and decision making as a
loop of cognitive operations in the serial processor of the
ACT-R architecture. The UML diagram in Fig. 5 shows the
behavior of the cognitive model. This diagram identifies one
primary loop, which corresponds largely to the control
component in Fig. 4. The primary loop implements the
identification of the near and the far point, in other words,
the points responsible for the stable navigation in the middle
of the road. From the initial state, the model finds the road
marks and sets the near point for stable navigation on the
road. The model then fires a production rule screening for a
traffic sign, changes the state according to the result and sets
the far point. In our model, the near and far point are used as
control components and explained in detail in the next
paragraph. If the model reaches the state find far it will
continuously repeat the primary control loop.

Fig. 4: Schematic representation of the production rules of
the driver model in a simple crossroad scenario. The title of
a box indicates the current goal and the corresponding
production rules. The arrows show the flow of control and
the asteriks the return to the parent-goal.
The independent subtasks of the (simplified) parent task
drive (see Fig. 4) were implemented as control, the
operational process controlling the input, monitoring, the
tactical process interacting with the environment, and
decision making, also analogous to the tactical level of
Michon (1985), managing maneuvers like overtaking. These
subtasks are processed serially. Every production of the top
level goal drive has sub-goals, which incorporate the three
components.

Fig. 5: UML-Diagram of the driver model. To execute the
task drive, the model runs through several states.

Development Environment The theory of ACT-R is
embedded in the ACT-R software in form of Common Lisp
functions. This model is implemented in the open source
Clozure CommonLisp 1.3 and the current version of ACT-R
6.0 under the operating system Ubuntu 9.04. In order to

This primary loop can be extended in case the monitoring
component finds a special state like an intersection, that is,
the condition part of a production rule investigating the right
road marks on the right detects a crossing and the action part
of this rule changes the state of the model, testing for other

434

given constraints. According to the result, the model might
change the state or repeat the primary control loop updating
the near and the far point for stable navigation.

points is determined, and in case it falls below a certain
safety distance, the model can react according to that. At a
crossroad the model will set the far point on the border of
the crossing or on the vehicle approaching from the right. If
the model decides to continue driving, it will not look again
for another car at the crossroad, which is surely an issue for
future implementations. Stopping is implemented by setting
the far point onto the near point. The model will continue a
loop until the other vehicle is not on the crossroad anymore
and out of the safety distance.

Control
The control component of attention while performing a
driving task manages the perception of lower level visual
cues and the control over the vehicle (e.g., stopping). The
model uses the simple concept of two salient visual
attributes, based on earlier findings on locomotion
(Llewellyn, 1971). Steering is described (Land & Horwood,
1995) as divided in two levels, guidance and stabilization,
by using a „far“ and a „near“ region. Models of steering
developed under this assumption have been proven to be
consistent with empirical evidence.
This task specific information was required to construct
the model. An issue to be addressed was what kind of
strategies might be used by a human in a driving
environment. Salvucci & Gray (2004) base the perception of
a cognitive model on a near and a far point for guidance and
stabilization. This model extends the idea of two levels to
the extend, that with the far point, also other salient
attributes are encoded. The visual attention of the model
does not only switch in between the near point in the middle
of the road and the horizon (or any other straight point
ahead), but also encodes crossings, traffic signs or other cars
coming from the right hand side on a crossing. For the here
created artificial road environment, these two points account
to capture the relevant aspects of the environment. The idea
behind this wider use of the far point is the possible
extension in further implementations. The far point could be
used to determine other attributes relevant or irrelevant for
the driving task and give an account, how errors while
driving (e.g. overlooking of a traffic light before a noisy
background during monitoring).

Monitoring
The monitoring component captures the environment
continuously and updates the declarative memory. In the
here implemented driving environment, the situation
awareness mainly focuses on other vehicles around or traffic
signs. The model shifts the focus of visual attention towards
a certain object which is then encoded as visual attribute in
the declarative memory. This shift is achieved through three
different methods of shifting attention: First by specific
locations or directions, second by specific characteristics,
and third by objects, that have not been in in the focus of
attention yet. The combination of these methods of attention
shift enables the model to create complex search strategies
through the production rules. As ACT-R has a build-in
memory decay mechanism, it might be possible to predict
driver errors because the chunks encoding the current
environment decay and can be forgotten if not updated
continuously. Another source of possible driver errors could
be the potential failure in encoding relevant information
(e.g. to overlook a traffic sign or a vehicle).

Decision Making
The information provided by the control and monitoring
component is used to determine if and what decisions must
be made on the tactical level concerning the maneuvering
(e.g. stopping or overtaking). Our focus on decision making
assumes that the attributes in the environment are encoded
correctly. The decision how to proceed (in what state of the
model) is based on a pattern matching with the knowledge
about the environment. If there is no crossing encoded, the
corresponding production rule will not fire and the primary
loop will continue. The decision whether to stop or to
continue driving depends on the encoded traffic sign or on
other vehicles. In our environment, the model always
recognized these situations correctly, but it would be
interesting in future implementations to observe the
behavior and decision of the model in case, an error during
encoding of attributes occurs.
In order for the model to produce a decision making
process similar to humans, encoding a visual attribute and
shifting visual attention cannot occur at the same time. For
this model, the focus of attention is for example either on
the near or far point or encoding a traffic sign.

Fig. 6: Near and far points for a straight road with a
vanishing point and a road segment with a lead car.
Fig. 6 illustrates the near and far points and how they are
set in some possible situations during the driving task. The
near point determines the position in the middle of the road.
The far point is used to identify the direction of driving and
other non-control points like vehicles, crossroads and traffic
signs. If there is a lead vehicle, the distance between the two

435

This study did not validate the model data so far. Future
research could compare the output file data with human
data, specially compare the attention shift of the model to
human drivers over eye-tracking and the reaction times. But
one must remember, that only most critical parts of key
scenarios can be validated as no single method is sufficient
enough to understand the complex task of human driving
behavior yet.

Results and Discussion
Obviously, the model presented here does not account for all
aspects of human attention during driving, especially not in
a naturalistic environment. There are still quite some
practical limitations in both, the architecture and the
modeling effort itself. This study is an attempt to capture
some of the difficult behaviors involved in driving. It also
shows some of the limitations of the ACT-R architecture.
This study presents a simple simulation environment and
a cognitive model of driver attention during car driving that
is able to interact during run-time.
To obtain an integrated driver model of human driving
behavior, it is essential to develop models in an architecture
which is not task specific and can also model human
behavior also in a different context, like ACT-R. This model
is a first attempt to recognize, still simplified, traffic signs
and crossroads and might make a first step towards the
vision of accident-free driving. A majority (over 80%) of the
automobile accidents are caused by the driver themselves
(Statistisches Bundesamt, 2011). Nearly 16% of the
accidents happen while turning and during exit, followed by
disregarding the right of way (15%) and not-adapted speed
(15%). Theoretically, the cognitive driver model could give
a deeper insight for around 30% of the human errors while
driving. However, it has to be taken into account that the
model is still interacting with a simplified environment and
not yet taking into account driver´s prior experience, which
could be implemented by an increased attention in
potentially high accident risk situations. The model and the
environment do not present a complete picture of driver
behavior yet, but they form a base to extend the ETA
framework in any direction.
The ACT-R architecture limits the employment of the
three components control, monitoring and decision making
by using a serial cognitive processor. The serial processing
of the subtasks is typical for the human bottleneck of
information processing (Anderson et al, 2004). The resulting
model is not an optimal model in a mathematical sense, but
approximates human behavior and makes it possible, to
mimic human cognitive capacities, simulate the dynamic
nature of human driving behavior, and therefore to produce
a cognitive adequate model of human driving behavior. If
the model is, for example, occupied with an attention shift,
it cannot simultaneously update the near point. Also, the
model can only fire on production rule at a time and only
one visual operation can be executed at a time. These
processes take a certain time which are written in an output
file. This file contains the time, the active buffer and the
according event. This enables the researcher to compare the
produced data with human data.
The knowledge representation comprehends declarative
knowledge in chunks and procedural knowledge in
production rules. For example, the scenario at a crossroad
was implemented in 73 explicit production rules, which are
highly detailed and is therefore open to future extensions of
the model.

ACT-R for complex tasks
Modeling such complex tasks in the cognitive architecture
ACT-R presents quite some technical challenges to the
modeler. For a complex driving task and the validation, the
ACT-R model and the participants should interact in the
same environment. However, for this validation, it must be
possible from the technical side to connect the ACT-R
model directly to the simulation environment, which can be
technical challenging. Also thinkable is to develop a Lisp
version of a driving simulator which can easily interact with
ACT-R. If the simulator allows to extract the same
information ACT-R does, the output files could be compared,
even though the multiple implementation might be a
potential source of errors. Also, the current version of ACTR has some difficulties to directly recognize other
components than the already implemented. The attempt to
model such complex tasks in generic cognitive architectures
show the applicability as well as the still remaining
technical limitations.
However, such a complex task might raise the question
not only about the limitations of the architecture itself, but
also the modeling of human behavior. It might be a good
approach to study the key scenarios of human attention
during driving in more detail and transfer these results into
the model code, breaking down the overall complex task
into smaller subtasks in specific situations.

Conclusion and Outlook
We hope that this research will motivate more members of
the computational modeling community to study human
attention during driving a car and to overcome the practical
limitations. Modeling of such complex tasks holds great
promise for meeting the modeling challenges.
The progress to date in the development of cognitive
architectures has been impressive, yet scientific gaps,
technical challenges and practical issues remain. On one
hand, cognitive models help to develop an understanding of
driver behavior and aim to provide a theoretical account for
human attention while driving. On the other hand, they are
powerful and practical tools when implementing humancentered design and real-world applications. First steps
towards the examination of the source of human mistakes
through distraction from the primary driving task through
secondary tasks like dialing a phone haven been taken
(Salvucci, 2001) showing the feasibility of the architecture
for these task and possible extensions.
The ACT-R architecture enables to elucidate interesting
aspects and provides a theory of human attention while

436

driving. At the same time, human attention during driving is
a challenging task for the ACT-R cognitive architecture. It
shows the still existing limitations beyond basic laboratory
tasks and pushes the research community to expand the
architecture towards more complex and finally real-world
tasks.

Reid, L. D., Solowka, E. N.,& Billing, A. M. (1981). A
systematic study of driver behavior steering control
models. Ergonomics, 24 , 447-462
Salvucci, D. D. (2001). Predicting the Effects of In-Car
Interface Use on Driver Performance: An Integrated
Model Approach. International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 55, 85-107
Salvucci, D. D. (2006). Modeling Driver Behavior in a
Cognitive Architecture. Human Factors, 48, 362-380
Salvucci, D. D., Liu, A. , & Boer, E. R. (2001). Control and
monitoring during lane changes. Vision in Vehicles, 9
Salvucci, D. D., & Gray, R. (2004). A Two-Point Visual
Control Model of Steering. Perception, 33, 1233
Statistisches
Bundesamt
(online
20.12.2011)
www.destatis.de

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the kind advice and assistance of Prof.
Bernhard Nebel, the support of Prof. Wolfram Burgard
(University of Freiburg), and for intensive discussions with
Dario Salvucci (University of Philadelphia). This work has
been partially supported by a grant from the DFG to MR
(Project R8-CSPACE in the SFB/TR8 “Spatial Cognition”).

References
Aasman, J. (1995). Modeling driver behavior in Soar. In:
Leidschendam, The Netherlands: KPN Research
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C. & Qin, Y. (2004). An Integrated Theory of the
Mind. Psychological Review, 111, 1036
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bellet, T., Bailly, B, Mayenobe, P., & Georgeon, O. (2007).
Modelling Driver Behavior in Automotive Environments.
Critical Issues in Driver Interactions with Intelligent
Transportation Systems. Cognitive Modelling and
Computational Simulation of Driver Mental Activities.
Benmimoun, A. (2004). Der Fahrer als Vorbild für
Fahrerassistenzsysteme? Ein fahrermodellbasierter Ansatz
zur Entwicklung von situationsadaptiven FAS. 13.
Aachener Kolloquium Fahrzeug- and Motorentechnik
Boer, E. R. (1996). Tangent point oriented curve negotiation.
IEEE Proceedings of the Intelligent Vehicles 96
Symposium
Byrne, M. D. (2001). ACT-R/PM and menu selection:
Applying a cognitive architecture to HCI. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 55, 41-84
Land, M., & Horwood, J.(1995). Which part of the road
guide steering? Nature, 3, 77, 339-340
Liu, Y. (1996). Queuing network modeling of elementary
mental processes. Psychological Review, 103, 116-136
Liu, Y., Feyen, R., & Tsimhoni, O. (2006). Queuing
Network-Model Human Processor (QN-MHP): A
computational Architecture for Multitasking Performance
in Human-Machine Systems. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction 13, 37§70
Llewellyn, L. (1971). Visual guidance of locomotion.
Journal of Experimental Psychology , 91, 245-254
Michon, J. A. (1985). A critical view of driver behavior
models: What do we know, what should we do? Human
behavior and traffic safety, 485–52, Plenum Press
Pomerlau, D., & Jochem T. (1996). Rapidly adapting
machine vision for automated vehicle steering. IEEE
Expert, 112, 19-27

437

