UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Attention in Three-way binding in Episodic Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kb6n45z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Yim, Hyoungwook
Dennis, Simon
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Attention in Three-way binding in Episodic Memory
Hyungwook Yim (yim.31@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
209C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Simon J. Dennis (dennis.210@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
200E Lazenby Hall, 1827 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
The current study examines the role of attention in forming
complex binding structures in episodic memory. Previous research
(Yim, Dennis, & Sloutsky, 2011a, 2011b) indicated that three-way
bindings can be formed within an explicit memory task. Here we
attempt to reduce explicit attending by presenting participants with
a variant of statistical learning. The paradigm was modified to
accommodate the constraints in two list learning paradigms
ABABr, and ABCD. Only the ABABr paradigm requires a threeway binding in order to perform above chance. Evidence of
learning was derived from learning curves, accuracies and reaction
time at test. Results show evidence of learning for the ABCD
condition but not for the ABABr condition. This finding indicates
that whereas the ABCD structure can be learned implicitly,
learning of ABABr lists depends on attention and requires explicit
learning.
Keywords: episodic memory, attention, three-way binding,
context use, statistical learning

Introduction
One of the memory tasks that we confront daily is finding
where we parked our car at work. Even though the only
thing that one need remember seems to be the parking spot,
one’s car, and the link between the two, we often fail. One
of the reasons that we are sometimes unable to retrieve this
memory is because our previous memories of parking the
car interfere with today’s memory. Therefore in order to
correctly retrieve today’s event, we also need to remember
the link between the context (i.e. today) and the event (i.e.
parking the car in a specific spot).
As depicted in the above example, one’s success in
retrieving an episode depends on what was remembered,
and how it was structured when it was remembered.
Depending on the episode that one has to remember, there
could be differences in the number of components that have
to be remembered, and the structure that has to be formed.
The process by which one forms a memory representation

containing multiple components is called binding (Cohen &
Eichenbaum, 1993; Schacter & Tulving, 1994). Along with
the ability to store the bounded memory components, it has
been argued that control processes such as memory
strategies and metacognitive operations also play a central
role in forming episodic memory (Ghetti & Lee, 2011).
However, how binding occurs and the nature of the structure
it forms are still not clear.
Yim, Dennis, & Sloutsky (2011a, 2011b) proposed that a
key determinant of performance during episodic memory
formation is simultaneously attending to the components
that should be remembered (e.g. events, context). This
attentional mechanism was argued to be used during
encoding and/or retrieval especially when the binding
structure is complex. To support the argument, they
presented a list learning paradigm to different age groups
(i.e. 4-year olds, 7-year olds, and adults). The participants
had to remember two lists each consisting of six pairs of
pictures. The two lists were separated by a retention interval
and the pairs were presented one at a time. At the end of
studying the two lists a cued recall test was given with a
context cue and an item cue (see Figure 1-(a) left slide for
an example of a trial which has a context cue and two items).
The main manipulation was the structure of the lists which
varied the complexity of their required binding structure.
In an ABABr condition two lists had an identical picture
set with the only difference between the two lists being how
they were paired (Porter & Duncan, 1953; Postman, 1964,
see Figure 1-(b) left). For example, in the first list there
would be two pairs, [apple]-[dog] and [chair]-[car], and in
the second list there would be two different pairs, [apple][car] and [chair]-[dog], which is a re-arrangement of the
first two pairs. It has been logically illustrated by
Humphreys, Bain, & Pike (1989) that to correctly answer a
given cued recall test (e.g. what was paired with apple in
list1?) one must have formed, at the minimum, a three-way
binding structure that includes the two items [apple] and

2587

[dog], and the context [list1] together. Suppose that one
formed a simpler binding structure such as a two-way
binding structure (e.g. [apple] – [dog] or [apple] – [car]). In
this case when cued with “apple” and “list1” in a cued recall
test (e.g. what was paired with apple in list1?), the [apple]
will not only elicit [dog] in list1 but also [car] in list2, which
would make one’s recall ambiguous. However, if one
formed a three-way binding structure, [apple] and [list1]
will act as a compound cue, and will elicit the correct
answer [dog].
In an ABAC condition (see Figure 1-(b) middle), the cues
were identical between the two lists whereas the targets
were different. In this condition the minimal binding
structure that is required to remember the episode correctly
are known to be two two-way binding structures (Barnes &
Underwood, 1959; Postman, 1962). For example, one
should have formed at least the binding between the two
items (e.g. [apple] – [dog]) and the binding between an item
and the context ([list1] – [dog]) to correctly answer at test
(e.g. what was paired with apple in list1?). If one had only
formed a single two-way binding structure in this case, it
would be hard to recall the correct answer since [apple] has
multiple two-way bindings, which are [dog] and [rat].
However, if one had formed two two-way binding structures,
the item to context binding (e.g. [list1] – [dog]) would
restrict the multiple bindings and lead to a correct response,
[dog].
Finally, in an ABCD condition two lists contained
different items (see Figure 1-(b) right). Therefore a single
two-way binding structure between the two items would be
sufficient at test without considering the context (provided
the items are selected so that there are no preexisting
bindings between them).
A multinomial process tree (MPT) model (see Batchelder
& Riefer, 1999 for a review) was used to quantify the
relative contributions of the cue-target, context-target and
the three-way binding structures. Differences among age
groups were mainly restricted to the three-way binding
structure. In particular, the improved ability to form threeway bindings differentiated the 7 year olds and adults,
suggesting that development of the critical mechanisms is
extended, perhaps through the teenage years. In a follow up
study, Yim and colleagues increased the saliency of the
context cue for 4 year olds (e.g. visiting Elmo’s house
instead of visiting a green house, see Figure 1-(a) right
slide). By increasing the saliency of the context cue, 4 year
olds increased the ability to use the context information
(list). If the formation of episodic memory (or three-way
binding structure) only relied on having the representational
capacity to bind memory components, the manipulation of
stimulus attention (or saliency) should not affect one’s
performance. However, the results suggest that
simultaneous attention to components is required for
successful binding. It was also argued that since children
have low attentional control (Zelazo, Carlson, & Kesek,
2008), the developmental mechanism underlying episodic

binding would be relying on attentional control during
encoding and/or retrieval.
From the above results, it seems that attention plays an
important role in binding, especially for the three-way
binding structure. The goal of this research is to test this
hypothesis directly. To ensure low or no attention, a
statistical learning paradigm (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport,
1996) was used by modifying the task used in Yim, Dennis
&, Sloutsky (2011). In the modified task, participants saw a
sequence of cartoon characters one at a time and their task
was to distinguish whether the character was a male or a
female while their accuracy and reaction time were
measured. The sequence had a specific pattern resembling
the ABCD condition and the ABABr condition that were
used in the previous study. However, instead of presenting
the two items and context together, the items and context
were presented sequentially using pictures of cartoon
characters (see Figure 1-(c)). Therefore, there was always a
picture representing the list context followed by two
pictures which represented the items. The main prediction
was that if two items and context are bound together during
learning, the triplet would be segmented as in the original
statistical learning paradigm. Therefore, it would be possible
to predict the third picture after seeing the first two pictures
in the triplet (Turk-Browne, Simon, & Sederberg, in press).
As a result, faster reaction time or higher accuracy at the
third item in a triplet would be an indicator of learning the
triplet.
(a)

Low saliency experiment

(b)

ABABr
condition
List1

List2

apple – dog apple – car
chair – car chair – dog

(c)

High saliency experiment

ABAC
condition
List1

List2

apple – dog
chair – car

apple – rat
chair – cat

ABCD
condition
List1

List2

apple – dog pear – desk
chair – car
leaf – cup

ABABr condition
List1 – A – B – List2 – A – D – List2 – C – B …..
….
Triplet 1

Triplet 2

Triplet 3

….

Figure 1: An illustration of experiment used in Yim,
Dennis, & Sloutsky (2011a, 2011b) and its modification. (a)
Stimuli used in the original experiment. The ‘green house’
and ‘Elmo’ represents the context cue whereas the
‘door’/‘apple’ represents the item cue, and the
‘cup’/‘elephant’ represents the target items (b) An example
of the structure of the list in three conditions. (c) A
modification of the original list learning paradigm (ABABr
condition) into a statistical learning paradigm.

2588

Experiment
Method
Participants Eighty undergraduate students at The Ohio
State University participated for course credit (44 females,
M = 19.11 years, SD = 1.38 years). Ten additional
participates were excluded from the sample due to pressing
the wrong key (N=5), chance level accuracy (N=4), and not
understanding the instructions (N=1).
Stimuli The stimuli were thirty six pictures of cartoon
characters where half were male and the other half female.
Post-experimental questions indicated that the sex of each
character was easily determined by the participants. Each
picture was presented on a white squared patch (10.55cm ×
10.55 cm), which was centered on a black background of a
17inch computer monitor. For every participant, the pictures
were randomly assigned to each experimental condition
following the constraint of each condition.
The practice phase preceded the experiment and had five
male and five female pictures where the order of
presentation was randomized. The pictures in the practice
were not used in the experiment. All experimental
conditions including the baseline condition consist of
triplets (i.e. context and two items). In each experimental
condition, there were four unique triplets in the learning
phase and an additional four unique triplets at test (see
Figure 2-(a), (b)). The triplets in the learning phase followed
the structure of the two list learning paradigms (i.e. ABABr,
and ABCD) but were presented one at a time following the
order of [context]-[item1]-[item2]. At test, participants were
presented with triplets consisting of the learned elements,
such that some of the triplets conformed to the learned
statistics (i.e., Congruent) and some did not (Incongruent).
Since the current paradigm examines the existence of a
binding structure via the predictability of the third item
based on the first two items, it is important to manipulate
the third item at test while controlling the first two items.
For example, in the ABABr condition if the first triplet (X1A-B) was learned, which would mean that a three-way
binding structure among the context (X1) and the two items
(A and B) is formed, after seeing a sequence of X1 and A, it
would be able to predict that the next item would be B.
Therefore, response time or/and accuracy of item B would
be faster or higher. On the other hand, a corresponding
incongruent triplet (i.e. X1-A-D) would results in a slower
response time or lower accuracy since the sequence violates
the learned statistics and would interfere with the learned
prediction “B”.
In each learning phase, there were ten repetitions for each
unique triplet. In a repetition there were four unique triplets
which result in a total of 120 (10 (repetition) × 4 (number of
triplets) × 3 (pictures in a triplet)) trial per learning phase. In
addition to the learning phase, the test phase consisted of 8
triplets, which had 4 congruent triplets identical to the
learning phase and 4 incongruent triplets. Therefore the test
phase had 24 trials (8 (triplets) × 3 (trials per triplet))
Therefore, there was a total of 144 trials for each condition.

There was also a baseline condition, which was designed to
have no predictability of the third picture based on the first
two pictures. Therefore, the triplets were all possible
combinations using two pictures at each position (see Figure
2-(c)). The goal of the baseline condition was to measure the
latency decrease that was due to task familiarity rather than
to statistical learning. The total number of trials for the
baseline condition was same as the experimental conditions.
However, since there were eight unique triplets in the
baseline condition, the whole triplet was repeated five times
instead of ten. Finally, all conditions had the same number
of male and female picture in each position of the triplet,
and the frequency of the last picture in each triplet was
equated for each condition.
(a) ABABr
learning

X1‐A‐B
X1‐C‐D
X2‐A‐D
X2‐C‐B

(c) Baseline
test
congruent

X1‐A‐B
X1‐C‐D
X2‐A‐D
X2‐C‐B

X1‐A‐D
X1‐C‐B
X2‐A‐B
X2‐C‐D

(b) ABCD
learning

X3‐G‐H
X3‐M‐H
X4‐J‐K
X4‐N‐K

learning

incongruent

test
congruent

incongruent

X3‐G‐H
X3‐M‐H
X4‐J‐K
X4‐N‐K

X3‐G‐K
X3‐M‐K
X4‐J‐H
X4‐N‐H

test
congruent

X5‐O‐P
X5‐Q‐P
X5‐O‐R
X5‐Q‐R
X6‐O‐P
X6‐Q‐P
X6‐O‐R
X6‐Q‐R

X5‐O‐P
X5‐Q‐R
X6‐Q‐P
X6‐O‐R

Figure 2: The structure of stimuli in each condition. Every
letter represents a picture that was presented sequentially
where X denotes a context while other letters denote items.
Procedure The experiment consisted of three blocks in
addition to the practice block, where each block was
assigned to a specific condition (i.e. the ABABr condition,
ABCD condition and, the baseline condition). Each block
consisted of a learning phase and a test phase, and the
transition between learning and test was unbeknownst to the
participants while there was a break between blocks. Each
participant experienced all four conditions, where the order
of the conditions was randomized and the participants did
not know the identity of each condition. The procedure of
each condition was identical except for the stimuli and the
sequence of each stimuli being presented as explained in the
stimuli section. Participants were told that they would see
cartoon characters and their job was to distinguish whether
it was a male or a female. The pictures were presented on
the screen until the participants respond, and the next
picture was presented after a 750msec ISI. The participants
were not informed that there was a triplet structure in each
condition. The test phase consist of 4 old triplets from the
learning phase and 4 new triplets that where incongruent to
the triplets in the learning phase. The order of the triplets
was randomized.

2589

After the experiment, participants were asked whether they
saw a pattern in the sequence and whether there were any
cartoon characters for which it was difficult to determine
their sex.

Figure 3: Accuracy for each condition at learning and test.
Error bars indicate +/- one standard error.

Figure 4: Comparing accuracy for congruent (Con) and
incongruent (Incon) triplets at each condition at test. Error
bars indicate +/- one standard error. * indicates p < .05

Results
The results from the post-experimental questions show that
all pictures were distinguishable. Moreover, there were no
participants who reported finding a pattern in the sequences,
thus confirming that learning was indeed implicit.
For the analysis, only the reaction time and accuracy of the
third position in the triplet was used. The overall accuracy
was 96.48% (SD = 2.71%), with 96.64% (SD = 2.69%) for
learning and 95.66% (SD = 5.03%) for test. A 2 × 3 (Phase:
Learning vs. Test by Condition: ABABr, ABCD, and
baseline) within-subjects ANOVA was conducted on
accuracy showed no effect on Phase (p = .247), nor
Condition (p = .220), and no interaction (p = .565) (see
Figure 3). A 2 × 2 (Congruency × Condition) withinsubjects ANOVA conducted on the accuracy at test only
showed a marginal main effect for Congruency (F(1, 79) =
2.95, p = .09, ηp2 = .036), whereas there was no significant
main effect for Condition (p = .625) nor significant
interaction (p = .159) (see Figure 4). Conducting a paired ttest between the congruent and incongruent triplets in each
condition showed a significant difference in the ABCD
condition (t(79) = 1.95, p < .05, d = .30) but not in the
ABABr condition (p = .81).

Before analyzing the reaction time data (RT), values below
250msec and above 2500msec were excluded as outliers.
The excluded data was .23% of the total learning data,
and .08% for the test data. Also the median value was used
for each subject’s RT for each repetition in a condition.
The overall mean RT for learning was 577msec (SD =
203msec), 589msec (SD = 190msec) for the ABABr
condition, 573msec (SD = 189msec) for the ABCD
condition, and 551msec (SD = 80msec) for the Baseline
condition (see Figure 5-(a)).To analyze learning during each
condition, the asymptote of each learning curve was
calculated. The asymptotic point was chosen by examining
the last four repetitions for the experimental conditions and
the last two repetitions for the baseline condition (cf. note
that experimental conditions of four unique triplets and the
baseline condition has eight unique triplets). The median
value of each subject’s RT was calculated among the
asymptotic points and was analyzed using one way withinsubjects ANOVA. Results show that there was a significant
difference among conditions (F(1.95, 154.30) = 3.49, p
< .05, ηp2 = .042). Conducting a pair-wise comparison with
Bonferroni adjustments showed that the ABABr condition
was significantly different from the ABCD condition (p
< .05), and not different from the Baseline condition (p =
1.00). Difference between the Baseline condition and the
ABAC condition was also marginally significant (p < .10)
(see Figure 6).
The mean RT for the ABABr condition at test was
572msec (SD = 121msec) for the congruent trials, and
563msec (SD = 150msec) for the incongruent trials. For the
ABCD condition it was 543msec (SD = 118msec) for the
congruent trials, and 577msec (SD = 162msec) for the
incongruent trials. The congruent trials for the Baseline
condition was 546msec (SD = 86msec). The analysis of test
data suggests that for the ABCD conditions the congruent
triplets elicited faster response than the incongruent triplets,
which was not the case for the ABABr condition (see Figure
5-(b)). A 2 × 2 (Condition × Congruency) within-subjects
ANOVA conducted on the test data showed no main effect
for Condition (p < .518) nor Congruency (p < .201), but a
significant interaction (F(1, 79) = 7.63, p < .005, ηp2 = .088).
Further comparison between the congruent and incongruent
triplets within each condition was conducted by a paired ttest. Results showed a significant difference in the ABCD
condition between congruent and incongruent triplets (t(79)
= 3.24, p < .005, d = .24). However there was no significant
difference between the congruent and incongruent triplets in
the ABABr condition (p = .534).
In sum, the learning data showed that the ABCD condition
had a significant difference in the amount of learning
compared to the baseline condition, whereas the ABABr did
not. Results from the test data indicated that only the ABCD
condition, but not the ABABr condition, exhibited evidence
of learning.

2590

(a)

Reaction time (msec)

ABABr

ABCD
620

620

600

600

600

580

580

580

560

560

560

540

540

540

520

520

520

500

500

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Repetition

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Repetition

Reaction time (msec)

ABABr

(b)

Baseline

620

500

ABCD
620

600

600

580

580

580

560

560

560

540

540

540

520

520

520

500

500

Incon

2 3 4 5
Repetition
Baseline

620

Con

1

620

**

Con

600

Incon

500

Con

Figure 5: RT at each condition during (a) learning at each repetition, (b) test at congruent (Con) and
incongruent (Incon) trials. Error bars indicate +/- one standard error. ** indicates p < .005.
580

*

570
Reaction time (msec)

+

560
550
540
530
520
510

ABABr

ABCD

Baseline

Figure 6: Comparing the asymptotic point for each
condition during learning. Error bars indicate +/- one
standard error. * indicates p < .05, + indicates p = .10

General Discussion
The current study examined the possibility of forming a
complex binding structure without attention by presenting
participants with an implicit statistical learning task.
Results showed that there was evidence of learning only in
the ABCD condition but not in the ABABr condition. These
findings suggest that whereas forming a two-way binding
structure does not require attention, a three-way binding
structure does require attention.
The results could be viewed from the point of view of the
sequential learning literature (e.g. Reber, 1993) where the
conditional probability of the 1st item (context item) and the
2nd item (item1) in a triplet plays a role in predicting the 3rd
item (item2). Based on the predictability of each condition,

the ABABr in nature is the hardest condition to learn since
the first two items conjointly should predict the third item.
This argument is also consistent within the memory
literature where a three-way binding structure is required to
correctly recall in an ABABr condition - the two cures are
conjointly bound with the target item (Humphreys, Bain, &
Pike, 1989). On the other hand, the ABCD condition only
requires association between the 2nd and 3rd item, which is
also consistent with the memory literature – two-way
binding structure.
However, predictability might not be the only factor that
plays a role in the ABABr condition. The baseline condition
has no predictability since it consist of all possible
combinations using binary values at each position of a
triplet. Thus, there should be no advantage from predicting
the 3rd item. However, comparing the ABABr condition and
baseline condition at test and learning shows no difference
between the two conditions. Since there is evidence that 2nd
order sequences are learnable (Stadler & Frensch, 1998),
learning the ABABr condition should gain from
predictability. Therefore, it is possible that the ABABr
condition confronts additional interference which could not
be alleviated without attention (cf. however, it is arguable
that the ABABr condition requires more learning trials.)
The argued binding mechanism has some similarities
compared to the binding mechanisms in other fields. In
visual perception, binding concerns with object recognition
(Treisman, 1996). To recognize an object and differentiate
is from others, one should properly bind the properties (e.g.
color, shape, location, etc.) to the correct object. Known that
different properties are processed in different areas of the
brain (Hubel & Wiesel, 2004), correct binding could not be
done without attention (Treisman & Schmidt, 1982).
Relational reasoning also requires a binding mechanism

2591

(Hummel & Holyoak, 2003), where one has to bind correct
fillers (e.g. cat, tiger) to correct roles (e.g. B is bigger than
A) to form a relational representation (e.g. a tiger is bigger
than a cat), and to further generalize or infer the
representation.
The similarities among these bindings are that incoming
components have to be bound together for further
processing, and that incorrect binding will produce an
erroneous response. However, the level of binding seems to
be quite different even though they could be on the
continuum. The components in the binding process of visual
perception are features that are within the visual object.
Moreover, due to dedicated feature detectors the binding
process during visual perception would require less
elaborated attention than in episodic memory. On the other
hand, binding in relational reasoning requires more
elaborate attention than episodic memory since the binding
structure (i.e. role) is not a simple association but has a
specific structure (e.g. ~ is bigger than). There is no
evidence that the binding process has the same underlying
mechanism across these domains. However, based on the
similarities at the computational level, it is possible that
there could be common mechanisms that involve the
attentional system.
Finally, the fact that the participants failed to learn in the
ABABr condition without attentional mechanism raises a
question about the nature of the ABAC condition. Both
ABAC and ABABr conditions require a complex binding
structure to correctly remember the episode, which is a
three-way binding and two two-way binding respectively. In
forming a three-way binding structure, one should attend to
all three elements that should be bound together. Therefore,
attention is critical mostly at encoding but also at retrieval.
However, it is possible that the two two-way binding
structures are formed as two independent two-way bindings
and integrated at retrieval. Thus, attention will mostly be
required at retrieval. To address these issues, future studies
should utilize methods that could measure attention during
encoding and retrieval separately.

References
Barnes, J. M., & Underwood, B. J. (1959). “Fate” of firstlist associations in transfer theory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58(2), 97-105.
Batchelder, W. H., & Riefer, D. M. (1999). Theoretical and
empirical review of multinomial process tree modeling.
Psychological Bulletin & Review, 6(1), 57-86.
Cohen, N. J., & Eichenbaum, H. (1993). Memory, amnesia,
and the hippocampal system. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Ghetti, S., & Lee, J. (2011). Children’s episodic memory.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2,
365-373.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (2004). Brain and Visual
Perception: The Story of a 25-Year Collaboration.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Humphreys, M. S., Bain, J. D., & Pike, R. (1989). Different
Ways to Cue a Coherent Memory System.
Psychological Review, 96(2), 208-233.
Porter, L. W., & Duncan, C. P. (1953). Negative Transfer in
Verbal Learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
46(1), 61-64.
Postman, L. (1962). Transfer of training as a function of
experimental paradigm and degree of first-list learning.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1,
109-118.
Postman, L. (1964). Studies of Learning to Learn II.
Changes in Transfer as a Function of Practice. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 3, 437-447.
Reber, A. S. (1993). Implicit Learning and Tacit Knowledge:
An Essay on the Cognitive Unconscious. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274, 1926-1928.
Schacter, D. L., & Tulving, E. (1994). Memory Systems
1994 (1st ed.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Stadler, M. A., & Frensch, P. A. (1998). Handbook of
Implicit Learning. Tousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Treisman, A. (1996). The binding problem. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 6, 171-178.
Treisman, A., & Schmidt, H. (1982). Illusory conjunctions
in the perception of objects. Cognitive Psychology, 14,
107-141.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Sederberg, P. B., & Simon, M. G. (in
press). Scene representations in parahippocampal
cortex depend on temporal context. Journal of
Neuroscience.
Yim, H., Dennis, S., & Sloutsky, V. (2011a). The
Development of Context Use and Three-way Binding
in Episodic Memory. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T.
Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 30003005). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Yim, H., Dennis, S., & Sloutsky, V. (2011b). The
Development of Context Use and Three-way Binding
in Episodic Memory. Poster Presented at the Seventh
Biennial Meeting of the Cognitive Development
Society (CDS). Philadelphia, PA.
Zelazo, P. D., Carlson, S. M., & Kesek, A. (2008). The
Development of Executive Function in Childhood. In
C. A. Nelson & M. Luciana (Eds.), Handbook of
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

2592

