UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of metabolic loading on statistical learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2sz4t3fx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Stevens, David
Arciuli, Joanne
Anderson, David
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of metabolic loading on statistical learning
David Stevens (david.stevens@sydney.edu.au)
Discipline of Exercise and Sport Science, East Street,
Lidcombe, N.S.W., 2141, Australia.

Joanne Arciuli (joanne.arciuli@sydney.edu.au)
Discipline of Speech Pathology, East Street,
Lidcombe, N.S.W., 2141, Australia.

David I. Anderson (danders@sfsu.edu)
Department of Kinesiology, 1600 Holloway Avenue,
San Francisco, CA 94132, U.S.A.

A. Mark Williams (m.williams@ljmu.ac.uk)
School of Sport and Exercise Science, 15-21 Webster Street,
Liverpool, L3 2ET, U.K.

Abstract
We investigated whether concurrent exercise would affect
statistical learning (SL). During familiarization, participants were
exposed to pictures that appeared sequentially, in a seemingly
random fashion. In fact, the pictures were grouped into triplets. In
the surprise test phase, participants identified triplets they had seen
during familiarization. There were three groups: a group that
performed familiarization seated on an exercise bike (CON), a
group that performed familiarization while engaged in resistance
free cycling (RF), and a group that performed familiarization while
cycling at 60% of maximum effort (EX). The CON group correctly
identified 72% of triplets in the test phase. The RF and EX groups
correctly identified 61% and 55%, respectively. Only the CON
group demonstrated performance that was significantly greater
than chance. The RF group only just failed to demonstrate
significant SL. Thus, concurrent exercise can suppress SL. Work is
underway to determine the mechanism by which such suppression
occurs.
Keywords: Statistical learning; exercise; metabolic loading.

Introduction
Statistical learning (SL) refers to the ability to detect
statistical regularities implicitly and use this information to
guide related behavior. Since the seminal research
conducted by Saffran, Aslin and Newport (1996)
demonstrating that 8-month old infants are capable of
learning syllables embedded in an auditorily presented
sequence, this area of research has increased rapidly. SL has
now been shown to operate on sequential auditorily
presented stimuli (Aslin, Saffran & Newport, 1998; Saffran
et al., 1996; Saffran et al., 1997) and sequential visually
presented stimuli (Arciuli & Simpson, 2011; Fiser & Aslin,
2001; Turk-Browne & Scholl, 2009). It has been shown to
operate on adjacent dependencies (Lany & Gómez, 2008;
Newport & Aslin, 2004) and non-adjacent dependencies
(Creel, Newport & Aslin, 2004; Gebhart, Newport & Aslin,
2009). SL operates on spatial as well as temporal
regularities (Turk-Browne & Scholl, 2009). Recently,

researchers have linked a capacity for SL with key cognitive
activities such as spoken language proficiency (Conway,
Karpicke & Pisoni, 2007; Evans, Saffran & Robe-Torres,
2009) and reading (Arciuli & Simpson, in press).
In short, SL is a robust process that develops early
in life and is linked with a wide range of cognitive and
perceptual activities. As such, it is important to understand
whether SL can be enhanced or suppressed. While there
have been a handful of studies investigating brain activity
during SL (Turk-Browne, Scholl, Chun & Johnson, 2009;
Turk-Browne, Scholl, Johnson & Chun, 2010), little is
known about the physiological processes that underpin the
capacity for SL. In this study, we sought to learn more about
these physiological underpinnings by examining the effects
of metabolic loading (i.e., exercise) on SL.
It is well known that exercise can affect brain
activity and cognitive function; however, these effects can
operate in different ways. Cognition appears to be enhanced
over the longer term as a result of ongoing exercise (Hill,
Storandt & Malley, 1993; Ratey & Loehr, 2011).
Researchers studying the behaviors of animals have
demonstrated exercise-related increases in brain-derived
neurotrophic factors as well as increasing levels of neural
plasticity of brain tissue (for a comprehensive review, see
Hertzog, Kramer, Wilson & Lindenberger, 2009).
There is conflicting evidence related to cognition
during acute exercise, with several researchers finding an
enhancement (Chmura, Nazar, Kaciuba-Uscilko, 1994;
Yagi, Coburn, Estes & Arruda, 1999), others finding
suppression (Audiffren, Brisswalter, Brandet & Bosquet,
1998; Dietrich & Sparling, 2004), and some finding no
difference (Davranche et al., 2006; Dietrich & Sparling,
2004; McMorris et al, 2003;). Yagi et al. (2006) suggested
that neural activation in the brain is enhanced by exercise,
whereas Dietrich and Sparling (2004) suggested that
exercise causes function in the prefrontal lobe to become
depressed during exercise; hence, they found suppression in
some cognitive tests, but no effect in others.

1013

Importantly, existing research has used tasks of
explicit cognitive processing to assess performance. The
task that has been most commonly utilized is the choice
reaction time task (e.g. Audiffren et al., 1998; McMorris et
al, 2003). However, a range of cognitive tasks have been
used. For example, Dietrich and Sparling (2004) used a
mathematics test (to test pre-frontal function) and a
vocabulary test (which they suggested was a test of non prefrontal function). We are not aware of research on the
effects of exercise on implicit cognitive processing.
Specifically, to date, no researchers have examined the
impact of exercise on the brain’s capacity to learn statistical
regularities.
The primary aim of this experiment was to
examine how metabolic loading affects concomitant SL.
The exploratory nature of this research meant that
directional hypotheses could not be easily formulated. It
seemed likely that concomitant exercise might suppress SL
in comparison with a non-exercising control group;
however, it was important to control for the possibility that
some kind of dual-task loading, rather than the exercise
itself, might also affect SL. Thus, we included an additional
condition where participants performed the SL task while
engaging in resistance-free cycling.

Methods
Subjects
A total of 24 participants (age 24±3.3; 14 females, ̇ O2max
= 47.8 (± 4.9) ml.kg-1.min-1, no known neurological or
physical problems) were recruited from the University of
Sydney population. Ethics approval was granted by the
institution.

Statistical learning task
Participants undertook the embedded triplet learning task
created by Arciuli and Simpson (2011; 2012). The task is
comprised of a familiarization and then a surprise test
phase, controlled by Eprime presentation software (v2.0,
Psychology Software Tools, PA, U.S.A.). Stimuli were
eighteen cartoon-like figures sourced from the website
http://www.clipartconnection.com/en/. Six were used
exclusively for instruction and practice. The remaining
twelve appeared only in the familiarization and test phases.
None resembled real-world animals, people or popular
cartoon characters. The twelve stimuli used for the
familiarization and test phases can be found in the Appendix
sections of Arciuli and Simpson (2011; 2012). These twelve
experimental stimuli were divided into four groups of three
(four base triplets), hereafter referred to as ABC, DEF, GHI
and JKL (see Appendix 1).
The familiarization phase consisted of a continuous
stream of stimuli, with each cartoon character shown in
isolation in the centre of the display against a white
background. Each was visible for 800msec with an interstimulus-interval (ISI) of 200msec. Each base triplet was

selected for inclusion 24 times each (resulting in a total of
96 triplets). For six of these 24 instances, one of the cartoon
characters was presented twice in a row in order to provide a
cover task (detection of repeated characters). Detection of
these repeated characters was the cover task during
familiarization. This cover task ensured that participants
paid attention to the familiarization stream because
participants were required to watch the screen and press a
button whenever they saw a repeated character. Repetitions
were counterbalanced among and within each triplet. So, for
example, the repetitions for base triplet ABC meant there
were two occurrences of the sequence AABC, two
occurrences of the sequence ABBC, and two occurrences of
ABCC (along with 18 occurrences of the sequence ABC).
This procedure meant that for each base triplet the strict
triplet structure was violated (e.g., ABBC) on two of twentyfour occasions. The repetition was done in this way (all
three items in a triplet used for repetition) to ensure that the
repetitions did not inadvertently cue the participants to the
existence of the triplet boundaries. The familiarization
phase consisted of 312 individual characters, with each of
the 12 characters appearing 26 times each. The order of the
triplets within the familiarization phase was randomized.
The sole restriction was that the same base triplet could not
appear consecutively (e.g., ABCABC).
In both of the previous studies reported by Arciuli
and Simpson the familiarization phase was followed
immediately by the surprise test phase. However, in the
present study, the surprise test phase was given to
participants after a time delay of 5 minutes. This was
necessary because participants required time to move from
the bike to a desk where they performed the surprise test
phase.
The surprise test phase consisted of 64 trials with
each trial containing two triplets: one of the four base
triplets and one of four impossible triplets. These impossible
triplets never appeared in the familiarization stream and
each was created by taking one character from three
different base triplets (e.g., AEI, DHL, GKC and JBF). The
stimuli in the test trials were presented individually with the
same duration and ISI as was used in the familiarization
stream. A 1,000 msec gap separated the two triplets in each
test trial. After all six characters had been presented
participants were prompted to identify which of the two
triplets had appeared previously (during familiarization).
This procedure constituted a 2-alternative forced-choice task
(2AFC). The presentation order of base triplets and
impossible triplets was counterbalanced. Across the 64 test
trials each base triplet and each impossible triplet was seen
16 times, and each individual character was seen 32 times.
Participants received a different random order for the test
trials.

Procedure
Participants performed a ̇ O2max test on a Lode Cycle
ergometer. The ̇ O2max test required participants to cycle
until fatigued. They started at a low intensity and it was

1014

increased every minute until either the participant chose to
stop or the investigator ended the test (for safety or
diagnostic reasons). Heart rate was collected with a heart
rate monitor (Polar) and ̇ O2 were collected throughout the
test using an electronic metabolic cart (MedGraphics)
(Thompson, Gordon & Pescatello, 2009).
Participants were randomly allocated into 3 groups,
with 8 participants in each; a control group (CON) who
performed familiarization while seated, a resistance free
group (RF) who performed familiarization while free
pedaling on the cycle, and the exercise group (EX), who
performed the familiarization whilst cycling at their own
60% ̇ O2max to ensure participants in this group were
exercising at equivalent levels of intensity (i.e., relative to
their personal ̇ O2max). This power output was chosen
because it is a commonly used power output in studies of
exercise and conscious cognition (Arcelin & Brisswalter,
1999; Pesce, Capranica, Tessitore & Figura, 2002; Pontifex
& Hillman, 2006).
All participants underwent the familiarization
phase while seated on the cycle so that all had the same
level of postural discomfort. The Lode Cycle ergometer had
the function of allowing a power output to be set which
would be automatically maintained even when cadence
changed. This was particularly important for the EX as it
ensured participants could maintain attention on the SL task
without having to focus on maintaining a certain cadence.
For the cover task during familiarization, participants were
asked to respond by pressing a button that was placed on the
handlebars. This button was connected to an E-prime
response box which was not fixed to the handle bar, so the
participant could choose their preferred hand and move the
button into a position for comfort. Each participant in the
EX group cycled at their respective 60% ̇ O2max values for
the duration of the familiarization phase only. These
participants cycled for 5 minutes prior to the
commencement of the familiarization, during which time
metabolic data was collected. Metabolic recording
equipment was removed before beginning the
familiarization phase so as to not discomfort the
participants. Instead, continuous heart rate monitoring was
used during familiarization. Upon completion of the
familiarization phase, all groups were given a 5 minute rest
period before the testing phase. For all participants the
surprise test phase was performed at a desk while seated on
a chair.

and follow-up t-tests. An α level of .05 was set for the
experiment.

Data Analysis

The results reported here provide several insights into
statistical learning (SL). First, significant SL was observed
in the CON group. This finding adds to a growing body of
evidence indicating that humans can implicitly learn
regularities embedded in input, even while undertaking a
cover task. A novel finding was that metabolic loading
appears to impact upon participants’ ability to detect these
statistical regularities. This effect occurs even during a
relatively short bout of exercise. The RF group showed a
higher degree of SL compared with the EX group but less

A participant was considered to have learnt about the
embedded regularities in the familiarization phase if they
identified more than 50% of the triplets (above chance
level). Thus, one-sample t-tests were used to determine
whether there was significant SL for each group. This was
the same data analysis technique used by Arciuli and
Simpson (2011; 2012). Overall averages were then
compared across the three groups using a one-way ANOVA

Results
First, detection of repeated aliens during familiarization (the
cover task) was examined. These data are reported in Table
1. Participants appeared to be paying similar, high levels of
attention during familiarization across each of the three
experimental conditions. A one-way ANOVA was
conducted on the accuracy of detecting repeated characters
during the familiarization phase. No significant difference
was found (F(2,21) < 1), across the three groups.
Table 1: Accuracy of responding during Familiarization
(±SD).
Group
CON
RF
EX

Number of repeated
characters identified
97.4% (±2.2%)
98.4% (±3.1%)
99.5% (±1.5%)

The overall degree of SL for each group during the surprise
test phase is displayed in Table 2. One-sample t-tests
revealed that only the CON group showed significant SL by
demonstrating a level of performance that was significantly
greater than chance (i.e., greater than 50%), t(7) = 4.175, p <
.05. The RF group just failed to demonstrate statistical
learning, t(7) = 2.311, p = .054 whereas the EX group did not
demonstrate statistical learning, t(7) = 1.050, p = .329.
Table 2: Degree of SL during Test phase (±SD).
Group
CON
RF
EX

Percentage triplets identified
72% (±14%)
61% (±14%)
55% (±13%)

A one-way ANOVA demonstrated that there was no
significant difference amongst these means F(2,21) = 3.011, p
= .071; however, given the marginal significance, post-hoc
t-tests were conducted. Results demonstrated that the only
significant difference was between the CON and EX groups,
t(14) = 2.337 (p = .035).

Discussion

1015

learning compared with the CON group. SL in the RF group
just failed to reach significance, potentially due to low
statistical power. The latter finding may suggest a graded
pattern of performance whereby the mental effort associated
with dual-task requirements (cycling resistance-free while
also performing the SL task) affects SL. We interpret this
data to demonstrate that even without any metabolic
interference on the brain, the task of simply moving the
legs, which in itself is a seemingly automatic task, appears
to reduce the level of SL. This reduction appears to be
amplified when metabolic loading is introduced.
Given the uncertainty surrounding the mechanisms
underpinning explicit cognitive function during acute
exercise, and given the possible differences between explicit
and implicit cognition, it is difficult to know what caused
the reduction in SL we observed in our EX group.
As exercise only lasted for around 15 minutes, at
what is classed ‘moderate intensity’, and given that all
participants had eaten and were hydrated, it is highly
unlikely that metabolic factors such as dehydration or low
blood glucose would have contributed to the results. It
seems more likely that some form of psychological or
neurological interference induced by exercise may have
suppressed SL.
From a psychological standpoint, a similar
phenomenon was demonstrated by Audiffren et al. (2008)
where reaction time significantly increased during exercise
compared to rest. This phenomenon has since been referred
to as resource allocation competition. Pontifex and Hillman
(2007) demonstrated that EEG activation is reduced when
cycling, reflecting an ‘inefficiency’ of resource allocation.
Specifically, they demonstrated reduced N1 amplitude,
which has been shown to be part of the visual discrimination
resource component (Vogel & Luck, 2000). Turk-Browne et
al. (2009) conducted an fMRI study where participants
performed a similar statistical visual learning task to the one
presented here and found that activation in the occipital
regions was increased (along with significant SL). If cycling
suppresses some function in the visual cortex, sensitivity to
visually presented statistical regularities may be affected.
We aim to conduct the same experiment using an auditorily
presented version of this SL task to further investigate this
hypothesis.
There is another possibility, related to a more
general effect of acute exercise on the brain. A review by
Williamson, Fadel and Mitchell (2006) highlighted that
there is a high neuroelectrical resource demand on the brain
to maintain central control over metabolic reactions, such as
vascular control for blood pressure, despite these processes
being autonomic. Pontifex and Hillman (2007) suggested
that additional neuroelectric demands further increase the
load associated with dual tasking within the brain. Given
that the RF group had the added demand of the resistance
free cycling, and the EX group had the even greater demand
of cycling plus central metabolic control, this may help to
explain why there appeared to a graded pattern of results.

These findings open up many avenues for further
research and as such we are currently undertaking several
additional studies. To investigate whether exercise causes
changes in both implicit and explicit tasks measures of
cognitive performance, we will use the same exercise
paradigm whilst participants undertake an explicit working
memory task, such as digit span. We are also planning to
compare the effects of exercise on implicit versus explicit
versions of the embedded triplet task. In addition, we are
exploring the effect of different exercise intensities so that
we can determine at what metabolic level impairments in
begin to SL occur. As mentioned, we will also examine
whether exercise affects SL similarly regardless of whether
stimuli are presented visually or auditorily. It is also
interesting to ponder what would happen if we were to
reverse the timing of the exercise in order to study how
metabolic loading during the test phase affects answers after
completing the familiarization phase at rest.

Acknowledgments
The first author is in receipt of an Australian Postgraduate
Award scholarship. Additional funding was provided by the
University of Sydney Postgraduate Research Support
Scheme. Thanks goes to Ian Simpson, PhD., for his help
with E-Prime.

References
Arcelin, R. & Brisswalter, J. (1999). Performance stability
in simultaneous tasks of pedaling and reaction time.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 88, 1193-1199.
Arciuli, J. & Simpson, I. C. (2011). Statistical learning in
typically developing children: the role of age and speed of
stimulus presentation. Developmental Science. 14, 464473.
Arciuli, J., & Simpson, I. (2012). Statistical learning is
related to reading ability in children and adults. Cognitive
Science. 36, 286-304.
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R. & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by 8month-old infants. Psychological Science. 9, 321-324.
Audiffren, M., Brisswalter, J., Brandet, J. P. & Bosquet, L.
(1998). The relation of exercise intensity to attention
deficit: Analysis of a cycling task. Science & Sports, 13,
81-83.
Brisswalter, J., Arcelin, R., Audiffren, M. & Delignieres, D.
(1997). Influence of physical exercise on simple reaction
time: effect of physical fitness. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 85, 1019-1027.
Chmura, J., Nazar, K. & Kaciuba-Uscilko, H. (1994).
Choice reaction times during graded exercise in relation
to blood lactate and plasma catecholamine thresholds.
International Journal of Sports Medicine, 15, 172-176.
Conway, C. M., Karpicke, J. & Pisoni, D. B. (2007).
Contribution of implicit sequence learning to spoken
language processing: Some preliminary findings with
hearing adults. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf
Education, 12, 317-334.

1016

Creel, S.C., Newport, E. L. & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Distant
melodies: statistical learning of nonadjacent dependencies
in tone sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 53, 1119-1130.
Davranche, K., Audiffren, M. & Denjean, A. (2006). A
distributional analysis of the effect of physical exercise on
choice reaction time task. Journal of Sports Sciences, 24,
323-329.
Evans, J. L., Saffran, J. R. & Robe-Torres, K. (2009).
Statistical learning in children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing
Research, 52, 321-335.
Fiser, J. & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.
Griffin, E. W., Mullally, S., Foley, C., Warmington, S. A.,
O’Mara, S. M. & Kelly, A. M. (2011). Aerobic exercise
improves hippocampal function and increases in BDNF in
the serum of young adult males. Physiology and
Behavior, 104, 934-941.
Hayes, N. A. & Broadbent, D. E. (1988). Two modes of
learning for interactive tasks. Cognition, 83, 479-488.
Hertzog, C., Kramer, A. F., Wilson, R. S. & Lindenberger,
U. (2009). Enrichment effects of adult cognitive
development. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 9, 1-65.
Hill, R. D., Storandt, M. & Malley, M. (1993). The impact
of long-term exercise training on psychological function
in older adults. Journals of Gerontology, 48, P12-P17.
Hunt, R. H. & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Statistical learning in a
serial reaction time task: access to separable statistical
cues by individuals learners. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 685-680.
Lany, J. & Gómez, R. L. (2008). Twelve-month-old infants
benefit from prior experience in statistical learning.
Psychological Science, 19, 1247-1252.
Misyak, J. B., Christiansen, M. H. & Tomblin, J. B. (2010).
Sequential expectations: The role of prediction-based
learning in language. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2, 138153.
Newport, E. L. & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a distance
I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies.
Cognitive Psychology, 48, 127-162.
O’Callaghan, R. M., Ohle, R. & Kely, A. M. (2007). The
effects of forced exercise on hippocampal plasticity in the
rat: A comparison of LTP, spatial- and non-spatial
learning. Behavioural Brain Research, 176, 362-366.
Perruchet, P. & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and
statistical learning: one phenomenon, two approaches.
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 233-238.
Pesce, C., Capranica, L., Tessitore, A . & Figura, F. (2002).
Effects of a sub-maximal physical load on the orienting
and focusing of visual attention. Journal of Human
Movement Studies, 42, 401-420.
Pontifex, M. B. & Hillman, C. H. (2006). Neuroelectric
measurement of cognition during aerobic exercise.
Methods, 45, 271-278.

Pontifex, M. B. & Hillman, C. H. (2007). Neuroelectric and
behavioral indicies of interference control during acute
exercise. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118, 570-580.
Ratey, J. J. & Loehr, J. E. (2011). The positive impact of
physical activity on cognition during adulthood: A review
of
underlying
mechanisms,
evidence
and
recommendations. Reviews in Neurosciences, 22, 171185.
Rathus, J. H., Reber, A. S., Manza, L. & Kushner, M.
(1994). Implicit and explicit learning: differential effects
of affective states. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 79, 93133.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N. & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Nature, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., Aslin, R. N., Tunick, R. A. &
Barrueco, S. (1997). Incidental language learning:
Listening (and learning) out of the corner of your ear.
Psychological Science, 8, 101-105.
Thompson, W. (Ed.). (2009). ACSM’s Guidelines for
Exercise Testing and Prescription (8 th Ed.). Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Jungé, J. A. & Scholl, B. J. (2005).
The automaticity of visual statistical learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 552-564.
Turk-Browne, N. B. & Scholl, B. J. (2009). Flexible visual
statistical learning: Transfer across space and time.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 35, 195-202.
Turk-Brown, N. B., Scholl, B. J., Chun, M. M. & Johnson,
M. K. (2009). Neural evidence of statistical learning:
Efficient detection of visual regularities without
awareness. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 19341945.
Turk-Brown, N. B., Scholl, B. J., Johnson, M. K. &Chun,
M. M. (2010). Implicit perceptual anticipation triggered
by statistical learning. Journal of Neuroscience, 30,
11177-11187.
Vogel, E. K. & Luck, S. J. (2000). The visual N1
component as an index of a discrimination task.
Psychophysiology, 37, 190-203
Williamson, J. W., Fadel, P. J. & Mitchell, J. H. (2006).
New insights into central cardiovascular control during
exercise in humans: a central command update.
Experimental Physiology, 91, 51-58.
Yagi, T., Coburn, K. L., Estes, K. M. & Arruda, J. E.
(1999). Effects of aerobic exercise and gender on visual
and auditory P300, reaction time and accuracy. European
Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational
Physiology, 80, 402-408.
Zoladz, J. A. & Pilc, A. (2010). The effect of physical
activity on the brain derived neurotrophic factor: from
animal to human studies. Journal of Physiology and
Pharmacology, 61, 533-541.

1017

