UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Development of Second-order Social Cognition and its Relation with Complex Language
Understanding and Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tb3q55w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Arslan, Burcu
Hohenberger, Annette
Verbrugge, Rineke

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Development of Second-order Social Cognition and its Relation with Complex
Language Understanding and Memory
Burcu Arslan (barslan.cogs@gmail.com)
Annette Hohenberger (hohenberger@ii.metu.edu.tr)
Department of Cognitive Science, Middle East Technical University, Üniversiteler Mahallesi,
Dumlupınar Bulvarı, No: 1, 06800, Ankara, Turkey

Rineke Verbrugge (l.c.verbrugge@ai.rug.nl)
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 407,
9700 AK Groningen, The Netherlands
Abstract
In this study, the development of second-order social
cognition and its possible relationship with language and
memory were investigated. For this reason two second-order
false belief tasks (FBT_2), a short term memory task (WST),
a complex working memory task (LST), a linguistic
perspective-taking test (PTT) and a double-embedded relative
clause task (REL_2) were used with 21 Turkish kindergarten
children (aged 4-5 years), 47 primary school children (aged 612 years) and 10 adults. A general developmental trend was
found for all tasks. However, a multiple linear regression
showed that once age was partialed out, none of the other
tasks could predict FBT_2 scores. Our findings are consistent
with the modularity view that Theory of Mind (ToM) is a
faculty of the human mind that does not share intrinsic
content with other faculties such as language and memory
(Leslie et al., 2004) and also with Apperly's (2011) 'twosystems' account of Theory of Mind. However, it develops
together with those other faculties which may constrain the
expression of children’s false belief reasoning as a
manifestation of their social cognitive abilities.
Keywords: Second-order Social Cognition; Cognitive
Development; Theory of Mind; Language; Memory

Introduction
In daily life, we are constantly in interaction with other
agents, such as co-workers, friends and family members. As
a result of this interaction, we form models pertaining to the
different mental states of other agents. Social cognition of
individuals is shaped based on these models. The ability to
understand that different agents have different mental states,
such as desires, beliefs, knowledge and intentions, which
can be different from one's own, is called Theory of Mind
(ToM) (Premack & Woodruff, 1978). Zero-order, firstorder, second-order and higher-order reasoning are different
levels of social cognition. The objects of zero-order
reasoning are the rules of nature and our real-life
environment. For instance, if David knows: “There is an
apple on the table”, he is applying zero-order reasoning.
However, in daily life we are not just talking about world
facts. Social interaction covers statements such as “David
thinks Jessica knows that there is an apple on the table”. In
this situation David is applying first-order reasoning by
attributing a mental state to Jessica. In addition to first-order
reasoning, there are even more complex social situations

like “Jack thinks David knows that Jessica knows that there
is an apple on the table”. This time, Jack is applying secondorder reasoning by attributing first-order reasoning to David
who attributes a mental state to Jessica who reasons about
an object in the real world; therefore we, in turn, are
attributing third-order reasoning to Jack. In this study we
follow Verbrugge (2009) in using the term ‘second-order
social cognition’ in the same sense as ‘second-order theory
of mind’.
First-order ToM develops between the ages of three and
five (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). Interestingly, second-order
ToM develops much later, between the ages of six and nine
(Perner, 1988). The reason for this gap is not entirely clear
yet and attracts the curiosity of researchers who are working
on ToM. In Verbrugge (2009), it is hypothesized that the
developmental latency between first and second-order social
reasoning is due to children’s constraints on serial
processing rather than limitations in simple working
memory capacity. More explicitly, 6 year-old children may
have the ability to represent another person’s mental state
about their own mental state. However, they cannot apply
this ability because of the lack of efficiency in applying the
related mental processes serially (cf. Hendriks, Van Rijn, &
Valkenier, 2007).
One of the most widely applied verbal paradigms for
studying ToM is the false-belief task (FBT), which has first
been studied by Wimmer and Perner (1983). The main idea
of the FBT is to examine whether children can attribute a
false belief to another agent in a given story where they
know the reality and the other agent has a false belief. Using
language comprehension tasks is another verbal paradigm
for studying the development of social cognition. These
tasks generally test listeners’ semantic and/or pragmatic
inferential abilities. In these tasks, the listener has to take
the speaker’s linguistic alternatives and his/her choice into
account to understand the correct meaning of the sentence.
In the present study, a complex language comprehension
task was used to test children’s ability to meet a questioner’s
expectations of an appropriate answer to his / her questions
in a given context, by taking the questioner’s perspective.
The development of ToM has been intensely investigated
and documented in the literature. However, one of the
debatable issues is still if other factors contribute to ToM

1290

understanding during development. There is one influential
factor, namely language development (Astington & Baird,
2004; Flobbe, Verbrugge, Hendriks, & Krämer, 2008): Does
language have an effect on acquiring ToM, or not? In order
to elucidate the relationship between language and social
reasoning during development, two language tasks were
used in this study. The first one is a complex language
comprehension task in which the morphological structure in
particular zero- vs. accusative-marked nouns had to be
mastered and the second one is a double-embedded relative
clause task in which complex syntactic structure was
required. Generally, complement clauses are studied in the
literature in order to investigate the relationship between the
syntactical component of language and ToM. Unlike
complement clauses, relative clauses do not necessarily
involve mental state predicates. Using relative clauses
instead of complement clauses allows us to specifically
focus on the structural format of 2-way embedding. This is a
purely structural parallel between second-order embedding
in the thought domain and second-order embedding in the
language domain.

Method
Participants
A total of 68 (35 female, 33 male, M=7.53 yrs, SD=2.53)
children and 10 (5 female, 5 male, M=33.48 yrs, SD=10.00)
adults participated in the experiments. Children’s grades
varied from kindergarten to fifth-grade, and their age range
varied from 4 to 12 years. There were 21 kindergarten
children (M=4.43 yrs, SE= .07), 17 first graders (M=6.99
yrs, SE= .09), 15 third graders (M=9.01 yrs, SE= .08) and
15 fifth graders (M=11.00 yrs, SE= .10). A group of 10
adults served as a control group.

Design
A cross-sectional study with the four above-mentioned age
groups was conducted. All subjects participated in the
following five tests: word span task, second-order false
belief task, perspective-taking test, second-order relative
clause task, and listening span task.
All of the tests were completed in one session, which
varied from 25 minutes to 35 minutes. Children were tested
in a quiet empty classroom at their school.

Materials and Procedures
Word Span Task (WST) Children’s short term memory
was tested with Ünal’s (2008) Turkish version of the WST.
Mono-syllabic Turkish words such as “saç, tuz” and “yurt”
(hair, salt and country) were selected considering their
frequency in daily usage and easy pronunciation. There are
a total of seven sets, which consist of 2 to 8 words. Each set
comprised 3 sub-sets. An example of a set of 2 words is as
follows: i) köşk muz (manor banana); ii) pil üst (battery
upper); iii) buz dört (ice four).

The words from these sets were read to the participants
starting from the 2-word set. After reading one set (i.e. köşk
muz), the participant repeated the words in that order. If the
participant made two errors, i.e., any error in two of the
three sub-sets of that level, the experiment was terminated.
If he/she made fewer than two errors, the subsequent, next
higher, set was read (i.e. the 3-word set). The word span
equals the correct number of words at the respective level at
which the child makes fewer than two errors. Thus, in the
analysis the word span range may vary between 1 and 8.
Second-order False Belief Task (FBT_2) This task
consists of two different second-order false belief stories,
namely the ‘Birthday Puppy’ Story and the ‘Chocolate Bar’
Story. Both stories were adapted from English to Turkish
from Flobbe et al. (2008) with the authors’ permission.
These stories were told to the subjects by presenting Flobbe
et al.’s (2008) drawings. Second-order embedding structures
such as “Mary thinks that John thinks the chocolate is in the
drawer” were not used in the stories.
For both stories, the drawings were shown to the
participants while the stories were being told. The order of
stories in the false belief task was balanced. If a participant
gave correct answers to the reality control (Where is the
chocolate now?), first-order ignorance (Does John know
that Mary has hidden the chocolate in the toy chest?),
linguistic control (Does Mary know that John saw her hide
the chocolate?), second-order false belief (Where does Mary
think that John will look for the chocolate?) and justification
(Why does she think that?) questions, the participant’s score
of the first story was 1. The total score for both of the false
belief stories is therefore minimally 0 and maximally 2.
Since the questions preceding the second-order false belief
question are control questions, they need to be answered
correctly in order for the false belief question to be possibly
answered correctly.
Perspective-taking Test (PTT) The perspective-taking test
is a complex language comprehension task including two
close-ended questions with two options. In the story, Ali
tells Ayşe that he is planning to go to the bookstore today.
Ayşe wants Ali to buy a storybook. Ali goes to the
bookstore and buys the book. While Ali is going back home,
he sees his friend Mehmet on the road. Mehmet asks Ali
what he did today. At this point, the experimenter asks the
participant which of the following answers, (a) or (b), Ali
gives to Mehmet:
a) Kitab-ı al-dı-m. (I bought the book.)
Book-ACC buy-PAST-1PSg
b) Kitap al-dı-m. (I bought a book.)
Book buy-PAST-1PSg
After that, the experimenter continues to tell the story. Ali
goes back home. Ayşe opens the door and asks Ali what he
did today. This time the experimenter asks the participant
which of the following answers, (a) or (b), Ali gives to
Ayşe: a) Kitabı aldım or b) Kitap aldım. The order of the
answers to the close-ended questions provided to the

1291

subjects was balanced across participants. Since Mehmet
asks the question without having been introduced to the
book before, the expected answer for the first question was
the answer with zero-marking: “Kitap aldım” (referring to
“a book”). The reasoning behind this answer is as follows:
Ali knows that Mehmet does not know that Ali went to the
bookstore to buy a storybook for Ayşe. However, the
expected answer for the second question was “Kitabı aldım”
(referring to “the book”) rather than “Kitap aldım”, since
Ayşe had told Ali that she wanted him to buy a storybook,
The reasoning behind this answer is as follows: Ali knows
that Ayşe wants to know whether Ali bought the storybook
or not.
If the participant gave the expected answer to the two
questions, s/he received a score of 2 points.
Double-embedded Relative Clause Task (REL_2) This
task is related to the comprehension of relative clauses (RC)
in Turkish. This task was adapted from Özge (2010) with
the author’s permission. The questions and the drawings
were modified to double-embedded RCs in order to analyze
the participants’ second-order language embedding abilities,
on a par with their second-order ToM abilities. One practice
and 6 experimental items were used. Figure 1 demonstrates
the drawings for one of the questions related to this task.
The critical positions for finding the correct answers were
equally distributed across the drawings (3 times in the first
row and 3 times in the second row) and between right (2
times), left (2 times), and central position (2 times).
First, introductory pictures were shown to the participants
in order to familiarize them with the animals in the action by
telling the name of the animals and the actions (e.g., “this is
a pushing sheep”). After that, the pictures representing the
questions were shown one by one (see Figure 1).

were repeated up to 4 times. Participants’ scores could range
from 0-6.
Listening Span Task (LST) In order to measure complex
working memory, Ünal’s (2008) English-to-Turkish
adaptation of the original LST was used with the author’s
permission. The task consists of sets of sentences read out to
the participants one by one. There are a total of five
collections, each of which consists of six sets of sentences.
The first collection contains six sets of two sentences each,
the second collection contains six sets of three sentences
each, and so forth, until the fifth collection, which contains
six sets of six sentences each. An example of a 3-sentence
set of LST is as follows: i) Muzlar bisiklete biner. (Bananas
ride bicycles); ii) Elimiz beş parmaklıdır. (Our hands have
five fingers); iii) Soğan acıdır. (Onions are hot).
The participants were expected to first judge the
truthfulness of the sentences by saying “Yes” or “No”.
Secondly, they had to recall the last word of all the
sentences of a set told to them, in reverse order. After they
gave an answer to the first sentence, the next sentence was
told to them. For example, for the 2-sentence set, if the first
sentence is “Muzlar bisiklete biner.” (Bananas ride
bicycles), the participants were required to say
“Hayır1;biner”. After that, if the second sentence is “Elimiz
beş parmaklıdır.” (Our hands have five fingers), they were
required to say “Evet2;parmaklıdır, biner.”. If the participant
made less than two mistakes in a sentence collection, the
subsequent sentence set, which comprised one more
sentence, was told to the participant. The score of the
participants equaled the number of sentence collections in
which they did not make more than one mistake.
Participants’ scores could range from 0-6.

Hypotheses
We hypothesized main effects of grade for all tasks.
Children’s performance should increase with increasing
grade. Furthermore, we hypothesized that FBT_2 could be
predicted by the remaining tasks, in particular by the
complex language tasks, PTT and REL_2, to the extent that
those share variance with it.

Results
Figure 1: Hangi resimde kuzuyu iten maymunu iten bir kuzu
var? (“In which picture there is a sheep pushing a monkey
that is pushing a sheep?”)
The first and second rows of the picture were pointed out
in order to make it clear that there are two separate lines of
pictures by saying, “This is the first picture and this is the
second picture”. In the trial session, it was explained that the
participants were required to point out the row with the
animals related to their answer. If they could not answer
correctly in the trial, the correct animals were pointed out by
the first author with necessary explanations. The sentences

First, the statistical analyses of children’s responses to the
five tasks are presented. Later, the results of the fifth graders
will be compared with the results of adults. The p values are
two-tailed, unless stated otherwise (in which case they are
one-tailed). In order to analyze the developmental trend in
the tasks used in the experiment, the data was divided into
four groups according to the children’s grades
(kindergarten, 1st, 3rd, 5th grade). Since the data violates
normality assumptions, non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis and
Mann-Whitney tests were used. Since six Mann-Whitney
Tests were used to test the difference across the grades, the

1292

1
2

‘Hayır’ means ‘No’.
‘Evet’ means ‘Yes’.

FBT_2
There is a significant difference in performance between the
grades (χ2 (2) = 40.22, p= .000). According to the MannWhitney Tests, while there is a steady increase in
performance, there is no significant difference between the
first and third grades and between the third and fifth grades.
However, there is a significant difference between
kindergarten and grade one (Z= -3.73, p= .000),
kindergarten and grade three (Z= -4.73, p = .000),
kindergarten and grade five (Z= -5.36, p = .000), and grade
one and five (Z= -2.99, p = .003). Figure 2 shows the mean
values of the FBT_2 score according to the grades. Since all
of the adults and all of the fifth graders answered all of the
questions correctly, there is no significant difference
between the adults’ and fifth graders’ FBT_2 performance
(χ2 (2) = 0.00, p= 1.00).

There is a significant difference between the grades (χ2 (2) =
8.53, p= .036). According to the Mann-Whitney Tests, there
is no difference between the kindergarten and grade one,
grade one and three, grade one and five, grade three and
five, while there is a significant difference between the
kindergarten and grade five (Z= -2.473, p= .006, one-tailed).
Figure 4 shows the mean values of the perspective-taking
test score according to the grades. The analysis showed that
there is no significant difference between the adults’ and
fifth graders’ performance (χ2 (2) = 1.778, p= .182).

1.5
1
0.5
0
first

third

fifth

Figure 4: The development of PTT

REL_2

1.5
1
0.5
0
kinder

first

third

fifth

Figure 2: The development of FBT_2

There is a significant difference between the grades (χ2 (2) =
27.37, p= .000). In order to see which grades differ
significantly from each other, Mann Whitney Tests were
used. Figure 5 shows the mean values of the doubleembedded relative clause score according to the grades. The
analysis showed that there is a significant difference
between the adults’ and fifth graders’ performance (χ2 (2) =
6.096, p= .014).

WST
There is a significant difference between the grades (χ2 (2) =
24.67, p= .000). According to the Mann-Whitney Tests,
there is no difference between the first, third and fifth
grades, while there is a significant difference between
kindergarten and grade one (Z= -3.06, p= .002),
kindergarten and grade three (Z= -4.14, p= .000), and
kindergarten and grade five (Z= -3.59, p= .000). Figure 3
shows the mean values of the Word Span Task score
according to the grades. The analysis showed that there is a
significant difference between the adults’ and fifth graders’
performance (χ2 (2) = 8.925, p= .003).
6
Mean of WST
scores

2

kinder

Mean of REL_2
scores

Mean of FBT_2
scores

2

PTT

Mean of of PTT
scores

alpha level for the Bonferroni correction was set to .008.
Although the data was not normally distributed, linear
regression analysis was used to investigate the relationship
between the second-order false belief task and the other
tasks. Error bars in Figures 2-6 represent standard errors.

4
2
0
kinder

first

third

Figure 3: The development of WST

fifth

6
4
2
0
kinder

first

third

fifth

Figure 5: The development of REL_2

LST
There is a highly significant difference between the grades
(χ2 (2) = 30.87, p= .000). According to the Mann-Whitney
Tests, there is no difference between the kindergarten and
first grade, nor between third and fifth grades, while there is
a significant difference between the kindergarten and grade
three (Z=-3.53, p= .000), kindergarten and grade five (Z= 4.64, p = .000), grades one and three (Z= -2.92, p = .003),
and grades one and five (Z=-4.08, p = .000). Figure 6 shows
the mean values of the Listening Span Task score according
to the grades. The analysis showed that there is a significant
difference between the adults’ and fifth graders’
performance (χ2 (2) = 4.729, p= .030).

1293

Mean of LST score

method, the FBT_2 score could be predicted by age by the
following formula: 0.27 X age – 0.814 (F66, 1= 83.965, p=
.000) and by age and all tasks by the following formula:
0.236 X age + 0.145 X WST + 0.045 REL_2 – 0.034 X LST
– 0.130 X PTT – 1.098 (F62, 5= 17.519, p= .000, r= .765, R2=
.586). However, only the contribution of age is significant
(β= .655, t= 5.45, p = .000). Collinearity diagnostics showed
that age (94%) and WST (90%) each load highly on a
different single dimension. This means that age and the
WST do not share variance with each other. On the other
hand, PTT, REL_2 and LST share some variance with one
another. Still they mainly load on their own distinctive
dimension. This is because they are also related to different
abilities. Moreover, the LST (60%) and the REL_2 (75%)
load highest on the same dimension which shows that both
tasks tap into the same cognitive ability.

3
2
1
0
kinder

first

third

fifth

Figure 6: The development of LST

PTT Predicting FBT_2
Since the data violates normality, the non-parametric
Spearman’s Rank Order Correlation was used to test the
relationship between total FBT_2 and PTT scores. This
analysis showed that there is no significant relationship
between total FBT_2 and PTT (rs = .19, p= .126). Partial
correlation was also used in order to control the other
variables. When age is controlled for, the previous
correlation of rs= .19 between PTT and FBT_2 drops to .095 (p= .444); when WST is controlled for, the correlation
drops to .12 (p= .922), when REL_2 is controlled for, the
correlation drops to .036 (p= .772) and when LST is
controlled for, the correlation drops to -.22 (p= .860).

Table 2: Correlations of all tasks and age for FBT_2
Variable
Age
WST
PTT
REL_2
LST

REL_2 Predicting FBT_2
Since the data violates normality, the non-parametric
Spearman’s Rank Order Correlation was used to test the
relationship between total FBT_2 and REL_2. This analysis
showed that there is a significant relationship between total
FBT_2 and REL_2 scores (rs = .54, p= .000). Bivariate
regression was also used in order to predict the model of
REL_2 score predicting the FBT_2 score. Using the enter
method, the FBT_2 score could be predicted from the
REL_2 score by the following formula: 0.24 X REL_2 +
0.673 (F66,1= 26.196, p= .000, r= .533, R2= .284). Partial
correlation was also used in order to control the other
variables. When age is controlled for, the previous
correlation of r = .533 between REL_2 and FBT_2 drops to
.10 (p= .42); when WST is controlled for, the correlation
drops to .39 (p= .001); when PTT is controlled for, the
correlation drops to .52 (p=.000) and when LST is
controlled for, the correlation drops to .25 (p= .041).
In the light of the partial analyses, multiple linear
regression was used with age and REL_2 scores as
independent variables and FBT_2 as dependent variable.
Using the enter method, the FBT_2 score could be predicted
from age and REL_2 score by the following formula:
FBT_2= 0.039 X REL_2+ 0.25 X age – 0.751 (F65, 2=
42.091, p= .000, r= .751, R2= .564). However, only the
contribution of age is significant (β= .692, t= 6.47, p =
.000).

Multiple Linear Regression for FBT_2
Two models were constructed by using multiple linear
regression to predict the FBT_2 score: first just with age as
predictor and second with age and all tasks. Table 2 shows
the correlations of all tasks for FBT_2. Using the enter

Correlation (r)
.748
.518
.160
.533
.503

p
.000**
.000**
.096 n.s.
.000**
.000**

General Discussion and Conclusions
As can be seen clearly from Figure 2, a linear
developmental trend was found for the second-order false
belief task score from grade one (6- 7 years) to grade five
(10- 12 years), preceded by a big step between kindergarten
and grade 1. We can say that second-order false belief
reasoning starts to develop around the age of 6, and reaches
adult-like understanding at around the age of 9;5 (grade 5).
These findings are compatible with Perner and Wimmer’s
(1985) study, which states that second-order false belief
understanding occurs after the age of 6. Although
kindergarten children failed in the second-order false belief
task on average, there were three of them who succeeded in
the ‘Birthday Puppy’ Story and one of them who succeeded
in both the ‘Birthday Puppy’ Story and ‘Chocolate Bar’
Story. Since their Listening Span Task and doubleembedded relative clause task scores were better than the
others, this is compatible with the view that children before
the age of 6 may indeed have second-order social cognition
which may show itself if the respective cognitive resources
have also developed.
The results of the Word Span Task showed a significant
and clear developmental trend from kindergarten to third
grade. Fifth graders’ score was somewhat lower than that of
the 3rd graders, but only insignificantly.
The results of the Perspective Taking Test showed that
kindergarten children and first graders had scores around 1
which is the score expected by chance. The salient
development occurs between 1st and 3rd grade. Making
pragmatic inferences by picking up morpho-syntactic clues

1294

like case-marking is a very advanced meta-linguistic skill.
Giving correct answers to the questions requires a
comparison between the two case forms and a decision
which of them is better suited for the given context. Even
adults’ performance was not perfect and did not
significantly differ from that of 5th graders. However,
unlike children, some of the adults changed their first wrong
answer and gave a correct answer after hearing the second
question. This shows that some of the adults took the
hearer’s perspective and/or the experimenter’s intention of
asking those questions into account.
To the best of our knowledge this is the first time that a
double-embedded relative clause task has been devised in a
Turkish developmental study. Our result revealed a very
strong developmental trend in the task. Also, adults
outperformed fifth graders in this task.
In Listening Span Task, participants were expected to
judge the semantic truth of the sentences, to report it, to
remember the last word of that sentence, and then repeat the
same steps again for the next sentence by also reporting the
last word of the previous sentence, and so on. Since in
Turkish the present form of the verb takes the suffixes –er, ar, -ir, -ür, -ur for positive sentences and takes the suffixes –
maz, -mez for the negative ones, the most challenging part
of the task for children and even for some adults was to
repeat the last word of the sentence when its semantic truth
was false. So, they must inhibit the regular way of reporting,
and have to report it in the instructed from. This inhibition
in the Listening Span Task is thought to be similar to the
inhibition necessary in false belief reasoning. The results
showed a strong developmental trend, again particularly
between first and third graders.
Even though second-order false belief scores could be
significantly predicted by all other tasks (except for
Perspective Taking Test), the regression analyses showed
that only the contribution of age was significant. Once age
was taken out, none of the other tasks could predict secondorder false belief task anymore. In view of theoretical
accounts of ToM, our findings are compatible with Leslie et
al.’s (2004) modular account of ToM. He and his colleagues
argue that ToM is a separate cognitive faculty as compared
to language or memory. It is innate, i.e., in principle in place
from early on, however, in order to manifest itself it may
need to await the cognitive maturation of the child in those
other domains. The “serial bottleneck” (Verbrugge 2009)
might be one of those constraints that is overcome during
development. Our findings are also compatible with
Apperly's (2011) 'two-systems' account of ToM. Apperly
posits that low-level efficient processing modules take care
of simple ascriptions of perception, knowledge and belief,
while high-level ToM makes use of less efficient and slower
to develop general knowledge and inferential reasoning
processes.
Since in our study we found concurrent development in
all the cognitive abilities that we tested, that is, no delay
between any of them, ToM may at any time have been
supported just sufficiently enough to manifest itself at that

level. Indeed, it might be impossible to prove the relation
between ToM and the other cognitive domains in a crosssectional study like ours, but only in a longitudinal study
where such delays may be observed within rather than
across individuals.

Acknowledgments
Rineke Verbrugge is grateful to the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research for Vici grant NWO277-80-01.

References
Apperly, I (2011). Mindreaders: The Cognitive Basis of
"Theory of Mind". Psychology Press; Hove.
Astington, JW., and Baird, J. (2005). Why Language
Matters for Theory of Mind. Oxford University Press;
Oxford.
Flobbe, L., Verbrugge, R., Hendriks, P. and Krämer I.
(2008). Children’s application of theory of mind in
reasoning and language. Journal of Logic, Language and
Information, 17 (4), 2008, 417-442. Special issue on
formal models for real people, edited by M. Counihan.
Hendriks, P., van Rijn, H., and Valkenier, B. (2007).
Learning to reason about speakers’ alternatives in
sentence comprehension: A computational account.
Lingua, 117(11), 1879–1896.
Leslie, Alan M., Friedman, Ori, and German, Tim P. (2004).
Core mechanisms in 'theory or mind'. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12, 528-533.
Özge, D. (2010). Mechanisms and Strategies in the
Processing and Acquisition of Relative Clauses in Turkish
Monolingual and Turkish-English Bilingual Children.
PhD thesis, Middle East Technical University, AnkaraTurkey.
Perner, J. (1988). Higher-order beliefs and intentions in
children’s understanding of social interaction. In J.W.
Astington, P.L. Harris, and D.R. Olson, (Eds.).
Developing Theories of Mind. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge. 271–294.
Perner, J. and Wimmer, H. (1985). "John thinks that Mary
thinks that...": Attribution of second-order beliefs by 5- to
10-year old children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 5, 125-137
Premack, D., and Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the
chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 4, 515-526.
Ünal, G. (2008). Release from Proactive Interference and its
relations to Executive Functions: A developmental study
on Turkish children. Master thesis, Middle East Technical
University, Ankara-Turkey.
Verbrugge, R. (2009). Logic and social cognition: The facts
matter, and so do computational models. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 38 (6), 649-680.
Wimmer, H. and Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13, 103–128.

1295

