UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Semantic Transparency in the Processing of Verb-particle Constructions by
French-English Bilinguals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7nb96790

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Blais, Mary-Jane
Gonnerman, Laura

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Semantic Transparency in the Processing of Verb-particle Constructions
by French-English Bilinguals
Mary-Jane Blais (mary-jane.blais@mail.mcgill.ca)
School of Communication Science and Disorders, McGill University, 1266 Pine Ave W
Montreal, QC, H3G 1A8 CAN

Laura M. Gonnerman (laura.gonnerman@mcgill.ca)
School of Communication Science and Disorders, McGill University, 1266 Pine Ave W
Montreal, QC, H3G 1A8 CAN
Abstract
Verb-particle constructions (phrasal verbs) are a notoriously
difficult aspect of English to acquire for second-language (L2)
learners. This study was conducted to assess whether L2 English
speakers would show sensitivity to the subtle semantic properties
of these constructions, namely the gradations in semantic
transparency of different verb-particle constructions (e.g., finish up
vs. chew out). L1 French, L2 English bilingual participants
completed an off-line (explicit) survey of similarity ratings, as well
as an on-line (implicit) masked priming task. Bilinguals showed
less agreement in their off-line ratings of semantic similarity, but
their ratings were generally similar to those of monolinguals. On
the masked priming task, the more proficient bilinguals showed a
pattern of effects parallel to monolinguals, indicating similar
sensitivity to semantic similarity at an implicit level. These
findings suggest that the properties of verb-particle constructions
can be both implicitly and explicitly grasped by L2 speakers whose
L1 lacks phrasal verbs.
Keywords: Verb-particle constructions; bilingualism; semantic
ratings; second language; masked priming.

Introduction
Verb-particle constructions, also known as phrasal verbs1,
are semantic units composed of a verb and a particle, which
may be superficially similar to either a preposition (e.g.,
turn out of the house) or an adverb (e.g., break the question
down). Common examples in English include THROW OUT,
LOOK UP, CHEW OUT, FINISH UP, PULL OVER, and hundreds of
others. These expressions are extremely common in some
languages (e.g., English, German), though notably absent in
others (e.g., French, Spanish, Italian). The language-specific
properties of this phenomenon make it of interest to research
in both monolingual and bilingual psycholinguistics.
Current bilingualism research has demonstrated that nonnative speakers have particular difficulty using these
constructions, but has not yet identified the source of this
difficulty. The present study was thus designed to
investigate one aspect of verb-particle constructions that has
been shown to affect monolinguals’ processing: semantic
transparency of the construction, which ranges from
transparent (e.g., finish up) to opaque (e.g., chew out).
1

While some authors prefer one or the other for various reasons,
in this text the terms “phrasal verb” and “verb-particle
construction” will be used interchangeably.

Semantic transparency was investigated using both an
explicit and an implicit measure, to determine the level of
processing where monolinguals and bilinguals differ.

The Nature and Processing of Phrasal Verbs
Semantically, phrasal verbs are generally assumed to be
stored as units in the lexicon, similarly to words or idioms
(e.g., Jackendoff, 1995). That is, the meanings of such
expressions are memorized holistically, separately from the
meanings of the component words. There is much less
consensus, however, as to whether these units are processed
lexically in the same way as any other word, or whether
syntactic processing is also necessary. Arguments based on
traditional linguistic analysis have shed some light on this
issue, but have been ultimately inconclusive. For example,
phrasal verbs are amenable to processes of derivational
morphology, changing from verbs into nouns in expressions
such as “a show-off,” “a fixer-upper” or “a passer-by” (e.g.,
Farrell, 2005). On the other hand, the verb and particle are
clearly distinct units in the sentence that can be separated
both by a noun phrase (e.g., throw it out) and by an adverb
(e.g., fixed it right up). This type of insertion should not be
possible within a single word, according to the so-called
Lexical Integrity Principle (Chomsky, 1970); thus, in this
sense verb-particle constructions behave similarly to
syntactic phrases.
More recently, researchers have approached this question
of whether verb-particle constructions are more phrase-like
or word-like, using psycholinguistic and neuroimaging
techniques. For example, Konopka and Bock (2009) showed
that word order preferences for verb particles can be
structurally primed; participants were more likely to
remember a sentence as having an adjacent (or nonadjacent) verb and particle if they had just seen a different
sentence with the same structure. This finding, which held
regardless of the idiomaticity of the construction, was taken
as evidence for more structurally-based accounts of phrasal
verb processing. A different conclusion was drawn by
Cappelle, Shtyrov and Pulvermuller (2010), who used
magnetoencephalograpy (MEG) to record neural responses
to verb-particle pairs that were congruent (e.g., heat up) or
incongruent (e.g., heat down). The mismatch negativity
responses to these pairs were comparable to responses
patterns typically elicited by words, rather than sentences.

1338

The authors concluded that at a neural level, phrasal verbs
are processed lexically rather than syntactically. Thus, both
linguistic and neuro-cognitive methods have yielded mixed
results with regard to the nature of phrasal verb processing.
An alternative perspective holds that this strictly modular
view of the lexicon versus the syntax creates a false
dichotomy that fails to account for the behavior of verbparticles. For example, in an effort to conform them to these
designations, many researchers have categorized phrasal
verbs as either “transparent,” that is, interpretable based on
knowledge of the component words, or “idiomatic,” having
an opaque meaning that can only be memorized (e.g., Dagut
& Laufer, 1985). However, it has recently been recognized
that an entire spectrum exists between these two extremes.
Gonnerman and Hayes (2005) asked native English speakers
to rate, on a scale of 1-9, the degree of similarity between a
verb-particle construction and its component verb alone
(e.g., “How similar is carry off to carry?”). Their
participants gave highly consistent ratings that were
distributed through the entire range of the scale. For
example, the pair finish up/finish was considered to be very
similar while chew out/chew was rated as highly dissimilar.
Other items, such as look up/look were generally rated
around the middle of the scale.
In the same study, the authors tested participants’ implicit
sensitivity to dependency using masked priming, an on-line
task. Participants were asked to make a lexical decision to
target words presented visually on a computer screen.
Before each target, a prime consisting of another word or
word combination was presented for 35ms, long enough to
be processed subliminally but too short to be recognized
consciously. Lexical decisions were facilitated when a target
verb (e.g., finish) was primed by a low-dependency verb
particle construction (e.g., finish up), but not when the target
(e.g., chew) was primed by a high-dependency construction
(e.g., chew out). Thus, these participants were shown to
recognize dependency variations in both offline and on-line
semantic processing.

Processing in Second-language (L2) Learners
Phrasal verbs have long been recognized as among the
most difficult aspects of English to acquire for secondlanguage (L2) learners, and are also therefore of interest to
those in the English as a Second Language (ESL) teaching
profession (Neagu, 2007). Several researchers have
investigated this phenomenon in bilinguals, though most of
this work has focused on the avoidance of verb-particles in
production. For example, Dagaut and Laufer (1985) found
that in written English tasks, native Hebrew speakers tended
to avoid phrasal verbs (e.g., let down) in favor of single-verb
synonyms (e.g., disappoint). While the authors attributed
this effect to the lack of verb-particle constructions in
Hebrew, subsequent studies have shown that similar
difficulties are experienced by learners whose native
languages include phrasal verbs, such as Dutch (Hulstijn &
Marchena, 1989) and Swedish (Laufer & Eliasson, 1992).
For these speakers, however, phrasal verbs seem to be more

easily acquired as a function of proficiency; advanced Dutch
and Swedish learners display more native-like behaviour
than either intermediates with the same L1s or advanced
learners with L1 Hebrew. Thus, the difficulty of L2 English
phrasal verbs appears to result from a compounding of
factors that are both syntactic (inter-language differences)
and semantic (inherent difficulty of acquiring idiomatic
vocabulary). Later research (e.g., Liao & Fukuya, 2005;
Gonzalez, 2010) has strengthened the hypothesis that
avoidance of phrasal verbs decreases as English proficiency
increases for all speakers, but that it does so more quickly
for speakers with verb-particle constructions in their L1s.
Thus far, most investigations of verb-particles in L2
speakers have focused on production, particularly on the
phenomenon of avoidance. However, it is equally important
to investigate these structures at the level of receptive
language processing. Comprehension of various linguistic
structures precedes their production, both in first language
(e.g., Benedict, 1977) and second language (e.g., Ringbom,
1992) acquisition, making this an important aspect of
determining bilinguals’ competence with phrasal verbs.
In one of the few studies of phrasal verbs in on-line L2
comprehension, Matlock and Heredia (2002) measured the
time it took for non-native speakers with various L1s to read
English sentences involving the same phrase in either a
verb+preposition context (e.g., John ate up the street) or a
verb+particle context (e.g., John ate up the pizza). While
native English speakers and early bilinguals (i.e., having
acquired English before age 12) reacted more quickly to
verb-particle constructions, late bilinguals seemed to
process phrases involving a literal preposition most easily.
This was taken as evidence that in processing figurative
language, native speakers and early bilinguals can activate a
figurative meaning instantly while late bilinguals must first
retrieve the literal meaning before seeking alternate
interpretations. While promising, however, this study had
several limitations. First, the authors’ “on-line” measure was
response time to an entire sentence, a relatively crude
method which was unable to isolate the processing of the
verb-particle construction itself. Moreover, first language
and current proficiency level were not carefully controlled
in this experiment.
A different, though related line of research is the study of
idioms in second language comprehension. Like phrasal
verbs, idioms consist of words that appear in other contexts
but which take on a new meaning in a particular
combination and a particular context. Given this similarity,
it is not surprising that both types of constructions are
difficult for second language learners. Models of
monolingual idiom comprehension differ in the role they
attribute to compositional versus non-compositional
processes (see Titone & Connine, 1999, for a review);
however, most current theories agree that native speakers
may access either the literal or non-literal meaning of an
idiom first depending on the construction itself as well as
contextual and discourse factors (Giora, 2002; Titone &
Connine, 1999). There is somewhat less consensus about

1339

whether non-native speakers take full advantage of this
complex processing strategy. One proposal (Cieslicka,
2006; Cieslicka & Heredia, 2011) is that the literal
meanings of idioms enjoy universal salience for non-native
speakers; that is, these speakers will always activate a literal
interpretation before seeking an alternative reading. This
“Literal Salience Hypothesis” is proposed to hold regardless
of the context, familiarity, or decomposability of an idiom.
However, not all researchers agree with this account (e.g.,
Bulut and Çelik-Yazici, 2004).
Thus, psycholinguistic studies suggest that both phrasal
verbs and other types of non-literal language are processed
in fundamentally different ways by native versus non-native
speakers. However, there remains a significant need for
more work describing the comprehension of L2 phrasal
verbs. First, while work on idiom processing has made
valuable contributions to this line of research, it must be
recognized that full idioms, such as kick the bucket and let
the cat out of the bag, differ from phrasal verbs in several
important respects. While idioms constitute a large class of
expressions with a great deal of variation in their syntax and
flexibility, verb-particles pattern fairly regularly and behave
much
like
literal
verb-preposition
combinations
syntactically (Dixon, 1982). Some particles also behave
more like morphemes in the sense that they can be applied
productively; for example, the perfective UP can be applied
to any verb that can be thought of as completive, yielding
FINISH UP, WASH UP, GROW UP, ROLL UP, WRITE UP and many
more. Thus, it might be expected that in interpreting verbparticles, as opposed to idioms, second-language learners
would have additional sources of information (from
regularities in the language) and may not rely so heavily on
an initial literal interpretation.
Second, research on second language learning in general
must distinguish between explicit and implicit language
processes. The importance of dissociating these aspects of
comprehension has been recognized at least as far back as
Bialystok (1979), who found that while learners acquired
both explicit and implicit knowledge of a new language, it
was largely the explicit component that improved with
increased instruction. This study also found that learners
employed either their implicit or explicit knowledge
depending on the processing demands of the task. More
recently, Ellis (2005) emphasized the difference between
these types of knowledge, which he defined using a variety
of criteria including awareness, time available, attention,
systematicity, certainty, metalinguistic knowledge, and
learnability. This study found that explicit language ability
was more strongly related to years of instruction, while
implicit competence was correlated with age of acquisition.
Taken together, these results support the need to measure
acquisition of a particular structure both implicitly and
explicitly, an approach we have taken in the present study.
The following experiments were conducted to test whether
native speakers of French, a language that lacks verbparticle constructions, are sensitive to the same semantic
variations recognized by native speakers.

Verb-particle Similarity Ratings
To measure bilinguals’ sensitivity to the semantic
transparency of verb-particle constructions, we used an
explicit, off-line, similarity rating task. Past research
(Gonnerman & Hayes, 2005) has shown that when asked to
rate the similarity between verbs and their corresponding
verb-particle constructions, native English speakers provide
consistent ratings across a spectrum ranging from low (chew
out/chew) to mid (look up/look) to high (chew out/chew)
similarity. To determine whether L2 speakers are sensitive
to this variability, we administered a similar survey to
French dominant English bilinguals. This metalinguistic
task was designed to measure participants' explicit
knowledge of verb-particle semantics, which we predicted
would be similar to, but less accurate than that of
monolinguals.

Participants
34 adult (age 18-40) native speakers of Canadian French
were recruited through web-based advertisements on a
university research mailing list, and participated voluntarily.
English proficiency was self-rated as either Beginner (n=1),
Intermediate (n=9), Advanced (n=20) or Near-native (n=4).
Participants also reported their age of first exposure to
English, which ranged from 1 to 20 years, with a mean of
8.21 years.

Materials
78 verb-particle pairs were presented in an internet-based
survey. Stimuli were selected from a larger set of 212 verbparticle constructions that were rated by monolinguals in
Gonnerman and Hayes’ (2005) study, and contained an even
distribution of low (mean rating < 4), medium (4-6) and
high (>6 ) similarity items as rated by the monolinguals.
Particles (e.g., up, on, off) were evenly distributed among
high, medium and low similarity items. In addition, items in
each group were matched for the frequency (Kucera &
Francis, 1967) of the verbs (e.g., throw), as well as for the
frequency of verb-particle constructions in their entirety
(e.g., throw up).

Procedure
Each participant rated all 78 items. Participants were asked
to rate the similarity in meaning of verb particle/verb pairs
on a scale from 1 (very dissimilar) to 9 (very similar).
Instructions for this task included examples of highly
similar as well as dissimilar pairs with corresponding
ratings. Ratings were compiled electronically and analyzed
for comparison with the ratings obtained from monolinguals
by Gonnerman & Hayes (2005).

Results & Discussion
Similarity ratings of the 78 items from monolinguals and
bilinguals are shown in Figure 1. Results are arranged in
ascending order of the monolinguals' ratings. Monolingual
and bilingual ratings are positively correlated with

1340

correlation coefficient 0.707 (p<.01), indicating that
bilinguals can make similar judgments of semantic
similarity to native English speakers. Ratings from the
bilinguals were fairly evenly distributed across the range of
the scale; on average, participants chose each point on the
scale between 6 and 10 times. Interestingly, ratings of the
two groups agreed more consistently in the middle of the
scale than at either end, with those of the lowest-similarity
items being most discrepant.

process which would not have time to occur in a masked
priming paradigm.

Participants
30 native speakers of French, aged 18 to 35, participated for
monetary compensation. Inclusion criteria were identical to
those of the similarity rating experiment: participants were
required to consider themselves non-native speakers of
English but to have functional proficiency in English. Age
of first exposure to English ranged from 1 to 15 years, with
a mean of 7.79 years. English proficiency was self-reported
as Intermediate (n=7), Advanced (n=16) or Near-native
(n=5).

Materials

Figure 1: Mean semantic similarity ratings obtained from
French-English bilinguals and English monolinguals from
Gonnerman & Hayes' (2005). Verb/verb-particle pairs are
arranged in ascending order of the monolinguals' mean
ratings.
In other respects, bilinguals' ratings differed from those of
the monolinguals. Bilingual speakers' ratings were
significantly less consistent than monolinguals, with an
average standard deviation of 2.33, as opposed to 1.96 for
the monolinguals (F(1,77)=56.16, p<.001). Bilinguals’
ratings also showed a reduced range (5.94), as compared to
the monolinguals' range of 6.82. These results indicate that
while second language speakers do recognize a range of
semantic transparency across verb-particle constructions,
they are generally more variable in their responses.

Masked Priming
As an on-line measure of semantic processing,
participants completed a masked priming task in which a
target verb (e.g., LOOK) was primed by its corresponding
verb-particle construction (e.g., look up). In past research
(Gonnerman & Hayes, 2005), priming has been found to be
strongest for verb-particle constructions rated as highly
similar in meaning to their isolated verbs. This task was
designed to determine whether bilinguals’ implicit
processing of verb-particle constructions would be predicted
by the degree of semantic transparency, as has been shown
for monolinguals. In addition, the task serves as an implicit
comparison to the explicit data obtained from the ratings
task. If applicable to verb-particle constructions, the Literal
Salience Hypothesis (Cieslicka, 2006; Cieslicka & Heredia,
2011), would predict poor performance on the priming task;
Literal Salience holds that non-literal language is always
first interpreted literally and only then re-analyzed, a

The same 78 verb-particle constructions were used as
related primes for their corresponding verbs (e.g., cover
up/cover). For each construction, an unrelated control prime
was created to match in frequency and number of letters
(e.g., show off/cover). Control primes did not overlap with
test primes in meaning or orthography. Finally, identity
primes (e.g., cover/cover) were included for each item.
Stimuli were divided into three lists, with one of these
conditions in each list so that no participant responded to
any verb more than once. In order to reduce the proportion
of related prime-target pairs, 78 real word prime-target filler
items were added to each list. In addition, 156 non-word
filler items were included, matching the real words in
frequency and orthography as closely as possible. Of these,
half employed verb particle primes with non-words that
were either “related” (e.g., keep out/keem) or “unrelated”
(e.g., live down/bool), while the other half used single words
as primes. Thus, each participant responded to 312 items, of
which 39 were related prime-target pairs containing verb
particle constructions.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room with
dim, natural lighting. Stimuli were presented using
PsyScope (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993)
software on CRT monitors running at 85 HZ. Each trial
consisted of a fixation point (*) displayed for 1000ms, after
which a mask (%#@!&^$) was displayed for 500ms;
subsequently, the prime appeared briefly for 35ms followed
immediately by the target, which remained on the screen for
200ms. Participants made a lexical decision to the target by
pressing the yes/no buttons on a button box, from which
reaction times were recorded. After the participant’s
response, a 500ms delay occurred before presentation of the
next trial. Stimuli appeared in white on a black background,
with primes in lower case letters and targets in upper case
letters.

Results & Discussion
Four participants, who made errors on more than 40% of
the items, were excluded from the analyses. For all other
participants, only correct responses were included in the

1341

analyses. Data were trimmed to exclude outliers; that is,
response times slower than 300ms or faster than 1000ms. A
3 (Prime Type: Related vs. Unrelated vs. Identity) by 3
(Prime-target similarity: Low vs. Mid vs. High) repeated
measures ANOVA was conducted to determine whether
priming effects were modulated by semantic similarity.
Because we were interested in priming effects specifically,
we also planned comparisons between the unrelated and
related response times. Priming effect for the monolinguals
(from Gonnerman & Hayes, 2005) and bilinguals are shown
in Tables 1 and 2 below. An identity condition was also
included for the bilinguals to rule out the possibility that
bilinguals are only reading the first word in the verb-particle
primes, that is, reading only the first element (e.g., throw)
and ignoring the particle separated by a space (e.g. up).
Including the identity condition therefore allowed us to
determine whether priming for related targets reflects the
whole prime, since otherwise throw off/throw would simply
elicit the same identity priming as throw/throw).
Results showed a significant main effect of Prime Type
(F(2, 50)=7.96, p<.01) and a significant main effect of
Similarity (F(2, 50)=7.19, p<.01). The interaction of these
factors was non-significant. Planned comparisons revealed
significant (p<.05) differences between the unrelated and
identity primes across all conditions, and significant
differences between the unrelated and related primes in the
mid and high-similarity conditions (see Table 2 below).
Table 1: Monolinguals' response latencies for target words
by prime type and similarity (from Gonnerman & Hayes,
2005).
Monolinguals

Prime-target Similarity

Prime Type

Low

Mid

High

Unrelated (cast off/throw)

550

553

557

Related (throw up/throw)

543

532

537

Unrelated-Related

7

21*

20*

Table 2: Bilinguals' response latencies for target words by
prime type and similarity.
Bilinguals

Prime-target Similarity

Prime Type

Low

Mid

High

Unrelated (cast off/throw)

605

619

605

Related (throw up/throw)

592

599

576

Identity (throw/throw)

583

595

569

Unrelated-Identity

22*

24*

Unrelated-Related

13

20*

36*
24*

Tables 1 and 2 show the response latencies from
monolingual and bilingual participants to unrelated, related
and (for the bilinguals) identity primes. Responses from the
bilinguals were slower overall, consistent with the increased
processing cost of responding in one's second language. In

all other respects, however, results from the two groups are
strikingly similar. In addition, for the bilinguals identity
priming across all three conditions was higher than
Unrelated-Related priming, indicating that the bilinguals did
in fact respond differently to the verb-particle constructions
than to the verbs alone. As did the monolinguals, the
bilingual speakers showed no priming effect for low
similarity items, but significant facilitation from verbparticles rated as having mid or high similarity to the target
verbs.
These results suggest that, contrary to our
expectations, at an implicit level L2 speakers are sensitive to
the same gradations in semantic transparency that are
reflected in monolingual priming effects.

General Discussion
The present study was designed to investigate the
performance of non-native English speakers on implicit and
explicit measures of phrasal verb comprehension. Based on
past research, we hypothesized that the bilinguals would
have difficulty with both tasks, showing decreased
sensitivity to the variations in verb/verb-particle similarity
that are easily recognized by monolinguals.
Somewhat surprisingly, responses of the L2 speakers
approximated those of monolinguals on both the explicit
and implicit semantic tasks. This native-like behaviour
supports the findings of past research (e.g., Laufer &
Eliason, 1992; Liao & Fukuya, 2005) demonstrating that
non-native speakers can improve their competence with
verb-particle constructions regardless of L1. Importantly, it
also extends this literature from production to
comprehension, suggesting that use of these constructions
reflects their mastery even at a subconscious level.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that bilingual responses
were not identical to those of monolinguals, especially in
the variability between participants on the similarity rating
task. More research is needed to determine whether this
reflects a fundamental difference between monolinguals and
bilinguals, or whether even this effect might disappear in
high-proficiency L2 speakers.
The results from the masked priming experiment do not
support an extension of the Literal Salience Hypothesis
(Cieslicka, 2006; Cieslicka & Heredia, 2011) to verbparticle construction processing in L2. Being below the
consciousness threshold, the presentation length of the
primes in this experiment was considered brief enough to
measure initial, automatic interpretation. Thus, if bilingual
speakers universally activated the literal meaning of a verb
without considering it in conjunction with a particle, then
identical priming would be expected for verb-particle
constructions and identity primes across conditions. In
contrast, our participants showed consistently higher
priming for identity primes than for related verb-particle
primes. Additionally, the difference between high and
low/mid similarity items can only be explained if
participants were responding to the construction as a unit
and not simply to the literal combination of words. These
data suggest that the literal salience account of idiom

1342

processing in bilinguals does not apply to processing of
verb-particle constructions.
When comparing the present study to past research, it
should be noted that the bilingual participants in this study
had a somewhat different language experience than those in
most previous studies of phrasal verb acquisition (e.g.,
Dagut & Laufer, 1985; Hulstijn & Marchena, 1989; Laufer
& Eliason, 1992). While past research has largely focused
on speakers learning English in a formal or foreignlanguage setting, our participants were inhabitants of
Montreal, where both French and English are regularly used
in formal/educational as well as informal contexts. Thus,
although context of exposure was not explicitly controlled
in our study, it is reasonable to expect that most of our
participants had (either currently or at some point in the
past) some degree of contact with and use of English in
everyday speaking situations. The present study therefore
offers an important extension of work on L2 phrasal verbs
to a bilingual population more apt to use English in informal
as well as formal contexts.
Several possible directions for future research are
suggested by the present study. Gonnerman & Hayes
(2005), have noted that variations in verb-particle similarity
can influence speakers' word-order preferences, for instance,
deciding whether a verb and particle should appear in an
adjacent (e.g., throw out the garbage) or shifted (e.g., throw
the garbage out) construction. A logical extension of this
experiment would be to investigate whether bilinguals use
semantic similarity to influence their word-order
preferences. In addition, past work on avoidance of verbparticle constructions in bilinguals suggests a need for more
careful comparison of bilinguals with different proficiency
levels and ages of acquisition. Finally, evidence from both
bilingual and monolingual processing must ultimately be
integrated with theoretical models of cognitive/linguistic
function, addressing such issues as the interface between the
lexical and semantic systems.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by two graduate research
awards to the first author, from the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and
from the Fonds québécois de recherche sur la nature et les
technologies (FQRNT).

References
Bialystok, E. (1979). Explicit and implicit judgements of L2
grammaticality. Language Learning, 29, 81-103.
Bulut, T. & Çelik-Yazici, I. (2004). Idiom processing in L2:
Through rose-colored glasses. The Reading Matrix, 4,
105-116.
Cappelle, B., Shtyrov, Y., & Pulvermüller, F. (2009).
Heating up or cooling up the brain? MEG evidence that
phrasal verbs are lexical units. Brain & Language, 115,
189-201.

Cieslicka, A.B. (2006) Literal salience in on-line processing
of idiomatic expressions by second-language learners.
Second Language Research, 22, 115-144.
Cieslicka, A.B., Heredia, R.R. (2011). Hemispheric
asymmetries in processing L1 and L2 idioms: Effects of
salience and context. Brain & Language, 116, 136-150.
Chomsky, N. (1970). Remarks on nominalization. In R. A.
Jacobs & P. S. Rosenbaum (Eds.), Readings in English
transformational grammar (pp. 184–221). Waltham, MA.:
Ginn.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M. & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: An interactive graphic system for
designing and controlling experiments in the psychology
laboratory using Macintosh computers. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25, 257271.
Dagaut, M. & Laufer, B. (1989). Avoidance of phrasal
verbs: A case for contrastive analysis. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 7, 73-79.
Dixon, R.M.W. (1982). The grammar of English phrasal
verbs. Australian Journal of Linguistics, 2, 1-42.
Ellis, R. (2005). Measuring implicit and explicit knowledge
of a second language. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 27, 141-172.
Farrell, P. (2005). English verb–preposition constructions:
Constituency and order. Language, 80(1), 96–137.
Giora, R. (2002) Literal vs. figurative language: different or
equal? Journal of Pragmatics, 34, 487–506.
Gonnerman, L.M., & Hayes, C.R. (2005). The professor
chewed the students… out: Effects of dependency, length,
and adjacency on word order preferences in sentences
with verb particle constructions. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. (pp. 785-790). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jackendoff, R. (1995). The boundaries of the lexicon. In M.
Everaert, E. van der Linden, A. Schenk, & R. Schreuder
(Eds.). Idioms: Structural and psychological perspectives
(pp. 133-165). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Konopka, A.E. & Bock, K. (2009). Lexical or syntactic
control
of
sentence
formulation?
Structural
generalizations from idiom production. Cognitive
Psychology, 58, 68-101.
Laufer, B. & Eliasson, S. (1992). What causes avoidance in
L2 learning? Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15,
35-48.
Liao, Y. & Fukuya, Y.J. (2004). Avoidance of phrasal
verbs: The case of Chinese learners of English. Language
Learning, 52, 193-226.
Neagu, M. (2007). English verb particles and their
acquisition: a cognitive approach. Revista Espanola de
Linguista Aplicada, 20, 121-138.
Titone, D.A. & Connine, C.M.. (1999) On the compositional
and non-compositional nature of idiomatic expressions.
Journal of pragmatics, 31, 1655-1674.

1343

