UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The perception of simplified and traditional Chinese characters in the eye of simplified and
traditional Chinese readers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0hg0b4dg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Liu, Tianyin
Hsiao, Janet

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The perception of simplified and traditional Chinese characters in the eye of
simplified and traditional Chinese readers
Tianyin Liu (kanalty@hku.hk)
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
604 Knowles Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
Abstract

components and have better ability to ignore some
unimportant configural information for recognition, such as
exact distances between features (Ge, Wang, McCleery, &
Lee, 2006) compared with novices (Ho, Ng, & Ng., 2003;
Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009). Consequently, expert readers may
process Chinese characters less holistically than novices.
There are currently two Chinese writing systems in use
in Chinese speaking regions, namely simplified and
traditional Chinese. The simplified script was created during
the writing reform initiated by the central government of the
People’s Republic of China in the 1960s for easing the
learning process. Today the majority of Chinese speaking
regions including Mainland China, Singapore, and Malaysia
use the simplified script, while Hong Kong and Taiwan
continue to use the traditional script. The simplification
process did not apply to all characters; among the most
frequently used 3,500 characters, around 40% were
simplified, which have approximately 22.5% fewer strokes
than the traditional counterparts (Gao & Kao, 2002); the
remaining 60% remained the same in two scripts.
The effects of simplifying the script have aroused some
discussion since last decade. For instance, while simplified
characters were designed to ease the learning process, many
researchers (e.g., Chen, 1999) believe that pure reduction of
strokes without standardization of principles may make the
characters harder to learn: on one hand, reducing the stroke
numbers may make the characters more legible and easier to
write for beginners; on the other hand, up to a certain point,
characters may become less distinguishable due to high
visual similarity among one another as readers’ lexicon size
expands (Chen, 1999). Consistent with this speculation,
McBride-Chang et al. (2005) recently found that visual
skills of children who learned simplified characters were
significantly better than those of Hong Kong children who
learned the traditional script. Peng, Winett, and Wang’s
(2010) ERP data were also consistent with the finding that
simplified character readers have greater visual
discrimination skills than traditional character readers in
perceiving Chinese characters.
Thus, it is possible that the simplification has significantly
increased visual similarity among characters in the Chinese
lexicon. Simplified characters may differ from one another
in fewer strokes than traditional characters. As the ability to
identify these diagnostic features is important for
recognition (e.g., Oliva & Schyns, 1997), reading simplified
characters may involve more analytic/reduced holistic
processing than reading traditional characters. Here we aim

Expertise in Chinese character recognition is marked by
analytic/reduced holistic processing (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009),
which depends mainly on readers’ writing rather than reading
experience (Tso, Au, & Hsiao, 2011). Here we examined
whether simplified and traditional Chinese readers process
characters differently in terms of holistic processing. When
processing characters that are distinctive in the simplified and
traditional scripts, we found that simplified Chinese readers
were more analytic than traditional Chinese readers in
perceiving simplified characters; this effect depended on their
writing rather than reading/copying performance. In contrast,
the two groups did not differ in holistic processing of
traditional characters, regardless of their performance
difference in writing/reading traditional characters. When
processing characters that are shared in the two scripts,
simplified Chinese readers were also more analytic than
traditional Chinese readers. These results suggest that
simplified Chinese readers may have developed better
analytic processing skills than traditional Chinese readers
from experiences with simplified characters, and these skills
are transferrable to the processing of shared and even
traditional characters.
Keywords: Chinese character recognition, holistic processing,
reading, writing

Introduction
Chinese characters are the basic writing units in Chinese
orthography. They consist of strokes packed into a square
configuration, in contrast to words in most alphabetic
languages, which are linear combinations of letters. It has
been suggested that Chinese characters have many visual
similarities with faces (McCleery et. al., 2008). For example,
both faces and Chinese characters have a homogenous
shape, are recognized at the individual level, and learnt in an
upright orientation. However, expertise in face recognition
is marked by holistic processing, that is, to perceive features
of an object as a whole instead of various parts (Gauthier &
Tanaka, 2002); in contrast, expertise in recognizing Chinese
characters is marked by reduced holistic processing (Hsiao
& Cottrell, 2009). This effect may be due to expert Chinese
readers’ knowledge about Chinese orthography. Chinese
characters are composed of strokes, which combine to form
over a thousand different stroke patterns in Chinese
orthography (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2006), and stroke patterns
are the smallest functional units in Chinese character
recognition (Chen, Allport, & Marshall, 1996). For expert
Chinese readers, when recognizing Chinese characters, they
may be more sensitive to the internal constituent

689

Chinese before 1 . Both groups had similar education
background (average years of education, Mainland = 15.46,
SE = .37; Hong Kong = 15.38, SE = .44) and similar age
(Mainland average = 22.25, SE = .65; Hong Kong average =
22.42, SE = .81). All of them had normal or corrected-tonormal vision and were right-handed as measured by the
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971).

to examine whether native traditional and simplified
Chinese readers process Chinese characters differently due
to the differences in their scripts. We first examine their
perception of characters in either the simplified or the
traditional form; we predict that simplified Chinese readers
will perceive simplified characters less holistically than
traditional readers due to their expertise with the simplified
script, and vice versa in the perception of traditional
characters. In addition to the characters that have different
visual forms in the two scripts, around 60% of the most
frequently used characters have the same form in the two
scripts, and these shared characters provide us a unique
opportunity to test the transfer effect of reading
simplified/traditional characters. Because both reader
groups are experts in reading shared characters, if the two
groups differ in they way they perceive/process the shared
characters, it will suggest a transfer effect from their
experience with the simplified or traditional scripts.
Tso, Hsiao, and Au (2011) recently examined how writing
experience influences holistic processing in Chinese
character recognition. They recruited proficient Chinese
readers who were skilled in both reading and writing
(Writers), and those who had limited writing experience
regardless of their proficient reading ability (LimitedWriters). They found that Writers perceived Chinese
characters less holistically than Limited-Writers, and
holistic processing effect was dependent on writing rather
than reading performance. Although simplified Chinese
readers may still be able to read traditional characters
through their similarity with simplified characters or context
information, they generally do not know how to write them
(and vice versa for traditional Chinese readers). Thus,
similar to Limited-Writers, they may perceive characters in
their unfamiliar script more holistically, and this effect may
depend on their writing rather than reading performance. To
verify this hypothesis, we also measure participants’ reading
and writing performance in the two scripts and examine
whether their (reduced) holistic processing can be predicted
by these measures. This study is also the first to investigate
holistic processing effects in the two Chinese scripts across
two groups of readers.

Holistic processing
The complete composite paradigm was used to examine
holistic processing effects (Gauthier & Bukach, 2007). The
experiment procedure was adopted from Hsiao and Cottrell
(2009; Fig. 1). In each trial, participants were presented with
a pair of Chinese characters simultaneously, and told to
attend to only half of each character and judge whether they
were the same or different. In congruent trials, the attended
and irrelevant halves of the characters led to the same
response (i.e., both were the same or different); in
incongruent trials, they led to different responses. The level
of holistic processing was assessed by the performance
difference between the congruent and incongruent trials.
Materials The materials consisted of 480 pairs of low to
medium frequency (Kwan, 2001) Chinese characters in
Ming font, divided equally into three script types: 160 pairs
were simplified characters; 160 pairs were the
corresponding traditional version of the simplified
characters, i.e., having same meanings and pronunciations
and differing in orthography; the remaining 160 pairs were
characters shared between the two scripts (i.e., shared
characters). Characters of different script types were
matched in relative character frequency, and the traditional
characters were significantly more complex than the
simplified ones (t(159) = 6.17, p < .01). In each script type,
half of the characters had a top-bottom (TB) configuration,
and the other half were left-right (LR) structured2, and two
groups were matched in complexity and frequency. The 80
character pairs in each script type and character
configuration combination were further divided into the four
conditions in the complete composite paradigm, with 20
pairs in each condition shown in Fig. 1a. Each character
could be divided into two components, horizontally for TB
and vertically for LR characters. In either character
configuration condition, the attended halves were matched
across congruent and incongruent trials (see Fig. 1a for an
illustration), and character frequency and visual complexity
were also matched across congruent and incongruent trials.

Methods
Participants
24 native simplified Chinese readers (5 males and 19
females) from Mainland China and 24 native traditional
Chinese readers (9 males and 15 females) from Hong Kong
participated in the study. They were all skilled writers in
their own script: all Mainland participants had passed the
Chinese test of National Entrance Examination to college,
and all Hong Kong participants had passed the Chinese test
of Hong Kong Advanced Level Examination. They were all
students at University of Hong Kong; all simplified Chinese
readers had resided in Hong Kong for less than 1 years
(average length of stay was 9.35 months) by the time they
were recruited and had limited exposure to traditional

Design The design had three within-subject variables:
congruency (congruent vs. incongruent), character
1

Note that the official written languages used in Hong Kong are
English and traditional Chinese, and the official language for
instruction at University of Hong Kong is English.
2
We used both TB and LR characters to counterbalance possible
influence from character structure; the LR structure is the most
dominant structure in Chinese orthography, followed by the TB
structure (see, e.g., Hsiao & Shillcock, 2006).

690

configuration (TB vs. LR), and script type (simplified vs.
traditional vs. shared); and a between-subject variable:
group (simplified vs. traditional Chinese readers). The
dependent variable was discrimination sensitivity measured
by A’, a bias-free nonparametric measure of sensitivity3.

LR configuration. In either configuration, 20 characters
were simplified characters, 20 were the corresponding
traditional version of the simplified characters, and the
remaining 20 were shared characters; these characters were
not used in the holistic processing task. All characters were
of medium to high frequency (Kwan, 2001); they were
matched in relative frequency across the script types. The
traditional characters had significantly more strokes than the
simplified ones (t(39) = 10.92, p < .01). In each trial, after a
500 ms central fixation, participants were presented with a
character occupying 1.5° of visual angle at the center of the
screen, and they were asked to read it out in front of a
microphone. Upon their response, the screen turned blank
and the experimenter pressed buttons on a response box to
record the accuracy and initiate the next trial.

Procedure All characters were shown in low contrast to
avoid ceiling effects. In each trial, participants were
presented with a central fixation cross for 1000 ms,
followed by a symbol indicating which half of the character
(top or bottom for TB characters; left or right for LR
characters) they should attend to. They were then presented
with a pair of characters above and below the initial fixation
respectively for 500 ms, followed by a mask (Fig. 1b). Both
characters were about 2.5° of visual angle away from the
center, each occupying around 1.5° of visual angle.
Participants performed a same-or-different judgment task as
quickly and accurately as possible with a response box; their
accuracy was collected. There were six blocks of test; each
block had 80 trials; characters with different configurations
or in different script types were presented in different
blocks. The sequence of blocks was counterbalanced across
participants. A practice session with characters not used in
the materials was given before the test.

Character Copying Participants copied 60 characters (20
shared, 20 simplified, and 20 traditional) as quickly and as
accurately as possible. The characters were randomly
selected from those used in the character naming task; half
of them had a TB structure whereas the other half had a LR
configuration. All characters were of medium to high
frequency and were matched in relative frequency across
script types. The traditional characters had significantly
more strokes than their simplified counterparts (t(19) = 8.26,
p < .01). In each trial, after a 500 ms central fixation,
participants were shown a stimulus at the center of the
screen, occupying around 1.5° of visual angle, and were
asked to copy it as quickly and as accurately as possible.
After they finished copying, they pressed a button on a
response box to signal completion and the screen turned
blank. Then the experimenter pressed buttons on a response
box to record the accuracy and to initiate the next trial. 60
stimuli were presented in a random order in one block.
Word Dictation Task 40 characters (20 shared and 20
traditional/simplified) were selected from the character
naming task. Each character was concatenated with a second
character to compose a two-character word, and these words
were used here. Words instead of characters were used to
avoid the ambiguity due to the many homophone characters
in Chinese. All words were of medium to high frequency
(Taiwan Ministry of Education, 1997) and were matched in
relative word frequency across different script types.
Participants listened to the words presented in a female
voice in their native language respectively, i.e., Cantonese
for Hong Kong participants and Mandarin for Mainland
participants. The audio recordings of the words were
presented by a computer in a random order, and participants
wrote down each word in their own script first and then in
the other script, even if they thought the characters were the
same in the two scripts. If they did not know how to write a
character, they indicated it by putting a cross on the space.
In each trial, after the words “get ready” presented on the
screen for 500 ms, participants were presented with a
stimulus; they then pressed buttons on a response box to
indicate whether they knew how to write it or not. After

Fig. 1: Illustration of stimulus pairs in the complete
composite paradigm (a) and trial sequences (b). In (a), the
attended components are the bottom halves shaded in grey.

Reading & Writing Performance
Tasks assessing participants’ reading and writing abilities
were adopted from Tso et al. (2011). Participants’ reading
ability was assessed by a character naming task, in which
they named the characters in their mother tongue (i.e.,
Putonghua for Mainland China participants and Cantonese
for Hong Kong participants). Their writing ability was
assessed by a character copying and a word dictation task.
Character Naming The materials consisted of 120 Chinese
characters, half with a TB structure and the other half with a

3

, where H and

F present hit rate and false alarm rate respectively.

691

writing the word in both scripts, they pressed a button to
indicate completion and start the next trial. Their accuracy
of writing the first character of each word was assessed (to
match the character naming task).

Holistic Processing
In A’, repeated measures ANOVA revealed main effects of
congruency (F(1, 46) = 70.40, p < .01), and character
configuration (F(1, 46) = 33.79, p < .01). Participants did
better in congruent (M = .98, SE = .00) than incongruent
trials (M = .94, SE = .01), and in processing LR (M = .97,
SE = .02) than TB (M = .95, SE = .02) characters. A
significant interaction between congruency and group (F(1,
46) = 6.60, p < .05) indicated that traditional Chinese
readers were more holistic than simplified Chinese readers
in general. There was also a three-way interaction between
script type, congruency, and group (F(2, 92) = 5.027, p
< .05), suggesting that the interaction between congruency
and group was different across the three script types. To
investigate how the two groups differed in processing
different script types, we first contrasted their difference in
processing simplified vs. traditional characters; we then
compared their behavior in processing shared characters to
examine
how
their
experience
in
processing
simplified/traditional characters influenced their perception
of shared characters.

Results
Reading and Writing Performances
Reading Performance Participants’ character naming
performance was summarized in Table 1. Repeated
measures ANOVA revealed a main effect of script type in
accuracy (F(2, 92) = 5.40, p < .01) and response time (RT)
(F(2, 92) = 5.60, p < .01); and an interaction between group
and script type in accuracy (F(2, 92) = 14.66, p < .01) and
RT (F(2, 92) = 15.70, p < .01). Simplified Chinese readers
were more accurate in naming shared (t(46) = 1.51, p < .05;
although the difference was only 1%) and simplified
characters (t(46) = 2.87, p < .05) than traditional Chinese
readers, and traditional Chinese readers were more accurate
in naming traditional characters (t(46) = 3.33, p < .01; these
differences were not significant in RT).

Simplified vs. Traditional characters Repeated-measure
ANOVAs revealed main effects of congruency (F(1, 46) =
65.55, p < .01) and character configuration (F(1, 46) =
33.26, p < .01). There was an interaction between
congruency and group (F(1, 46) = 5.30, p < .05): simplified
Chinese readers perceived both characters less holistically
overall; and a three-way interaction between script type,
congruency, and group (F(1, 46) = 5.11, p < .05), suggesting
the interaction between congruency and group was different
between the two scripts.
When we examined their performance in processing the
two scripts separately, in processing simplified characters,
as predicted, the interaction between congruency and group
was significant (F(1, 46) = 5.74, p < .05): simplified
Chinese readers processed simplified characters less
holistically than traditional Chinese readers (Fig. 2a),
possibly due to their expertise with simplified characters.
Nevertheless, in processing traditional characters, there was
no interaction between group and congruency (p = .76; Fig.
2b). This suggests that the two groups processed traditional
characters with a similar level of holistic processing,
regardless of their performance difference in reading and
writing traditional characters.
Since the two groups differed in some reading and
writing performance measures in processing simplified
characters (Table 1), to examine whether the difference in
holistic processing of simplified characters was dependent
on these measures, we put them as covariates in separate
ANCOVA tests. Participants’ reading performance in
traditional and shared characters could hardly explain the
holistic processing difference, because the interaction was
still significant if we put their shared character reading
accuracy (F(1, 46) = 5.62, p < .05) or RT (F(1, 46) = 6.08, p
< .05), or traditional character reading RT (F(1, 46) = 5.66,
p < .05) as a covariate separately, and it was marginal when

Table 1: Summary of participants reading and writing performance
* p < .05, ** p < .01

Writing Performance Participants’ writing performance
was summarized in Table 1. In character copying, repeatmeasures ANOVA revealed a main effect of script type in
both accuracy (F(2, 92) = 93.40, p < .01) and RT (F(2, 92) =
135.28, p < .01), and an interaction between group and
script type in accuracy (F(2, 92) = 81.76, p < .01) and RT
(F(2, 92) = 115.38, p < .01). Traditional Chinese readers
were faster (t(46) = -7.58, p < .01) and more accurate (t(46)
= 9.58, p < .01) in copying traditional characters, but less
accurate in copying simplified characters (t(46) = -3.58, p
< .05) than simplified Chinese readers. In contrast, the two
groups did not differ in the accuracy or RT of copying
shared characters; this suggests that both group had similar
level of copying skills in shared characters. In the dictation
task, a main effect of script type (F(2, 92) = 59.15, p < .01)
and an interaction between script type and group (F(2, 92) =
171.96, p < .01) were found. Simplified Chinese readers
were more accurate in recalling and writing shared (t(46) =
2.41, p < .05) and simplified characters (t(46) = 6.13, p
< .01), but were less accurate in recalling and writing
traditional characters (t(43) = 21.86, p < .01) than traditional
Chinese readers.

692

traditional character reading accuracy was put as a covariate
(F(1, 46) = 3.62, p =.06). Similarly, when putting either
their simplified character naming accuracy (F(1, 46) = 4.01,
p < .05) or simplified character copying RT (F(1, 46) = 5.99,
p < .05) as covariates the interaction between congruency
and group was still significant. When we put their simplified
character reading RT (F(1, 46) = 3.23, p = .08) or copying
accuracy (F(1, 46) = 2.71, p = .11), the interaction between
congruency and group became marginal. Only when we put
simplified character dictation accuracy (F(1, 46) = .627, p
= .43) as a covariate did the interaction become insignificant.
Furthermore, participants A’ difference between congruent
and incongruent trials (the measure of holistic processing) in
processing simplified Chinese characters was significantly
correlated with their simplified character dictation (r = -.39,
p < .05) but not with reading or copying performances.
These results were consistent with Tso et al.’s (2011)
finding that the reduced holistic processing effect in expert
Chinese character processing may depend more on writing
rather than reading or copying performance.

interaction became insignificant. Also, participants’ shared
character holistic processing significantly correlated with
simplified character dictation (r = -.36, p < .05) but not with
any other reading/writing performance measures. These
results suggested that the difference in holistic processing of
shared characters could not be completely accounted for by
their performance difference in reading/writing shared
characters; rather, it was dependent on their writing
performance of simplified characters. Thus, the holistic
processing difference was likely due to a transfer effect
from simplified Chinese readers’ expertise with simplified
characters.

Figure 3: Performance of simplified and traditional Chinese
readers in the holistic processing task with shared characters.

Discussion
Here we examined whether simplified and traditional
Chinese readers processed Chinese characters differently in
terms of holistic processing, and whether their writing and
reading performance measures could uniquely predict these
differences. We found that when processing simplified
characters, simplified Chinese readers were less holistic
than traditional Chinese readers, and the difference was
dependent on their word dictation performance rather than
reading or copying performances. This finding is consistent
with Tso et al.’s (2001) study, which showed a close
relationship between writing experience and reduced
holistic processing in Chinese character recognition. In
contrast, although simplified Chinese readers performed
much worse in both reading and writing traditional
characters than traditional Chinese readers, their
performance in holistic processing of traditional characters
did not differ from traditional Chinese readers. This effect
may be because processing simplified characters generally
requires more analytic processing due to higher visual
similarity among characters compared with traditional
characters. Thus, simplified Chinese readers may have
developed a better analytic processing skill in reading
Chinese characters in general, and it could be more easily
transferred to reading traditional characters compared with
the generalization from traditional to simplified characters
in traditional Chinese readers. This speculation is consistent
with the recent finding that simplified Chinese readers have

Fig. 2: Performance of simplified and traditional Chinese
readers in the holistic processing task with (a) simplified
Chinese characters and (b) traditional Chinese characters.
Shared characters A main effect of congruency was found
(F(1, 46) = 54.96, p < .01). There was an interaction
between congruency and group (F(1, 46) = 5.01, p < .05):
simplified Chinese readers were less holistic than traditional
Chinese readers (Fig. 3), even though these characters were
shared in the two scripts. Since the two groups also differed
in some reading/writing performance measures (Table 1), to
examine whether the difference in holistic processing was
dependent on these measures, they were put as covariates in
separate ANCOVA tests. We found that the interaction
between congruency and group was still significant when
putting shared character naming accuracy (F(1, 46) = 4.72,
p < .05) or RT (F(1, 46) = 5.25, p < .05), copying accuracy
(F(1, 46) = 4.97, p < .05), or dictation accuracy (F(1, 46) =
4.74, p < .05) as a covariate. When putting shared character
copying RT (F(1, 46) = 3.44, p = .07), as a covariate, the
interaction became marginally significant. However, when
putting simplified character copying accuracy as a covariate,
the interaction became very marginal (F(1, 46) = 2.52, p
= .12), and when putting simplified character dictation
accuracy as a covariate (F(1, 46) = .60, p = .43), the

693

better visual skills than traditional Chinese readers (e.g.,
McBride-Chang et al., 2005; Peng et al., 2010).
When processing characters that are the same in the two
scripts (shared characters), simplified Chinese readers were
also less holistic than traditional Chinese readers, even
though both groups were experts in processing shared
characters. Although simplified Chinese readers had better
dictation performance in shared characters, further analysis
showed that this difference in holistic processing was not
dependent on their writing abilities of shared characters, but
on their writing abilities of simplified characters. These
findings further support our hypothesis that recognizing
simplified characters requires more analytic processing than
recognizing traditional characters, and this enhanced
analytic processing skill is transferrable to the processing of
characters that are shared in both scripts, and even to
traditional characters.
Note however that the enhanced analytic processing in the
simplified Chinese readers compared with the traditional
Chinese readers here may also be accounted for by the
difference in Chinese teaching method adopted in Mainland
China and Hong Kong. In Hong Kong, children learn to
read and write Chinese mainly through rote repetition,
whereas in Mainland, children are taught explicitly about
character components. As the result, simplified Chinese
readers in Mainland may be generally more sensitive to the
internal constituent components of characters than
traditional Chinese readers in Hong Kong (McBride-Chang
et al., 2005). To rule out the influence from the teaching
methods in accounting for the current results, future work
will examine whether similar effects can be found in
traditional Chinese readers in Taiwan, where Children are
also taught about character components explicitly.
In conclusion, here we show that expertise in reading and
writing simplified Chinese characters equips readers with
better analytic processing skills that are transferrable to the
processing of shared and even traditional characters.

neuroscience studies of the Chinese language (pp. 195–
206). Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Ge, L., Wang, Z., McCleery, J. P., & Lee, K. (2006).
Activation of face expertise and the inversion effect.
Psychological Science, 17, 12-16.
Ho, C. S. H., Ng, T. T., & Ng, W. K., (2003). A ‘radical’
approach to reading development in Chinese: The role of
semantic radicals and phonetic radicals. Journal of
Literacy Research, 35 (3), 849-878.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cottrell, G. W. (2009). Not all visual
expertise is holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of
Chinese character recognition. Psychological Science, 20,
455-463.
Hsiao, J. H., & Shillcock, R. (2006). Analysis of a Chinese
phonetic compound database: Implications for
orthographic processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 35, 405-426.
Kwan, T. W. (2001). Hong Kong, Mainland China &
Taiwan: Chinese character frequency-A trans-regional,
diachronic survey. Character Frequency. Retrieved
October
30,
2011
from
http://arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Lexis/chifreq/
McBride-Chang, C., Chow, B. W. Y., Zhong, Y., Burgess,
S., & Hayward, W. (2005). Chinese character acquisition
and visual skills in two Chinese scripts. Reading and
Writing, 18, 99-128.
McCleery, J. P., Zhang, L., Ge, L., Wang, Z., Christiansen,
E. M., Lee, K., & Cottrell, G. W. (2008). The roles of
visual expertise and visual input in the face inversion
effect: Behavioral and neurocomputational evidence.
Vision Research, 48, 703- 715.
Oliva, A., & Schyns, P. G. (1997). Coarse blobs or fine
edges? Evidence that information diagnosticity changes
the perception of complex visual stimuli. Cognitive
Psychology, 34, 72–107.
Peng, G., Minett, J. W., & Wang, W. S. -Y. (2010). Cultural
background influences the liminal perception of Chinese
characters: An ERP study. Journal of Psycholinguistics,
23, 416-426.
Taiwan Ministry of Education. (1997). 八十六年常用語詞
調查報告書. Retrieved October 30, 2011 from
http://www.edu.tw/files/site_content/M0001/86news/ch2.h
tml?open
Tso, R. V. Y., Au, T. K., & Hsiao, J. H. (2011). The
Influence of Writing Experiences on Holistic Processing
in Chinese Character Recognition. In L. Carlson, C.
Hoelscher, & T.F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1442-1447). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code: HKU 745210H to J.H. Hsiao).

References
Chen, P. (1999). Modern Chinese: History and
Sociolinguistics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Chen, Y. P., Allport, D. A., & Marshall, J. C. (1996). What
are the functional orthographic units in Chinese word
recognition: The stroke or the stroke pattern? Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology. A, Human
Experimental Psychology, 49, 1024-1043.
Gauthier, I., & Tanaka, J. W. (2002). Configural and holistic
face processing: The Whole story. Journal of Vision, 2
(7), 616.
Gao, D.-G., & Kao, H. S. R. (2002). Psycho-geometric
analysis of commonly used Chinese characters. In H. S.
R. Kao, C.-K. Leong, & D.-G. Gao (Eds.), Cognitive

694

