UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Footbridge Dilemma Reflects More Utilitarian Thinking Than The Trolley Dilemma:
Effect Of Number Of Victims In Moral Dilemmas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8062w0px

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Nakamura, Kuninori

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Footbridge Dilemma Reflects More Utilitarian Thinking Than The Trolley
Dilemma: Effect Of Number Of Victims In Moral Dilemmas
Kuninori Nakamura (nakamura.kuninori@gmail.com)
Graduate School of Decision Science & Technology,
Tokyo Institute of Technology
2-12-1, Ohkayama, Meguro-Ku, Tokyo 152-8552, Japan
Abstract
Previous studies on moral judgment have assumed that the
trolley and footbridge dilemmas (Thomson, 1985) reflect
utilitarian and deontologist thinking, respectively. However,
on the basis of the “intervention myopia” hypothesis
(Waldmann & Dieterich, 2007) and recent findings in
analyses of moral dilemmas (Nakamura, 2011), the current
study led a somewhat paradoxical prediction: An effect of the
manipulation of the number of victims, considered a
utilitarian aspect of moral dilemmas, is larger in the
footbridge dilemma than in the trolley dilemma. In order to
test this prediction, two experimental studies were conducted
in which the number of victims in the trolley and footbridge
dilemmas were manipulated. Results of the two studies
consistently showed an interaction between the dilemma type
and the number of victims, thereby indicating that the
manipulation of the utilitarian aspect of moral dilemmas has
more effect on the footbridge dilemma, which is believed to
reflect deontologist thinking.
Keywords: trolley dilemma, footbridge dilemma, utilitarian,
deontologist

Introduction
Is it permissible to sacrifice fewer lives to save more? This
is a central question in the debate between utilitarianism and
deontology. Utilitarians (e.g., Bentham, 1789; 1948) argue
that it is indeed permissible because saving more lives
results in greater utility for society than saving fewer ones,
whereas deontologists (e.g., Kant, 1965) argue that it is not
permissible because life is an ultimate right that should not
be violated, irrespective of the number benefit yielded by its
sacrifice. This debate has drawn the attention of various
researchers who have proposed a number of solutions (see
e.g., Singer, 1979; Thomson, 1986; Greene & Haidt, 2002;
Mikhail, 2009).
The philosophical debate between utilitarians and
deontologists concerns the normative theory of moral
judgment. However, psychologists are interested in the
descriptive aspect of moral judgment: are people utilitarian
or deontologist? The answer to this question is, surprisingly,
“it depends on the context.” A discrepancy between the
trolley and footbridge dilemmas (Thomson, 1985) clearly
demonstrates the context dependency in moral judgment.
The trolley dilemma can be described in the following
manner: A runaway trolley is headed for five people who
will be killed if it proceeds on its current course. The only
way to save them is to hit a switch that will turn the trolley
onto an alternate set of tracks where it will kill one person
instead of five. Should one turn the trolley in order to save

five people at the expense of one? Most people answer yes
to this dilemma. Then, consider a similar problem, the
footbridge dilemma. As before, a trolley threatens to kill
five people. You are standing next to a large stranger on a
footbridge that spans the tracks, in between the oncoming
trolley and the five people. In this scenario, the only way to
save the five people is to push this stranger off the bridge,
onto the tracks below. He will die if you do this, but his
body will stop the trolley from reaching the others. Should
one save the five others by pushing this stranger to his
death? To this question, most people answer no (with regard
to precise data, see Greene & Haidt, 2002).
With regard to the dominant responses in these
dilemmas, people appear to be utilitarians when solving the
trolley dilemma and deontologists when solving the
footbridge dilemma. In the former dilemma, a person’s
choice appears to depend on the number of workmen to be
saved, whereas people make much of the right of the man
on the bridge in the latter dilemma. Thus, it has been
considered that the trolley dilemma reflects the utilitarian
way of thinking, whereas the footbridge dilemma reflects
the deontologist way of thinking (Greene, Sommerville,
Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001; Waldmann & Dieterich,
2007). With regard to this discrepancy in the dominant
responses between the trolley and footbridge dilemmas,
various theoretical explanations have been proposed such as
the dual process theory (Greene et al., 2001), moral
grammar theory (Hauser, 2007; Mikhail, 2009), or causal
decision theory (Waldmann & Dieterich, 2007).
Although theorists of moral reasoning differ in terms of
how to explain the discrepancy between the trolley and
footbridge
dilemmas,
they
consistently
receive
correspondence between the two dilemmas and
philosophical way of thinking without any doubt. For
example, Greene et al. (2001) said that the dominant
response in the footbridge dilemma could be justified in a
Kantian (deontologist) vein, but this justification has trouble
when considering the trolley dilemma (Greene et al., 2001,
p2106). Hauser (2006, p113–4) explained the philosophical
implication of the trolley and footbridge dilemmas in terms
of whether the utilitarian calculation can justify dominant
responses in these dilemmas. Waldmann and Dieterich
(2007) also argued that throwing the switch in the trolley
dilemma is in line with the utilitarian view, whereas the
footbridge dilemma is in line with the deontologist
perspective (Waldmann & Dieterich, 2007, p247–8).
Although there are differing theoretical explanations for the
discrepancy between the trolley and footbridge dilemmas,
the theorists in moral reasoning research have no doubt in

803

the assumption that the trolley dilemma reflects utilitarian
thinking, and the footbridge dilemma reflects deontologist
thinking.
However,
current
research
proposes
another
interpretation of the difference between the two moral
dilemmas: the footbridge dilemma reflects more utilitarian
thinking than the trolley dilemma. Although this hypothesis
apparently sounds strange when considering the
presumption in related studies, it can be naturally derived
from a theoretical explanation (Waldmann & Dieterich,
2007) and recent empirical findings (Nakamura, 2011) in
moral dilemmas. In what follows, we explain this
interpretation more precisely.
Waldmann and Dieterich (2007) proposed the
“intervention myopia hypothesis”, which insists that moral
intuitions are influenced by the locus of the intervention in
the underlying causal model, and an attentional focus on the
victims is highlighted by the intervention, leading to the
neglect of other victims located in the background. More
specifically, it treats the trolley dilemma as the intervening
agent (trolley) and the footbridge dilemma as the
intervening potential patient (victim). Thus, attentional
focus on the one victim becomes stronger in the footbridge
dilemma than in the trolley dilemma, thereby resulting in
deontologist judgments being more likely in the former
dilemma. Based on this theoretical explanation for moral
dilemmas, Waldmann and Dieterich (2007) performed a
series of experiments in which the focus of intervention was
manipulated. For example, they compared how participants’
moral judgment would differ between “throwing a bomb on
the man” and “throwing a man on a bomb” to save many
people. In terms of their hypothesis, the former action
corresponds to the agent intervention, and the latter action
corresponds to the patient intervention. Results of their
experiment consistently supported their hypothesis and
revealed that sacrificing one victim to save more victims is
more permitted in the agent intervention than in the patient
intervention.
One crucial aspect of Waldmann and Dieterich’s
(2007) hypothesis is that it considers the difference between
the trolley and footbridge dilemma as that of attentional
focus to causal structure. As stated above, according to this
hypothesis, people make more of the patient when
considering the footbridge dilemma compared to the trolley
dilemma; they do not permit the sacrificing of a man in the
footbridge dilemma as they do in the trolley dilemma. This
explanation is intuitively natural and appears to match the
dominant responses in these two dilemmas.
At the same time, the explanation in terms of
attentional focus also leads to an interesting prediction.
Many studies (e.g., Slovic, Griffin, & Tversky, 1990;
Tversky & Koheler, 1994; Tversky, Sattath, & Slovic, 1988;
also see Fischer & Hawkins, 1993) have demonstrated that a
given attribute or element carries more weight for decision
making when it becomes prominent. Although these studies
are varied in their research subjects, such as preference
reversal (Slovic et al., 1990; Tversky et al., 1988) or

probability judgment (Tversky & Koheler, 1994), these
studies consistently assume that an attribute or element
looms larger when it receives attention and its impact on
judgment becomes stronger than when it does not receive
attention. If so, the following prediction can be drawn from
Waldmann and Dieterich’s (2007) hypothesis; people are
more sensitive to a difference in the number of victims in the
footbridge dilemma than in the trolley dilemma because the
victims are paid more attention in the footbridge dilemma
than in the trolley dilemma. More specifically, the effect of
the manipulation of the number of victims is larger in the
footbridge dilemma than in the trolley dilemma because the
victims in the former dilemma loom larger than in the latter
dilemma. As you see, this prediction can be derived from
the existing explanation very naturally. However, it
contradicts the dominant view that matches the trolley and
footbridge dilemmas to utilitarian and deontologist thinking
(e.g., Greene et al., 2001).
Although the above prediction appears to be paradoxical,
Nakamura (2011) also demonstrates that the footbridge
dilemma surely reflects utilitarian thinking more so than the
trolley dilemma. He required participants to answer 62 types
of moral dilemmas used in Greene et al. (2001) and
analyzed the correlation structure of participants’ judgments
using factor analysis and structural equation modeling. The
results demonstrated that the moral dilemmas used in
Greene et al. (2001) can be explained by four factors:
rationality, life-dilemma, risk averse, and efficiency (see
Nakamura, 2011). Among these four factors, the risk-averse
factor contributed to the difference between the trolley and
footbridge dilemmas. This factor mainly comprises
problems similar to Asian disease problems (e.g., Tversky
& Kahneman, 1984) that require participants to consider a
trade-off between probability and outcome (“90% chance of
causing no deaths at all and has a 10% chance of causing
1000 deaths or an 88% chance of causing no deaths and a
12% chance of causing 10 deaths”). This factor can be
interpreted as the calculation of expected value for each
alternative that can be thought of as a utilitarian aspect of
moral dilemmas. Surprisingly, a result of structural equation
modeling in Nakamura (2011) demonstrated that the riskaverse factor had a significant effect on the footbridge
dilemma but not on the trolley dilemma, which is in
accordance with the entailment of the intervention myopia
hypothesis stated above. That is, results of the multivariate
analysis that deals with the correlation structure among the
moral dilemmas also indicate a relationship between
utilitarian thinking and the footbridge dilemma.
The above discussion consistently suggests that the
footbridge dilemma reflects utilitarian thinking more so than
the trolley dilemma. Considering that previous studies,
including both psychological and philosophical ones, have
positioned these dilemmas as symbols for utilitarian and
deontologist thinking (e.g., Foot, 1978; Greene et al., 2001;
Thomson, 1985), this implication is very important because
it contradicts the prevailing view of these two dilemmas.
Additionally, the suggestion of the above discussion is

804

drawn from a natural deduction of the existing theoretical
approach (Waldmann & Dieterich, 2007) that also supports
this prevailing view. Thus, an exploration of the utilitarian
aspect of these two dilemmas leads to a clarification of the
meaning of “utilitarian” and “deontologist.”
The purpose of this study is to test the hypothesis that
the footbridge dilemma is more related to utilitarian
thinking than the trolley dilemma. In order to accomplish
this, the current research emphasizes the number of victims.
Previous studies combined the trolley and footbridge
dilemmas with utilitarian and deontologist thinking in terms
of whether participants make much of the number of people
to be saved or one man’s right to live. In this vein, the
number of victims can be considered a utilitarian aspect of
the moral dilemmas. The following two studies manipulated
the number of victims in both the trolley and footbridge
dilemmas and examined its effect on these two dilemmas.

Study 1
Study 1 aimed to investigate how a manipulation of the
number of victims in the trolley and footbridge dilemmas
would work under a standard experimental procedure. Many
studies on moral dilemmas (e.g., Greene et al., 2001; Hauser,
Cushman, Young, Jin, & Mikhail, 2009) have adopted a
forced choice paradigm in which participants are required to
choose whether sacrificing a victim to save more people
would be permissible or not and have analyzed the
percentage of participants who answered yes. Thus, Study 1
examined how the percentage of participants would change
according to the number of victims in the trolley and
footbridge dilemmas.

Participants and design
Two hundred eighty-five undergraduates who were naïve to
the dilemma tasks participated in Study 1 for course credit.
We prepared six types of scenarios in which the story
(trolley or footbridge) and number of victims (one/two/five)
were manipulated, and each participant received one of the
six types of scenarios randomly. As a result, in the trolley
dilemma condition, the number of participants who were
assigned to the one-, two-, and five-victim condition were
49, 49, and 53, respectively. In the footbridge dilemma
condition, the number of participants was 43, 58, and 53
(one-, two-, and five-victim condition, respectively).

Materials and procedure
Participants received a booklet and before they read the
booklet, they were told that the study was about moral
dilemmas. The instructions on the first page stated that the
task was to read descriptions of a situation and to consider
an act described in the scene. The second page presented the
scenario and included a response format requiring
participants to indicate whether the act (“turn the
trolley”/”push the man”) was morally permissible.
The following was the first paragraph in both the trolley
and footbridge dilemma conditions:

There is an emergency where a trolley runs out of
control. Although a driver tries to stop the trolley, it
does not appear to stop. Unfortunately, the trolley is
rushing toward ten workmen. If the trolley does not stop,
it will surely kill all ten workmen.
After this paragraph, participants in the trolley dilemma
condition were shown the following scenario:
There is another railway of the trolley, and if you hit the
switch, the trolley changes its course, and the ten
workmen will be saved. However, there is #__ workman
(or men) on the other course, and if you hit the switch,
this workman (or men) will surely be killed by the
runaway trolley. Is it permissible to hit the switch to
save the ten workmen?
After the first paragraph, participants in the footbridge
dilemma condition were shown the following scenario:
There is a footbridge on the course of the trolley, and
#__ man (or men) standing on this footbridge. If you
throw the man on the railway, the trolley will stop
because the man’s body becomes a barrier, and the ten
workmen will be saved. However, the man (or men) on
the footbridge will be killed. Is it permissible to push
the man on the footbridge to save the ten workmen?
The blanks shown in the above texts were replaced by
numbers (one, two, or five), depending on the conditions of
the number of the victims. The descriptions of these two
dilemmas comprised only of sentences and did not employ
any pictures. All the participants finished the tasks within 10
minutes.

Results and discussion
Figure 1 depicts the percentage of participants who believed
that sacrificing fewer to save more was “morally
permissible” in each condition. As this graph demonstrates,
the effect of the number of the people on moral judgment
differs between the trolley and footbridge dilemmas. In the
footbridge dilemma, acceptability for the death of one
person to save ten people decreases as the number of lives
sacrificed increases, whereas in the trolley dilemma, the
percentage of participants who permitted sacrificing the few
remains constant. A logistic multiple regression analysis
showed that an effect of the number of victims, B = -0.25,
Wald (1) = 5.47, p = 0.02 and interaction between the
number of victims and the type of dilemma, B = -0.33, Wald
(1) = 4.33, p = 0.37 were significant, thereby indicating that
whether manipulation of the number of people to be
sacrificed would affect moral judgment depends on the
context of the dilemma. Multiple comparisons among the
conditions in the number of the victims indicate significant
differences in the footbridge dilemma, (chi-square test:
Ps<.01), but not in the trolley dilemma (Ps>.10). Thus,
results of Study 1 supported our prediction that the

805

permissibility to sacrifice few to save more. In order to
examine this, Study 2 required participants to estimate the
number of people to be saved that seemed to be equal to
sacrificing fewer people.

0.55
Ratio of the participants who chose
"permissible"

Trolly

0.50

Footbridge

0.45

Participants and design

0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Numbers of the victims

Figure 1 Results of Study 1
footbridge dilemma reflects utilitarian thinking more so than
the trolley dilemma.
One noteworthy result of Study 1 is that the difference
between the trolley and footbridge dilemmas is not
significant when one person must be sacrificed to save ten
(P>.10). As far as I know, this is the first example
demonstrating that the ratio of participants who chose
“permissible” in the footbridge dilemma was equal to that of
the trolley dilemma. One plausible reason for this result is
that the current research differs in terms of the number of
people to be saved and the number of victims. Most
previous studies on the trolley and footbridge dilemmas
(e.g., Greene et al., 2001; Mikhail, 2009; Waldmann &
Dieterich, 2007) used five and one as the number of people
to be saved and number of victims, respectively. In contrast
to these studies, in order to examine the utilitarian aspect of
the moral dilemma, the current study used ten as the number
of people to be saved, and three values (one, two, or five)
for the number of victims. It is possible that the number of
victims affect the difference between the trolley and
footbridge dilemmas, although it requires further study.
Study 2 will also address this problem in the results and
discussion section.

Study 2
Study 2 aimed to replicate the findings in Study 1 under a
condition where the following two modifications in the
experimental procedure were added. First, Study 2
manipulated the number of victims as a within factor to
examine whether the results in Study 1 were due to a
reflection of individual differences. Second, Study 2
adopted the number of people to be saved as a dependent
variable. Although the current research aimed to examine
the utilitarian aspects of the moral dilemmas, the
permissibility judgment used in Study 1 appears to be
somewhat different from utilitarian calculation because
“permissibility” sounds like a subjective impression. Thus,
it is not certain whether the same trends would be found if
participants are required to make a utilitarian calculation for

Fifty undergraduates participated in Study 2 for course
credit and were randomly assigned to one of two conditions:
the trolley dilemma condition or the footbridge dilemma
condition. All the experimental materials and response
formats were given in the form of a booklet. The first page
contained the same instructions as Study1, and the second
page described the scenario and included a response format.
In both the trolley dilemma conditions, participants read the
following:
There is an emergency where a trolley runs out of
control. Although a driver tries to stop the trolley, it
does not appear to stop. Unfortunately, the trolley is
rushing toward some workmen. If the trolley does not
stop, it will surely kill all the workmen.
There is another railway for the trolley, and if you hit
the switch, the trolley changes its course, and the ten
workmen will be saved. However, there are some
workmen on the other course, and if you hit the switch,
the workmen on the other railway will surely be killed
by the runaway trolley.
As shown, these instructions are almost the same as those of
Study 1, except that the number of victims and people to be
saved were not stated explicitly. In the footbridge condition,
the first paragraph shown to participants was the same as
that in the trolley dilemma condition, but the second
paragraph was as given below:
There is a footbridge on the path of the trolley, and
some men are standing on this footbridge. If you throw
the men on the railway, the trolley will stop because the
men’s bodies become a barrier, and the workmen will
be saved. However, the men on the footbridge will be
killed. Is it permissible to push the men on the
footbridge to save the ten workmen?
After reading the above texts, participants in both conditions
were required to answer the following question under three
conditions, where the number of victims were one, two, or
five:
Consider that the number of workmen on the other
railway (the footbridge) is #__. How many people do
you think are enough to justify hitting the switch
(pushing them)? Insert a number in the blank.
The blank shown in the response format was replaced by
numbers (one, two, or five). All participants finished within
20 minutes.

806

Results and discussion
The results of Study 2 depicted in Figure 2 indicate that the
slope of the function between the number of victims and the
dependent variable is steeper in the footbridge condition
than in the trolley condition. A 2 (type of dilemma:
trolley/footbridge) by 3 (number of people to be sacrificed:
1/2/5) ANOVA demonstrated significant main effects of the
two factors: type of dilemma, F(1, 48) = 7.22, p < .01;
number of victims, F(2, 47) = 16.57, p < .01; and interaction
F(2, 96) = 6.60, p < .01. Analyses of the simple main effect
by Ryan’s method indicated that the simple effect of the
type of dilemma was significant only in the five-person
condition, F(1, 144) = 18.68, p < .01, and the simple main
effect of the number of people was significant only in the
footbridge condition, F(2, 96) = 22.05, p < .01. These
results replicate the findings of Study 1, which suggest that
the effect of the number of victims is stronger in the
footbridge dilemma than in the trolley dilemma, thereby
supporting our position that the footbridge dilemma reflects
the utilitarian aspect of the moral dilemma more than the
trolley dilemma. Additionally, Study 2 also failed to find the
difference between the trolley and footbridge dilemmas
when the number of victims is small. These results replicate
the pattern found in Study 1.

Number of the person to be saved

40
35

Trolley
Footbridge

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Number of the victims

Figure 2 Results of Study 2

General discussion
The results of the two studies consistently demonstrated that
the footbridge dilemma was more sensitive to the
manipulation of the number of people to be sacrificed than
the trolley dilemma. Study 1 demonstrated that as the
number of victims increased, the ratio of participants who
permitted sacrificing the few in the footbridge dilemma
decreased, whereas those in the trolley dilemma did not
change. Study 2 asked participants the number of people to
be saved to permit a sacrifice and found that the effect of the
number of victims was larger in the footbridge dilemma
than in the trolley dilemma.
The current results provide the following four theoretical
implications. First, this article demonstrates a connection

between the footbridge dilemma and the utilitarian aspect of
the moral dilemma. Previous studies (e.g., Greene et al.,
2001; Hauser, 2007; Waldmann & Dieterich, 2007) have
assumed that the trolley dilemma reflects utilitarian thinking,
whereas the footbridge dilemma reflects deontologist
thinking. These studies mainly draw this assumption from a
pattern of the dominant responses of the trolley and
footbridge dilemmas. In contrast to these studies, the current
research took into account sensitivity to the manipulation of
the utilitarian aspect of the moral dilemma and derived a
contradictive view. As far as we know, this is the first
example that challenges the prevailing view: “utilitarian”
trolley and “deontologist” footbridge. In addition, the
current results reveal the reason why people consider
pushing the man not permissible in order to save the five
workmen in the original footbridge dilemma. It is not
because they think the man’s right to live should not be
violated; rather, people think that five people are not enough
to sacrifice one person.
Second, the current results are in line with the
perspective that causal structure might be key to
understanding moral reasoning (Waldmann & Dieterich,
2007). According to Waldmann and Dieterich’s (2007) view,
intervention to causal path in moral dilemmas plays an
important role for moral reasoning because it changes
attentional weights on agent and patient. The hypothesis
tested in the current study is naturally derived from this
explanation because attention is believed to affect
sensitivity to the attribute that it focuses on (e.g., Tversky &
Koheler, 1994; Tversky et al., 1988). The results of the two
studies consistently support the hypothesis, thus indirectly
confirming Waldmann and Dieterich’s (2007) proposition.
Additionally, the current results also support Nakamura’s
(2011) implication that the footbridge dilemma is
considered more consequential than the trolley dilemma
because the risk-averse factor solely affected the footbridge
dilemma.
Third, the current research also suggests that moral
reasoning processes may be easily influenced by the number
of victims. Both Studies 1 and 2 failed to find a difference
between the trolley and footbridge dilemmas that have been
replicated robustly (e.g., Greene et al., 2001; Greene &
Haidt, 2002). The main difference between previous studies
and the current study is the number of victims and people to
be saved. With regard to the number of people to be saved
by sacrificing fewer people, this research used “ten” in
Study 1, whereas previous studies used “five.” Study 2 left
the number of people to be saved blank and required
participants to provide a number that they would be willing
to sacrifice. In this vein, there is a possibility that this
difference in the numbers used in the scenario might
produce a discrepancy in the results between the current
research and previous studies. Although this possibility is an
issue for future examination, it would be useful to explore
the relationship between numerical value and moral
judgment.

807

Fourth, the current research indicates the importance of
exploring not only the dominant response but also
sensitivity to manipulation when investigating the moral
dilemma. The current research focused on the effect of the
number of victims and succeeded to derive a somewhat
different conclusion by identifying an interaction between
the number of victims and types of dilemma. This result
might provide an important implication to a methodology of
experimental philosophy (e.g., Knobe, 2004, 2007; Knobe
& Nichols, 2009). Experimental philosophy attempts to
solve philosophical issues not by speculation but by
empirical investigation. In doing so, experimental
philosophy mainly deals with average responses in moral
reasoning problems, as previous studies on moral dilemmas
have done (e.g., Knobe, 2003). However, empirical data are
not limited to the average. Correlation among the problems
(e.g., Nakamura, 2011) or sensitivity to independent
variables can also provide interesting information in
understanding the nature of a moral issue. Concern for the
data analysis method would benefit experimental
philosophy and produce results that are applicable to
philosophical issues.
This discussion also leads to an examination of
“utilitarian” and “deontologist” thinking. The proposition
that the trolley dilemma reflects the utilitarian thinking has
its basis on the dominant responses to this dilemma,
whereas the current research has its basis on examination to
the sensitivity to the number of the victims in moral
reasoning. Then, some reader may consider a following
question; which is the more plausible evidence to determine
the utilitarian thinking? I think this question is a
fundamental one for experimental philosophy. That is, one
more message of the current research is that empirical
studies on the moral reasoning should consider not only the
meaning of the moral dilemma but also how to interpret
empirical evidence in the dilemma. As far as I know, there
is no study that considers this problem, and I hope this
research would be a first step to this problem.

References
Bentham, J. (1948/1789). An Introduction to the Principles
of Morals and Legislation. Halfner Press, New York.
Fischer, G. W., & Hawkins, S. A. (1993). Strategy
compatibility, scale compatibility, and the prominence
effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 19, 580–597.
Foot, P. (1978). The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine
of the Double Effect in Virtues and Vices. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J.
M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293,
2105–2108.
Greene, J., & Haidt, J. (2002). How (and where) does moral
judgment work? Trends in Cognitive Science, 12, 571–
523.

Hauser, M. (2006). Moral Minds: How Nature Designed a
Universal Sense of Right and Wrong. Harper
Collins/Ecco, NY.
Hauser, M., Cushman, F., Young, L., Jin, R. K., & Mikhail,
J. (2009). A dissociation between moral judgment and
its justification. Mind & Language,
Kant, I. (1959). Foundation of the Metaphysics of Morals.
(Lewis White Beck, Trans.) Indianapolis: BobbsMerrill. (Original work published 1785).
Knobe, J. (2003b). Intentional action in folk psychology: An
experimental investigation. Philosophical Psychology,
16, 309–324.
Knobe, J. (2004). What is experimental philosophy? The
Philosophers’ Magazine, 28.
Knobe, J. (2007). Experimental philosophy and
philosophical significance, Philosophical Explorations,
10, 119–122.
Knobe, J., & Nichols, S. (2008). Experimental Philosophy.
Oxford University Press, USA.
Mikhail, J. (2009). Moral grammar and intuitive
jurisprudence: A formal model of unconscious moral
and legal knowledge. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 50, 27–100.
Nakamura. K. (2011). A closer look at the moral dilemma:
Exploration of the latent structure and meaning of
“emotional” and “rational.” Proceedings of the Thirtythird Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 1084–1089.
Singer, P. (1979). Practical Ethics. Cambridge University
Press.
Slovic, P., Griffin, D., & Tversky, A. (1990). Compatibility
effects in to pay for public goods. In R. M. Hogarth
(Ed.), Insights in Decision Making: Theory and
Applications. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago.
Thomson, J. J. (1985). The trolley problem. In J.M. Fischer
& M. Ravizza (Eds.), Ethics: Problems and Principles
(pp. 67–76). Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Fort Worth,
TX.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211,
453-458.
Tversky, A., & Koheler, D. (1994). Support theory: A
nonextensional representation of subjective probability.
Psychological Review, 101, 547–567.
Tversky, A., Sattath, S., & Slovic, P. (1988). Contingent
weighting in judgment and choice. Psychological
Review, 95, 371–384.
Waldmann, M. R., & Dieterich, J. H. (2007). Throwing a
bomb on a person versus throwing a person on a bomb:
Intervention myopia in moral intuitions. Psychological
Science, 18, 247–253.

808

