UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Colour Difference and Colour Codability on Reference Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tt70500

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Viethen, Jette
Goudbeek, Martijn
Krahmer, Emiel

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Colour Difference and Colour Codability
on Reference Production
Jette Viethen (h.a.e.viethen@uvt.nl)
Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC)
Tilburg University
The Netherlands
Abstract
It has often been observed that colour is a highly preferred attribute for use in distinguishing descriptions, that is, referring
expressions with the purpose of identifying an object within a
visual scene. However, most of these observations were based
on visual displays containing only colours that were maximally
different in hue and for which the language of experimentation
possessed basic colour terms. The experiment described in this
paper investigates the question whether people’s preference for
colour is reduced if the colour of the target referent is similar
to that of the distractors. Because colours that look similar are
often also harder to distinguish linguistically, we also examine the impact of the codability of the used colour values. The
results of our experiment show that, while people are indeed
less likely to use colour when the colours in the display are
similar, this effect is entirely due to the difficulty in naming
similar colours. When the colours of target and distractors are
similar but can be named using different basic colour terms, no
reduction in colour use was observed.
Keywords: reference production, language production, colour

Introduction
Referring expressions are an essential part of communication.
Whenever people engage in any type of discourse they use referring expressions to encode the entities that they are talking
or writing about. Sometimes it suffices to use a pronoun to let
the addressee know what is meant, but often a distinguishing
description, a noun phrase differentiating the target referent
from all other visually available distractor objects, is necessary. The production of such distinguishing descriptions has
been a central theme for researchers both in psycholinguistic and in computational research on reference production.
One particular question of interest is which attributes should
be chosen for realisation in a distinguishing description, the
problem of semantic content selection.
One of the most often made observations in psycholinguistic research regarding the choice of attributes for distinguishing descriptions is that people seem to favour colour over
almost all other attributes when describing a target referent
with the aim of identification (cf. Pechmann, 1989; Belke
& Meyer, 2002; Sedivy, 2003; Brown-Schmidt & Tanenhaus,
2006; Arts, Maes, Noordman, & Jansen, 2011). This includes
frequent redundant use of colour; cases in which the referring
expression would be equally as distinguishing if colour was
not mentioned. In some cases, people even use colour when
all objects in a scene are of the same colour (Koolen, Goudbeek, & Krahmer, 2012).

However, as far as we know, all of this research was based
on stimulus material using prototypical primary colours with
clearly defined basic colour terms. In this paper, we investigate the question of whether people’s preference for using
the colour attribute diminishes or remains the same when the
colour values in a visual scene are more similar to each other,
and when no different basic colour terms exist for them.
Various researchers have argued that colour is preferred
over, for example, size, in reference production, because it
expresses absolute rather than relative information. In particular, Pechmann (1989) found in an early eye-tracking study
that people usually begin to verbalise a description before
they have fully scanned the scene. He found that a third of
the descriptions in his data that contained both size and colour
did not follow standard word order by mentioning colour before size (e.g., the blue small car).1 He also noted that the
first-mentioned attribute in overspecified descriptions was almost always colour, which often was ultimately not useful
for the task of distinguishing the target referent from the visual context. He argued that both these observations might be
due to the fact that colour is more easily cognisable than the
other distinguishing features in his experiment because it can
be perceived without having to compare the target referent to
the other objects in the scene.
Belke and Meyer (2002) found similar overspecification
effects for colour and size as Pechmann. They additionally
provided eye-tracking evidence from a same–different judgement task for an account which credits this effect to differences in the way absolute and relative attributes are processed
at a perceptual level. Based on experiments using the Stroop
paradigm, Naor-Raz, Tarr, and Kersten (2003) even argued
that an object’s colour is an intrinsic component of the visual
representation retained in long-term memory.
Another prominent source of evidence for people’s preference for colour comes from corpus studies on purpose-built
collections of referring expressions. The furniture section of
the TUNA Corpus is a collection of human-produced distinguishing descriptions for furniture items differing in type,
colour, size and orientation. In this corpus, colour is used
redundantly more than three times as often as the other at1 The standard word order is in this case identical for English and
Dutch, the language of Pechmann’s experiment.

1084

tributes (Gatt, 2007, p. 82). In their recent experiments on
semantic alignment in referring expressions, Goudbeek and
Krahmer (2012) examined whether people can be primed to
use a dispreferred attribute over a preferred one. Because they
re-used the visual stimulus objects from the TUNA Corpus,
they made the much higher frequency of colour over that of
orientation in that corpus an underlying assumption in their
experimental design.
A further corpus analysis by Viethen and Dale (2011),
based on a large set of referring expressions for simple 3D
scenes, also found that people mentioned the colour of the target object in a large proportion of the cases in which it was not
necessary for identification. For size, on the other hand, their
analysis found that its use depended highly on how well it
distinguished the target from the other distractors, especially
those of the same type as the target, pointing to a much more
‘utilitarian’ attitude towards size than towards colour. This
is in line with findings from eye-tracking experiments which
have shown that size is rarely used in situations where it adds
no discriminatory power to the referring expression at all ,
while the same is not true for colour (Sedivy, 2003; BrownSchmidt & Tanenhaus, 2006).
In light of this evidence, it is uncontroversial that colour
plays a special role in referential communication. Yet, it must
be noted that all of these results are based on stimuli with
objects coloured in a small number of very different hues (red,
blue, green, yellow, grey), sometimes even only black and
white. In other words, the colour differences between the
objects presented to participants were as large as possible.
No research exists using stimulus objects in similar
colours. An intuitively plausible prediction is that the use of
colour decreases as the similarity between the colours in the
scene increases. This prediction follows also from Deutsch
and Herrmann’s (1976) third postulate (p. 43). They show
that in a situation with two identical objects that only differ
in width and height, with a large difference in width and a
small difference in height, people tend to use only the width
attribute in a distinguishing description, and vice versa. Herrmann and Deutsch extrapolate from these findings that, in
any situation in which more than one attribute can be used
for identification, people will tend to use the one in which
the objects differ most. If, on the other hand, the observed
high rate of colour use in referential communication is indeed
due to a smaller cognitive effort involved in mentioning it, as
many other psycholinguists and computational linguists have
argued, it should be unchanged in situations with colours that
are not maximally different.
A confounding factor lies in the varying codability of different colour values. The more similar two colours are, the
more likely it is that they fall within the range of the same
basic colour term, such as red, blue or yellow, depending on
the basic colour terms that exist in a given language.2 In such
2 Which

hues are grouped under the same basic colour terms differs for different languages, as they carve up the colour spectrum
in different ways and at different granularities (Kay, Berlin, Maffi,
Merrifield, & Cook, 2010).

a case, more complex colour terms, such as dark red or light
blue have to be constructed. It is conceivable that a colour
value that is harder to encode is less likely to be verbalised.
Regarding the effect of colour difference, two conflicting
hypotheses can be formulated:
1. The colour of an object is perceived independently from
the colours of surrounding objects and gets included in distinguishing descriptions reflexively rather than based on a
consideration of its usefulness. This hypothesis is in line
with most claims in the literature and predicts that the extent of the difference between the target’s colour and that of
the distractor objects has no impact on people’s reference
behaviour.
2. The high use of colour is based to some extent on an assessment of the difference in colour between the target item
and the distractors. Following from (Herrmann & Deutsch,
1976), a lower use of colour should be expected when the
colours are similar than in situations where the colours are
as different from each other as possible.
For the effect of colour codability our hypothesis is:
3. The codability of a target’s colour with respect to distractor
colours effects the likelihood of it being used in a distinguishing description. Colours that can be named by a basic
colour term are more likely to be included than those for
which a complex term has to be used.
In the following, we describe an experiment designed to
arbitrate between Hypotheses 1 and 2 and to test Hypothesis 3. Our results support the assumption of Hypothesis 3 that
the use of colour is reduced when the codability of the colour
value of an item is reduced, and advocate Hypothesis 1 over
Hypothesis 2.
These results can inform ongoing research on developing
computational models of reference production, as this work
has begun to align its focus with that of psycholinguistic research. Researchers from the computational field are looking more and more for evidence about how humans solve the
problem of content selection for reference production, in order to inform their models (cf. Dale & Reiter, 1995; Kelleher
& Kruijff, 2006; Viethen & Dale, 2006; Deemter, Gatt, Sluis,
& Power, 2012). One main reason for this move towards
human-likeness as a criterion for task success of reference
generation systems is the aim to create computational models
that are in some sense cognitively plausible. The results of
our experiment show that even computational models that are
solely focussed on content selection for reference production
need to pay more attention to the problem of lexical choice,
as these two issues appear to be more closely intertwined than
most existing models acknowledge.

Experiment
The experiment took the form of a reference production task,
in which participants were shown displays of simple geometric objects on a computer screen. They were asked to describe

1085

(a) A hidiff item: one large red (b) A lodiff item: one small dark
and two small blue squares.
blue and two large light blue diamonds.

(a) A hicode item: one large pink (b) A locode item: one small
and two small red triangles.
light blue and two large dark blue
circles.

Figure 1: Example stimuli from the two colour-difference
conditions.

Figure 2: Example stimuli from the two colour-codability
conditions.

one of the objects in such a way that an imaginary partner
would be able to identify it.

tion and the locode condition.
To determine the exact colour values to use we referred to
the Hue Saturation Brightness (HSB) colour model. For the
two dark colours we used the canonical values for blue (H =
245°) and red (H = 0°), 100% saturation, and a slightly lowered brightness (75%). For the lighter colours, we subtracted
35°from the original hue values, decreased the saturation and
the increased the brightness. We finetuned the values for the
lighter colours based on a pretest, to ensure that people would
agree on calling them roze and lichtblauw. This resulted in
the HSB values (215°, 70%, 100%) for light blue and (320°,
58%, 95%) for pink.
To ensure that there were the same number of target objects in each of the four colours (red, pink, dark blue and
light blue), half the items in the hidiff condition used red and
dark blue objects, and the other half pink and light blue ones.
The position of the target was balanced across items. Furthermore, each condition contained a balanced number of trials
using each of the four object types.
The type of the distractor objects was always the same as
that of the target, so that type was never distinguishing. However, the size of the distractors was different from that of the
target object, in order to give the participants an alternative
option to using colour. It would not make sense to measure
the rate of colour use, if colour was the only distinguishing
feature in some or all trials.
We aimed to keep the size difference between target and
distractors constant across all trials. To this end, we defined
the size of an object by the length of its longest internal distance (the diameter for a circle, the diagonal for a square, an
edge for a triangle, and the vertical line in a diamond), rather
than, for example, its area. The longest internal distance of
the large objects was set to twice that of the small objects.

Method
Participants 63 undergraduate students of Tilburg University took part in the experiment in return for course credit. 48
were female and 15 male. Their age ranged from 19 to 26
years (M = 20 years and 10 months). They were all fluent
speakers of Dutch, the language of the experiment.
Materials and Design Each participant was shown 32 critical items and 64 filler items. The critical trials consisted of
simple scenes containing three two-dimensional geometrical
figures: one intended referent and two distractor objects. In
order to keep the design as simple as possible, the two distractor objects were identical. However, the target item differed
in both colour and size from the two distractors, so that either
of these two attributes was sufficient to fully distinguish it.
Our main manipulation concerned the difference in colour
between the target and the distractors. In half of the trials
this difference was large (hidiff condition), in the other half
it was small (lodiff condition). Figure 1(a) shows a trial from
the hidiff condition, and Figure 1(b) is an example from the
lodiff condition.
As discussed above, the more similar two colours are, the
less likely it is that they can be distinguished by basic colour
terms. For example, the basic colour term blue is not sufficient to distinguish the target in Figure 1(b) from the distractors; instead, the complex colour term dark blue has to be
used. This applies in Dutch in the same way as in English. To
test the impact that the codability of different colour values
might have on the content of referring expressions (see Hypothesis 3), we used a nested variable within the lodiff condition, by including two different hues: red and blue. For red
hues, Dutch (just as English) possesses two different basic
colour terms, even at a low difference, namely rood (red) and
roze (pink). Thus, stimuli with red and pink objects, such as
the one in Figure 2(a), form the hicode condition. For blue,
the complex colour terms donkerblauw (dark blue) and lichtblauw (light blue) have to be used, resulting in a locode condition (an example stimulus is shown in Figure 2(b)). The
lodiff items were equally divided between the hicode condi-

Filler Items We included two types of fillers, which were
carefully designed to mislead the participants regarding the
exact aims of the experiment.
The 32 geometrical fillers were similar to the critical stimuli in that they showed three geometrical objects, but they
used type and pattern as distinguishing attributes. Colour and
size were never fully distinguishing in the fillers, in order to
avoid priming the use of these two attributes. The target was

1086

Table 1: Count and proportion of responses containing colour.
condition
hidiff (N=1008)
lodiff (N=1008)
lodiff-hicode (N=504)
lodiff-locode (N=504)
(a) A geometric filler.

count
747
681
376
305

mean
.74
.68
.75
.61

stdev
.35
.36
.36
.40

(b) A Greeble filler.

a pilot experiment that participants tended to exhaustively describe the whole scene.

Figure 3: Two example filler items.
either striped or checkered so as not to prime the use of solid
as a pattern which might then also show up in the critical trials where it was non-distinguishing. Half of the geometrical
fillers were in black and white and in 9 of them the target
was green, in order to distract from the small set of colours
used in the critical trials. Again, the target referent’s type and
size was balanced across the whole set. Figure 3(a) shows an
example of a geometric filler.
The 32 ‘Greeble’ fillers each showed two novel 3D figures in purple.3 We chose pairs such that the target object
could always be distinguished from the distractor object by
its main shape and the direction in which its protrusions were
pointing. Because these objects are designed to be difficult
to describe and look very different from the geometric items,
we hoped they would prevent the participants from adopting
a standard strategy for describing the geometric items. An
example Greeble filler is shown in Figure 3(b). Debriefing
revealed that the participants were not aware of the purpose
of the experiment, and the majority of participants believed
that the Greeble items were the critical stimuli of the experiment.
Procedure Two stimulus lists were created by producing
one random ordering and then reversing it for the second
list. Each critical stimulus was prepended with one geometrical and one Greeble filler item, which were chosen semirandomly in a way such that the target was never in the same
position in more than four items in a row. The item directly
before each critical stimulus was always a Greeble filler to
minimise any possibility of lexical or semantic priming from
the geometrical filler responses to the critical responses.
The Dutch instructions told the participants that they would
see a number of simple scenes on a computer screen. They
were asked to verbally describe the object pointed at by an arrow to an imaginary partner without using position information. They had to complete the sentence Klik nu op de/het . . .
(‘Now click on the . . . ’) which was shown underneath each
item. Their voice was recorded using a headset.
Before each item, a fixation cross was displayed for 1.5
seconds, then the stimulus item was shown for 4.5 seconds
during which the participants had to give their response. We
introduced this relatively short response time after finding in
3 The Greebles are courtesy of Michael J. Tarr, Center for the
Neural Basis of Cognition and Department of Psychology, Carnegie
Mellon University, http://www.tarrlab.org/.

Results
Coding of the Independent Variables As main dependent
measure, we analyse the proportion of colour use in the different conditions. We consider a description to contain colour,
if a colour value is mentioned that is true of the target, independently of the distinguishingness of this value. For example, we consider the description in Example (1) for the
target in Figure 2(b), where all three objects are blue, as a use
of colour. As a secondary measure we also look at the use
of size, in order to get an insight into the question whether
colour gets mostly used redundantly.
(1) de kleine blauwe cirkel
(the small blue circle) [for the stimulus in Figure 2(b)]
The responses were transcribed and coded for use of colour
and size by a Dutch native-speaker.
Data Analysis Table 1 displays the mean proportion and
standard deviation of colour use in the hidiff and lodiff conditions as well as the two nested conditions under lodiff (hicode
and locode). It shows that people were more likely to use
colour when the colours in the stimulus scene were very different than when they were similar. However, it also shows
that the mean proportion of colour use in the lodiff-hicode
condition was very similar to that in the hidiff condition.
We conducted a within-participants analysis of variance
(ANOVA) to compare the three meaningful conditions (hidiff, lodiff-hicode, lodiff-locode), which showed the differences between these conditions to be highly statistically significant (F(2, 124) = 19.9, p < .001, η2 = .24). A test of
planned within-participant Contrasts confirmed that the difference between the hidiff and the lodiff condition was significant (F(1, 62) = 18.7, p < .001, η2 = .23); participants used
colour more in the hidiff condition than in the lodiff condition. The same is the case for the effect of codability (locode
vs. hicode conditions) (F(1, 62) = 20.3, p < .001, η2 = .25),
confirming that people used colour more when the colours
could be distinguished by basic colour terms. However, there
was no statistically significant difference between lodiffhicode and the hidiff condition (F(1, 62) < 1).
For size, the opposite picture emerges. Table 2 shows that
people were less likely to use size when the colour difference
was high than when the colours were similar, and that people
used size more often in situations in which the name of the

1087

used a wrong colour (pink instead of red, and in this case the
participant corrected themselves). This further strengthens
the argument that colour naming is an inherently easier task
than naming the size made by a number of researchers including (Pechmann, 1989; Belke & Meyer, 2002; Naor-Raz et al.,
2003; Kelleher & Kruijff, 2006).

Table 2: Count and proportion of responses containing size.
condition
hidiff (N=1008)
lodiff (N=1008)
lodiff-hicode (N=504)
lodiff-locode (N=504)

count
584
679
282
397

mean
.58
.67
.56
.79

stdev
.36
.31
.36
.30

colour was difficult to encode. Again, the difference between
the hidiff and the lodiff-hicode conditions does not appear
very big.
The statistical analysis with tests of planned Contrasts revealed the same pattern as for colour use: the overall difference between hidiff, lodiff-hicode, and lodiff-locode is significant with an even bigger effect size (F(2, 124) = 39.7, p <
.001, η2 = .39); as are the differences between hicode and
overall locode (F(1, 62) = 19.3, p < .001, η2 = .24) and
between hicode and locode-lodiff (F(1, 62) = 52.3, p <
.001, η2 = .48). This means that people used size less often
in the hidiff and the hicode conditions than in the locode condition. Again, there was no statistically significant difference
between hidiff and lodiff-hicode (F(1, 62) = 1.1).

Discussion
The main observation from our results is that a smaller difference in colour alone does not result in a decrease in the use
of colour in referring expressions. The apparent difference
in colour use between the hidiff and lodiff conditions arises
solely from the difficulty in coding the colour value in the
locode condition. This lends support to Hypothesis 1, stating that people’s preference for colour is independent from
its value. It also confirms Hypothesis 3, which predicts that
colours that are difficult to name because no distinguishing
basic colour term is available, are less likely to be mentioned
in a distinguishing description.
Interestingly, there were 99 distinguishing descriptions that
contained a non-distinguishing colour value, such as in Example (1) above. All 99 of these cases occurred in the lodifflocode condition. It is not surprising that no such cases occurred in the other conditions, because no basic colour terms
exist that encompass both red and blue, red and pink, or pink
and blue. However, the fact that almost a third of all colour
terms used in the locode condition were non-distinguishing
further supports the hypothesis that people often mention
colour not for its discriminatory power but because it is easily available perceptually. By mentioning the basic, yet nondistinguishing, colour term blauw they can follow their preference for using colour but avoid the difficulty involved in retrieving and uttering a more complex colour term. This raises
the question whether it is indeed the complexity of a colour
term that stops people from using it or rather the fact that in
our locode scenes the target’s colour term (e.g. lichtblauw in
Figure 2(b)) partly overlaps lexically with that applying to the
distractors (donkerblauw in Figure 2(b)).
Furthermore, of the 37 descriptions in which a property
was mentioned that was not true of the target object, only one

The rate at which people used size was inversely proportional to the use of colour. Of course, size had to be used in
descriptions not including colour in an identification task with
these two attributes as the only distinguishing features. However, this does not necessarily mean that it has to be omitted
in cases in which colour was mentioned. Instead, the rate of
size use might have stayed constant, indicating a relatively
high rate of overspecification in the hidiff and hicode conditions. Two possible explanations for the difference in the
use of size between the different conditions are conceivable.
First, it might be the case that the choice to use size is influenced directly by the experimental variables. This might
be due to the fact that the speaker has to scan the scene
in order to determine the relative size of the target object.
While scanning a locode scene he might notice the usefulness of colour—which according to Pechmann’s (1989) and
Belke and Meyer’s (2002) incrementality accounts might already have been uttered at this stage—and decide whether to
use size based on this information alone, independently of
whether colour is actually mentioned or not. Second, the use
of size might be impacted by the use of colour. People might
make their choices about which attributes to use sequentially,
one attribute at a time and the decision about size succeeds
the decision about colour. So, once a speaker has decided not
to mention colour, size has to be included in order to fulfil
the referential task of identification. Further experimentation
would be required to arbitrate between these two accounts.
Consequences for Computational Modelling The main
assumption regarding the use of colour remains unchallenged
by our results: colour is highly preferred by human speakers
and should therefore feature highly in the output of computational referring expression generation systems that are aimed
at producing human-like output. However, our results reemphasise the importance of an issue which seems to have
lost traction in the decades since (Dale & Reiter, 1995): that
of lexical choice. Dale and Reiter’s original algorithm included a FindBestValue function, acknowledging the fact that
different level values exist for many attributes and that not
all values are equally adequate in a given situation. However, their algorithm makes its decision about which attributes
to include based on the most distinguishing value for an attribute, meaning that a colour value expressed by a more complex term, such as light blue, is more likely to be included for
the colour attribute than a basic one, such as blue. This is of
course not advocated by our data.
Our findings speak loudly against the separation of semantic content selection and lexical choice present in most recent
computational approaches to referring expression generation.
Computational reference production models with a claim to

1088

human-likeness need to take into account how difficult it will
be to realise each attribute lexically already when they make
the decision about the use of this attribute. The results presented here clearly show that even highly preferred attributes
such as colour should get included less often in situations in
which they are hard to code, or that in some cases a less specific value should get used.
A second point emerging from our data is that the deterministic nature of most existing computational reference production models is clearly not in line with human reference behaviour. While we can observe increases or decreases in the
use of certain attributes depending on different experimental
variables, there always remains a large amount of variation.
Therefore, REG systems that are serious about modelling human behaviour must begin to use probabilistic mechanisms
in order to be able to capture the non-deterministic choices
people make when they refer. A notable first move in this
direction was made by Gatt, van Gompel, Krahmer, and van
Deemter (2011).

Conclusions
Previous research often took it for granted that colour is a
highly preferred attribute in reference production, but so far a
serious and systematic study of this has been lacking. Existing results were based on stimuli in maximally different primary colours; this paper is the first to investigate what happens if the stimulus colours are similar to each other. Our
results suggest that the similarity between the colour of the
target referent and that of any distractor objects indeed has
little effect on the content people choose for a referring expression, supporting the view that colour gets chosen due to
being perceivable with low cognitive effort.
However, we show that colours that can be encoded using
a basic colour term, such as blue, are more likely to be mentioned than those for which a more complex term, such as
light blue, has to be found in order to distinguish from, for
example, dark blue distractors. Current computational models of reference production do not account for this result, as
they usually separate the selection of semantic content and
lexical choice into two distinct processes.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper forms part of the VICI project
“Bridging the Gap between Psycholinguistics and Computational
Linguistics: the Case of Referring Expressions”, funded by the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO grant 27770-007). We thank Elsa Jonkers for help with the transcription and
annotation of the data.

References
Arts, A., Maes, A., Noordman, L., & Jansen, C. (2011). Overspecification in written instruction. Linguistics, 49(3), 555–
574.
Belke, E., & Meyer, A. S. (2002). Tracking the time course
of multidimensional stimulus discrimination: Analysis of
viewing patterns and processing time during same-different
decisions. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology,
14(2), 237–266.

Brown-Schmidt, S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006). Watching the eyes when talking about size: An investigation of
message formulation and utterance planning. Journal of
Memory and Language, 54, 592–609.
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretations
of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science, 19(2), 233–263.
Deemter, K. van, Gatt, A., Sluis, I. van der, & Power, R.
(2012). Generation of referring expressions: Assessing the
incremental algorithm. Cognitive Science, in press.
Gatt, A. (2007). Generating Coherent Reference to Multiple
Entities. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Aberdeen, UK.
Gatt, A., van Gompel, R., Krahmer, E., & van Deemter, K.
(2011). Non-deterministic attribute selection in reference
production. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Production
of Referring Expressions: Bridging the gap between empirical, computational and theoretical approaches to reference (PRE-CogSci 2011). Boston MA, USA.
Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2012). Alignment in interactive reference production: Content planning, modifier ordering and referential overspecification. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(2), 269–289.
Herrmann, T., & Deutsch, W. (1976). Psychologie der Objektbenennung. Bern: Verlag Hans Huber.
Kay, P., Berlin, B., Maffi, L., Merrifield, W. R., & Cook, R.
(2010). The World Color Survey. Stanford CA, USA: CSLI
Publications.
Kelleher, J., & Kruijff, G.-J. (2006). Incremental generation
of spatial referring expressions in situated dialog. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 1041–1048).
Sydney, Australia.
Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2012). The effect
of scene variation on the redundant use of color in definite
reference. Cognitive Science, to appear.
Naor-Raz, G., Tarr, M. J., & Kersten, D. (2003). Is color
an intrinic property of object representation? Perception,
32(6), 667–680.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27(1), 89–110.
Sedivy, J. C. (2003). Pragmatic versus form-based accounts
of referential contrast: Evidence for effects of informativity
expectations. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32(1),
3–23.
Viethen, J., & Dale, R. (2006). Algorithms for generating
referring expressions: Do they do what people do? In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Natural
Language Generation (pp. 63–70). Sydney, Australia.
Viethen, J., & Dale, R. (2011). GRE3D7: A corpus of distinguishing descriptions for objects in visual scenes. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Using Corpora in Natural Language Generation (NLG): Language Generation
and Evaluation (UCNLG+Eval). Edinburgh, UK.

1089

