UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Virtual Agents’ Gender and Rapport on Enhancing Math Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6tf7c239

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Karacora, Bilge
Dehghani, Morteza
Kramer-Mertens, Nicole
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Virtual Agents’ Gender and Rapport
on Enhancing Math Performance
Bilge Karacora1 (bilge.karacora@stud.uni-due.de), Morteza Dehghani2 (morteza@ict.usc.edu),
Nicole Krämer-Mertens1 (nicole.kraemer@uni-due.de), Jonathan Gratch2 (gratch@ict.usc.edu)
1

Department of Social Psychology, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Forsthausweg 2, 47057 Duisburg, Germany

2

Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California,
12015 Waterfront Dr., Playa Vista, CA 90094-2536, USA

Rapport has been shown as an effective way to create
behavioral realism in virtual agents. In social psychology,
rapport is described as the establishment of a positive
relationship among interaction partners by rapidly detecting
and responding to each other’s nonverbal behavior (Gratch
et al., 2007a). This includes displaying behaviors that
indicate positive emotions (such as head nods and smiles),
showing mutual attentiveness (such as mutual gaze) and
certain coordination behaviors (such as postural mimicry
and synchronized movement) (Tickle-Degnan & Rosenthal,
1990). Niewiadomski et al. (2010) reports that when an
agent displays appropriate and socially adapted emotional
expressions, he is perceived as more human-like than an
agent that shows human expressions which are inappropriate
or not socially adapted. Garau et al. (2005) conducted a
study showing that only participants who interacted with an
agent that was responsive to their movements, experienced a
sense of personal contact with the agent which influenced
them to behave more socially considerate as opposed to
interacting with a static or moving but unresponsive agent.
This indicates that rapport is an important feature in order
for the agent to be perceived as human-like and for any
social effects, such as social facilitation, to occur.
Previous research on social facilitation/inhibition
illustrates how the presence of others affects an individuals’
task performance either positively or negatively (Guerin &
Innes, 1982; Zanjonc, 1965; Sanders, Baron & Moore,
1978). Whether or not similar facilitation/inhibition effects
occur in presence of virtual agents has been subject to
several studies. Rickenberg and Reeves (2000) found that
tasks are facilitated or inhibited by the “social” presence of
a virtual agent. A study by Zanbaka et al. (2004) indicates
that when asked to perform a task, participants reacted
similarly to the presence of a virtual agent as they would
have in the presence of another human. A follow-up study
by Zanbaka et al. (2007) demonstrates that the presence of a
virtual agent inhibits the performance of participants on a
mathematical task. The limitation of this study was that the
sample consisted of only female participants being
confronted with an agent of matching gender. Hayes et al.
(2010) found a similar decrease in performance with regard

Abstract
The purpose of the present research is to investigate whether
virtual agents can help enhance participants’ performance,
effort and motivation in mathematics. We hypothesize that a
minimal amount behavioral realism induced by display of
rapport is necessary for any social effects to occur in humancomputer interaction. Further, we examine whether social
facilitation effects occur depending on the gender of the
participants and the interacting virtual agents. In a 2x2
between subjects design, participants interacted with a male
or female virtual agent that either displayed rapport or no
rapport. Our results confirm that gender plays a role when
interacting with virtual agents that are capable of establishing
rapport. Participants’ performance and effort were
significantly enhanced when interacting with an agent of
opposite gender that displayed rapport. Our results have
implications on designing agents for education and training
purposes.
Keywords: social facilitation, STEM, rapport, virtual agents

Introduction
There is considerable interest in factors that enhance science
and math performance. Recently, there has been an upsurge
of interest in educational technology that exploits social and
motivational factors that enhance math performance in
general, and reduce gender inequality in particular (Kim,
2004; Baylor & Ryu, 2003). This work builds on the
phenomena that people often treat computers as social
actors. Therefore, psychological factors that improve
people's performance in traditional face-to-face settings can
be simulated by technologies in form of virtual learning
companions or virtual instructors. In this paper, we seek to
address two related goals. First, we aim to show that certain
social psychological phenomena can enhance math
performance in a human-computer setting. Specifically, we
show that a form of social facilitation can improve
performance on standardized math tests. Second, we seek to
provide further evidence that people do treat computers as
social actors and help elucidate the design principles that
foster this effect. We specifically demonstrate that virtual
agents must possess a minimum level of behavioral realism
to achieve any social effects.

563

to male participants interacting with an agent of the same
gender. However, the study demonstrated that when male
participants interacted with an agent of the opposite gender
their performance improved. The authors argued that
participants experienced a stronger feeling of “being in the
room with the agent” when interacting with an agent of
opposite gender. A post-hoc explanation for Hayes et al.’s
findings is that the improvement may have been caused of
social facilitation effects.

posters posted on craigslist.com and were paid $30. The
experiment took about 60 minutes.

Design
We used a 2x2 full factorial between subjects design, with
the first variable being the gender of the agent matching the
gender of the participant (gender match/gender no match)
and the second variable being whether or not the agent
displayed rapport (rapport/no rapport). Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the four conditions.
Improvement in performance, motivation and increase in
effort were measured as dependent variables. We calculated
participants’ performance improvement by the difference in
their performance before and during the interaction with the
agent. For this purpose, we subtracted the number of math
problems they solved correctly in the second task from the
number they solved correctly in the first task. To measure
participants’ motivational state with regards to the
mathematical tasks we used the Situational Motivation Scale
(SIMS) by Guay et al. (2000). By subtracting the number of
solved math problems in the second task from the number
solved in the first task, we calculated the increase in effort.
This variable was interpreted as an additional indicator for
their situational motivation.

Experiment
Our goal in this paper is to investigate whether a virtual
agent can motivate participants and help to improve their
performance in a mathematical task. For this purpose, we
examine whether social facilitation effects occur when
participants interact with virtual agents and how gender and
rapport influence these effects. We extend the previous
findings of Hayes at al. (2010) by including both, male and
female participants, in an experiment in which they interact
with a virtual agent of either matching or opposing gender.
We hypothesize that interacting with a human-like rapport
agent of the opposite gender facilitates participants’
performance on mathematical tasks. First, we assume that
social facilitation effects will cause participants’ to show
more motivation, invest more effort and achieve a higher
improvement of performance when interacting with an agent
of the opposite gender. Second, we further expect such
social facilitation effects only to occur when rapport is
displayed by the agent. The reason is that rapport has been
shown to be necessary for an agent to be perceived as a
(human-like) social entity, which is required for social
effects to occur.
In order to test these assumptions, we designed an
experiment in which we manipulated virtual agents’ gender
and rapport behavior. We recruited male and female
participants and had them perform two mathematical tasks,
one before interacting with an agent and one during the
interaction. Each participant was either confronted with an
agent of matching gender or of opposing gender. The agents
used in the rapport condition were capable of showing
appropriate positive responses such as head nods and smiles
in reaction to the participants’ verbal and nonverbal
behavior. The agents in the no-rapport condition only show
minimal unresponsive movements such as breathing or
blinking. We explored the effects of our experimental
conditions by comparing the participants’ performance
before and during the interaction with the agent. We also
investigated participants’ motivation and increase of effort
to solve the math problems.

Sample of three questions in the first task:
A) The child care center charges $11 an hour plus a daily $3
drop-off fee. How many hours of childcare did Robert pay
for if he dropped his son off 3 days last week and paid $130
at the end of the week?
B) A rental store charges a fine of 25 percent of the usual
full-day rental rate for each hour that an item is late. Ryan
rented a rototiller for one day for $40. He returned it 3 hours
late. How much was his total bill for the rental and the fine?
C) What is the value of the expression 3 + 4 × 6 – 2(5 × 8)?
Sample of equivalent questions in the second task:
A) To do a 12-page report, a word processor charges
$26.50. His fee includes a $2.50 delivery charge. How much
does he charge per page?
B) Mr. Smith rented a car for 7 days. The car rental charges
500 $ per week and a fine of 15% for each day the car is
returned late plus a handling fee of 15 $. He returned the
car 2 days late. How much did he have to pay in the end?

Participants

C) Evaluate the following expression: 4(12 – 9)2.

We recruited seventy-four participants (58.1 % females),
from the greater Los Angeles area. Their age ranged from
18 to 34 years with an average age of 23.64 (SD=3.97).
16.2% of participants had high school education, 78.4%
collage education and 5,6% went to graduate school.
Participants were recruited by responding to recruitment

Figure 1: Sample of math problems

564

2006, 2007a, 2007b). To produce listening behaviors, the
Rapport Agent first collects and analyzes audiovisual
features from the speaker’s voice (silence, speech) and
upper-body movements (head nod, smile, eye gaze) in real
time. This happens via a microphone and a Videre Design
Small Vision System stereo camera, which was placed in
front of the participants to capture their movements.
Watson, an image-based tracking library developed by
Morency (2005), uses images captured by the stereo camera
to track the participant’s head position and orientation.
Acoustic features are derived from properties of the pitch
and intensity of the speech signal using a signal processing
package, LAUN (Gratch et al., 2006). The Rapport Agent
displays behaviors that show that the animated character is
“alive” (eye blinking, breathing), and listening behaviors
such as posture shifts and head nods automatically triggered
by the system corresponding to participants’ verbal and
nonverbal behavior. This allows the agent to provide
contingent feedback while the speaker is speaking by
following a response model (Huang et al., 2011) to decide
which behavioral response would be most appropriate (such
as head nod or smile). The different animations are
converted into Behavior Markup Language (BML) (Kopp et
al., 2006), send to an action scheduler (to determine the
duration of each animation) and passed on to Smartbody, an
animation system that blends the different animations
naturally into each other (Thiebaux & Marsella, 2007). The
commercial game engine Gamebryo then renders the
animations and displays them to the user.

Mathematical Tasks
Two mathematical tasks were presented to the participants.
Each task consisted of a set of 24 math problems
comparable to original GRE and SAT math items (for
samples of these questions please refer to Figure 1). The
math problems were selected out of a larger set of questions
pretested with regard to their difficulty. By pretesting the
problems we made sure that both tasks have approximate
levels of difficulty and require the same sets of skills. Also,
tasks had enough number of questions to prevent ceiling
effects due to participants finishing all the math problems in
less than ten minutes. To avoid an improvement in
performance in the second task due to simple
learning/practice, the math problems were modified with
regard to their wording and surface features. This way the
first and the second task appeared distinct from each other
while they still each required the same set of skills.

Rapport Agent
Participants interacted with a female or male virtual agent
with a human-like appearance. Four different characters
were used: two male and two female (Figure 2) to control
for possible effects of particular agents. We used the
Rapport Agent developed by Gratch et al. (2006). To create
rapport with the participant, the agent displayed positive
listening behaviors (such as nodding and smiling) that
correspond to the verbal and nonverbal behavior of a human
speaker. Previous studies of the rapport agent have shown
that it is highly capable of creating the experience of rapport
comparable with a face-to-face condition (Gratch et al.,

Figure 2: Agents used in the experiment

565

mathematics in general. Then, the agent would announce the
end of the interaction and would disappear from the
monitor. Finally, situational motivation and demographic
variables were measured in a post survey without the virtual
agent visible or the experimenter present. Subsequently,
participants were debriefed. During debriefing it was made
sure that participants had not been aware during the
experiment that the experimenter or any other human was
involved and/or had any part in the interaction (for an
overview of the study flow, see Figure 3).

Procedure
After an explanation of the study and obtaining consent,
participants were led to a private room where they
completed the experiment individually. Participants were
seated at a desk with two monitors that were positioned next
to each other. They were then instructed to work on a
mathematical task for ten minutes, which was presented as a
computer-based survey on one of the monitors. The second
monitor was turned off at this point. To minimize selfpresentation concerns, the anonymity of task performance
results and the non-competitiveness of the task were
emphasized. The experimenter left the room for the duration
of the working period. Participants’ answers were not
reviewed by the experimenter and they were not given any
performance feedback. Next, the experimenter provided
detailed (verbal and written) instructions on the following
interaction with the virtual agent. It was emphasized that the
agent is a computer program and that participants will be
alone during their interaction period. The agent was then
launched and displayed on the second monitor. The
experimenter would leave the room before the interaction
started and then would control the virtual agent’s speech
over a separate computer in a different location, without the
participants’ knowledge. The agent’ nonverbal behaviors
were automated by the system according to the condition
(rapport/no rapport) as described above. First, the agent
asked how the participants estimated their performance on a
5-point Likert-scale (very poor to very good). Next, they
were asked to rate how difficult they thought the math
problems were on another 5-point Likert-scale (easy to
hard). This was followed by the second task period that was
part of the interaction. The agent would instruct the
participants to load the task on the other monitor and work
on it for a time period of ten minutes. During that time the
agent reminded the participants twice of the time remaining
(5 minutes and 1 minute left) and also let them know when
time was up. Afterwards, the agent asked the participants to
estimate their performance with regard to the second task on
the same scale. At the last part of the interaction, the agent
interviewed the participants concerning their experiences
while working on the tasks and their attitudes towards

Results
We first verified that agent appearance did not affect the
results. As anticipated, there were no significant differences
between agents with the same gender but different
appearances. Therefore, the data was collapsed for further
analysis.
There was an overall improvement of performance
between the first task when the agent was absent (M = 3.86,
SD = 2.72) and the second task when the agent was present
(M = 5.49, SD = 3.33, t(73) = -7.29, p = 0.001). Also, selfevaluation of participants increased from the first task (M =
2.93, SD = 1.00) to the second task (M = 3.15, SD = 1.08,
t(73) = -2.44, p = 0.017). Moreover, Participants showed
significantly more effort by attempting to solve more math
problems in the second task, when the agent was present, (M
= 10.01, SD = 3.67) compared to the first task (M = 8.41, SD
= 3.49; t(73) = -4.70, p = 0.001).
A 2 X 2 ANOVA, with the first factor being the display
of rapport by the agent (rapport/no rapport) and the second
factor
being
the
gender
condition
(matching
gender/opposing gender) showed a main effect of rapport on
the improvement in performance (F(71) = 4.96, p = 0.029)
(Figure 4). When the agent displayed rapport (M = 2.09, SD
= 1.96), participants showed a significantly higher
improvement in performance than without rapport (M =
1.21, SD = 1.79; t(72) = 2.02, p = 0.047). Specifically, in the
opposing gender condition, there was a significant
difference between the rapport (M = 2.56, SD = 1.59) and
no-rapport conditions (M = 0.87, SD = 1.92), with

Agent present

DV: Performance

DV: Performance

Improvement in performance
DV: Effort

DV: Effort
Increase in effort
Figure 3: Study Flow

566

DV: Situational
motivation
+
Demographic
variables

does not match their own. Research in social psychology
has shown that establishing rapport between people and
their instructors in face-to face interactions increases
desirable outcomes such as motivation and improvement in
task success (Granitz et al., 2009; Thomas et al., 1982). Our
results show that rapport has a similar positive effect on
performance in human-computer-interaction.
Overall, interacting with a virtual agent significantly
enhanced participants’ performance and effort. Our findings
indicate that interacting with virtual agents of opposite
gender that are capable of displaying rapport behavior
improves participants’ performance on mathematical tasks
most. It supported participants’ motivation and increased
their effort to perform well by attempting to solve a higher
number of math problems. We hope to further examine
whether and how gender differences play a role in this
interaction.

Conclusion
In summary, contributions of this work are three-fold. First,
the study adds to literature on human-computer-interaction
with regard to virtual agents by showing that the agent’s
gender and rapport are both key factors for achieving
desirable outcomes such as motivation, effort and
performance with regard to mathematical tasks. Virtual
Agents which are capable of establishing rapport can
contribute to improve people’s performance in mathematics,
specifically with regard to standardized math tests. This
observation may support the development of useful and
effective applications in mathematical education and
training, such as virtual instructors, tutors or learning
companions. Second, it shows that social facilitation effects
occur when interacting with virtual agents of opposing
gender. Finally, this work makes a methodological
contribution to the fields of experimental psychology and
human-computer-interaction.

Figure 4: Performance Improvement
significantly higher performance in the rapport condition
(t(29) = 2.68, p = 0.012). The difference in improvement in
the no-match condition did not reach significance.
We expected performance improvement to occur due to an
increase of effort and motivation, thus we used one-tailed ttests for these two variables. In the opposing gender
condition participants invested more effort when rapport
was displayed (M = 2.25, SD = 3.17) compared to no
displayed rapport (M = 0.27, SD = 3.37, t(29) = 1.69, p =
0.051). In the opposing gender condition, there was a
significant trend in increase of motivation between the
rapport (M = 63.50, SD = 8.16) and no rapport (M = 56.13,
SD = 12.78) condition (t(29) = 1.93, p =.032). Within the
matching gender condition the display of rapport did not
show any influence on the dependent variables.

Acknowledgments

Discussion

This research was supported by the National Scientific
Foundation under grant # IIS-0916858. The first author
received support by the PROMOS Program of the German
Academic Exchange Service (DAAD).

We expected that facilitation effects to occur when
participants interact with a virtual agent of opposite gender
and that this will only be the case if the agent displays
rapport. The results of this study support these hypotheses.
When rapport was displayed, participants’ improvement was
higher when they interacted with an agent of opposite
gender than with an agent of matching gender. The same
patterns were found for effort. This indicates that a social
facilitation effect only occurs under a certain gender
condition, i.e. opposing gender, and when rapport is
displayed by the agent. Participants’ performance improved
most when they interacted with a virtual agent of opposite
gender that displayed rapport and it improved least with an
agent of the opposite gender who did not display rapport.
This indicates that rapport has an effect on participants’
improvement in performance only when the agents’ gender

References
Baylor, A. L. & Ryu, J. (2003). Does the presence of image
and animation enhance pedagogical agent persona?
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 28(4), 373395.
Garau, M., Slater, M., Pertaub, D. P. & Razzaque, S. (2005).
The responses of people to virtual humans in an
immersive virtual environment. Presence: Teleoperators
and Virtual Environments, 14, 104-116.

567

Granitz, N. A., Koernig, S. K., & Harich, K. R. (2009). Now
it’s personal: Antecedents and outcomes of rapport
between business faculty and their students. Journal of
Marketing Education, 31(1), 52-65.
Gratch, J., Okhmatovskaia, A., Lamothe, F., Marsella, S.,
Morales, M., van der Werf, R. J., et al. (2006). Virtual
Rapport. 6th International Conference on Intelligent
Virtual Agents. Marina del Rey, CA: Springer.
Gratch, J., Wang, N., Gerten, J., Fast, E., & Duffy, R.
(2007a). Creating Rapport with Virtual Agents. In C.
Pelachaud, J.-C. Martin, E. André, G. Chollet, K.
Karpouzis, & D. Pelé (Eds.), International Conference on
Intelligent Virtual Agents 2007. LNAI 4722 (pp. 125-138).
Paris, France: Springer Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Gratch, J., Wang, N., Okhmatovskaia, A., Lamothe, F.,
Morales, M., & Morency, L. P. (2007b). Can virtual
humans be more engaging than real ones? In J. Jacko
(Ed.). Human-Computer-Interaction, Part III, HCII 2007.
LNCS 4552, 286–297. Beijing, China: Springer Verlag
Berlin-Heidelberg.
Guay, F., Vallerand, R. J. & Blanchard, C. (2000). On the
Assessment of Situational Intrinsic and Extrinsic
Motivation: The Situational Motivation Scale (SIMS).
Motivation and Emotion, 24 (3), 175-213.
Guerin, B. & Innes, J. M. (1982). Social facilitation and
social monitoring: A look at Zanjonc’s mere presence
hypothesis. British Journal of Social Psychology, 2, 7-18.
Hayes A. L., Ulinski, A.C. & Hodges, L. F. (2010). That
Avatar Is Looking at Me! Social Inhibition in Virtual
Worlds. In: Allbeck, J. et al. (Eds.). International
Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents 2010, LNAI
6356, 454-467.
Huang, L., Morency, L. P. & Gratch, J. (2011). Virtual
Rapport 2.0. In: International Conference on Intelligent
Virtual Agents.
Kim, Y. (2004). Pedagogical agents as learning
companions: The effects of agent affect and gender on
learning, self-efficacy, and agent persona. Tallahassee,
FL: United State University.
Kopp, S., Krenn, B., Marsella, S., Marshall, A. N.,
Pelachaud, C., Pirker, H., Thrisson, K. R. & Vilhjlmsson,
H. (2006). Towards a common framework for multimodal
generation: the behavior markup language. In:
International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents,
21-23.
Morency, L. P., Sidner, C., & Darrell, T. (2005). Towards
context-based visual feedback Recognition for Embodied
Agents. Proceedings of the Symposium on conversational
Informatics for Supporting Social Intelligence and
Interaction (pp. 69-72). Hatfield, UK: AISB.
Rickenberg, R. & Reeves, B. (2000). The Effect of
Animated Characters on Anxiety, Task Performance, and
Evaluations of User Interfaces. Letters of ComputerHuman-Interaction 2000, 49-56.
Sanders, G. S., Baron, R. & Moore, D. L. (1978).
Distraction and social comparison as mediators of social

facilitation effects. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 14, 291-303.
Thiebaux, T. & Marsella, S. (2007). Smartbody: Behavior
realization for embodied conversational agents. In: 7th
International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents.
Thomas, D., Ribitch, F. & Freie, J.(1982). The relationship
between psychological identification with instructors and
student ratings of college courses. Instructional Science,
11(2), 139-154.
Tickle-Degnan L. & Rosenthal R. (1990). The nature of
rapport and its nonverbal correlates. Psychological
Inquiry, 1(4), 285-293.
Zanbaka, C., Ulinski, A., Goolkasian, P. & Hodges, L. F.
(2004). Effects of Virtual Human Presence on Task
Performance. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference of Additive Technologies 2004, 174-181.
Zanbaka C., Ulinski, A., Goolkasian, P. & Hodges, L. F.
(2007): Social responses to virtual humans: implications
on future interface design. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
2007, San Jose, CA, USA, April 28 - May 03, 1561-1570.
ACM, New York.
Zanjonc, R.B. (1965): Social Facilitation. Science, 149, 269274.

568

