UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effects of amnesia on driving performance in elderly drivers.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jd0198t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kawano, Naoko
Iwamoto, Kunhiro
Ebe, Kazutoshi
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effects of amnesia on driving performance in elderly drivers
Naoko Kawano (n-kawano@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.

Kunihiro Iwamoto (iwamoto@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.

Kazutoshi Ebe (whitejam@nifty.ne.jp)
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc., Japan.

Katsuyuki Ukai (ukai777@kamiiida-hp.jp)
Kamiiida daiichi General hospital, Japan.

Yusuke Suzuki (yus@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Department of Geriatrics, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.

Hiroyuki Umegaki (umegaki@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Department of Geriatrics, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.

Tetsuya Iidaka (iidaka@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.

Norio Ozaki (ozaki-n@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.
Abstract
Cognitive dysfunction caused by some neurodegenerative
diseases is associated with an increased risk of traffic
accidents. Previous studies have reported inconsistent results
for prodromal and early stages of dementia. Few studies have
directly compared the effects on driving performance of
amnestic subtype of mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) with
those by normal aging in elderly drivers. The present study
examines the association between cognitive decline and
driving ability in elderly drivers with aMCI. The participants
were 19 healthy young adults (HYA), 26 healthy elderly
adults (HEA), and 12 elderly patients with aMCI. All
performed a road-tracking, a car-following, and a harshbraking task on a driving simulator (DS). Elderly participants
also completed cognitive assessment tasks including measures
of memory performance. All MCI participants showed a welldefined memory decline, and demonstrated significantly
decreased performance on the car-following and road-tracking
tasks as compared with the HYA group. However, the aMCI
group also demonstrated significantly decreased performance
on the car-following task as compared with HEA. In elderly
participants, the car-following performance was positive
correlated with the score on the Trail Making Test-B. This
evidence indicates a difference for driving ability between
individuals with symptomatic memory impairment and the

aging-related memory of normal controls. This difference
may be associated with flexibility of visual attention and
executive function.
Keywords: mild cognitive impairment, driving simulator,
Trail Making Test, elderly driver, normal aging.

Introduction
Driving is a specialized and complex action that requires the
use of extensive cognitive abilities. Age-related dysfunction
of the central nervous systems in people with dementia,
such as symptoms caused by Alzheimer’s disease, may
influence driving. Studies have found that drivers with
dementia have 2.5 to 4.7 times the risk of an automobile
accident compared to cognitively intact elderly drivers
(Cooper, Tallman, Tuokko, & Beattie, 1993; Molnar, Patel,
Marshall, Man-Son-Hing, & Wilson, 2006). Fatal motor
vehicle crash rates (per miles driven) show a U-shape curve
with the highest rates among the youngest and oldest drivers
(Hakamies-Blomqvist, Sirén, & Davidse, 2004).
Cognitive limitations not only from some age-related
neurodegenerative diseases but also from aging-related
normal changes are associated with an increased risk of
being involved in a traffic accident. Epidemiological studies
demonstrated that elderly patients with mild dementia are

1762

high-risk drivers, as a group, compared with cognitively
intact drivers (Man-Son-Hing Marshall, Molnar, & Wilson,
2007). However, there is little evidence showing the
difference in the actual driving behaviors of individuals in
these two groups (Iverson et al., 2010). A substantial
number of patients with a Clinical Dementia Rating Scale
(CDR: Morris, 1993) scores of 0.5-1.0, which are in the
preclinical or early stage of dementia, were still able to drive
safely in an on-road driving test (Brown et al., 2005).
Iverson et al. recommend that studies are needed to identify
the appropriate predictive factors for risky driving in patient
with prodromal and mild dementia, and then to develop a
composite system of rating risk for drivers in the early
stages of dementia.
“Mild cognitive impairment (MCI)” is conceptualized as
a transitional state between normal cognitive aging and
clinical dementia, with amnestic and non-amnestic subtypes
of MCI have been defined (Petersen & Morris, 2005). The
amnestic subtype of MCI (aMCI) is characterized by
memory impairment, and is often operationalized as the
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale score of 0.5. People with
aMCI progress to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) at a rate of 815% per year, as compared to the normal aging with a
dementia progression rate of 1-2% per year (Petersen et al.,
2001). Therefore aMCI is considered a prodromal syndrome
of AD, and often precedes the onset of dementia.
Individuals with MCI may be at risk for decline in
everyday complex functions, including driving. However,
we have limited information about the crash risk and driving
behaviors of individuals with clinical MCI (Man-Son-Hing
et al., 2007). Recently, Frittelli et al. (2009) reported that
MCI had a limited effect on driving performance on a
driving simulator, and that AD patients’ unsafe driving
behavior was not predicted by their MMSE scores. They
compared patients with mild AD and with MCI and agematched neurologically normal controls. However, it is not
clear which cognitive characteristics of individuals with
MCI do endorse safer driving performance or which do not.
O’Connor, Edwards, Walley, and Crowe (2011) reported
associations between driving behaviors, assessed by a selfreport questioners, and classification of MCI. Their sample
was a subset of the mobility data (n = 2381) in the
Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent and Vital
Elderly (ACTIVE) study (N = 2802), and the subset
included 82 individuals with the aMCI, 140 individuals with
the non-amnestic subtype of MCI, and 82 individuals with
multi-domain subtype of MCI, and normal controls. They
investigated psychometrically well-defined MCI at baseline
as a predictor in a five years follow-up of changes in driving
behaviors. Their results suggested that MCI status predicted
declines in driving frequency and increases in driving
difficulty. The classification of MCI subtypes predicted
different trajectories of changes for driving frequency and
driving difficulty. The amnestic and non-amnestic groups
showed greater declines in driving frequency than the multidomain group and the normal controls. The amnestic and
non-amnestic groups showed increases for driving difficulty

in common situations, whereas the multi-domain group
showed a greater increase for driving difficulty only in
complex situations. The aMCI showed decline in driving
frequency but did not self-report driving difficulty. The
authors discussed these findings from the viewpoint of selfregulation and risk perception in their groups’ driving
behaviors. They suggested that these findings may reflect
impaired risk perception related to amnesia. Objective
assessment data of driving performance is still need to
determine actual risk assessment.
In the present study, we considered these remaining
problems, and examined individuals with clinical aMCI and
age-matched memory-intact individuals and normal young
adults to evaluate driving performance using a driving
simulator (DS). Although many consider road testing to be
the gold standard to evaluate driving competence, road tests
are costly and can be dangerous when the driver is
incompetent. The DS appears to be a safe and cost-effective
method for the objective evaluation of driving performance.
In order (1) to examine how cognitive state may impair
driving performance in patients with a prodromal stage of
dementia, and (2) to identify cognitive variables explaining
the deterioration of driving performance in the aMCI group,
we designed a case-control study to compare the driving
performance decline between adults with clinical aMCI and
elderly adults with an intact memory, based on the
performance of normal young adults.

Method
Participants
We recruited 19 healthy young adults (HYA: 39.3 years old,
SD = 6.5), 26 healthy elderly adults (HEA: 70.0 years old,
SD = 6.1), and 12 elderly patients with aMCI (71.8 years
old, SD = 7.6). The participants were naïve with regard to
this study, and were paid for their participation. All were
active drivers with more than 10 years of driving experience.
They all had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and no
history of cerebral vascular events.
The Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine and
Nagoya University Hospital ethics review committee
approved this study. Written informed consent was obtained
from all participant prior to their participation.
All participants were examined by an experienced
psychologist who used the same task order. They had no
history of psychiatric problem as assessed by the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID: First, Spitzer,
Gibbon, & Williams, 1997). The HYA and HEA individuals
were recruited in non-clinical setting, and had no
impairment in activities daily living (ADL) and no evidence
of dementia on the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR =
0.0). They showed no evidence of cognitive decline on
enrollment screening questionnaire. The patients with aMCI
were recruited in clinical setting. All were diagnosed
according to the criteria for MCI, provided by the Petersen
group. All of the aMCI group had a CDR = 0.5.

1763

Amnesia confirmation The confirmation of amnesia was
identified using psychometric methods. All elderly
participants were assessed using structured neuropsychological tests, including the Mini-Mental State
Examination (MMSE: Folstein, Folstein, & McHugh, 1975),
to their confirm general cognitive state, and the Logical
Memory delayed recall subtests of the Wechsler Memory
Scale-Revised (WMS-R: Wechsler, 1987) to confirm
memory function.
Cognitive functions Additional neuropsychological
measures, which have been used in previous studies related
to complex driving tasks, were also used. The digit span
subtests of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised
(WAIS-R: Wechsler, 1981) and the Trail Making Test
(TMT) -A were used to assess simple attention and
concentration function. The TMT-B and the Modified
Stroop Test were used to assess attention flexibility and
executive function. The Clock Drawing Test (CDT) was
used to assess visuospacial function.

Tasks
Driving performance Daily driving skills associated with
traffic accidents were measured by a road-tracking, a carfollowing, and a harsh-braking task. These tasks were run
on a DS manufactured by Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc.
(Nagakute, Japan).
The car-following task involved a straight two-lane road
with no other traffic, except for a single preceding car.
When the preceding car decelerated, its brake lights came
on. As the preceding car accelerated (to 60 km/h) or
decelerated (to 40 km/h), the participant was required to
maintain a distance between the cars as close to 5 m as
possible. The car-following distance (m) was recorded every
20 ms. Performance was measured as the coefficient of
variation (CV) obtained by dividing the standard deviation
of the distance between the cars by the mean value (see
Uchiyama, Ebe, Kozato, Okada, & Sadato, 2003). Therefore,
a smaller distance CV value (DCV) indicated better
performance. The test duration was 5 min.
The road-tracking task required the participant to drive at
a constant speed of 100 km/h, while stabilizing the vehicle
at the center of a gently winding road. The standard
deviation of the lateral position (SDLP; in cm), which
indicates weaving, was used as performance measures.
Recordings were made every 20 ms during the test, which
lasted for a period of 5 minutes.
The harsh-braking task included a straight two-lane road
with no traffic, but with humanoid models on either side of
the left lane. The humanoid models randomly ran onto the
road as the participant’s car approached. The participant was
instructed to maintain a constant speed of 50 km/h and to
avoid hitting the humanoid models by harsh braking as
quickly as possible. The brake reaction time (BRT; in ms)
was used as a measure of the cognitive psychomotor
performance, including attention efficiency (see Ridout &
Hindmarch, 2001). Each test consisted of 7 BRT trials over

a 5-min period, and the mean BRT was calculated from
these results.
The driving performance evaluation using the DS was
performed after the neuropsychological testing was
complete. Before starting the evaluation, each driver was
familiarized with the DS in three practice driving trials.
During the practice, the driving performances of the HEA
participants had plateaued (Kawano et al., in press). Within
one week of the practice session, the test session was
performed for each DS task, in the following order: the
road-tracking, car-following, and harsh-braking task.

Statistical analyses
To compare the demographic data including age, education,
and the neuropsychological test performances among the
groups, Kruskal-Wallis tests were carried out. Post hoc
multiple comparisons were computed by the Mann-Whitney
U test with the ordinary Bonferroni adjustment. DS values
were compared among groups by one-way ANOVAs, after
applying log transformations to normalize the data. Post hoc
multiple comparisons were computed by the Tukey HSD.
To analyses the relationship between the performance of DS
task and some neuropsychological values, correlational
analyses based on the Spearman's ρ and multiple linear
regression analyses were carried out.
All Statistical analysis was performed with the SPSS. A Pvalue of less than 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical
significance.

Results
The characteristics of participant group are shown in Table
1. No significant differences were shown in age and
education level between NEA and aMCI groups. There were
significant differences between the two elderly groups for
the MMSE and the Logical Memory delayed recall subtests
of the WMS-R. All NEA individuals had MMSE scores
over 26, and Logical Memory delayed recall performances
over 11. On the other hand, all individuals with aMCI had a
score of 9 or below on the Logical Memory delayed recall
task.
To examine whether aMCI affected DS performance, the
performance on each of the three DS tasks were compared
among the groups. Figure 1 displays the groups’ mean
performance for each driving task. For the car-following
task, the ANOVA revealed a main effect of group (F(2, 54)
= 16.61, p = 0.00, η2 = 0.38). Multiple comparisons by
Tukey HSD tests showed significant differences among all
groups. The performance of NYA was significant higher
than aMCI and NEA (t = 5.76, p = 0.00, r = 0.73; t = 2.69,
p= 0.03, r = 0.38), and NEA was significant higher than
aMCI (t = 3.76, p = 0.00, r = 0.53). For the road-tracking
task, the ANOVA revealed a main effect of group (F(2, 54)
= 17.62, p = 0.00, η2 = 0.40). Multiple comparison by Tukey
HSD tests showed significant differences between NYA and
aMCI. The performance of NYA was higher than aMCI and
NEA (t = 5.53, p = 0.00, r = 0.71; t = 4.51, p = 0.00, r =

1764

Table 1: Characteristics of each group: Mean (Standard Deviations)

Sex (female/male)
Age (years)
Education (years)
Cognitive characteristics
Mini-Mental State Examination
WMS-R Logical Memory: delayed recall

aMCI
2/10
71.8
13.4

(7.6)
(3.5)

NEA
11/15
70.0
(6.1)
14.4
(2.8)

25.5
4.6

(2.9)
(3.7)

28.5
20.0

NYA
1/18
39.3
16.6

(6.5)
(1.7)

(1.4)
(5.3)

Note. aMCI = amnestic type of mild cognitive impairment, NEA = normal elderly adults, NYA = normal young adults,
WMS-R = Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised.
0.56), but there was no significant difference between NYA
and aMCI (t = 1.95, p = 0.14, r = 0.31). For the harshbraking task, 12 persons had missing values caused by
technical problems or the participants. A one-way ANOVA
was performed for 10 aMCI participants, 19 NEA
participants, and 16 NYA participants. The analysis
revealed no main effect of group (F(2, 42) = 3.21, p = 0.05,
η2 = 0.13). There were no significant differences between
groups.
Correlational analyses were conducted to examine the
relationship between the performance on the car-following
task (DCV) and some neuropsychological values in elderly
groups. In the elderly group mixed NEA and aMCI, there
were significant positive correlations between the DCV on
the car-following task and TMT-A, TMT-B, and the
Modified Stroop Test (ρ = 0.47, p = 0.00; ρ = 0.54, p = 0.00;
ρ = 0.38, p = 0.02). No significant correlations were found
between DCV and CDT (ρ = -0.18, p = 0.30), or DCV and
the WAIS-R digit span subtest (ρ = -0.31, p = 0.06). In the
aMCI group only, there were significant positive
correlations between DCV and TMT-A, TMT-B, and the
Modified Stroop Test (ρ = 0.47, p = 0.00; ρ = 0.54, p = 0.00;
ρ = 0.38, p = 0.02). No significant correlations were found
between DCV and CDT (ρ = -0.18, p = 0.30), or DCV and
the WAIS-R digit span subtest (ρ = -0.31, p = 0.06). In
addition, to confirm whether these variables, which are
significantly associated with DCV, predicted the carfollowing performance more than just memory impairment

did, multiple linear regression analyses were carried out.
Adjusting for the delayed recall performance on the WMSR Logical Memory, the predictive strength of TMT-A,
TMT-B, and the Modified Stroop Test was confirmed using
log transformation DCV as an independent variable. Results
of multiple linear regression analyses are displayed in Table
2. The results showd that the TMT-B performance
significantly predicts the car-following performance after
adjusting for the severity level of amnesia (β = 0.40, p =
0.04, R = 0.63, adjusted R2 = 0.40).

Discussion
This study has provided clear evidence that late-life amnesia
harms driving performance. An elderly sample with these
characteristics showed that significantly decreased
performance on the car-following and road-tracking tasks as
compared with the normal young adults. However, the
results showed a difference between individuals with
symptomatic memory impairment and normal aging-related
characteristics for driving abilities. There was no significant
difference among the elderly groups on the road-tracking
task. In contrast, there was a significant difference between
groups on the car-following task. These results indicate that
aMCI affects driving performance in patients with a
prodromal stage of dementia, but normal aging also affects
performance.

Figure 1: Means for DS task performances for each group.
Note. DCV = distance coefficient of variation, SDLP = standard deviation of the lateral position, BRT = brake reaction time,
aMCI = amnestic subtype of mild cognitive impairment, NEA = normal elderly adults, NYA = normal young adults.

1765

Table 2: Association between the performance for the car-following task and
neuropsychological test scores in the elderly group.

TMT-A
WMSR-delayed recall
TMT-B
WMSR-de
Modified Stroop Test
WMSR-delayed recall

R
R2
adjusted R2 B
0.577 0.333 0.292
0.011
-0.069
0.629 0.396 0.359
0.007
-0.042
0.574 0.329 0.290
0.023
-0.057

β
0.167
-0.475
0.395
-0.290
0.260
-0.382

P
95% confidence interval of B
0.318
-0.011
0.033
0.007 * -0.118
-0.021
0.040 * 0.000
0.013
0.124
-0.097
0.012
0.140
-0.008
0.053
0.033 * -0.109
-0.005

Note. TMT = Trail Making Test, WMSR = Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised: Logical Memory.
Second, the different findings may be due to sample
characteristics of MCI group and age matched control group.
We checked that all the MCI participants showed a welldefined memory decline, and that all the normal elderly
controls had intact memory and normal cognitive
characteristics. In the present study, we examined these
elderly people with amnesia and age-matched memory
intact controls to evaluate driving performances using
driving simulator, and compared their performance with
normal young adults. Frittelli et al. (2009) compared among
mild AD patients, people with MCI, and age-matched
neurologically normal controls. We considered the problems
involved with normal aging, and we found that not only
aMCI but also normal-aging impaired driving performance.
Our results indicated that MCI impaired car-following
accuracy.
Simulated driving was found to be significant impaired in
participants with aMCI. To identify cognitive variables
explaining the decrement in car-following performance in
late-life, correlational analyses were conducted. Although
car-following performance was significantly related to
performance on the TMT-A, TMT-B, and the Modified
Stroop Test in our study sample, the correlations with the
MMSE were not significant. These results are in agreement
with previous studies showing that the MMSE, a
widespread dementia screening tool, is limited as a
predictive instrument. A few studies have reported a
significant relation of MMSE scores to driving simulator
and on-road driving performance (e.g. Fitten et al., 1995),
but many studies have indicated that MMSE scores did not
discriminate unsafe drivers from elderly drivers with
unimpaired performance (Brown et al., 2005; Fox, Bowden,
Bashford, & Smith, 1997; O’Neill et al., 1992). Also,
general cognitive decline assessed by the MMSE is not
found at the start of brain degeneration disease, and the
aMCI operational criteria are conditional on a normal score
on the MMSE. Thus, our elderly sample had less variability
in MMSE scores. For patients with a prodromal stage of
dementia, the MMSE is not useful as a predictor of safe
driving, which has been shown in our results and numerous
other studies with inconsistent results.
We found a linear relationship between performance on
the TMT-B and the car-following task, and this relationship

remained after adjusting for the degree of symptomatic
memory impairment. It is possible that the TMT-B is a
useful tool for classifying elderly drivers as to whether they
would pass or fail on the car-following task. The TMT is
associated with attention flexibility and executive function
(Lezak, 2004). The difference between unsafe drivers and
persons with unimpaired performance may be associated
with the flexibility of visual attention and executive function.
Particularly, the TMT-B assesses more precisely the ability
to alternate between two cognitive sets of stimuli, while the
TMT-A of the test provides useful information concerning
attention, visual scanning, speed of eye-hand coordination
and information processing (Zalonis et al, 2008). These
results suggest that persons with MCI who not only have
memory impairment but also have difficulty gathering and
processing information in parallel should drive under close
supervision.
According to a cybernetic model of driving output, driver
psychopathology is only one of a multitude of factors to
consider (Moller, 2011). However, factors of driver
psychopathology, normally limitations of psychological and
neurophysiologic functioning, are associated with driving
performance. Future studies need to evaluate the appropriate
weighting of these risk factors in people with MCI, and
develop criteria for re-evaluation of competency to drive.
Limitation The results of this study are constrained by
certain limitations that are outlined below. Although we
concluded this experiment based on the premise that
participants in the three experimental groups were
homogenous, there may have been differences in
participants within each group. These differences may have
been caused by misclassification of the amnesia status as a
result of differences in age, educational level, or chronic
physical disorder, although, the age and education level of
the sample were not correlated with DS performance. We
also did not consider the possibility that individuals with
aMCI may have other impairments (a multiple-domain
subtype) or not (amnestic single-domain subtype), because
of the small sample size. Future studies need to consider
these details of individuals in amnestic subtypes, nonamnestic subtypes, and multi-domain subtypes of MCI.
Finally, whereas it is generally considered that road testing
is the gold standard by which to evaluate driving

1766

competence, we used the DS. There is a definite difference
between on-road testing and DS tasks provide. The former
can provide information on daily habits related to driving,
whereas the latter provides objective assessment of
competence. Future studies need to conduct longitudinal
investigations of traffic incidents and compare them with
changes in DS performance.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this study was provided by research grants from
the following: the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of
Japan; the Chiyoda Mutual Life Foundation; the Hori
Sciences and Arts Foundation; the Conference for
Expressway-related Social Contribution Activities; the
Japan
Health
Foundation; the Suzuken Memorial
Foundation, the ZENKYOREN, and the General Insurance
Association of Japan.

References
Brown, L. B., Stern, R. A., Cahn-Weiner, D. A., Rogers, B.,
Messer, M. A., Lannon, M. C., Maxwell, C., Souza, T.,
White, T., & Ott, B. R. (2005). Driving Scenes Test of the
Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NAB) and onroad driving performance in aging and very mild dementia.
Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 20, 209-216.
Cooper, P. J., Tallman, K., Tuokko, H., & Beattie, B.L.
(1993). Vehicle Crash Involvement and Cognitive Deficit
in Older Drivers. Journal of Safety Research, 24, 9-17.
First, M.B., Spitzer, R.L., Gibbon, M., Williams, J.B.W. &
Benjamin, L. (1994). The structured clinical interview for
DSM-IV Axis II personality disorders (SCID-II) (Version
2.0). New York: Biometrics Research, New York State
Psychiatric Institute.
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975).
"Mini-mental state": a practical method for grading the
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 12, 189-198.
Fox, G. K., Bowden, S. C., Bashford, G. M., Smith, D. S.
(1997). Alzheimer's disease and driving: prediction and
assessment of driving performance. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 45, 949-953.
Frittelli, C., Borghetti, D., Iudice, G., Bonanni, E., Maestri,
M., Tognoni, G., Pasquali, L. & Iudice, A. (2009). Effects
of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment on
driving ability: a controlled clinical study by simulated
driving test. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
24, 232-238.
Hakamies-Blomqvist, L., Sirén, A. & Davidse, R.J. (2004).
Older drivers-a review. VTI report 497A. Swedish
National Road and Transport Research Institute VTI,
Linköping.
Iverson, D. J., Gronseth, G. S., Reger, M. A., Classen, S.,
Dubinsky, R. M., & Rizzo, M. (2010). Practice parameter
update: evaluation and management of driving risk in
dementia. Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee
of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology, 74,
1316-1324.

Kawano, N., Iwamoto, K., Ebe, K., Aleksic, B. Noda, A.,
Umegaki, H., Kuzuya, M., Iidaka, T., & Ozaki, N. (in
press). Slower adaptation to the driving simulator and
simulator sickness in older adults. Aging Clinical and
Experimental Research.
Lezak, M. D. (2004). Neuropsychological assessment (4th
ed.). New York: Oxford University.
Man-Son-Hing, M., Marshall, S. C., Molnar, F. J., & Wilson,
K. G. (2007). Systematic review of driving risk and the
efficacy of compensatory strategies in persons with
dementia. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 55,
878-884.
Moller, H. (2011). Psychiatric disorders and driving
performance. In D. L. Fisher, M. Rizzo, & J. Caird (Eds.),
Handbook of driving simulation for engineering, medicine,
and psychology. London: Taylor & Francis.
Molnar, F. M., Patel, A., Marshall, S. C., Man-Son-Hing,
M., & Wilson, K. G. (2006). Clinical utility of officebased cognitive predictors of fitness to drive in persons
with dementia: A systematic review. Journal of the
American Geriatric Society, 54, 1809-1824.
Morris, J.C. (1993). The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR):
Current version and scoring rules. Neurology, 43, 24122414.
O'Connor, M. L., Edwards, J. D., Wadley, V. G., & Crowe,
M. (2010). Changes in mobility among older adults with
psychometrically defined mild cognitive impairment. The
Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences
and Social Sciences, 65B(3), 306-316.
O'Neill, D., Neubauer, K., Boyle, M., Gerrard, J., Surmon,
D., & Wilcock, G. K. (1992). Dementia and driving.
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 85(4), 199-202.
Petersen, R. C. & Morris, J. C. (2005). Mild Cognitive
Impairment as a Clinical Entity and Treatment Target.
Archives of Neurology, 62, 1160-1163.
Petersen, R. C., Doody, R., Kurz, A., Mohs, R. C., Morris, J.
C., Rabins, P. V., Ritchie, K., Rossor, M., Thal, L., &
Winblad, B. (2001). Current concepts in mild cognitive
impairment. Archives of. Neurology, 58(12), 1985-1992.
Ridout, F., & Hindmarch, I. (2001). Effects of tianeptine
and mianserin on car driving skills. Psychopharmacology,
154, 356-361.
Uchiyama, Y., Ebe, K., Kozato, A., Okada, T., & Sadato, N.
(2003). The neural substrates of driving at a safe distance:
a functional MRI study. Neuroscience Letters, 352, 199202.
Wechsler, D. (1981). Manual for the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale-Revised. New York: The Psychological
Corporation.
Wechsler, D. (1987). Manual for the Wechsler Memory
Scale-Revised. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological
Corporation.
Zalonis, I., Kararizou, E., Triantafyllou, N. I., Kapaki, E.,
Papageorgiou, S., Sgouropoulos, P., & Vassilopoulos, D.
(2008). A normative study of the trail making test A and B
in Greek adults. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 22(5),
842-850.

1767

