UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The face inversion effect and evoked brain potentials: Complete loss of configural
information affects the N170

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8h52h6z5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Civile, Ciro
Elchlepp, Heike
McLaren, Rossy
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The face inversion effect and evoked
brain potentials:
Complete loss of configural information affects the N170
Ciro Civile (cc413@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Heike Elchlepp (H.Elchlepp@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

R. McLaren (R.P.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Aureliu Lavric (A.Lavric@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

I.P.L. McLaren (I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Abstract
The face inversion effect (FIE) is a reduction in recognition
performance for inverted faces compared to upright faces that is
greater than that typically observed with other stimulus types (e.g.
houses; Yin, 1969). Nevertheless, the demonstration that the
inversion effect in recognition memory can be as strong with
images of dogs as with faces when the subjects are experts in
specific dog breeds (Diamond & Carey, 1986), suggests that there
may be other factors, such as expertise, which give rise to the FIE.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while subjects
performed an Old/New recognition study on normal and scrambled
faces presented in upright and inverted orientations. We obtained
the standard result for normal faces: The electrophysiological
activity corresponding to the N170 was larger and delayed for
normal inverted faces as compared to normal upright ones. On the
other hand, the ERPs for scrambled inverted faces were not
significantly larger or delayed as compared to scrambled upright
stimuli. These results, in combination, show how the effect of
inversion on the N170 is reliably greater when the faces are normal
compared to scrambled, which suggests the disruption of
configural information affects the FIE.
Keywords:Face recognition; Face inversion effect; N170; First
and second order relational information; Old/new recognition
task

Introduction
Recognition of objects that are usually seen in one
orientation is sometimes strongly impaired when the same
objects are turned upside down, showing how intrinsically
difficult it is to identify them. This has been found to be
particularly the case for faces, leading to a phenomenon
known as the face inversion effect (FIE). Thus, the fact that
recognition of human faces is more impaired by inversion
than is recognition for other stimuli has underlined how

faces are, in some sense, special. Some of the first evidence
for the FIE reported by Yin (1969) presented participants
with upright or inverted pictures of faces, airplanes, houses,
and other stimuli. Following the study phase, participants
were then tested with stimuli in the same orientation in a
recognition task paradigm. The results showed that when the
stimuli were studied and tested in an upright orientation,
faces were better recognized than other sets of stimuli.
However, when the same stimuli were presented and tested
in an inverted orientation, recognition for faces decreased
more than was the case for the other classes of stimuli. Yin
(1969, experiment 3) replicated this result in an experiment
using line drawings of facial stimuli and period costumes,
thus controlling for the effect of subtle shadow information
in an inverted face as a potential explanation for the large
effect of inversion. In this experiment faces were not the
easiest stimuli to be recognized when presented in an
upright orientation. Therefore, the large FIE could not be
attributed to the overall difficulty in discriminating within a
stimulus category. Yin interpreted his results in terms of a
face-specific process.
Over the past two decades more behavioral evidence has
emerged that challenges the assumption that facial stimuli
are special, not the least of which is the demonstration
presented by Diamond and Carey (1986) that the inversion
effect on recognition memory can be as strong with pictures
of dogs as with faces when the subjects are experts in the
identification and assessment of specific dog breeds. Given
that the only stimuli that result in a substantial inversion
effect are the ones for which the subjects have the necessary
expertise, this suggests that the FIE may not be due to the
fact that facial stimuli are subject to special processing
because they are facial in nature, but instead that there are

1416

other factors, such as expertise, which give rise to this
effect. They distinguished between three types of
information that can be used in recognition: isolated
features, first-order relational features and second-order
relational features. Isolated or local features are the
independent constituent elements of an object. First-order
information consists of spatial relations between constituent
elements of an object, for example, the arrangement of the
nose above the mouth. It is the first-order information that
organizes a set of facial features into a face. Second-order
information defines the relative size of these spatial
relationships with regard to a base prototype. All faces tend
to possess the same set of first-order relations, the essential
manner in which faces differ from each other is captured by
second-order relational information. These two kinds of
relational information are both examples of configural
information. Diamond and Carey suggested that large
inversion effects will be obtained only if three conditions
are met. Firstly, the members of the class of stimuli must
share a configuration. Secondly, it must be possible to
individuate the members of the class through second-order
information. Finally, observers must have the expertise to
exploit such second-order information. They proposed that
the elements that distinguish faces lie on a continuum from
isolated/local to second-order relational. Thus, recognition
of members within the class differs from other types of
recognition in its reliance on second-order relational
features and in requiring expertise to use these features.
Searcy and Bartlett (1996) and Leder and Bruce (1998)
have provided very clear evidence on the effect of
disrupting configural information by inversion. In one of
their experiments, Searcy and Bartlett (1996) made faces
grotesque by either changing local elements, such as
blackening teeth, blurring the pupils, or by changing the
facial configuration. When shown in an inverted orientation,
faces that were distorted through configural changes seemed
to be more similar to the normal version, while the “locally
distorted face” still looked grotesque. Thus, configural
changes did not survive the inversion process as well as
local ones. In another experiment, Leder and Bruce (1998)
distorted faces so as to be more distinctive, either changing
local features by giving them darker lips, bushier eye brows,
etc. or by changing configural information to give a shorter
mouth to nose spatial relation, etc. Distinctiveness
impressions caused by distorted configural information
disappeared when faces were presented in an inverted
orientation compared to both upright faces and faces
distorted in their local aspects. These results all provide
evidence for the powerful effect that relational information
has in the processing of upright faces relative to inverted
faces. But there is still a question as to what precisely is the
difficulty caused by any disruption of configural
information consequent on inversion. The suggestion from
some theories of perceptual learning (e.g. McLaren, 1997) is
that expertise for faces can act directly on configural
information, and confers the ability to make better use of it
by effectively reducing the salience of first order relational

information (which is also configural but shared by most
faces), leaving second order relational information relatively
salient which aids discrimination. Thus, once configural
information in upright faces has been disrupted (or at least
our ability to make use of it), the benefits conferred by our
expertise with those faces would tend to decrease, making
them less easy to discriminate from one another. This
explanation for the effect of expertise in face processing has
some empirical support. The key finding is that it has been
shown that experience with exemplars of a category that can
be represented by a prototype (and have second order
relational structure as a result of their variation about that
prototype) leads to an increased ability to discriminate
between members of that category. This improvement is lost
when the stimuli are presented in an inverted orientation
(McLaren, 1997). Recently, Civile et al., (2011) provided
some evidence that disrupting second order relational
information by inverting (rotating by 1800) the eyes and the
mouth, producing Thatcherised faces, whilst leaving other
types of information (first order and local) intact reduces,
even if it does not entirely eliminate, the FIE. However, in
that same study they proposed that the FIE was still present
for Thatcherised baseline stimuli (but significantly smaller
than for normal faces) because Thatcherised faces still had
some second-order information which had not been
disrupted by the manipulation. Thus, in a second experiment
they created a set of faces with all the second-order
information disrupted. To do this they scrambled the faces
by shuffling at random each of the features within a face.
The effect of this was, in part, the expected one in that any
inversion effect for the scrambled faces disappeared. The
new finding was that performance for scrambled faces,
whether in an upright or inverted orientation, was now
below not only that for upright normal faces but also below
that obtained for inverted normal faces. A possible
explanation for this finding was that using scrambled faces
may have affected both first and second order relational
structure. In particular, when the ears were moved inside the
face and replaced with other features, the typical shape of
every face was changed to the point where it was no longer
easily recognizable as a face.
In this present study, we aimed to replicate behaviorally
those results obtained by Civile et al., (2011), but this time
we used a slightly different design. Participants were
presented with two old/new recognition tasks, one including
male faces and another female faces. All together the
sample of faces seen in this experiment was more than
double that used in the Civile et al., (2011) study. This was
done so that we could measure event-related potentials
(ERPs) recording subjects’ neural activity while performing
the tasks. There have been previous ERPs studies that have
compared the presentation of normal upright faces and
normal inverted faces. Rossion et al., (1999) recorded neural
activity in a delayed-matching task. A larger amplitude and
delayed activity on the N170 was found for inverted faces
compared to upright faces suggesting that inversion may
slow down and increase difficulty in face processing.

1417

Following the ERP literature on the N170 (de Haan et al.,
2002; Eimer, 2000; Tanaka & Curran, 2001;Rossion et al.,
2002) we predicted a larger inversion effect on the N170 for
normal faces compared to scrambled faces which suffer
from disrupted configural information. We expected to
obtain significantly larger and delayed N170 amplitudes for
normal inverted faces compared to normal upright faces.
This follows from the assumption that inversion effects the
expertise needed to exploit configural information, and that
the N170 depends on the ability to make use of this
information. Thus, this difference is expected to be
significantly larger than the one between the amplitudes for
scrambled upright and inverted faces as the influence of
expertise here will be minimal. We also looked for neural
activity correlates to the disadvantage that scrambled faces
have compared to normal inverted faces.

Materials
The study used 320 images in total, half female and half
male. These were photographs of faces of former students at
the University of Cambridge. The faces were standardized
in grey scale format using Adobe Photoshop. A program
called Gimp 2.6 was used to manipulate the 320 stimuli.
Any given face stimulus was prepared in four different
versions i.e. normal upright, normal inverted, scrambled
upright and scrambled inverted which were used in a
counterbalanced fashion across participants so that each face
was equally often used in each condition of the
experiment.Six facial features were used for scrambling i.e.
the mouth, nose, two ears and the two eyes (including
eyebrows). Scrambling was done by selecting at random one
feature of the face and moving it to the forehead (chosen
because this is the widest space inside the face and so can
accommodate any feature). Following this, a second feature
was selected and moved to the space left empty by the first
feature, and so on until all the six facial features had been
moved. Examples of the stimuli used are given in Figure 1.
The experiment was run using E-prime software Version 1.1
installed on a PC computer.

Normal
Upright

Normal
Inverted

Scrambled
Upright

Procedure
The experiment consisted of an initial ‘study phase’
followed by an ‘old/new recognition phase’ using only male
faces, and then another ‘study phase’ and ‘old/new
recognition phase’, but this time using only female facial
stimuli. After the instructions, the first part of the
experiment involved participants looking at 80 male faces
(presented one at a time in random order).The participants
saw a fixation cross in the centre of the screen that was
presented for 500 ms, followed by a black screen for 500 ms
and then by a facial stimulus that was presented for 3000ms.
Then the fixation cross and the black screen were repeated,
and another face presented, until all stimuli had been seen.
These faces will be termed the “familiar”(designated as type
1) faces for that participant because they were presented
again later on in the old/new recognition task. The face
types were: Normal Inverted faces (1NI); Normal Upright
faces (1NU); Scrambled Inverted faces (1SI) and Scrambled
Upright faces (1SU). Following the study phase, after
further instructions, there was an old/new recognition task in
which participants were shown (in random order) the 80
male faces they had already seen (i.e. the familiar faces)
intermixed with a further 80 unseen male faces which were
designated as type 2 and split into the same four face subtypes as in the study phase. During this old/new recognition
task participants indicated whether or not they had seen the
male face during the study phase by pressing the ‘.’ key If
they recognized the face or to press ‘x’ if they did not. Each
face never appeared as more than one face sub-type at a
time during the experiment. The facial stimuli available
were divided into sets of 20giving 8 sets of stimuli, and each
participant group was shown a different combination of the
160 facial stimuli split over the 8 sets as shown in Table 1.
Because there were 160 male faces to consider (80 in the
study phase and 80 in the recognition task), four participant
breaks were incorporated. These allowed participants to rest
their eyes after they had viewed 40 male faces. The second
part of the experiment followed the same procedure as that
used in the first part of the experiment. The only difference
this time was that participants saw female faces.

Scrambled
Inverted

Figure 1; Examples of stimuli used in the experiment
showing the four different facial conditions. The dimensions
of the stimuli were 5.63cm x 7.84cm. The stimuli were
presented at a resolution of 1280 x 960. Participants sat 1m
away from the screen on which the images were presented.
Table.1.Combinations of facial stimuli presented to each

Participants
24 undergraduates and postgraduates at the University of
Exeter took part in the experiment.

1418

participant group. The same face set combinations were
used in the first and second half of the experiment for the
male and female faces.

EEG Apparatus
The EEG was sampled continuously during study and
recognition phases at 500 Hz with a bandpass of 0.016-100
Hz, the reference at Cz and the ground at AFz using 64
Ag/AgCl active electrodes and BrainAmp amplifiers. There
were 61 electrodes on the scalp in an extended 10-20
configuration and one on each earlobe. Their impedances
were kept below 10 kΩ. The EEG was filtered offline with a
20 Hz low-pass filter (24 dB/oct) and re-referenced to the
linked ears.

inverted faces, and another planned comparison revealed no
significant effect of inversion for scrambled upright vs.
scrambled inverted faces, F(1,23) =0.026, p=ns. The effect
of face type on the recognition of upright faces was also
analyzed. Normal upright faces were recognized
significantly better than scrambled upright faces F(1,23)
=56.75, p<.001, but there was no significant difference in
the recognition of normal inverted faces and scrambled
inverted faces. Finally, scrambled upright were recognized
significantly above chance, F(1,23) = 19.63, p<.01, as were
scrambled inverted faces, F(1,23) = 28.04, p<.01.

EEG Analysis
Peak amplitudes of the N170 in study and recognition
phases were examined for differences between the
experimental conditions. To improve the estimates of N170
amplitude and latency given the relatively small number of
ERP segments in each condition (leading to a low signal-tonoise ratio), N170 extraction was aided by linear
decomposition of the EEG by means of Independent
Component Analysis (ICA, Bell & Sejnowski, 1995). ICA
was run separately for each subject using all scalp channels
and the entire dataset. For analyses of the recognition phase,
segments associated with incorrect responses were
discarded (there were no responses in the study phase). The
remaining EEG segments were averaged for every
participant and experimental condition. In each subject, we
identified ICA components that: (1) showed a deflection
(peak) in the N170 time-range (at 150-200 ms following
stimulus onset), and (2) had a scalp distribution containing
an occipital-temporal negativity characteristic of N170 (the
scalp distributions of components are the columns of the
inverted unmixing matrix). This resulted in 1-4 ICA
components corresponding to the N170 identified in most
subjects (mean 2.6; SD 1) - these were back-transformed
into the EEG electrode space (by multiplying the
components with the inverted unmixing matrix that had the
columns corresponding to other components set to zero) and
submitted to statistical analysis of N170 peak amplitude and
latency.
Results
Behavioral Results
The data from all 24 participants contributed to the signal
detection d’ analysis. Responses for male and female faces
were collapsed and transformed into d’ measures. A
significant interaction was found between face type and
orientation, F(1,23) =20.77, p<.01.Figure 2 shows the
results for the mean d’ obtained for each face type. A
planned comparison was used to examine whether or not
there was a significant inversion effect for normal facial
stimuli. This gave a highly significant advantage F(1,23)
=34.37, p<.001, for normal upright faces vs. normal

Figure 2; Behavioral results from old/new recognition
task. The X-axis shows the four different stimulus’
conditions, whereas the Y-axis shows the d’ means for each
of the four facial conditions.
N170 analysis
N170 latency and amplitude analyses were run in
electrode PO8 which was the electrode showing most of the
activity during our experiment. We attempted to run the
same analyses on the N170 data as on the d’ behavioral data
considered earlier to facilitate comparison.
Study phase (see Figure 3)
Latency analysis: The Face Type by Orientation
interaction was significant, i.e. the effect of face inversion
on N170 latencies was reliably larger when faces were
Normal compared to Scrambled, F(1,23) = 7.79, p < .05. In
particular, the face inversion effect was highly reliable for
Normal faces, F(1,23) =24.54, p<.001, with N170 latencies
peaking 10 ms earlier for upright faces (at 175 ms)
compared to inverted faces (186 ms). For scrambled faces,
peaks for inverted faces were delayed compared to upright
faces by less than 1 ms failing to reach significance, F(1,23)
=0.18, p=ns. Latencies of upright faces peaked earlier (by 5
ms) when faces were Normal compared to Scrambled. This
difference was reliable, F(1,23) =5.36, p <.05.
Peak amplitude analysis: The difference in peak
amplitudes between upright and inverted faces was larger
when faces were Normal (-0.61V) than when they were
Scrambled (0.18V), but this was only marginally reliable,

1419

F(1,23) =3.13, p<.1.The effect of inversion neared
significance for Normal faces, F(1,23) =3.28, p<.1, with
more negative amplitudes for inverted (-1.56V) compared
to upright (-0.94.V) faces. For scrambled faces, the
inversion effect did not approach significance F(1,23) =.075
p=ns. The effect of Face Type was not reliable for upright
faces, F(1,23) =0.30, p=ns. Amplitudes for inverted faces
were significantly larger when the faces were Normal
compared to Scrambled (-0.711 V) F(1,23) =4.23, p<.05.
Old/new recognition task (see Figure 4)
Latency analysis: A significant Orientation by Face Type
interaction was found F(1,23) = 6.45, p<.025. A significant
inversion effect was observed for normal faces F(1,23)
=37.34, p<.001,with N170 latencies peaking 9 ms earlier for
upright faces (at 167 ms) compared to inverted faces (178
ms). A trend towards significance was found for the
inversion effect related to scrambled faces F(1,23) =2.51,
p=.13with N170 latencies peaking at nearly 4 ms earlier for
upright Scrambled faces ( at 176.3 ms) compared to inverted
(179.90 ms). A final comparison revealed a significant
effect for upright normal stimuli compared to scrambled
upright stimuli F(1,23) =9.06, p<.01.
Peak amplitude analysis: No reliable Orientation by Face
Type interaction was found. Means show a near significant
inversion effect for Normal faces, with more negative
amplitudes for inverted (-1.815V) vs. upright (-1.200V),
F(1,23) = 3.67, p=.06. No reliable difference was found for
scrambled faces amplitudes F(1,23) = 0.79, p=ns. No
significant effect was found for upright normal stimuli
compared to upright scrambled ones, F(1,23) = 1.03, p=ns.
However a significant effect was found for normal inverted
faces compared to scrambled inverted (-1.216 V) , F(1,23)
= 5.91, p<.05.

relative to the main stimulus-locked ERP, the amplitude
scale is the same in the insert as in the main figure.

Figure.4.The X-axis shows the elapsed time after a
stimulus was presented. The Y-axis shows the amplitudes
(V) of the electrophysiological reactions in the old/new
recognition phase of the experiment. The insert in this figure
is the ERP time-locked to the N170 peak, as identified in
individual subjects during the old/new recognition task.

Discussion
On the behavioral side, and in agreement with the
literature, we have obtained a strong inversion effect for
normal faces. This has been eliminated entirely with
scrambled faces. We have clear evidence here that
configural information does indeed play an important role in
driving the inversion effect for faces. Analyses on both the
amplitude and latency of the N170 indicate a numerically
larger inversion effect for normal faces than for scrambled
faces. Running the same planned comparisons on the ERP
data as for the behavioral data produces a very similar
pattern of results, i.e. a strong inversion effect for the
normal faces, and no inversion effect for scrambled faces,
and a difference in N170 latencies between the upright
normal and scrambled faces. The new finding here is that
the scrambled stimuli (both upright and inverted) elicit a
very similar N170 to one elicited by normal upright stimuli.

General Discussion

Figure.3. The X-axis shows the elapsed time after a
stimulus was presented, whereas the Y-axis shows the
amplitudes (V) of the electrophysiological reactions in the
study phase of the experiment. The insert in this figure is the
ERP time-locked to the N170 peak, as identified in
individual subjects. The time-scale of the inserts is stretched

From the behavioral results of this study we have
confirmed we can obtain a significant inversion effect with
normal faces that can be eliminated entirely by disrupting
both sources of configural information in the scrambled
faces. This is consistent with our hypothesis that
participants when presented with scrambled faces in an
upright orientation would have no applicable expertise for
those upright faces. Thus, when the same scrambled faces
are presented in an inverted orientation, participants would
not suffer any loss of expertise, as there was none to start
with. Hence, we do not observe any inversion effect with
scrambled faces. This supports the idea that the inversion
effect observed with normal faces can at least in part be

1420

explained by our ability to exploit configural information
for categories of stimuli that possess both the necessary
structure and are sufficiently familiar. If this structure is
disrupted, then so is the inversion effect.
The ERP results provide neural correlates of our
behavioral findings. In particular, in the study phase where
participants were only asked to look at the faces and try to
memorize them, analyses on both the amplitude and latency
of the N170 gave a larger inversion effect for normal faces
than for scrambled faces, and this result was highly
significant for the latencies. Running the same planned
comparisons on the ERP data as used for the behavioral data
produces a very similar pattern of results, i.e. a strong
inversion effect for the normal faces, none for the scrambled
faces. However, If we study the waveforms that are timelocked to stimulus onset, then the new finding here is that
both upright and inverted scrambled stimuli elicited a
similar N170 to that for normal upright stimuli. This
presents us with something of a mismatch with the
behavioral patterns of results. According to the literature on
face inversion and the N170, the ability to use configural
information facilitates face processing, and this is supported
by our behavioral results. The loss of configural information
on inversion could have resulted in a selective amplification
of the neural activity linked to faces because of an increase
in difficulty due to a decrease in expertise for those faces
presented in an inverted orientation (de Haan et al., 2002;
Eimer, 2000; Tanaka & Curran, 2001;Rossion et al., 2002).
In favor of this hypothesis is the correspondence between
the behavioral data for the effects of inversion on normal
faces and N170 for normal faces. This can also explain the
lack of an inversion effect for the scrambled faces.
Participants do not have expertise for these latter stimuli,
thus the level of difficulty in processing them whether
upright or inverted is the same leading to a similar N170 for
both. However, according to this hypothesis we should
have expected to obtain a larger and delayed N170 for
scrambled faces compared to the N170 for normal upright
faces and we did not. Instead, they are more similar to the
N170 for normal upright faces.
Our results do agree with ERP studies using normal
upright faces and familiar objects such as shoes or houses or
chairs, in which it was found that the N170 elicited for these
objects was more similar to that for normal upright faces.
We can contrast this with the result obtained by Rossion et
al(2000), which compared the N170 elicited by a novel
class of stimuli called Greebles which shared a common
configuration to that obtained with faces and found it to be
more like the N170 to inverted faces. This may suggest that
our study may suffer from a lack of a correct baseline. Our
scrambled stimuli were constructed by shuffling at random
each of the features presented within a face. If our normal
faces could be represented by a prototype, this was not the
case for our scrambled faces, which instead varied a great
deal in configuration because of the many different ways we
shuffled the features within the face. It may be that our
results show that participants perceived those scrambled

stimuli as many different types of object rather than as a set
of new stimuli that could be represented by a prototype and
shared a new configuration.

Conclusion
In conclusion further research will be needed to evaluate
the full implications of our results, but our data clearly
suggest that there is a role for both first and second order
structure in face recognition, that we argue can be
understood in terms of experience-based expertise. And we
have also shown that the elimination of the FIE can be
correlated with a reduction of differences in neural activity
in the N170.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper was supported by a
Postgraduate studentship and an Exeter Graduate
Fellowship awarded to Ciro Civile.

References
Bell, A. J, & Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). An information–
maximization approach to blind separation and blind
deconvolution. Neural Computation, 7, 1129-59.
de Haan, M., Pascalis, O., & Johnson, M.H. (2002).
Specialization of neural mechanisms underlying face
recognition in human infants. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14, 199-209.
Civile, C., R.P. McLaren., and I.P.L. McLaren (2011).
Perceptual learning and face recognition: Disruption of
second order relational information reduces the face
inversion effect. In L.Carlson, C.Hoelscher, & T. Shipley
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive
Science
Society
(2083-2088).
Austin,
TX:Cognitive Science Society.
Diamond, R. & Carey, S. (1986). Why faces are and are
not special: An effect of expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 115, 107-117.
Eimer, M. (2000). The face-specific N170 component
reflects late stages in the structural encoding of faces.
NeuroReport, 11, 2319-2324.
McLaren, I.P.L(1997). Categorization and perceptual
learning: An analogue of the face inversion effect. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 50A (2),.
257-273.
Rossion, B., Delvenne, J., Debatisse, D., Goffaux, V.,
Bruyer, R., Crommelinck, M., Guerit, M. (1999). SpatioTemporal localization of the face inversion effect: an eventrelated potentials study. Biological Psychology 50, 173-189.
Rossion, B., Gauthier, I., Goffaux, V., Tarr, M.-J.,
Crommelinck, M. (2002). Expertise training with novel
objects leads to face-like electrophysiological responses.
Psychological Science, 13, 250-257
Tanaka JW, Curran T. A neural basis for expert object
recognition Psychol Sci. 2001 Jan 12(1):43-7.
Yin, R. K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145.

1421

