UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Specificity of Online Variation in Speech Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mz1d1tx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kirov, Christo
Wilson, Colin

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Specificity of Online Variation in Speech Production
Christo Kirov(kirov@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Colin Wilson (colin@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA
Abstract

Interestingly, offline phonetic enhancement effects seem
to be rather general: they appear to depend only on the
(frequency-weighted) density of a word’s neighborhood, not
on the precise phonological relationships between the word
and its neighbors. For example, Scarborough (2004) found
that words that were particularly confusable by their nasal
consonant (i.e., had one or more lexical neighbors that differed in the position of the nasal) did not show greater
vowel nasalization than words that were not similarly confusable. Words like stem, with minimal pair neighbor step,
showed similar levels of nasalization as words like plank,
with no nasal-differing neighbors in the lexicon. Similarly,
Goldinger & Summers (1989) found more VOT enhancement
for voiceless-initial words from dense neighborhoods than
those from sparse neighborhoods, even though both sets of
words had exactly one minimal pair lexical neighbor that began with a voiced sound. The generality of offline phonetic
enhancement suggests that it is driven by competition among
entire lexical items, not among sublexical units.
Unlike offline effects, online effects on phonetic realization by definition depend on the context in which a word is
uttered, such as the discourse topic, transitional probabilities
conditioned on preceding material, and other contextuallysalient words. A classic online effect is the Lombard Reflex, a set of vocal changes that include increases in amplitude and pitch that occur when speakers attempt to talk over
noise (Lau, 2008; Zhao & Jurafsky, 2009). More recently, a
number of corpus-based studies have found that the contextual predictability of speech elements, including phonemes
and syllables, is inversely related to their length. Less predictable elements tend to be longer (e.g., Cohen-Priva & Jurafsky 2008, Aylett & Turk 2004, van Son & Pols 2003).
This paper aims to expand our understanding of online
phonetic enhancement effects, looking not just at predictability effects but at how a word’s phonological neighborhood in
context — the sound structure of contextually salient competitors — affects phonetic realization along several dimensions of possible hyperarticulation. This will provide further
insight into how competition between similar words plays out
during speech production. In previous work, Baese-Berke
& Goldrick (2009) found that VOT is lengthened when a
voiceless-stop initial word is pronounced in the context of
a voiced-initial neighbor (in comparison to the context of
a phonologically unrelated filler word). For example, cot
shows increased initial VOT in the context of got, but not in

Phonetic variation is sensitive to lexical properties of words,
such as frequency and neighborhood density, as well as contextual properties, such as predictability. Previous studies of
lexically-induced variation have observed that both vowels and
consonants are phonetically enhanced in words from dense
neighborhoods, and have suggested that this effect is modulated only by the number and frequency of the neighbors.
To determine whether contextual variation is driven by cognitive processes similar to those underlying lexical enhancement,
three experiments examined the effect of contextually salient
neighbors on the phonetic realization of vowels and initial
consonant aspiration. Enhancement was found only for consonants, and only when the neighbor differed from the target
word in a single feature. Unlike lexical effects, contextuallydriven phonetic enhancement reflects a highly specific competition among words, a finding that can be rationalized in terms
of the utility of speaker effort within a Bayesian model of word
communication.
Keywords: Speech production; lexical competition; communication; Bayesian modeling

Introduction
Competition among alternatives, and the need to resolve competition efficiently and correctly, are pervasive in speech perception and speech production (e.g., Luce & Pisoni 1998,
Marslen-Wilson & Zwitserlood 1989, Dell & Gordon 2003).
Listeners must determine the speaker’s intended message as
rapidly as possible given an inherently ambiguous signal. In
speech production, words and sublexical units that are partially consistent with the intended message compete for realization at multiple levels of processing. A number of studies
have examined how such competitive processes are reflected
in the fine-grained phonetic realization of speech sounds.
The number and relative frequency of phonologicallysimilar words in the lexicon (lexical neighbors) are known
to affect phonetic realization. We refer to such affects as offline because they appear to depend on relatively static lexical relationships among words rather than dynamic contextual factors. Researchers have found that “hard” words, those
with low lexical frequency and many high frequency neighbors, tend to be phonetically enhanced relative to “easy”
words with high frequency and few neighbors. Hard words
beginning with aspirated consonants have longer aspiration
(as measured by voice onset time, VOT) than easy words
(Goldinger & Summers, 1989). They are pronounced with an
expanded vowel space (Munson & Solomon, 2004; Wright,
2003), and also show increased vowel nasalization and vowelto-vowel coarticulation (Scarborough, 2004).

587

the context of fan.
Baese-Berke & Goldrick additionally put forward the
claim that this online enhancement of VOT, and perhaps online enhancement effects in general, have the same underlying
cognitive mechanism as the offline enhancement effects reviewed earlier. If this hypothesis were true, we would expect
offline and online effects to be empirically parallel. In particular, we would expect to find an online analogue of every
offline effect. Baese-Berke & Goldrick’s VOT enhancement
effect mirrors that found offline by Goldinger & Summers
(1989), providing partial support of the hypothesis. However,
to our knowledge researchers have yet to investigate online
analogues of other offline effects, including vowel space expansion and vowel nasalization.
Furthermore, if offline and online phonetic variation are
driven by the same processes of cognitive competition, we
would expect the generality of offline effects to be found in
online enhancement as well. Just as offline VOT enhancement does not seem to be modulated by the specific phonological structure of a word’s lexical neighbors, online VOT
enhancement should not be affected by the sound structure of
the words that have become salient in the speech discourse.
That is, any type of neighbor that is active in the speech
context should induce online enhancement. Baese-Berke &
Goldrick (2009) investigated only contextually salient neighbors of one kind, namely those differing in the voicing of the
initial consonant, and consequently the results of that study
cannot determine whether online competition is general or
specific.
We examined this issue in three experiments, and found
that online phonetic enhancements differ from offline effects
in two significant respects. Most importantly, online effects appear to be sensitive to the phonological properties of
words in the local discourse. Only competitors that have particular phonological relations with the target word — relations defined by word position and segmental makeup — induce online hyperarticulation. We show that these results are
predicted if speakers expend the effort involved in phonetic
enhancement only when that could contribute to listeners’
recognition accuracy, assuming a Bayesian model of word
recognition.

Speaker's Screen

Listener's Screen

CAP

CAP

GAP

FILL

Speaker says highlighted word.

GAP

FILL

Listener clicks on heard word.

Figure 1: Experimental paradigm.
the target word becomes highlighted on the speaker’s screen,
who then produces it aloud. At this point, the listener clicks
the word that was heard — the same word produced by the
speaker, if communication is successful. The speaker’s pronunciation of the target is recorded and analyzed acoustically
after the experiment. The experimental setup is illustrated
in Figure 1. This paradigm has the advantage of being able
to precisely control a target word’s “context” (the neighbors
that appear on-screen with it) and including motivation for
the speakers to communicate clearly, as they are made aware
if the listener fails to select the target word.

Experiment 1: Online Vowel Space Expansion
If online effects have the same underlying cause as offline
effects, we expect to find an online vowel expansion effect
mirroring the offline effect found (e.g., Munson & Solomon
2004). To test this hypothesis, we presented target words in
the context of neighbors that differed from the target only in
the vowel position. A condition where the same targets were
presented with unrelated filler words was used as a baseline
for comparison.
Table 1: Table of conditions for Experiment 1.
Target Vowel Filler
CAT
KIT
DOLL
Following previous work on vowel space dispersion, the
dependent acoustic variable measured was the Euclidean distance of each target vowel from the center of each subject’s
vowel space (defined as the subject’s mean F1 and F2 formant values). Participants (N=18) produced each of 16 target
words in each condition. Target position on screen was counterbalanced across speakers. Order of conditions for a given
target was also counterbalanced to avoid confounds with repetition effects. Results were analyzed using linear mixed results regression (lme4) in R, with condition as a fixed effect and subject and target item as random effects. Results
are summarized in Table 2; p-values were obtained using
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (pMCMC). There was no significant effect of onscreen neighbor on vowel space dispersion in
comparison to onscreen filler words, suggesting that there is

Experiments
All experiments used an experimental paradigm adapted
from Baese-Berke & Goldrick (2009). The goal behind the
paradigm is to simulate a situation where a speaker must accurately communicate a word to a listener even though contextually salient competitor words provide opportunities for
miscommunication. The paradigm involves two participants,
one playing the role of speaker and the other the role of listener. Each participant sits at a separate computer terminal,
which is not visible to the other participant. In each trial of
the experiment, two or more words appear on both screens:
a target word along with competitor words that are sometimes neighbors of the target. After approximately 1000ms,

588

Baese-Berke & Goldrick (2009) found VOT lengthening in
the initial segment of a target word presented with an onscreen neighbor differing in the voicing of its initial segment.
This experiment tested to see if any kind of neighbor can induce this enhancement effect, as might be expected if online
effects lack specificity in the way that offline effects do. Target words were presented in the context of neighbors that
differed only in onset (a replication of the Baese-Berke &
Goldrick study using voice-differing neighbors), vowel, or
coda positions. Different neighbor types were matched for
frequency (pairwise paired t-tests, all p > 0.3).

Onset

t
2.570
0.043
0.675

Coda

Filler

95
90
85

84.1

85.0

86.8

86.0

85.3 85.6

84.7

80

Average VOT (ms)

85.4

76.3
73.9
72.5

70

73.5

k

p

t

Figure 3: Experiment 2: VOT broken down by target onset
phoneme and condition.

Experiment 3: Featural Specificity of Online VOT
Enhancement

Table 4: Experiment 2: Statistical results.
SE
0.80555
0.80555
0.80555

Vowel

Onset
Vowel
Coda
Filler

75

Participants (N=24) produced each of 48 target words
twice in one of the four conditions, so that each word appeared in all conditions every four subjects. Results are
shown in Figure 2 and Table 4. Only onset-differing neighbors appear to cause a significant VOT enhancement effect
over fillers. This result suggests that online enhancement effects depend at least on position-level sublexical processing
and are thus more specific than offline effects.

Coeff
2.07000
0.03449
0.54367

81.0

Figure 2: Experiment 2: Comparison of mean VOT across
experimental conditions.

Table 3: Table of conditions for Experiment 2.
Target Onset Vowel Coda Filler
CAP
GAP
CUP
CAT DOLL

Condition
Onset Neighbor
Vowel Neighbor
Coda Neighbor

81.5
81.0

78

Experiment 2: Positional Specificity of Online VOT
Enhancement

82.9

80

Average VOT (ms)

Table 2: Experiment 1: Statistical results.
Condition
Coeff
SE
t
p
Vowel Neighbor 1.707 10.696 0.160 < 0.8732

82

84

86

no online analogue to offline vowel space dispersion effects.
This provides evidence that online and offline effects do not
share the same underlying cause.

p
< 0.0102∗
< 0.9659
< 0.4998

Interestingly, the effects found seem to be limited to the
first production of each target word. Second productions
show no VOT difference across conditions, suggesting a
strong effect of repetition in this experiment. Furthermore,
as shown in Figure 3, the effects found are limited to cases
when the target word begins with /p/ or /t/. This may be due
to a ceiling effect associated with the /k/-initial targets used
in the experiment, as /k/-initial words are known to have long
base VOTs that participants may find it difficult to lengthen
further.

The goal of this follow-up experiment, consisting of two
subexperiments, was to determine if online VOT enhancement involves an even lower level of sublexical processing.
In particular, we tested to see if only certain kinds of onset
neighbors can induce VOT enhancement. In the first subexperiment, we looked for an enhancement effect in the context
of place-differing neighbors. Different neighbor types were
matched for frequency (pairwise paired t-test, p > 0.8).
Table 5: Table of conditions for Experiment 3A.
Target Voice Place Filler
CAP
GAP
TAP DOLL
Participants (N=22) produced each of 33 target words

589

90

twice in one of the three conditions. Results are shown in
Figures 4 and 5 and Table 6. There is a significant VOT enhancement effect of place neighbors, and the effect is consistent across /p/, /t/, and /k/-initial targets.

Place
Voice
Filler

83.9

83.5 83.8
82.3

75

Table 6: Experiment 3A: Statistical results.
Condition
Coeff
SE
t
p
Voice Neighbor 2.1361 0.9329 2.290 < 0.0222∗
Place Neighbor 1.8506 0.9333 1.983 < 0.0476∗

80

Average VOT (ms)

85

86.6
85.6

76.5
75.7

It is interesting that the VOT of /p/ lengthens in the context of /k/ and /t/, given that /k/ and /t/ tend to have longer
average VOT that /p/, and thus VOT lengthening might make
/p/ initial words more similar to their competitors. However,
aspiration also contains spectral cues for place of articulation (e.g., labial /p/ vs. coronal /t/ or dorsal /k/; (Suchato &
Punyabukkana, 2005)), and lengthening VOT may strengthen
these cues .

70

73.6

k

t

Figure 5: Experiment 3A: VOT broken down by target onset
phoneme and condition.

82

84

86

Table 7: Table of conditions for Experiment 3B.
Target
Voice
Manner Filler
PUN
BUN
FUN
DOLL
KILT
GUILT
HILT
DOLL
TEEM DEEM SEEM DOLL

81.9

by target onset (Figure 7) indicates that there is an enhancement effect for /p/ onsets in the context of /f/ initial neighbors (p < 0.0225). Since /p/ is likely more similar to /f/ than
/k/ is to /h/ (differing in a major place feature) or /t/ is to
/s/ (differing in stridency)1 , it may be that online VOT enhancement may only occur in the context of neighbors that
are sufficiently similar to the target word — about one major
phonological feature away.2

82.0

80

Average VOT (ms)

p

78

79.9

Place

Voice

Filler

Figure 4: Experiment 3A: Comparison of mean VOT across
experimental conditions.

Table 8: Experiment 3B: Statistical results.
Condition
Voice Neighbor
Manner Neighbor

In the second subexperiment we looked for an effect of
neighbors differing in the manner of the onset. We attempted
to choose neighbors that differed minimally from the targets
with respect to manner, but were constrained by the phoneme
inventory of English. The /p/-initial targets were paired with
/f/-initial neighbors, which differ in manner and a minor place
feature (labial vs. labiodental); /t/-initial targets were paired
with /s/-initial neighbors, which differ in manner and stridency; and /k/-initial neighbors were paired with /h/-initial
neighbors, which differ in both manner and place. Different
neighbor types were matched for frequency (pairwise paired
t-test, p > 0.8).
Participants (N=22) produced each of 36 target words
twice in one of the three counterbalanced conditions. Results are shown in Figures 6 and 7 and Table 8. There appears to be no overall significant effect of manner neighbors
on VOT enhancement. However, the breakdown of the results

Coeff
3.2236
1.4489

SE
0.9293
0.9293

t
3.469
1.559

p
< 0.0005
< 0.1192

Explaining Online Variation as
Listener-Orientation: Modeling Speech
Perception
It has been hypothesized that language is designed to facilitate effective communication between speakers and listeners
1 Although /p/ and /f/ tend to pattern together as a natural class
more often than /k/ and /h/ or /t/ and /s/, the effects found might not
be due to their apparent similarity; instead, they may be a property
of /p/-initial targets. It is difficult to disentangle this question using
English stimuli, since another stop/fricative pair as similar as /p/ and
/f/ does not exist in the phoneme inventory.
2 All of the place neighbors in experiment 3A differ from the target in just one place feature.

590

80

79.7
78.0
75

76.6

P(Wt |S) =

Manner

Voice

Filler

P(S|Wt ) = ∑ P(S|PPti )

Figure 6: Experiment 3B: Comparison of mean VOT across
experimental conditions.

i

90

Unlike Shortlist B, the present model does not assume a fixed
amount of time per phoneme (see also Scharenborg, 2009).
P(S|PPt ) can be broken down into a sum over possible segmentations (SS) of the signal into phonemes.
P(S|PPt ) = ∑ P(SSi )

86.3

i

80

83.4
81.4
79.7

The likelihood that a particular phoneme generated a portion
of the signal in a segmentation is a function specified for the
model, and is intended to be empirically realistic (e.g., the
likelihood that a voiced phoneme like /g/ generated a large
amount of of aspiration is low).
As an example, the model can be used to simulate the results found in Experiment 2. It receives input incrementally
in 5ms frames, each containing one feature: C for closure,
A for aspiration, and V for vowel (e.g. gap would be represented as [CAAAV...C]). In addition, the model only needs to
distinguish between a target word and its on-screen competitor, resulting in a collapsed prior distribution over words (e.g.
P(cap) = P(gap) = 0.5). Simulation using this model indicate that when the target word is cap and it is pronounced in
the context of gap, the ratio of posterior probabilities monotonically improves in its favor as VOT increases.
Overall, the model has certain formal properties that make
it suitable for explaining the experimental results presented.
First, the posterior odds in favor of a target word can’t be
improved by hyperarticulating those parts of the word that
are identical to its competitors. Doing this would equally
increase the likelihood that the signal was generated by
the target and it’s competitor. Second, the improvement
in posterior odds gained by hyperarticulating the differing
parts of the target is minimal if the target and its competitor are not sufficiently similar to each other, since in that
case the likelihood that the competitor generated the signal, P(signal|competitor), remains near zero throughout the
recognition process, and consequently so does the competitor’s posterior probability. In other words, if the target and
competitor are different enough it would take a signal that is

79.4

75
70

Average VOT (ms)

85

Manner
Voice
Filler

83.6

70.7

71.2

65

67.0

k

P(S|Wt )P(Wt )
∑i P(S|Wi )P(Wi )

The likelihood function P(S|Wt ) is equal to the likelihood that
some prefix of the sequence of phonemes that make up the
word (PPt ) generated the signal seen so far:

70

Average VOT (ms)

85

given noisier input. It is this ratio of posterior probabilities
that expresses the concept of competition between alternatives in the model.
The posterior probability of each possible input word (Wt )
is equivalent to the likelihood that the word generated the signal seen so far (S), multiplied by the prior probability of the
word, divided by the total probability of the signal being generated by any word:

p

t

Figure 7: Experiment 3B: VOT broken down by target onset
phoneme and condition.

(e.g., Lindblom 1990, Genzel & Charniak 2002, Levy 2006,
Jaeger 2010, Frank 2008). This suggests that speakers may
alter their speech in an effort to aid the recognition accuracy
and speed of listeners.
This section presents a preliminary computational model
of speech perception intended to help explain the specificity
of online hyperarticulatory effects by allowing a comparison
of the efficacy of different speech modifications in aiding listeners. The model is an extension of Norris’s Shortlist B
(Norris & McQueen, 2008). It assumes that word recognition
is a Bayesian process (Norris & McQueen, 2008; Feldman,
Morgan, & Griffiths, 2009) that modifies a posterior distribution over possible input words as an acoustic signal unfolds.
The word with maximum posterior probability after a certain
amount of input is recognized. The ratio of the recognized
word’s probability to that of its competitors determines how
robust the match is — how likely it is to remain error-free

591

very unlikely to have been generated by the target for it to be
even slightly likely to have been generated by the competitor.
Together, these two properties predict the specificity of online
effects found experimentally. Speakers only seem to hyperarticulate when there is sufficient utility gained from the extra
effort (Lindblom, 1990).

sociation for computational linguistics (ACL) (p. 199-206).
Philadelphia.
Goldinger, S., & Summers, W. V. (1989). Lexical neighborhoods in speech production: A first report. In Research on
Speech Percetion Progress Report (p. 331-342). Bloomington.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology, 61, 23-62.
Lau, P. (2008). The Lombard Effect as a communicative
phenomenon (Tech. Rep.). UC Berkeley.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2006). Speakers optimize information density through syntactic reduction. In NIPS (Vol. 19,
p. 849-856).
Lindblom, B. (1990). Explaining phonetic variation: a
sketch of the H&H theory. In W. Hardcastle & A. Maschal
(Eds.), Speech Production and Speech Modeling (p. 403439). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken
words: The neighborhood activativation model. Ear and
Hearing, 19, 1-36.
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Zwitserlood, P. (1989). Accessing
spoken words: The importance of word onsets. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 15, 576-585.
Munson, B., & Solomon, N. P. (2004). The effect of phonological neighborhood density on vowel articulation. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 10481058.
Norris, D., & McQueen, J. M. (2008). Shortlist B: A
Bayesian model of continuous speech recognition. Psychological Review, 115(2), 357-395.
Scarborough, R. A. (2004). Coarticulation structure and the
lexicon. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, UCLA.
Scharenborg, O. (2009). Using durational cues in a computational model of spoken-word recognition. In INTERSPEECH (p. 1675-1678).
Son, R. van, & Pols, L. C. (2003). How efficient is speech?
In ICPhS (Vol. 25, p. 171-184).
Suchato, A., & Punyabukkana, P. (2005). Factors in classification of stop consonant place of articulation. In INTERSPEECH (p. 2969-2972).
Wright, R. (2003). Factors of lexical competition in vowel
articulation. In J. Local, R. Ogden, & R. Temple (Eds.),
Phonetic Interpretation: Papers in Laboratory Phonology
VI (p. 75-87). Cambridge University Press.
Zhao, Y., & Jurafsky, D. (2009). The effect of lexical
frequency and Lombard Reflex on tone hyperarticulation.
Journal of Phonetics, 37(2), 231-247.

Conclusions and Future Research
In summary, the experiments presented here indicate that offline and online effects of phonetic enhancement may not
share the same underlying mechanisms. Not all offline effects appear to have online analogues, as evidenced by the
apparent lack of a significant online vowel space expansion
effect. In addition, online effects appear to be more specific
than offline effects. Online enhancement can be caused only
by neighbors in the speech context that are minimally different from the target word (differing by approximately one
phonological feature). These findings are compatible with a
system in which speakers attempt to aid listener comprehension, with a Bayesian model of word recognition indicating
which speech changes are helpful and which aren’t.
However, the latter finding opens the possibility that vowels may indeed be subject to online hyperarticulation in principle, but that Experiment 1 did not include competitors that
were similar enough to induce this effect. In particular, the
vowel neighbors used in the experiment were not controlled
to be minimally different from the vowels in the target words
(in terms of backness and height features). Experiments 2 and
3 suggest that minimal difference is essential for inducing
online effects, and future experiments will explore whether
online vowel enhancement can be induced by minimallydifferent vowel neighbors.

References
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: A functional explanation for relashionships between redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in
spontaneous speech. Language and Speech, 47(1), 31-56.
Cohen-Priva, U., & Jurafsky, D. (2008, April). Phone information content influences phone duration. In Conference
on prosody and language processing.
Dell, G. S., & Gordon, J. K. (2003). Neighbors in the lexicon:
Friends or foes? In N. O. Schiller & A. S. Meyer (Eds.),
Phonetics and phonology in language comprehension and
production: Differences and similarities (p. 9-39). Mouton,
New York.
Feldman, N. H., Morgan, J. L., & Griffiths, T. L. (2009). The
influence of categories on perception: Explainng the perceptual magnet effect as optimal statistical inference. Psychological Review, 116(4), 752-782.
Frank, A. F., & Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Speaking rationally:
Uniform information density as an optimal strategy for language production. In CogSci (Vol. 30, p. 939-944).
Genzel, D., & Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy in
text. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the as-

592

