UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The inductive potential of religion categories in Northern Ireland

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4mj4w3pz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Smyth, Kirsty
Pendergrast, Conor
Feeney, Aidan
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Inductive Potential of Religion Categories in Northern Ireland
Kirsty Smyth (ksmyth26@qub.ac.uk)
Conor Pendergrast (cpendergrast01@qub.ac.uk)
Aidan Feeney (a.feeney@qub.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Queen’s University Belfast
University Road, Belfast BT7 1NN, Northern Ireland

John D. Coley (j.coley@neu.edu)
R. Cole Eidson (eidson.r@husky.neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University
360 Huntington Ave., MS 0125 NI
Boston, MA 02115-5000

Ulrike Niens (u.niens@qub.ac.uk)
School of Education, Queen’s University Belfast
69/71 University Street, Belfast BT7 1HL, Northern Ireland

time (Demoulin, Leyens & Yzerbyt, 2006; Gelman, 2003).
Essentialist reasoning has been found very early in
childhood; preschoolers make category-based inferences
even when perceptual similarity conflicts with categorymembership (Gelman & Markman, 1986).
According to Gelman (2003) inductive inference is an
indirect measure of essentialism; the more a category is
essentialised, the greater inductive potential it will have.
Although there is a very large social psychological literature
on essentialised social categories (e.g. Haslam, Bastian,
Bain & Kashima, 2006), there has been relatively little work
on how we make inductive inferences from social
categories. In this paper we will describe a large
developmental study designed to investigate the inductive
potential of religious categories in Northern Ireland.

Abstract
People often behave as if category members share an essence,
and essentialising a category in this way promotes inductive
inference. Although natural kind categories have been
predominantly studied, some social categories are
essentialised and here we consider the inductive potential of
religion categories for children in Northern Ireland. We asked
seven-, nine- and eleven-year olds in Catholic-maintained,
State-controlled and Integrated schools to decide whether
pairs of children shared a property. We manipulated the
degree of shared membership in religion, gender and musical
categories. Overall, religion was much more inductively
potent than gender, although older children and children from
the Catholic-maintained school were more likely to use
additional information about other categories when evaluating
inferences. These results suggest that religion categories are a
powerful basis for inference even in children as young as
seven-years, and that religion categories may be essentialised
in Northern Ireland.

Essentialised Social Categories

Keywords: Essentialism, inductive reasoning, category-based
induction, cognitive development

Introduction
One of the central functions of categories is to support
inductive inference (see Murphy, 2004). For example,
knowing that someone is a member of the Rotary Club may
help us to predict their behavior on the basis of previous
encounters with other members of that category. The
strength of an inductive inference from one member of a
category to another is, in part, determined by the degree to
which the category is essentialised. Members of
essentialised categories are believed to share an underlying,
unobservable essence (Gelman, 2003; Medin & Ortony,
1989), which we often can’t define, and so is sometimes
thought of as a place holder (Medin & Ortony, 1989).
Essentialised categories are assumed to have innate
potential, fixed boundaries, deep causal properties, the
capacity to be informative, and stable membership across

Evidence is accumulating to suggest that children
essentialise
certain
socially-constructed
categories
(Birnbaum et al., 2010; Deeb et al., 2011; Diesendruck &
haLevi, 2006; Gil-White, 2001; Hirschfeld, 1995; Kinzler &
Dautel, 2012; Rhodes & Gelman, 2009; Taylor et al, 2009).
Perhaps of most relevance to our goal of investigating
religion categories is previous work on race and ethnicity.
The degree to which race categories are essentialised has
been studied in a number of ways. For example, Deeb et al.
(2011, Study 3) presented Arab and Jewish participants with
a questionnaire designed to investigate children’s
essentialised beliefs about such categories, whereas Rhodes
and Gelman (2009) asked children whether categorization
decisions made by an alien, most of which were inconsistent
with the participants’ social categories, were correct.
Kinzler and Dautel (2012) asked participants whether a
target child’s ‘race’ or the language they spoke was most
likely to persist into adulthood.
Although different methodologies lead to different
conclusions about the developmental trajectory of

2351

essentialist beliefs about race categories, it is clear that
culture plays a role. For example, Rhodes and Gelman
(2009) observed an effect of whether adolescents were from
a rural or an urban background on how likely they were to
treat ‘race’ as a natural kind. Deeb et al. (2011) showed that
although essentialist beliefs about race categories appear to
recede by late childhood, culture and experience play a role
in determining the age at which they first begin to wane.
Kinzler & Dautel (2012) found that European-American
children do not treat ‘race’ as more predictive than language
until the age of 10; whereas 5 year old African-American
children privilege ‘race’ over language.
Other studies have examined the inductive potency of race
categories. For example, Hirschfeld (1995) showed that
children as young as three found race categories more
inductively powerful than occupation or body build
categories. In a study conducted in Israel with Jewish and
Arab children, Diesendruck and haLevi (2006) compared
the inductive potential of personality traits and a variety of
social categories including ethnicity and gender. They
found that five-year-old children treated social categories as
having more inductive potential than personality traits,
while adults found personality traits more powerful.
However, when the children and adults made inductive
inferences based on social categories only, ethnicity had the
greatest inductive potential for both groups. Birnbaum et al.
(2010) showed that ethnicity categories (Arab vs. Jew) had
the most inductive potential for religious Jewish children by
age 5 and up until 11 years of age. Birnbaum et al’s study
also highlights the effect of culture as neither secular Jewish
children nor Arab children showed the same effect.

Religion Categories
In this study we examined the development of sensitivity to
the religious categories, Catholic and Protestant, in
Northern Ireland. We are by no means the first to study the
psychological effects of the history of sectarian conflict
between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland (for a
relevant reviews see Trew, 2004). However, a study of the
inductive potency of religion categories in Northern Ireland
has the potential to add significantly to our understanding of
essentialised social categories. Most obviously, whereas
there are visual cues to racial or gender category
membership, there are no such cues for religion category
membership in Northern Ireland. Gil-White (2001) has
suggested that essentialised social categories possess visual
cues to category membership. In seeking to establish that
social categories for which there are no visual cues can be
highly inductively potent, our work will be a test of that
hypothesis.
In addition, given the link that has been found between
essentialism and stereotyping, prejudice and negative
intergroup relations (e.g. Haslam, Bastian, Bain & Kashima,
2006; Howell, Welkum & Dyck, 2011; Pauker et al, 2010;
Prentice & Miller, 2007), any tendency to essentialise
religion categories may have important social implications
for individuals in Northern Irish society. A review by

Prentice and Miller (2007) highlighted how essentialist
beliefs, such as innate potential, immutability of category
membership, stability of category membership over time,
and the belief that deep, hidden properties of a category give
rise to its observable properties can lead individuals to
stereotype another group, feel less inclined to attempt to
cross category boundaries that are apparently immutable,
and maintain prejudicial attitudes towards an outgroup. All
of these consequences of essentialised thinking could be
said to pertain in Northern Ireland, yet there has been no
study of how religion-category-based reasoning develops.

The Current Study
This study aimed to examine the inductive potential of
religion categories for seven-, nine-, and eleven-year-old
children in Northern Ireland. The lower age group has been
selected because of findings that by six to seven years of
age, Catholic and Protestant, are meaningful social labels
for children (Trew, 2004). Our first concern was the extent
to which children are prepared to base inferences about
individuals on information about the social categories to
which they belong, and how that tendency changes over
development. However, we were also concerned with the
effects of the environment on inference-making from
religion categories. One obvious environmental difference
between Northern Irish children is the kind of school that
they attend as in Northern Ireland there are different types
of school: state-controlled (often attended primarily by
children from a Protestant background); Catholicmaintained (attended primarily by children from a Catholic
background); and integrated (attended by children from both
communities). So as to examine effects of educational
environment on inferences, we included school type as a
variable in the study.
On each trial of our task we showed participants a line
drawing of a child said to be a member of two categories,
for example a male Protestant. Next we told participants that
the child possessed a blank property (e.g. likes to play a
game called badlage), and asked them whether they thought
another male Protestant, a male Catholic, a female
Protestant, and a female Catholic would also possess the
feature. Unlike standard triad tasks, our method does not
force participants to choose between categories as the basis
for an inference. Work on ethnic categories (Deeb et al,
2011) has shown that younger and older children
spontaneously mention and remember information about
ethnic categories or use them as the basis for inference.
Accordingly, we predicted that to the extent that religion
categories are essentialised, all of the children in this study
would base inferences on religion category membership.
Other work (Birnbaum et al, 2010) has shown that older
children take additional information into account when
making inferences. Accordingly, we predicted that with
development, children would use the control categories in
our task as an additional basis for inference. Because Deeb
et al. (2011) found that children from integrated schools
were more sensitive to ethnicity categories, we predicted

2352

that children in such schools in Northern Ireland might
show greater sensitivity to religion category somewhat
earlier in development than children attending other schools.

Method
Participants One hundred and thirty five (67 females and
68 males) primary school children in Northern Ireland
participated. Participants were aged 6-7 (P3), 8-9 (P5) and
10-11 (P7). Participants were recruited from one integrated
(33 children: 9 in P3; 10 in P5; 14 in P7); one statecontrolled (45 children: 12 in P3; 11 in P5; 22 in P7); and
one Catholic-maintained school (57 children: 18 in P3; 19 in
P5; 20 in P7). Children were tested for ten minutes each in
a quiet corner of the school.
Design The study had a 3 (School: Integrated; Statecontrolled; Catholic-maintained) x 3 (Year: P3; P5; P7) x 4
(Trial Type: both categories overlap; religion category only
overlaps; other category only overlaps; no overlap) mixed
design. Trial Type was manipulated within subjects, and
school and year were between subject variables.
On each trial participants received information about two
children’s membership in two categories. In four trials the
categories were religion and gender, in four others they
were religion and musical instrument, and in a final four
they were gender and musical instrument. There were two
religion categories, Protestant and Catholic, two gender
categories, male and female, and two musical instrument
categories, piano player and guitarist. Trials were blocked
by category pair and block order was counterbalanced.
Materials Each participant attempted 12 trials. A trial
consisted of a base picture and a target picture. The same
base picture was used for four target pictures. In one of the
base pictures, information was presented about the religion
and gender categories of the child. In another, information
was presented about religion category and which musical
instrument the child could play, and in the third base
picture, information was presented about gender and
musical instrument. The sets of four target pictures
presented with each base depicted four different children
who either shared memberships of the same two categories
as the base child, shared membership of only one of the
categories, or shared membership of neither category.
Example pictures and trials are presented in Figure 1.
In all cases information about category membership was
related orally when a picture was presented. Religion
category membership was visually represented by a picture
of a familiar Catholic or Protestant cathedral in Northern
Ireland. Gender category was clearly discriminable from the
pictures because of visual cues such as dress and hair length,
and musical instrument category was depicted by the
inclusion of a picture of a guitar or a piano. When gender
was not varied in a trial, the child was presented in
silhouette.
Three unfamiliar, novel properties were invented: ‘likes to
play a game called badlage’; ‘knows how to use a mixtle’;

‘will go brooping at the weekend’. The same property was
used for each of the trials associated with a particular base
picture, and the order in which properties were mentioned
was fixed. However, the order in which base pictures were
presented was fully counter-balanced so that each property
was presented with each base picture an equal number of
times. We also varied the base pictures so that, for example,
the base child defined by membership of a religion and a
gender category was depicted equally often as a Catholic
boy, a Catholic girl, a Protestant boy or a Protestant girl.

First, look at this child. This
child is a boy and a Catholic.
This child likes to play a game
called badlage.

Now, look at this child. This
child is a girl and a Protestant.
Do you think this child likes to
play a game called badlage?

First, look at this child. This
child is a piano player and a
Protestant. This child knows
how to use a mixtle.

Now, look at this child. This
child is a piano player and a
Catholic. Do you think this
child knows how to use a
mixtle?

Figure 1: Example stimulus materials. The top panel
illustrates how gender and religion categories were depicted.
The bottom panel illustrates how religion and musical
instrument categories were depicted.
Procedure Participants were tested individually at a quite
location in their school. On each trial participants indicated
whether the novel property was possessed by both children
or by the base child only.

Results
We present a number of different analyses of our results.
First, we present an analysis of the eight trials where
information was presented about the religion category to
which the base child belonged. In four of these trials, the
other category was gender, and in the remaining four the
other category was musical instrument. These eight trials

2353

2.0

1.5

Item x School Interaction
2.0

Catholic

*

*

Integrated

* *

*

State

*

1.5

*

1.0

*
*
0.5

0.0
Rel+/GM+

Rel+/GM-

Rel-/GM+

Rel-/GM-

Premise/Target Match

Figure 3: Interaction between school and trial type. (Bars
marked with an asterisk differ significantly from chance).

1.0

Item x Year Interaction

*
2.0

0.5

P3
P5
P7

*
*

0.0
Rel+/GM+

Rel+/GM-

Rel-/GM+

Rel-/GM-

Premise/Target Match

Figure 2: Mean rates of inference for each trial type. (Note
that here and throughout, bars marked with an asterisk differ
significantly from chance.)
An examination of Figure 3 suggests that regardless of the
type of school attended, children are more willing than not
to project properties once the base and target children share
religion category membership. However, only children
attending the Catholic-maintained school were as willing to
project properties in the REL-/GM+ condition as in the
REL+/GM- condition. These observations are supported by
t-tests comparing the mean number of properties projected
by children in each school on REL+/GM- and REL-/GM+
trials. The difference was not significant for children
attending the Catholic maintained school but was significant

2354

Mean Positive Inferences (out of two)

Mean Positive Inferences (out of two)

*

for the other two groups of children. Thus, the finding here
is of differences due to educational context in the potency of
categories other than religion.
Examination of Figure 4 suggests that something similar
underlies the significant interaction between Trial Type and
Age. Whereas religion appears to be the only inductively
potent category for seven- and nine-year-old children,
eleven-year-olds are almost as likely to project the property
in REL-/GM+ trials as in REL+/GM- trials. The results of
paired t-tests for each age group, comparing rates of

Mean Positive Inferences (out of two)

may be divided into four types. In two REL+/GM+ trials,
the base and target children belonged to the same two
categories. In two REL+/GM- trials, base and target
belonged to the same religion category, but to different
gender or musical instrument categories. In two REL-/GM+
trials, base and target belonged to different religion
categories but to the same gender or musical instrument
categories. Finally in two REL-/GM- trials, base and target
belonged to entirely different categories.
We carried out a 4(Trial Type) x 3(Year) x 3(School)
mixed design ANOVA on the number of times participants
endorsed each type of inference. As may be seen in Figure
2, the results of this analysis contained a highly significant
main effect of trial type, F(3, 378) = 56.38, p < .001. Post
hoc tests revealed that each of the means involved in this
effect differed significantly from every other mean. The
main effect was qualified by significant interactions
between School and Trial Type, F(6, 378) = 2.27, p < .05,
and between Year and Trial Type, F(6, 378) = 2.46, p < .05.
These interactions are shown in Figures 3 and 4
respectively.

*
1.5

*
*

*

*

1.0

*
*
0.5

0.0
Rel+/GM+

Rel+/GM-

Rel-/GM+

Rel-/GM-

Premise/Target Match

Figure 4: Interaction between year and trial type. (Bars
marked with an asterisk differ significantly from chance).

inference in each of these trial types, tended to support this
interpretation. It is also apparent from Figure 3 that the
oldest participants were more likely to project properties in
REL-/GM- trials, but we have no explanation for this
unexpected finding.
Thus far, we have collapsed gender and musical
instrument categories together. It is clear from the analysis
we have just described that overall, when information about
religion category membership is present, religion categories
are inductively more powerful than either musical
instrument or gender categories. However, these analyses do
not include trials where information about religion category
was not present.
To examine the relative potency of all three types of
category manipulated in this experiment, we calculated an
index for each one reflecting the number of times a property
was projected when there was overlap on that category type
or relation. For example, the Gender index included
G+/REL+, G+/REL-, G+/M+, and G+/M- trials. A
3(Relation) x 3(Year) x 3(School) mixed design ANOVA
on scores on these indices revealed a highly significant main
effect of Relation, F(2, 250) = 40.43, p < .001, and a
significant interaction between Relation and School, F(4,
250) = 3.05, p < .02. The mean score on the Religion index
(M = 3.00) was just higher than the mean score on the
Music index (M = 2.96), but not significantly so. Both of
these means were significantly higher than mean scores on
the Gender index (M = 2.21), and scores on all three indices
were significantly greater than chance (p < .005).
The interaction with School is displayed in Figure 5 where
it appears that music is more inductively potent for children
in the Catholic maintained school than is religion, whereas
these two categories are equally potent for children in the
Integrated school, and religion is more potent than music for
4.0

Catholic
Integrated

Number of Inferences (out of 4)

*

State
3.5

*
3.0

*

*

*

*
2.5

*

*

2.0
Religion

Music

Gender

Relation

Figure 5: Interaction between Relation and school. (Bars
marked with an asterisk differ significantly from chance).

children in the State controlled school. A t-test confirmed
that the difference between music and religion categories
was statistically significant for children in the Catholic
school. However, the difference between music and religion
was not significant (p = .11) for children in the Statecontrolled school. Scores on the Gender index were
significantly lower than scores on both of the other indices
for all three groups.

Discussion
These results show that by age seven, children in Northern
Ireland use religion categories—or at least the labels
Catholic and Protestant—to guide inferences about nonobvious properties. These categories promote stronger
inferences than other social categories (musicality, gender),
and do so for children across a diverse range of school
environments. Together, these findings suggest religion is
essentialised by school children in Northern Ireland.
Although religion-based inferences were universal, we
did see differences in the use of other social categories.
Specifically, the musical instrument played by a child was a
more potent guide for inferences for children in the Catholic
school than the Integrated school, and more so for the
Integrated school than the State school. Additionally,
children in the State-controlled school were less likely than
others to base inferences on gender. These findings suggest
that culture or school may emphasize certain social
categories over others, leading to differences in inductive
potential for those categories. To children in Catholicmaintained schools, information about multiple social
categories may be important, whereas to children in Statecontrolled schools, religion categories may be most salient.
An alternative explanation is that ability levels differed
between the schools, and that the use of information about
more than one category to evaluate an inference requires
additional cognitive resources. Further experimental work
will need to be carried out in order to discriminate between
these possibilities.
In addition to the universal potency of religion categories,
we observed a developmental increase in the inductive
potency of other social categories; 11-year-olds were more
likely than younger children to base inferences on shared
membership in non-religious categories. One interesting
methodological point about the pattern of results that we
have just described is that it would not have been detected
by a standard triad task. To illustrate, Birnbaum et al. (2010)
presented participants with trials where, for example, a child
was said to belong to two social categories (e.g. a male Arab
child) and participants were asked whether this base child
was more likely to share a property with a male Jewish child
or a female Arab child. Using this method, one can
underestimate the age at which a certain type of social
category begins to become important as well as the period
for which it is important. Because our method did not force
participants to choose between categories as a basis for their
inference, we were able to observe that religion categories
continued to be important at eleven-years of age but that

2355

other categories had also become more important by that
age. Had we used a triad task we might have observed a tailoff in the apparent use of religion categories by older
participants.
Of particular interest in this study is the performance of
children from the Integrated school; by virtue of their
contact with children from the “other” religious category
they might display sensitivity to religion category earlier
than children attending other schools. Deeb et al. (2011)
reported such an effect for Jewish children attending
integrated schools in Israel. We did not find an equivalent
effect of school type here, although because we did not ask
participants to disclose their religion, we cannot perform the
same analysis as Deeb et al. (2011). Perhaps Catholic and
Protestant children attending the same Integrated school
behave differently, and we are currently carrying out a study
designed, in part, to examine whether this is the case.
Consideration of children attending Integrated schools is
useful when thinking about the relationship between a
category’s inductive potency and the degree to which that
category might be essentialised. One possible relationship is
that social categories are inductively potent to the degree
that they are essentialised, as argued by Gelman (2003).
Another possibility is that a social category could be
inductively strong even when it is not strongly essentialised.
For example, Deeb et al (2011) reported a negative
correlation between scores on a questionnaire designed to
measure the extent to which children essentialise ethnic
categories, and children’s tendency to recall information
about ethnic category membership from an early
description. Participants who essentialised ethnic categories
less, recalled more information about ethnicity. This
analysis collapsed across school type, so the result may have
been driven entirely by children from the integrated sector.
In any case, the result raises the possibility that children
from different school sectors might perform similarly with
respect to religion categories on an inductive inference task,
but essentialise the categories to different extents. Members
of a society divided on religious lines may not believe that
members of the same religion category share an essence, but
may still recognize the usefulness of information about
religion category membership when making predictions
about individuals.
Thus far, our work has concerned children growing up in
a society that is still divided along religious lines. To
properly assess the inductive potency of religion categories
and the effects of culture on potency, there is a need for
cross-cultural work comparing children in Northern Ireland
to children from a society where religion is less divisive.
For example, had we run this study in such a society we
would have expected to find that gender categories are more
inductively potent for children than are religion categories.
We are currently collecting data to test this hypothesis.
We are at the beginning of a large project designed to
investigate the extent to which religion categories support
inferences differently across culture, across environment
and across development. The results we have presented here

suggest that for children developing in a culture where
religion categories are highly important, regardless of
educational environment, those categories are inductively
potent relatively early in development and continue to be so
at least until late childhood.

References
Birnbaum, D., Deeb, I., Segall, G., Ben-Eliyahu, A. &
Diesendruck, G. (2010) The development of social essentialism:
The case of Israeli children’s inferences about Jews and Arabs.
Child Development, 81, 3, 757-777.
Deeb, I., Segall, G., Birnbaum, D., Ben-Eliyahu, A. &
Diesendruck, G. (2011) Seeing isn’t believing: The effect of
intergroup exposure on children’s beliefs about ethnic
categories. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101,
6, 1139-1156.
Demoulin, S., Leyens, J. P. & Yzerbyt, V. (2006) Lay theories of
essentialism. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 9 (1),
25-42.
Diesendruck, G. & haLevi, H. (2006) The role of language,
appearance, and culture in children’s social category-based
induction. Child Development, 77, 3, 539-553.
Gelman, S. A. (2003) The essential child: Origins of essentialism
in everyday thought. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S. A. & Markman, E. M. (1986) Categories and induction
in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gil-White (2001) Are ethnic groups biological ‘species’ to the
human brain? Essentialism in our cognition of some social
categories. Current Anthropology, 42, 4, 515-554.
Haslam, N., Bastian, B., Bain, P. & Kashima, Y. (2006)
Psychological essentialism, implicit theories, and intergroup
relations. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 9 (1), 6376.
Hirschfeld, L. (1995) Do children have a theory of race?
Cognition, 54, 209-252.
Howell, A. J., Welkum, B. A., Dyck, H. L. (2011) Psychological
essentialism and its association with stigmatization. Personality
and Individual Differences, 50, 95-100.
Kinzler, K. D. & Dautel, J. B. (2012) Children’s essentialist
reasoning about language and race. Developmental Science, 15:
1, 131-138.
Medin, D. & Ortony, A. (1989) Psychological essentialism. In S.
Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical
processing (pp. 179-195). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Murphy, G. L. (2004) The big book of concepts. Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Rhodes, M. & Gelman, S. A. (2009) A developmental examination
of the conceptual structure of animal, artefact, and human social
categories across two cultural contexts. Cognitive Psychology,
59, 244-274.
Pauker, K., Ambady, N. & Apfelbaum, E. P. (2010) Race and
essentialist thinking in racial stereotype development. Child
Development, 81, 6, 1799-1813.
Prentice, D. A. and Miller, D. T. (2007) Psychological essentialism
of human categories. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 16, 4, 202-206.
Trew, K. (2004) Children and socio-cultural divisions in Northern
Ireland. Journal of Social Issues, 60, 3, 507-522.

2356

