UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Think Outside the Box: The Effects of Cognitive Training on Creative Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7cm9v5h3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ramsburg, Jared
Youmans, Robert

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Think Outside the Box:
The Effects of Cognitive Training on Creative Problem Solving
Jared T. Ramsburg (jramsb2@uic.edu)
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Psychology (MC 285)
1007 West Harrison Street
Chicago, Illinois, 60607-7137

Robert J. Youmans (ryouman2@gmu.edu)
George Mason University
Department of Psychology
4400 University Drive, MSN 3F5
Fairfax, VA 22030

Abstract
Problem solving requires the use of higher mental functions,
functions that can be improved with training (Brown, Ryan, &
Creswell, 2007). The current study examines the effects of
meditation on creative problem solving. Participants were
undergraduate students (n = 81) who were randomly assigned
to meditate or rest. Next, Pp were asked to solve a problem:
fishing out a small object from inside a box using one of four
available tools. Two of the available tools were potentially
useful, but the other two were intentionally designed to be
useless (i.e., they were incapable of retrieving the object).
There were no differences between meditators and nonmeditators with respect to solution rates, tool switching
behavior, or overall persistence. However, meditators spent
more time with their first tool that they selected, and more
time attempting to solve the task with the useful tools. Brief
meditation training may promote certain cognitive strategies
that are conducive to successful problem solving; implications
are discussed.
Keywords: problem solving; cognitive training; meditation.

Introduction
Recently, investigations have demonstrated that cognitive
training, activities designed to improve performance, selfcontrol, and brain physiology, provides an effective method
for improving a variety of higher order mental functions
including reasoning, decision-making, and task-set
switching (Basak, Boot, Voss, & Kramer, 2008; Mestre,
Dufresne, Gerace, & Hardiman, 1993; Willis et al., 2006).
Research suggests that a broad range of cognitive training
techniques is effective. Manger, Eikenland, and Asbjornsen
(2002) were able to improve the social-cognitive
functioning of female schoolchildren with a 9-month long
social-cognitive training program. Basak et al. (2008)
utilized 23.5 hours of training using a real-time strategy
video game, and found that the training improved task
switching, working memory, and reasoning. Smith et al.

(2009) found that a computerized cognitive training
program improved attention and memory of aged adults.
Indeed, these and many other studies demonstrate that
cognitive training can improve cognitive performance in a
variety of areas when used over the long term.
The study described here investigated a very specific
form of cognitive training called focused meditation, a
process where a person attempts to sustain attention on a
selected thought, detect mind wandering, and return to
focused attention. Meditation is a form of cognitive training,
and studies have demonstrated the benefits of meditation on
cognitive functions (Ramsburg & Youmans, 2011; Tang et
al., 2007; Zeidan, Johnson, Diamond, David, & Goolkasian,
2010). Meditation techniques are also relatively simple to
teach, and some research has demonstrated measurable
improvements in cognitive function even with very little
meditation experience. Ramsburg and Youmans (2011)
found that initial periods of meditation that lasted only six
minutes at the start of a class lecture improved academic
performance amongst lower division college students. Tang
et al. (2007) found that five 20-minute sessions of
meditation reliably improved attentional functioning, while
Zeidan et al. (2010) found improvements in attentional
functioning, working memory, and visuo-spatial processing
with only four sessions of meditation training.

Problem solving and meditation?
General problem solving skills involve an ability to
understand a problem, devise a plan of action, execute the
plan, and examine the results (Newell & Simon, 1972). An
important question in the problem solving literature is
whether the individual steps within the problem solving
process can be enhanced, and the answer it would seem is
‘maybe.’ For example, we know that experts in a given
domain are often superior to novices at both understanding a
problem and devising a plan of action. However, we also
know that when the rules of a domain are compromised

2222

(e.g., impossible chess positions) or when an expert in one
domain is asked to perform a task in a different domain, socalled ‘experts’ often fail to transfer their expertise between
the two domains (Ohlsson, 2011).
Although meditation has been shown to improve a variety
of cognitive functions, relatively few studies have directly
examined the influences of meditation training on problem
solving (Dillbeck, 1982; Kindler, 1979; Raingruber &
Robinson, 2007). Kindler (1979) found that group problem
solving could be improved with meditation training,
specifically, improving speed to solution and promoting
effective teamwork. Raingruber and Robinson (2007) found
using a qualitative approach that nurses engaged in
meditation training reported improvements in their problem
solving abilities, attention, and calm. These findings suggest
that meditation might be an effective method for improving
problem solving, but more study is clearly required.
If meditation were to enhance problem solving, we
hypothesize here that its influence might be most
pronounced on the actual execution of any given problem
solving strategy. Whereas expertise is likely to act on the
stages of problem solving that require accurate problem
framing (i.e., understanding problems and devising
solutions), meditation and other types of cognitive training
might have positive effects on some of the key cognitive
processes utilized while trying to execute a plan of action
during problem solving (Lutz et al., 2009; Mayer, 1992;
Tang et al., 2007; Zeidan et al., 2010). Ly and Spezio (2009)
found via fMRI that meditation could improve decisionmaking by influencing neural circuits in an enduring manner
for recruitment during the self-regulation of social cognitive
processes. Other studies have demonstrated that mediators
appear to display more conscientious decision making
(Kirk, Downar, & Read Montague, 2011), or cognitive
flexibility, a mental ability important in problem solving
(Dillbeck, 1982; So & Orme-Johnson, 2001). These and
other studies suggest a link between meditation and other
forms of cognitive training, and the cognitive functions used
during problem solving itself.
In this study, we examined the effect of meditation, a
form of cognitive training, on a real-world, creative
problem-solving task. Participants received either brief
meditation training or rest, and then attempted to solve a
novel creative problem. Although past studies have shown
only moderate training benefits on problem solving tasks
(e.g., Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2004), we hypothesized that
meditation, which has been shown to improve cognitive
functioning (So & Orme-Johnson, 2001; Tang et al., 2007)
may be an effective method for promoting creative problem
solving in general.

61 females and 20 males. Participants identified themselves
as Latino/Hispanic (45.7%), Black/African-American
(19.8%), Caucasian (19.8%), more than one race/other
(6.2%), Asian or Pacific Islander (4.9%), and Middle
Eastern (2.5%).

Problem-solving task
The researchers developed a novel creative problem-solving
task. The task was a physical problem that required the use
of unique experimenter designed tools to solve the task.
Specifically, the objective was to get a bolt out of a box and
across a red line (six and a half feet away from the box)
using the four experimenter designed tools.

Materials
Box and Bolt. The box (see Figure 1) was made using 5
½ by ¾ inch wood, a 16 inch in length, 3 inch high, and
1/16 inch thick piece of clear flexible plastic, and a 23 by 18
inch plywood base. The back face of the box measured 17 ¼
inches. The two wooded sides measured 23 inches in length.
The clear plastic front piece with red tape lining its top was
3 inches high and was glued into place 16 ½ inches from the
back side of the box, which left two 6 ¾ inch in length non
encased walls. A modified 5/8th inch lag bolt was the target
that participants were trying to retrieve. The bolt was placed
standing upright inside the box at the beginning of each
experiment. The bolt was 3 inches in length had seven 1 ¾
inch washers secured by two 5/8th inch nuts.

Figure 1. The Box with the Bolt in the Starting Position.
Claw. The claw was one of the two tools that were
capable of retrieving the bolt (see Figure 3). It consisted of
a modified metal grabber extension tool. The claw was 53 ¾
inches long. A piece of thin rope connected the “trigger” at
the handle, and the grasping claw. The grasp of the claw
was weak, making the straightforward method of using the
tool to retrieve the bolt difficult, but not impossible.

Method
Participants
Eighty-one California State University, Northridge students
participated for course credit. Participants had an average
age of 18.73 with a standard deviation of 1.32. There were

Figure 2. The Claw.

2223

Magnet. The magnet was the second tool that was
capable of retrieving the bolt (see Figure 4). It consisted of a
35 ½ inch long PVC pipe that was 1 ¼ inches in diameter
that was connected to another PVC pipe that was 12 inches
in length. The two pieces of PVC pipe were joined by a
spring that was 5/6 inch diameter and 8 inches long. A rope
was laced through the top that hung 34 ½ inches. At the end
of the rope was a 2-inch diameter magnet. The magnet was
too weak to lift the bolt outright, but it could be used to drag
the bolt. Using the magnet and loose string in combination,
it was difficult, but possible, to retrieve the bolt.

Self Report Measures. Six items administered pre and
post examined feelings of tension, ease, anxiety, selfconfidence, nervousness, and overexcitement measured on
five-point likert scales (1 = Not at all to 4 = Very Much So).
Additionally post measures for ‘how difficult was the task?’
(1 = very difficult to 5 = very easy) and ‘how frustrating
was the task?’ (1 = very frustrating to 5 = not frustrating)
were recorded.
Video Camera. A handheld digital-video camera on a
stationary platform was used to record tool switch behavior
and allow for an objective measure of time.

Design & Procedure

Figure 4. The Magnet.
Spatula. The spatula was one of two tools that were not
capable of retrieving the bolt. It consisted of a 49-inch long
piece of flexible PVC pipe that was 5/8 inches in diameter
had a plastic paint scrapper fastened to one end by three
screws (see Figure 5). The other end had a less flexible PVC
pipe that was 11 ½ inches long and 5/8 inch in diameter
attached. At each of these ends was a 23 ½ inch long PVC
pipe that would serve as the handles for the tool. The
flexibility of the tool made the tool useless.

Figure 5. The Spatula.
Ring. The ring was the second tool that was not capable of
retrieving the bolt. It consisted of a 48-inch long fiberglass
rod that was 1/8 inches in diameter where at one end of the
rod a thin rope was attached that was 44 inches in length
(see Figure 6). At the end of the rope a 4 ½ inch long heavyduty carabineer was tied; this carabineer served as the ‘ring’
that participants would use for ‘hooking’ the bolt. The shape
of the ring made the tool useless.

Figure 6. The Ring.

The study was an experimental design. Participants entered
the laboratory individually and were given consent forms to
review, after which, they were given a brief mood
questionnaire. This was followed with a 10-minute audio
recording of eyes closed guided meditation or eyes closed
rest.
Following the 10-minute training participants received
instructions for the creative problem-solving task.
Participants were informed that they would be participating
in a creative problem-solving task with the objective to
remove a bolt from a box and bringing it across a red line
using four experimenter-designed tools. Importantly,
participants had to obey the following four rules: 1) you
must stay within the red box when using a tool 2) you can
only touch the red and black parts of the tool when in use 3)
you can only use one tool at a time 4) you can switch tools
back and forth at your own discretion. Any participant that
had questions or needed clarification was given further
instruction if necessary for understanding the task and rules.
The participants were informed that the camera would be
recording tool usage. When a participant either solved the
task or quit the camera was turned off and the participant
then filled out questionnaires assessing mood, perceived
frustration of the task, perceived difficulty of the task, and
demographics information. Finally, participants were
debriefed and thanked for their time.

Results
The hypothesis was that meditation training would result in
successful completion of the task. For those that failed to
solve the task meditation would result in greater initial
persistence, overall persistence, and fewer tool switches.
Tool use behavior was also examined in order to determine
favoritism in tool usage. No significant differences were
found for mood, F < 1, frustration, F(1, 78) = 1.17, ns., or
task difficulty, F(1, 79) = 1.3, ns. The results revealed no
significant difference in success rates between meditation
(36.59%) and rest (35%), χ2 (81) = .02, ns. Overall tool
success rates were as follows: claw (20.99%), magnet
(13.58%), spatula (0%), and ring (0%; see Figure 7 for
results by condition).

2224

Solution Percentage

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Discussion
Meditation
Rest

Claw

Magnet

Ring

Shovel

Figure 7. Success rates by tools, split by condition.

Time Spent in Seconds

Of the remaining 52 participants that failed to solve the
task, 51 were used in the other analyses. One was removed
due to lost data. The meditation condition (M = 60.44
seconds, SD = 29.21) compared to the rest condition (M =
43.62 seconds, SD = 20.79) spent significantly more time
with the first tool, F(1, 49) = 5.65, p < .05. No reliable
differences were found between the meditation condition (M
= 722.64 seconds, SD = 534.2) and the rest condition (M =
790.69 seconds, SD = 539.06) for total time spent, F < 1. No
reliable differences were found between the meditation
condition (M = 7.52, SD = 3.72) and the rest condition (M =
7.73, SD = 3.52) for tool switch behavior, F < 1.
In a series of follow-up analyses, we examined tool use
behavior. Specifically, the time participants spent with the
useful tools (i.e., tools that were successfully used to solve
the task, the magnet and claw) and the useless tools (i.e.,
tools that no one could solve the task with, the spatula and
ring), in order to, determine whether participants favored the
useful over the useless tools. Post-hoc Tukey's HSD tests
showed that meditators spent more time with the useful
tools (M = 436.88 seconds, SD = 420.07) then the useless
ones (M = 227.13 seconds, SD = 227.62), p < .05, and that
resters had no reliable differences between time with the
useful tools (M = 372.82 seconds, SD = 310.02) compared
to the useless ones (M = 276 seconds, SD = 303.56), p > .05;
see Figure 8). In sum, success rates did not differ between
groups, nor did overall persistence, or tool switch behavior,
but those that meditated had a greater initial persistence, and
spent more time with the useful tools then the useless tools,
where resters did not differ in tool use preference.
500
Meditation
450
400
Rest
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Useful Tools
Useless Tools
Figure 8. Time spent with tool types by condition.

Although our hypotheses were not fully supported, the
findings suggest that meditation training might promote
some important behaviors useful in problem solving. One
could view the enhancement in initial persistence as taking
the time to get to know the problem, and spending more
time with the useful tools might suggest that meditators
were recognizing what tools appeared to be getting them
closer to the goal. Nonetheless, problem-solving success
did not differ between the groups, but was higher than
anticipated with 1/3rd of both conditions completing the
task. However, the 1/3rd success rate may be low enough to
demonstrate the difficulty of the task, where ratings of task
difficulty did not differ between groups. One might expect
that the meditation training might improve mood or reduce
frustration with the task since meditation is often associated
with better mood and less anxiety (Brown et al., 2007), but
the brevity of the training as seen in other studies using
limited training measures does not consistently result in
improvements in mood (Ramsburg & Youmans, 2011).
In order to gage persistence we had to eliminate those
that had solved the task because their times would reflect
time to solution, and not persistence. When we examined
persistence among those that failed to solve the task, we
found no differences between the groups, which might
suggest that brief meditation training does not enhance
persistence. However, when examining initial persistence
we found that those receiving the meditation training spent
significantly more time with their initial chosen tool,
perhaps, suggesting a need to become more familiar with
the problem before attempting the task with other tools.
Notably, of the four tools available to the participants,
two of the tools could be used to solve the task (claw and
magnet) and two were useless (spatula and ring). We found
that participants in both conditions did not differ in the
number of switches they made, suggesting similar levels of
flexibility. However, a closer inspection of the amount of
time with the various tools revealed that meditators spent
more time with the useful tools, whereas, the resters had no
reliable difference in how they spent their time attempting to
solve the task. The increase in time for useful tools among
meditators may have resulted from recognition of their
value for solving the task, perhaps as a result of
improvements in cognitive functioning. Conceivably,
attentiveness for usability of one tool over another might
lead those with meditation training to use the tools that
appear to be more effective given that meditation training is
associated with improved attentional functioning (Tang et
al., 2007). Nonetheless, more research is needed to
determine what aspects of cognitive functioning might most
benefit from meditation training when faced with a
problem-solving task and whether success rates might
increase with extensive training.
A problem with the present study that makes further
interpretation of the results difficult stems from the finding
that meditators did not improve in overall problem success.

2225

One admittedly post-hoc explanation might be related to the
observation that succeeding in this particular problem
solving task actually required that participants not only
select the tools that made the task possible, but use them in
non-traditional ways to retrieve the bolt. Research suggests
that chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation can
account for success with creative or insight problems when
faced with an impasse (see Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider, &
Rhenius, 1999). Chunk decomposition relates to the ability
to unpack chunks of information to where detailed
approaches can be vested. Constraint relaxation involves the
ability to reduce the severity of constraints that may occur
when faced with a problem. These processes appear to be
activated via successive failures that elicit further
decomposition and greater constraint relaxation. To be a
successful problem solver in the present study, a participant
would need to relax the constraints associated with how the
tool can be used because solutions require participants to
use the useful tools in a non-normal fashion in order to
achieve the goal (e.g., the claw’s grasp is ineffectual, but
with some maneuvering the claw could be used like a
shovel). Additionally, problem solving success may depend
on decomposition of chunks associated with the possible
strategies that when chunked are unsuccessful, but when
decomposed may provide novel strategies (i.e., a chunked
strategy can involve many steps that are thought of as one
process, but when the steps are isolated novel divergent
approaches could be adopted by combining different steps
from different strategies). More broadly, a participant would
need to think divergently, which is not a process influenced
by meditation training, although thinking divergently is a
process associated with some eastern philosophies that
utilize meditation training (see Dogen, 2007). Our
participants were only exposed to a brief 10-minute
meditation exercise absent eastern philosophical approaches
that expound divergent thinking. As such, in the absence of
an enhancement in divergent thinking, neither group could
be expected to think more creatively.

Future Research
The present study presented findings that may suggest
cognitive improvements with some aspects of problem
solving. However, the present study did not adequately
determine what underlying mechanisms cognitive training
via meditation influenced. Future research might investigate
what components of cognitive functioning, influenced by
meditation, are responsible for enhancing problem solving.
For instance, past research has shown that meditation can
enhance creativity (Jedrczak, Beresford, & Clements, 1985;
Travis, 1979), attention (Lutz et al., 2009), memory
(Kozhevnikov, Louchakova, Josipovic, & Motes, 2009), and
self-regulatory functioning (Brown, Ryan, & Creswell,
2007), but less is known about the applicability of these
benefits to problem solving. Understanding how the training
influences performance will help in determining how the
training might be used and whether certain aspects of the
training should be emphasized over other options.

The present study utilized a unique physical problemsolving task, with the objective of determining whether
meditation training could improve creative problem solving
performance. The results of the experiment left more
questions than answers, demonstrating the breadth of studies
that could follow, which might better clarify the processes
responsible for the benefits seen in the present study. For
instance, a brief ten-minute training exercise may have
produced some benefits to problem solving; one might infer
that more extensive training might further enhance
performance, where deliberate practice has been known to
enhance performance amongst novices and experts
(Ericsson et al., 1993).

References
Basak, C., Boot, W. R., Voss, M. W., & Kramer, A. F. (2008).
Can training in a real-time strategy video game attenuate
cognitive decline in older adults? Psychology and Aging, 23,
765-777.
Brown, K. W., Ryan, R. M., Creswell, J. D. (2007).
Mindfulness: Theoretical foundations and evidence for its
salutary effects. Psychological Inquiry, 18, 211-237.
Dillbeck, M. C. (1982). Meditation and flexibility of visual
perception and verbal problem solving. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 207-215.
Dogen, E. (2007). Shobogenzo: The treasure house of the eye
of the true teaching. (H. Nearman, Trans.). Mount Shasta,
CA: Shasta Abbey Press. (Original work published 12311253).
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Romer, C. (1993).
The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert
performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363-406.
Jedrczak, A., Beresford, M., & Clements, G. (1985). The TMSidhi program, pure consciousness, creativity and
intelligence. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 19, 270–275.
Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Toward a design theory of problem
solving.
Educational
Technology
Research
and
Development, 48, 63-85.
Kershaw, T. C., & Ohlsson, S. (2004). Multiple causes of
difficulty in insight: The case of the nine-dot problem.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30, 3-13.
Kindler, H. S. (1979). The influence of a meditation relaxation
technique on group problem-solving effectiveness. The
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 15, 527-533.
Kirk, U., Downer, J., & Montague, P. R. (2011). Interoception
drives increased rational decision-making in meditators
playing the ultimate game. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 5, 111.

Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning,
Memory,
and
Cognition
25(6):1534–1555
Kozhevnikov, M., Louchakova, O., Josipovic, Z., & Motes, M.
A. (2009). The enhancement of visuospatial processing
efficiency through Buddhist deity meditation. Psychological
Science, 20, 645–653.
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Rawlings, N. B., Francis, A. D.,

2226

Greischar, L. L. & Davidson, R. J. (2009). Training enhances
attentional stability: Neural and behavioral evidence. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 13418-13427.
Ly, M. & Spezio, M. L. (2009). The effect of meditation on
neural systems implicated in social judgments. NeuroImage,
47, S194.
Manger, T., Eikeland, O.-J., & Asbjornsen, A. (2002). Effects
of social-cognitive training on students’ locus of control.
School Psychology International, 23, 342-354.
Mayer, R. E. (1992). Thinking, problem solving, cognition (2nd
ed.). New York: Freeman.
Mestre, J. P., Dufresne, R. J., Gerace, W. J., & Hardiman, P. T.
(1993). Promoting skilled problem-solving behavior among
beginning physics students. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 30, 303-317.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. (1972). Human Problem Solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Ohlsson, S. (2011). Deep learning: How the mind overrides
experience. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Raingruber, B., & Robinson, C. (2007). The effectiveness of tai
chi, yoga, meditation, and reiki healing sessions in
promoting health and enhancing problem solving abilities of
registered nurses. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 28, 11411155.
Ramsburg, J. T., & Youmans, R. J. (2011). Cognitive training
promotes academic success: An analysis of focused
meditative practices on student quiz performance.
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Smith, G. E., Housen, P., Yaffe, K., Ruff, R., Kennison, R. F.,
et al. (2009). A cognitive training program based on
principles of brain plasticity: Results from the improvement
in memory with plasticity-based adaptive cognitive training
(IMPACT) study. Journal of American Geriatric Society, 57,
594-603.
So, K. T., & Orme-Johnson, D.W. (2001). Three randomized
experiments on the longitudinal effects of the Transcendental
Meditation technique on cognition. Intelligence, 29, 419–
441.
Tang, Y., Ma, Y., Wang, J., Fan, Y., Feng, S., et al. (2007).
Short-term meditation training improves attention and selfregulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104, 17152-17156.
Travis, F. (1979). Creative thinking and the Transcendental
Meditation technique. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 13,
169–180.
Pagnoni, G., Cekic, M. (2007). Age effects on gray matter
volume and attentional performance in Zen meditation.
Neurobiol. Aging 28,1623-1627.
Willis, S. L., Tennstedt, S. L., Marsiske, M., Ball, K., Elias, J.,
et al. (2006). Long-term effects of cognitive training on
everyday functional outcomes in older adults. American
Medical Association, 296, 2805-2814.
Zeidan, F., Johnson, S. K., Diamond, B. J., David, Z., &
Goolkasian, P. (2010). Mindfulness meditation improves
cognition. Evidence of brief mental training. Consciousness
& Cognition, 19, 597-605.

2227

