UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Time Course of Inhibitory Control During Analogical Reasoning: An Event-Related Potential
Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7mq7j317

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sweis, Brian
Bharani, Krishna
Morrison, Robert

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Time Course of Inhibitory Control During Analogical Reasoning:
An Event-Related Potential Approach
Brian M. Sweis (bsweis@luc.edu)

Departments of Biology and Psychology
Loyola University Chicago
1032 W Sheridan Rd
Chicago, IL 60626 USA
Krishna L. Bharani (kbharani@luc.edu)

Department of Psychology
Loyola University Chicago
1032 W Sheridan Rd
Chicago, IL 60626 USA
Robert G. Morrison (rmorrison@luc.edu)

Department of Psychology, Neuroscience Institute
Loyola University Chicago
1032 W Sheridan Rd
Chicago, IL 60626 USA
Abstract
Inhibitory control is an important aspect of analogical
reasoning critically dependent on prefrontal cortex. We used a
novel
visual
analogy
paradigm
with
scalp
electroencephalography (EEG) to explore several ways the
brain uses inhibitory control to perform analogy. Previous
studies have suggested that inhibitory control helps to manage
working memory, so we used a separate task to measure
individual differences in working-memory span to help us
interpret differences in inhibitory control during reasoning.
We found evidence that low working-memory span
individuals likely lacked the necessary inhibitory control to
keep unattended relations from entering visuospatial working
memory early in processing. We also found that a late frontal
event-related potential sensitive to relational distraction was
differentially modulated in high and low working memory
span individuals. These findings provide additional evidence
for the importance of inhibitory control during analogical
processing.
Keywords: analogy, working memory, inhibitory control,
EEG, ERP

Introduction
Studies involving children (Richland, Chan, Morrison, &
Au, 2010; Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006; Thibaut,
French, & Vezneva, 2010a, 2010b), younger adults (Cho,
Holyoak, & Cannon, 2007; Cho et al., 2010), older adults
(Viskontas et al., 2004), and patients with damage to
prefrontal cortex (Krawczyk et al., 2008; Morrison et al.,
2004) have all provided evidence that inhibitory control in
working memory (WM) is an important aspect of both
visual and verbal analogical reasoning. Neuroimaging

studies of analogical reasoning have implicated areas in
prefrontal cortex (PFC) as critical for semantic retrieval
during analogy (Bunge, Wendelken, Badre, & Wagner,
2005), avoiding distraction from non-goal related relational
information (Cho et al., 2010), and performing analogical
mapping and similar types of relational integration (Bunge,
Helskog, & Wendelken, 2009; Cho et al., 2010; Green et al.,
2010; Morrison, Nikitin, Bharani, & Doumas 2012).
Computational accounts of these data (Doumas, Morrison,
& Richland, under review; Knowlton, Morrison, Hummel,
& Holyoak, 2012; Morrison et al., 2004; Morrison, Doumas,
& Richland, 2011; Viskontas et al., 2004) suggest that
inhibitory control is central to the processes of semantic
retrieval and analogical mapping; however, there is little
direct experimental evidence for mechanisms by which
inhibitory control is recruited during analogical reasoning.
WM has been thought to play a critical role during
analogical reasoning (Halford, 1992; Morrison, 2005).
Domain-specific as well as central-executive WM dual tasks
interfere with analogical processing (Morrison, Truong, &
Holyoak, 2001; Waltz, Lau, Grewal, & Holyoak, 2000).
Likewise, individual differences in working-memory span
(see Conway et al., 2005) are frequently related to matrix
reasoning performance (e.g., Kane & Engle, 2002). In an
effort to understand how inhibitory control may be involved
in WM processing, Vogel, McCollough, and Machizawa
(2005) asked participants with high and low WM span to
perform a simple delayed match-to-sample WM task while
their brain activity was observed using scalp
encephalography (EEG). Vogel et al. identified a
Continuous Negative Variation (CNV) event-related

1030

potential (ERP) during the delay period in the task that
correlated with the number of items the participants were
required to hold in WM. Interestingly, when participants
were asked to remember two items and ignore two others,
the ERPs of high-WM span participants resembled those for
two item trials, while those of low-WM span participants
resembled those for four items. Thus, high-WM span
individuals appear to be better at managing their WM using
inhibitory control to suppress goal-irrelevant information.
Shimamura (2000) has argued that his type of dynamic
filtering appears to be a fundamental function of PFC.
Based on Learning and Inference with Schema and
Analogy (LISA; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003), a
neurally-plausible model of analogical reasoning, we have
previously argued that inhibitory control is necessary
throughout analogical processing (Morrison et al., 2004;
Morrison, Doumas, & Richland, 2011; Viskontas et al.,
2004). Specifically, inhibition plays a central role in (a)
LISA’s manipulation of relations in WM, (b) its ability to
select items for placement into WM, (c) its ability to
discover analogical mappings. Thus, we anticipate that
inhibitory control will be evident in analogical reasoning,
and may be modulated by the WM span of participants.
In an effort to explore two possible roles for inhibitory
control during analogical processing, we developed an
experimental paradigm for use with EEG (see Figure 1). On
each trial, participants were cued to solve a visual analogy
based on one of three abstract relations present in the
stimuli. Critically, on some valid trials one of the
unattended relations was not congruent. Participants need to
ignore this relation to arrive at the correct solution. Thus,
the task is similar to the version of the People Pieces
analogy task we had developed for behavioral (Cho,
Holyoak, & Cannon, 2007; Viskontas et al., 2004) and
neuroimaging studies (Cho et al., 2010) except that
participants were considering asymmetric relations as
opposed to same-different relations. The task was also
similar to Vogel et al. (2005), in that participants had a goalrelevant WM load (i.e, the to-be-attended-to relation) in the
presence of potentially distracting information.
We had two central hypotheses. First, people lower in
WM-span would be less efficient than higher WM-span
individuals in keeping goal-irrelevant information out of
visuospatial WM. Thus, we expected to see a more negative
CNV (Vogel et al., 2005) in occipitoparietal regions in low
WM-span individuals, indicating that they were storing
more information in their WM than higher WM-span
individuals who were efficiently filtering the goal-irrelevant
information.
Second, we predicted that relationally distracting trials
require the engagement of inhibitory control and thus should
engage areas in inferior frontal cortex (e.g., Cho et al., 2010)
to protect the analogical mapping process from goalirrelevant information.

Method
Participants verified visual analogies constructed from
shapes that possessed three varying properties (luminance,
orientation, and number; see Figure 1). On each trial,
participants were cued to attend to only one of the relations
formed by the three properties. Participants decided whether
the relation in the top pair was the same or different than the
relation in the bottom pair. There were three conditions in
this experiment: Valid–No Distraction, Valid–Distraction,
and Invalid. In the Valid–No Distraction condition, all three
relations were congruent between the top and bottom pair,
with the correct answer being “yes” to indicate that the
problem as cued was a valid analogy. In the Valid–
Distraction condition, the cued property had congruent
relations as in the previous condition; however, one of the
two unattended relations was incongruent, thus creating a
response conflict between the attended and unattended
relation. Invalid trials were just like Valid-Distraction
stimuli, except that participants were asked to attend to the
relation that did not map.

1031

Figure 1: Participants saw analogy problems in one of
three conditions. In “Valid–No Distraction” problems,
participants mapped based on a single relation (e.g.,
luminance—the shapes get darker from left to right), while
the other relations (e.g., orientation and number) could
also be successfully mapped between pairs. In “Valid—
Distraction” problems, participants once again were only
required to map based on one relation (e.g., number—the
number of dots in the shape decreased from left to right);
however, one of the other relations present did not
successfully map between pairs (e.g., luminosity in the
source decreased from left to right, while it increased from
left to right in the target). “Invalid” trials were like “Valid–
Distraction” trials; however, participants were to map
based on the invalid relation (e.g., orientation—the
arrowhead of the shape rotated counterclockwise in the
source, but clockwise in the target).

rejection criterion. Included participants have fewer than
15% of trials rejected due to EEG artifacts.

Participants
Twenty-nine undergraduate students from Loyola
University Chicago participated in the experiment. Of the 29
participants three were omitted from the analysis because of
poor EEG recording quality. The remaining 26 participants
were divided based on median WM-span into two equally
sized groups. The low-WM span group (M = 33, SEM = 2)
had a WM span smaller than the high WM-span group (M =
61, SEM = 2; t (24) = 7.5, p < .001).
Participants gave informed consent to take part in the
study. The Loyola University Chicago Institutional Review
Board approved all recruitment methods and procedures.

Procedure

Materials
Each analogy problem consisted of two pairs of geometric
shapes (see Figure 1). Each shape had one of four levels of
three parametrically manipulated properties: luminance,
orientation, and number. Shapes were combined into pairs
to create order relations with respect to the three properties.
For instance, pairs of shapes could be increasingly bright or
dark (luminance); rotate clockwise or counter clockwise
(orientation); and increase or decrease in number. In any
given problem a relation in the source (i.e., top pair) could
either match or mismatch the corresponding relation in the
target (i.e., bottom pair). A set of 144 unique stimuli was
generated, 72 of which contained pairs of shapes with all
congruent relations (used for Valid-No Distraction trials).
The remaining 72 stimuli were divided into thirds, with each
third having one mismatching relation in one of the three
properties. For the problems containing a mismatching
relation, if the participant was cued to attend to the
mismatching relation the trial was Invalid, but if the
participant was cued to attend to one of the matching
relations the trial type was Valid-Distraction.

EEG Recording
Scalp electroencephalography signal (EEG) was recorded
from each participant using a 38-channel Biosemi Active2
EEG system. 32 electrodes were located at standard 10/20
locations in a nylon-elastic cap. Two electrodes were placed
on the left and right mastoid bones for subsequent digital rereferencing. To expand the coverage of EEG monitoring, we
placed four electrodes on the face on the inferior and lateral
aspects of the eye orbit. These electrodes were used to
expand PFC electrode coverage and for ocular artifact
correction and rejection. Unfiltered EEG was re-referenced
to an average of the two mastoid electrodes and a 0.01 Hz
high-pass filter was applied after recording. A band-stop
filter from 59 to 61 Hz was also applied to the raw EEG to
remove any AC electrical contamination. EEG signal was
corrected for ocular artifacts using a spatial PCA filter
corrected for the average noise level in the signal according
a method available in EMSE (Source Signal Imaging, San
Diego CA). Signal was further cleaned via a ±100µV

After a participant was fitted with the EEG cap and
electrodes, he or she sat in a soundproof chamber equipped
with a 21-inch CRT monitor and an electronic response box
controlled by a program written in e-Prime 2.0. The
participant was positioned so that their head was 100cm
from the monitor. The stimulus was adjusted to 4 degrees of
visual angle. The participant then received task instructions
followed by 24 practice trials with feedback. After
completing these trials, the participant was asked if they had
any questions, and then was reminded to respond as quickly
and as accurately as possible and to blink only after a
response was made.
Each trial began with a randomly jittered fixation screen
that lasted 500 to 1000 ms. Then, the name of one of the
three properties appeared near the fixation point (see Figure
1), also for 500 to 1000 ms, before it disappeared (for 500 to
1000 ms) and was replaced by the stimulus shapes, which
remained visible until a button press was made. There were
no systematic difference in any of these jittered times
between conditions. The entire experiment consisted of 216
trials, and accuracy and response times (RT) were
measured. Participants completed four blocks of 54 trials,
with conditions and stimuli randomized within and across
blocks. One-minute breaks were given between blocks,
during which cumulative mean accuracy and RT were
reported to the participant.

WM Span
After completing the visual analogy task, participants
completed a 15-20 min operation span WM task (Conway et
al., 2005). On each trial, participants were asked to verify a
simple mental arithmetic problem and then were to
remember a letter. Trials were from 2 to 7 problems/letters
long. At the conclusion of a trial, participants were
presented with an array of letters and were to click the
letters in the sequence they were presented. WM span was
defined as the total number of letters correctly remembered
in the presented order. All participants performed the math
problems at 85% correct or better.

Results
Behavioral Results
Because yes-valid/no-invalid responses were used, we
report accuracy using d-prime1. Participants were less
accurate in the Valid–Distraction (M=3.0, SEM= .13) than
the Valid-No Distraction (M=3.2, SEM= .16) condition
F(1,24) = 17, p < .001, ηp2=.4); however, there was no
1

1032

Hit rates of 1 were replaced with .99 and hit rates of 0 were
replaced with .01 for purposes of calculating d-prime.

difference in RT between Valid–Distraction (M=2.2s;
SEM=.08) and Valid-No Distraction (M=2.2s; SEM=.09;
F(1,24) = .001, ns, ηp2<.001)). Additionally, there was no
interaction with WM-span group for either accuracy
(F(1,24) = .46, p =.5, ηp2=.02) or RT (F(1,24) = 1.3, p=.3,
ηp2=.05). Thus, we saw an effect of relational distraction
even in these relational simple problems; however, this
effect appeared not to be moderated by WM span.

EEG Results
Individual Differences in WM Our first predication was
that WM-span would be reflected in the CNV (Vogel et al.,
2005) in occipitoparietal regions. We believed this would
result from low WM-span individuals’ inferior ability to
ignore goal-irrelevant information during analogical
processing, similar to the effect observed by Vogel et al.
(2005) during a delay period in a delay match-to-sample
task. Consistent with this prediction we found that
participants in the low WM-span group showed a more
negative CNV (see Figure 2) from just after the occipital N1
wave (180ms) all the way through the end of task
processing (1700ms; F(1,24) = 7.1, p =.01, ηp2=.2). This
effect was not modulated by relational distraction (F(1,24) =
.2, p =.7, ηp2 = .008).
Effect of Relational Distraction Our second prediction
involved the role of PFC in managing distraction during
analogical mapping. Using a similar analogy task with
fMRI, Cho and colleagues (2010) had previously shown
areas in middle and inferior frontal gyri were sensitive to
relational distraction. We further hypothesized that this
effect would be late in processing, coincident with
analogical mapping (Morrison et al., 2012). We did not find
a main effect of relational distraction (see Figure 3; F(1,24)
= .6, p =.4, ηp2=.024); however, we did find an area in right

Figure 2: Modulation of the neural correlates of
visuospatial working memory during analogical
reasoning by WM-span. (a) A CNV ERP was more
negative for the low than the high WM-span group in
occipitoparietal electrodes (indicated by white dots in
Figure 2b). (b) Map showing high minus low WM-span
subtraction topography from 180 to 1700ms poststimulus.

Figure 3: Modulation of the neural correlates of
relational distraction by WM-span. (a) The Valid-NoDistraction ERP for low WM-span participants was
significantly less positive than either the ValidDistraction ERP for the same group, or either condition
ERP for the high WM-span group in right frontal
electrodes (indicated by white dots in Figure 3b). (b)
Map showing double subtraction topography from 1000
to 1700ms post-stimulus.
PFC consistent with Cho et al. (2010) which showed an
interaction between WM-span and relational distraction
F(1,24) = 7.1, p =.01, ηp2=.2). While the high WM-span
group did not show a difference between the ValidDistraction and Valid-No Distraction conditions (F(1,12) =
5.1, p =.3, ηp2=.07), the low WM-span group did (F(1,24) =
1.0, p =.01, ηp2=.2). Specifically, both conditions for the
high WM-span group showed similar levels to the Valid
Distraction condition for the low WM-span group, while the
Valid-No Distraction condition for the low WM-span group
was reliably less positive.

Discussion
In many real-world problem-solving situations, one may
have to choose between multiple common relations for use
as the source for an analogy. For instance, a molecular
biologist may want to favor repeat sequences instead of
common codons as the basis for an analogy between two
genes. Attending to codons when one is looking for repeat
sequences may be misleading, thus good attention to just the
chosen relation (e.g., a repeat sequence) and inhibition of
the irrelevant information (e.g., a specific codon) for the
situation is most efficient. However, faced with a new
situation, codons may now be the better relation to use, so
the system must be flexible to solve the problem at hand. In
the paradigm used in this study, reasoners were sometimes
asked to favor the relation based on one stimulus
characteristic over another as the basis for their analogy.
However, their focus needed to be flexible because what
was critical on one trial may be misleading on the next.
Using this paradigm we demonstrated two ways in which
inhibitory control can influence analogical processing.
First, as in Vogel and colleague’s (2005) demonstration
using EEG with a delayed match to sample task, we found

1033

EEG evidence that low WM-span individuals allowed more
information to enter visuospatial WM than high WM-span
individuals. It is likely that this difference resulted from
low-WM span individuals considering goal-irrelevant
relations regardless of condition. This occurred early in the
reasoning time course, beginning just after the first signals
of spatial attention (i.e., the occipital N1), and continued
throughout the trial time course. While, this did not result in
a difference in behavioral performance on the task, one can
imagine that in a more difficult task (e.g., at higher levels of
relational complexity), this inefficient gating of WM may
have behavioral consequences.
Secondly, we found sensitivity to relational distraction as
measured by a subtraction between Valid-No Distraction
and Valid-Distraction trials in a right frontal ERP was
modulated also by WM-span. It appears that high WM-span
individuals frequently engage this area of the brain during
later stages of analogical mapping, while low WM-span
individuals engage it more in the face of distraction. We
believe this aspect of inhibitory control is likely distinct
from the previous result. If high WM-span individuals are
better at using early inhibitory control to gate WM from
non-goal related information one might hypothesize that
they would require the later PFC mechanisms less; however,
it appears that high WM-span individuals use it consistently,
and on average more than low WM-span individuals. In
contrast, low WM-span individuals, could certainly make
use of the PFC mechanism for Valid-No Distraction trials to
focus on just the relevant relations; however, they don’t,
using it only when actual conflict is detected. Thus, the use
of PFC seems to be more reactive in the case of low WMspan individuals, while it is more proactive with high WMspan individuals. Thus, this appears to be a second neural
mechanism that favors high WM-span individuals.
This result is also consistent with the results from a
previous fMRI study using a very similar task that identified
areas in bilateral inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) as being more
active during analogy in the presence of relational
distraction (Cho et al., 2010). The EEG topography shown
in Figure 3 is consistent with the activation reported by Cho
and colleagues and also many other studies investigating the
role of inhibitory control in WM (e.g., Goel et al., 2000;
Goel & Dolan, 2003; Prado & Noveck, 2007; De Neys et
al., 2008) Also, as in Cho and colleague’s study the
topography resulting from the distraction contrast appears to
be at least partially distinct from the frontopolar area
previously identified as being associated with analogical
mapping via both EEG (Morrison et al., 2012) and fMRI
(Green et al., 2010) methods. Future investigations will
need to focus on how frontopolar PFC and IFG may interact
in the service of analogical reasoning.
Several previous behavioral studies have shown evidence
of the importance of inhibitory control during analogical
reasoning in the face of distraction (e.g., Cho et al., 2007;
Krawczyk et al., 2008; Morrison et al., 2004; Viskontas et
al. 2004); however, these studies typically only found

reliable effects when distraction was present in more
relationally complex problems.2 In the present study we
show the engagement of inhibitory control for even simple
one-relation analogy problems. However, this effect was
apparent only in the ERP results, and accuracy, not RT.
So what exactly does inhibitory control do during
analogical reasoning? Given our results it is quite likely
that the answer is not a unitary one. Likewise, in the LISA
model of analogical reasoning (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997,
2003; Knowlton et al., 2012), the function of inhibitory
control may be multifaceted, and may differ across the time
course of processing analogies. Future neuroimaging studies
will be driven by precise computational accounts of the
neural mechanisms underlying analogical processing (e.g.,
Knowlton et al., 2012; Morrison et al., 2012) and will likely
require EEG time-frequency analysis techniques to
appreciate the temporal dynamics of the neural circuits
responsible for analogical reasoning.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Keith Holyoak and Rebecca Silton for
comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The Carbon
Undergraduate Research Fellowship Program at Loyola
University Chicago (BMS, KLB, RGM), the American
Federation of Aging Research/Rosalinde and Arthur Gilbert
Foundation (RGM), the Illinois Department of Public
Health (RGM), and the Loyola University Chicago Deans of
Arts and Sciences and the Graduate School (RGM) provided
generous support.

References
Bunge, S. A., Helskog, E. H., & Wendelken, C. (2009).
Left, but not right, rostrolateral prefrontal cortex meets a
stringent test of the relational integration hypothesis.
NeuroImage, 46(1), 338-342. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2009.01.064
Bunge, S. A., Wendelken, C., Badre, D., & Wagner, A. D.
(2005). Analogical reasoning and prefrontal cortex:
Evidence for separable retrieval and integration
mechanisms. Cerebral
Cortex, 15(3),
239-249.
doi:10.1093/cercor/ bhh 126
Cho, S., Holyoak, K. J., & Cannon, T. D. (2007).
Analogical reasoning in working memory: Resources
shared among relational integration, interference
resolution, and maintenance. Memory & Cognition, 35(6),
1445-1455.
Cho, S., Moody, T. D., Fernandino, L., Mumford, J. A.,
Poldrack, R. A., Cannon, T. D., . . . Holyoak, K. J. (2010).
Common and dissociable prefrontal loci associated with
component mechanisms of analogical reasoning. Cerebral
Cortex, 20(3),524-533.doi:10.1093/cercor/bhp 121

2

1034

One notable exception is distraction effects during analogical
reasoning in young children (Richland et al., 2006; 2010).

Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick,
D. Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working
memory span tasks: A methodological review and user’s
guide. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 769-786.
De Neys W, Vartanian O, Goel V. 2008. Smarter than we
think: when our brains detect that we are biased.
Psychological Science, 19, 483-489.
Doumas, L.A.A., Morrison, R.G., & Richland, L.E. (2012).
Individual differences in relational learning and
analogical reasoning: A computational approach.
Manuscript submitted for publication (copy on file with
author).
Goel V, Buchel C, Frith C, Dolan RR. 2000. Dissociation of
mechanisms
underlying
syllogistic
reasoning.
Neuroimage, 12, 504-515.
Goel V, Dolan RJ. 2003. Explaining modulation of
reasoning by belief. Cognition, 87, B11-B22.
Green, A., Kraemer, D.J.M., Fugelsang, J., Gray, J.R., &
Dunbar, K. (2010). Connecting long distance: Semantic
distance in analogical reasoning modulates frontopolar
cortex activity. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 70-76.
Halford, G.S. (1992) Analogical reasoning and conceptual
complexity
in
cognitive
development. Human
Development, 35, (4), 193-217.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of prefrontal
cortex in working-memory capacity, executive attention,
and general fluid intelligence: An individual-differences
perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,9(4), 637671.
Knowlton, B.J., Morrison, R.G., Hummel, J.E., & Holyoak,
K.J. (2012). A Neurocomputational System for Relational
Reasoning. Manuscript submitted for publication (copy
on file with author).
Krawczyk, D. C., Morrison, R. G., Viskontas, I., Holyoak,
. J., Chow, T. W., Mendez, M. F., Miller, B. L., &
Knowlton, B. J. (2008). Distraction during relational
reasoning: The role of prefrontal cortex in interference
control. Neuropsychologia, 46, 2020-2032.
Morrison, R.G. (2005). Thinking in working memory. In
K.J. Holyoak & R.G. Morrison (Eds.), Cambridge
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, R.G., Doumas, L.A.A., & Richland, L.E. (2011).
A computational account of children's analogical
reasoning: Balancing inhibitory control in working
memory and relational representation. Developmental
Science, 14(3), 516-529. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.
00999.x

Morrison, R.G., Krawczyk, D., Holyoak, K.J., Hummel,
J.E., Chow, T., Miller, B., & Knowlton, B.J. (2004). A
neurocomputational model of analogical reasoning and its
breakdown in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Journal
of
Cognitive
Neuroscience,
16,
260-271.
doi:10.1162/089892904322984553
Morrison, R.G., Nikitin, V., & Bharani, K.L. (2012).
Neurocorrelates of analogical mapping: An event-related
potential approach.. Manuscript submitted for publication
(copy on file with author).
Morrison, R.G., Holyoak, K.J., & Truong, B. (2001).
Working memory modularity in analogical reasoning.
Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 663-668). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Prado J, Noveck IA. 2007. Overcoming perceptual features
in logical reasoning: a parametric functional magnetic
resonance imaging study. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19, 642-657.
Richland L.E., Chan, T-K., Morrison, R.G., & Au, T.K-F.
(2010). Young children’s analogical reasoning across
cultures: Similarities and differences. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 146-153.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Shimamura, A. P.(2000). The role of the prefrontal cortex
in dynamic filtering. Psychobiology, 28, 207-218.
Thibaut, J., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2010a). Cognitive
load and semantic analogies: Searching semantic
space. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(4), 569-574.
doi:10.3758/PBR.17.4.569
Thibaut, J., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2010b). The
development of analogy making in children: Cognitive
load and executive functions. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 106(1), 1-19. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2010.
01.001
Viskontas, I. V., Morrison, R. G., Holyoak, K. J., Hummel
J. E., & Knowlton, B. J. (2004). Relational integration,
inhibition, and analogical reasoning in older adults.
Psychology and Aging, 19(4), 581-591.
Vogel, E. K., McCollough, A. W., & Machizawa, M. G.
(2005). Neural measures reveal individual differences in
controlling access to working memory. Nature, 438, 500503.
Waltz, J. A., Lau, A., Grewal, S. K., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2000). The role of working memory in analogical
mapping. Memory & Cognition, 28, 1205-1212.

1035

