UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Toward machines that behave ethically better than humans do

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rj8883h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Pontier, Matthijs
Hoorn, Johan

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Toward machines that behave ethically better than humans do
Matthijs A. Pontier (m.a.pontier@vu.nl)
Johan F. Hoorn (j.f.hoorn@vu.nl)
VU University Amsterdam, Center for Advanced Media Research Amsterdam (CAMeRA),
De Boelelaan 1081, 1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
With the increasing dependence on autonomous operating agents
and robots the need for ethical machine behavior rises. This paper
presents a moral reasoner that combines connectionism,
utilitarianism and ethical theory about moral duties. The moral
decision-making matches the analysis of expert ethicists in the
health domain. This may be useful in many applications, especially
where machines interact with humans in a medical context.
Additionally, when connected to a cognitive model of emotional
intelligence and affective decision making, it can be explored how
moral decision making impacts affective behavior.
Keywords: Cognitive modeling, Machine ethics, Medical ethics

Introduction
In view of increasing intelligence and decreasing costs of
artificial agents and robots, organizations increasingly use
such systems for more complex tasks. With this
development, we increasingly rely on the intelligence of
agent systems. Because of market pressures to perform
faster, better, cheaper and more reliably, this reliance on
machine intelligence will continue to increase (Anderson,
Anderson & Armen, 2005).
As the intelligence of machines increases, the amount of
human supervision decreases and machines increasingly
operate autonomously. These developments request that we
should be able to rely on a certain level of ethical behavior
from machines. As Rosalind Picard (1997) nicely puts it:
‘‘the greater the freedom of a machine, the more it will need
moral standards’’. Especially when machines interact with
humans, which they increasingly do, we need to ensure that
these machines do not harm us or threaten our autonomy.
This need for ethical machine behavior has given rise to a
field that is variously known as Machine Morality, Machine
Ethics, or Friendly AI (Wallach, Franklin & Allen, 2010).
There are many domains where machines could play a
significant role in improving our quality of life as long as
ethical concerns about their behaviors can be overcome
(Anderson & Anderson, 2008). This may seem difficult, and
incorporating ethical behavior into machines is indeed far
from trivial. Moral decision making is arguably even one of
the most challenging tasks for computational approaches to
higher-order cognition (Wallach, Franklin & Allen, 2010).
Moreover, with the increasing complexity of autonomous
agents and robots, it becomes harder to predict their
behavior, and to conduct it along ethical guidelines. Some
may argue that this is a good reason not to let machines be
responsible for making ethical decisions. However, the
behavior of machines is still far easier to predict than the
behavior of humans. Moreover, human behavior is typically
far from being morally ideal (Allen, Varner & Zinser, 2000).
One of the reasons for this is that humans are not very good
at making impartial decisions. We can expect machines to

outperform us in this capability (Anderson & Anderson,
2010). Looking at it from this side, it seems that machines
capable of sufficient moral reasoning would even behave
ethically better than most human beings would. Perhaps
interacting with ethical robots may someday even inspire us
to behave ethically better ourselves.
There have been various approaches in giving machines
moral standards, using various methods. One of them, called
casuistry, looks at previous cases in which there is
agreement about the correct response. Using the similarities
with these previous cases and the correct responses to them,
the machine attempts to determine the correct response to a
new ethical dilemma.
Rzepka and Araki (2005) demonstrate an approach, in
which their system learns to make ethical decisions based on
web-based knowledge, to be ‘independent from the
programmer’. They argue it may be safer to imitate millions
of people, instead of a few ethicists and programmers. This
seems useful for imitating human ethical behavior, but it
does not seem plausible that machines using this method
will be able to behave ethically better than humans. After
all, the system bases its decision on the average behavior of
humans in general, misbehavior included.
Guarini (2006) offers another approach that could be
classified as casuistry. The presented system learns from
training examples of ethical dilemmas with a known correct
response using a neural network. After the learning process,
it is capable of providing plausible responses to new ethical
dilemmas. However, reclassification of cases remains
problematic in his approach due to a lack of reflection and
explicit representation. Therefore, Guarini concludes that
casuistry alone is not sufficient.
Anderson and Anderson (2007) agree with this
conclusion, and address the need for top-down processes.
The two most dominant top-down mechanisms are (1)
utilitarianism and (2) ethics about duties. Utilitarians claim
that ultimately morality is about maximizing the total
amount of ‘utility’ (a measure of happiness or well being) in
the world. The competing ‘big picture’ view of moral
principles is that ethics is about duties and, on the flip side
of duties, the rights of individuals (Wallach, Allen & Smit,
2008).
The two competitors described above may not differ as
much as it seems. Ethics about duties can be seen as a useful
model to maximize the total amount of utility. Thinking
about maximizing the total amount of utility in a too direct
manner may lead to a sub-optimal amount of utility. For
example, in the case of the decision to kill one person to
save five, killing the one person seems to maximize the total
amount of utility. After all, compared to the decision of
inaction, it leads to a situation with four more survivors
(Anderson, Anderson & Armen, 2006). However, for
humans it may be impossible to favor the decision of killing

2198

a person in this case over the decision of inaction, without
also making it more acceptable in other cases to kill human
beings. Therefore, not having the intuition that it is wrong to
kill one person to save more people would probably lead to
a smaller total amount of utility in the world.
Anderson, Anderson and Armen (2006) use Ross’s prima
facie duties (Ross, 1930). Here, prima facie means a moral
duty may be overruled by a more pressing one. They argue
that the ideal ethical theory incorporates multiple prima
facie duties with some sort of a decision procedure to
determine the ethically correct action in cases where the
duties give conflicting advice. Their system learns rules
from examples using a machine learning technique. After
learning, the system can produce correct responses to
unlearned cases.
However, according to Wallach, Franklin and Allen
(2010), the model of Anderson, Anderson and Armen
(2006) is rudimentary and cannot accommodate the
complexity of human decision making. In their work,
Wallach et al. make a distinction between top-down and
bottom-up moral-decision faculties and present an approach
that combines both directions. They argue that the capacity
for moral judgment in humans is a hybrid of both bottom-up
mechanisms shaped by evolution and learning, and topdown mechanisms capable of theory-driven reasoning.
Morally intelligent robots will eventually need a similar
fusion, which maintains the dynamic and flexible morality
of bottom-up systems, which accommodate diverse inputs,
while subjecting the evaluation of choices and actions to
top-down principles that represent ideals we strive to meet.
Wallach, Franklin & Allen (2010) explore the possibility to
implement moral reasoning in LIDA, a model of human
cognition. This system combines a bottom-up collection of
sensory data, such as in the neural network approach of
Guarini (2006), with top-down processes for making sense
of its current situation, to predict the results of actions.
However, the proposed model is not fully implemented yet.
The current paper can be seen as a first attempt in
combining a bottom-up and top-down approach. It combines
a bottom-up structure with top-down knowledge in the form
of moral duties. It balances between these duties and
computes a level of morality, which could be seen as an
estimation of the influence on the total amount of utility in
the world.
Wallach, Franklin and Allen (2010) argue that even agents
who adhere to a deontological ethic or are utilitarians may
require emotional intelligence as well as other ‘‘suprarational’’ faculties, such as a sense of self and a theory of
mind (ToM). Therefore, we represented the system in such a
way that it is easy to connect to Silicon Coppélia (Hoorn,
Pontier and Siddiqui, 2011), a cognitive model of emotional
intelligence and affective decision making. Silicon Coppélia
contains a feedback loop, by which it can learn about the
preferences of an individual patient, and personalize its
behavior. Silicon Coppélia estimates an Expected
Satisfaction of possible actions, based on bottom-up data
combined with top-down knowledge. This compares to the
predicted results of actions in Wallach, Franklin and Allen
(2010).

For simulation purposes, we focus on biomedical ethics,
because in this domain relatively much consensus exists
about ethically correct behavior. There is an ethically
defensible goal (health), whereas in other areas (such as
business and law) the goal may not be ethically defensible
(money, helping a ‘bad guy’) (Anderson & Anderson,
2007). Moreover, due to a foreseen lack of resources and
healthcare personnel to provide a high standard of care in
the near future (WHO, 2010), robots are increasingly being
used in healthcare.
Healthcare is a valid case where robots genuinely
contribute to treatment. For example, previous research
showed that animal-shaped robots can be useful as a tool for
occupational therapy. Robins et al. (2005) used mobile
robots to treat autistic children. Further, Wada and Shibata
(2007) developed Paro, a robot shaped like a baby-seal that
interacts with users to encourage positive mental effects.
Interaction with Paro has been shown to improve users’
moods, making them more active and communicative with
each other and caregivers. Research groups have used Paro
for therapy at eldercare facilities and with those having
Alzheimer’s disease (Kidd, Taggart & Turkle, 2006; Marti
et al., 2006). Banks, Willoughby and Banks (2008) showed
that animal-assisted therapy with an AIBO dog helped just
as good for reducing loneliness as therapy with a living dog.
By providing assistance during care tasks, or fulfilling
them, robots can relieve time for the many duties of care
workers. However, care robots require rigorous ethical
reflection to ensure that their design and introduction do not
impede the promotion of values and the dignity of patients
at such a vulnerable and sensitive time in their lives (Van
Wynsberghe, 2012)
According to Gillon (1994), beneficence, nonmaleficence, autonomy and justice are the four basic prima
facie moral commitments. Here, confidentiality and
truthfulness can be seen as a part of autonomy. Because we
aim to match the expert data given from Buchanan and
Brock (1989), who focus on dilemmas between autonomy,
beneficence and non-maleficence, we focus on these three
moral duties in the remainder of this paper.

The moral reasoner and its
relation to Silicon Coppélia
Silicon Coppélia (Hoorn et al., 2011) is a model of
emotional intelligence and affective decision making. In this
model, the agent perceives the user on several dimensions,
which leads to (simulated) feelings of involvement and
distance. These feelings represent the affective component
in the decision making process. The rational component
consists of the expected utility of an action for the agent
itself (i.e., the belief that an action leads to achieving desired
goals).
The system contains a library of goals and each agent has
a level of ambition for each goal. There are desired and
undesired goals, all with several levels of importance. The
levels of ambition the agent attaches to the goals are
represented by a real value between [-1, 1], where a negative
value means that the goal is undesired and a positive value
means that the goal is desired. A higher value means that the
goal is more important to the agent.

2199

The system contains a library of actions from which the
agents can perform. The agent has beliefs about actions
inhibiting or facilitating goals, represented by a real value
between [-1, 1], -1 being full inhibition, 1 being full
facilitation.
The expected utilities of possible actions are calculated by
looking at the goal-states it influences. If an action or a
feature is believed to facilitate a desired goal or inhibits an
undesired goal, this will increase its expected utility and
vice versa. The following formula is used to calculate the
expected utility for the agent itself.
ExpectedUtility(Action, Goal) =
Belief(facilitates(Action, Goal)) * Ambition(Goal)

Given the level of ambition for a goal and the believed
facilitation of that goal by an action, the agent calculates the
expected utility for itself of performing that action regarding
that goal by multiplying the believed facilitation of the goal
with the level of ambition for the goal.
In the current moral reasoner, the agent tries to maximize
the total amount of utility for everyone. In complex
situations, it would take too much computational load to
calculate all possible consequences of an action for
everyone, and extract this into a single value of ‘morality’ of
the action. Therefore, the agent tries to estimate the morality
of actions by following three moral duties. These three
duties consist of seeking to attain three moral values: (1)
Autonomy, (2) Non-Maleficence and (3) Beneficence. In the
moral reasoner, the three duties are seen as ‘moral goals’ to
satisfy everyone’s needs as much as possible. This
corresponds with Super’s conceptualization of the
relationship between needs and values: “values are
objectives that one seeks to attain to satisfy a need” (Super,
1973). The moral reasoner aims to pick actions that serve
these moral goals best.
What priorities should be given to these three moral
goals? According to Anderson and Anderson (2008), the
following consensus exists in medical ethics. A healthcare
worker should challenge a patient's decision only if the
patient is not capable of fully autonomous decision making
(e.g., the patient has irrational fears about an operation) and
there is either a violation of the duty of non-maleficence
(e.g., the patient is hurt) or a severe violation of the duty of
beneficence (e.g., the patient rejects an operation that will
strongly improve his or her quality of life). In other words,
Autonomy is the most important duty. Only when a patient
is not fully autonomous, the other moral goals come into
play. Further, Non-maleficence is a more important duty
than Beneficence, because only a severe violation of
Beneficence requires challenging a patient’s decision, while
any violation of Non-maleficence does. Therefore, the
ambition level for the moral goal ‘Autonomy’ was set to the
highest value and ‘Non-maleficence’, which was set to a
higher value than the ambition level for ‘Beneficence’. The
ambition levels that were given to the moral goals in the
moral reasoner can be found in Table 1.
The agent calculates estimated level of Morality of an
action by taking the sum of the ambition levels of the three
moral goals multiplied with the beliefs that the particular
actions facilitate the corresponding moral goals. When

Table 1: Ambition levels for moral goals
Moral Goal
Non-Maleficence
Beneficence
Autonomy

Ambition level
0.74
0.52
1

moral goals are believed to be better facilitated by a moral
action, the estimated level of Morality will be higher. . The
following formula is used to calculate the estimated
Morality of an action:
Morality(Action) =
Goal( Belief(facilitates(Action, Goal)) * Ambition(Goal))

Note that this is similar to calculating the Expected Utility
in Silicon Coppélia. To ensure that the decision of a fully
autonomous patient is never questioned, we added the
following rule to the moral reasoner:
IF
belief(facilitates(Action, autonomy) = max_value
THEN Moralilty(Action) = Morilaity(Action) + 2

As can be seen Figure 1, this can be represented as a
weighted association network, where moral goals are
associated with the possible actions via the belief strengths
that these actions facilitate the three moral goals. A decision
function F adds the rule and picks the action with the highest
activation as output.

Figure 1: Moral reasoner shown in graphical format

Simulation Results
To see whether the moral reasoner could simulate the moral
decision making of experts in medical ethics, the analysis of
ethical dilemmas by expert ethicists was taken from
Buchanan and Brock (1989). The following simulation
experiments examine whether the moral reasoner reaches
the same conclusions as these expert ethicists.

Experiment 1
Table 2: Simulation results of Experiment 1.
Try Again
Accept

Autonomy
-0.5
0.5

Non-Malef
1
-1

Benef
1
-1

Morality
0.76
-0.8

In the simulated situation, the patient refuses to take an
antibiotic that is almost certain to cure an infection that
would otherwise likely lead to his death. The decision is the

2200

result of an irrational fear the patient has of taking
medications. (For instance, perhaps a relative happened to
die shortly after taking medication and this patient now
believes that taking any medication will lead to death.)
According to Buchanan and Brock (1989), the correct
answer is that the health care worker should try again to
change the patient’s mind because if she accepts his decision
as final, the harm done to the patient is likely to be severe
(his death) and his decision can be considered as being less
than fully autonomous.
As can be seen in Table 2, the moral reasoner also
classifies the action ‘Try again’ as having a higher level of
morality than accepting the decision of the patient. In this
and the following tables, the fields under the three moral
goals represent the believed facilitation of the corresponding
moral goal by an action, as taken from Buchanan and Brock
(1989). ‘Non-Malef’ stands for Non-maleficence, and
‘Benef’ stands for Beneficence.

Experiment 2
Table 3: Simulation results of Experiment 2.
Try Again
Accept

Autonomy
-0.5
1

Non-Malef
1
-1

Benef
1
-1

Experiment 3
Table 4: Simulation results of Experiment 3.
Autonomy
-0.5
1

Non-Malef
0.5
-0.5

Benef
0.5
-0.5

Experiment 4
Table 5: Simulation results of Experiment 4.
Try Again
Accept

Morality
0.13
2.37

The patient refuses to take an antibiotic that is likely to
prevent complications from his illness, complications that
are not likely to be severe, because of long-standing
religious beliefs that do not allow him to take medications.
The correct answer is that the health care worker should
accept his decision, since once again the decision appears to
be fully autonomous and there is even less possible harm at

Autonomy
-0.5
0.5

Non-Malef
0
0

Benef
0.5
-0.5

Morality
-0.26
0.26

A patient will not consider taking medication that could only
help to alleviate some symptoms of a virus that must run its
course. He refuses the medication because he has heard
untrue rumors that the medication is unsafe.
Even though the decision is less than fully autonomous,
because it is based on false information, the little good that
could come from taking the medication does not justify
trying to change his mind. Thus, the doctor should accept
his decision. The moral reasoner also comes to this
conclusion, as can be seen in the last column of Table 5.

Experiment 5

Morality
0.76
1.70

Once again, the patient refuses to take an antibiotic that is
almost certain to cure an infection that would otherwise
likely lead to his death, but this time the decision is made on
the grounds of long-standing religious beliefs that do not
allow him to take medications.
The correct answer in this case, state Buchanan and Brock
(1989), is that the health care worker should accept the
patient’s decision as final because, although the harm that
will likely result is severe (his death), his decision can be
seen as being fully autonomous. The health care worker
must respect a fully autonomous decision made by a
competent adult patient, even if she disagrees with it, since
the decision concerns his body and a patient has the right to
decide what shall be done to his or her body.
As can be seen in Table 3, the moral reasoner comes to
the correct conclusion. Here, the rule to ensure the decision
of a fully autonomous patient is never questioned made a
difference. If the rule would not have existed, the morality
of ‘Accept’ would have been -0.3, and the moral reasoner
would have concluded that it was more moral to try again.

Try Again
Accept

stake than in Experiment 2. The moral reasoner comes to the
correct conclusion and estimates the Morality of ‘Accept’
higher than ‘Try Again’, as can be seen in Table 4

Table 6: Simulation results of Experiment 5.
Try Again
Accept

Autonomy
-0.5
0.5

Non-Malef
0.5
-0.5

Benef
0.5
-0.5

Morality
0.13
-0.13

A patient with incurable cancer refuses chemotherapy that
will let him live a few months longer, relatively pain free.
He refuses the treatment because, ignoring the clear
evidence to the contrary, he is convinced himself that he is
cancer-free and does not need chemotherapy.
According to Buchanan and Brock (1989), the ethically
preferable answer is to try again. The patient’s less than
fully autonomous decision will lead to harm (dying sooner)
and denies him the chance of a longer life (a violation of the
duty of beneficence), which he might later regret. The moral
reasoner comes to the same conclusion, as can be seen in
Table 6.

Experiment 6
Table 7: Simulation results of Experiment 6.
Try Again
Accept

Autonomy
-0.5
0.5

Non-Malef
0
0

Benef
1
-1

Morality
0.04
-0.04

A patient, who has suffered repeated rejection from others
due to a very large noncancerous abnormal growth on his
face, refuses to have simple and safe cosmetic surgery to
remove the growth. Even though this has negatively affected
his career and social life, he is resigned himself to being an
outcast, convinced that this is his fate in life. The doctor is
convinced that his rejection of the surgery stems from
depression due to his abnormality and that having the
surgery could vastly improve his entire life and outlook.
The doctor should try again to convince him because so
much of an improvement is at stake and his decision is less
than fully autonomous. Also here, the moral reasoner comes
to the same conclusion, as can be seen in Table 7.

2201

Discussion
The paper described a moral reasoner that combines a
bottom-up structure with top-down knowledge in the form
of moral duties. The reasoner estimates the influence of an
action on the total amount of utility in the world by the
believed contribution of the action to the following three
duties: Autonomy, Non-maleficence and Beneficence.
Following these three duties is represented as having three
moral goals. The moral reasoner is capable of balancing
between conflicting moral goals. In simulation experiments,
the reasoner reached the same conclusions as expert ethicists
(Buchanan & Brock, 1989).
Because the representation of goals and beliefs in the
moral reasoner is very similar to the representation of beliefs
and goals in the affective decision making process of Silicon
Coppélia (Hoorn, Pontier & Siddiqui, 2011), the moral
reasoner could easily be connected to the system. Thereby,
the moral reasoning could be combined with human-like
affective decision making, and the behavior of the system
could be personalized for individuals.
According to Anderson, Anderson and Armen (2006),
simply assigning linear weights to the moral duties is not
sufficiently expressive to capture their relationships. Indeed,
an extra rule had to be added to satisfy the expert data in
Experiment 2. However, for all other experiments, this rule
turned out not to be necessary.
Also without this rule, it would have been arguable that
the moral reasoner simulates human-like moral reasoning.
The analysis of the expert ethicists may not reflect the
public opinion, however. Perhaps the majority of laymen
would decide to question the patient’s refusal to take lifesaving medication. Arguably, it would not be seen as
inhuman if someone did.
Even between doctors, there is no consensus about the
interpretation of values and their ranking and meaning. In
the work of Van Wynsberghe (2012) this differed depending
on: the type of care (i.e., social vs. physical care), the task
(e.g., bathing vs. lifting vs. socializing), the care-giver and
their style, as well as the care-receiver and their specific
needs. The same robot used in one hospital can be accepted
differently depending on the ward. Workers in the post-natal
ward loved the TUG-robot, while workers in the oncology
ward found the robot to be rude, socially inappropriate and
annoying. These workers even kicked the robot when they
reached maximum frustration (Barras, 2009).
There may be doctors that feel the urge to pursue a patient
to take the life-saving medication, but only choose not to do
so because of ethical guidelines. It could be argued that,
when health care professionals are making decisions on a
strict ethical code, they are restricting their regular way of
decision-making.
Further, it can be questioned whether a patient can ever be
fully autonomous. According to Mappes and DeGrazia
(2001), for a decision by a patient concerning his or her care
to be considered fully autonomous, it must be intentional,
based on sufficient understanding of his or her medical
situation and the likely consequences of foregoing
treatment. Further, the patient must be sufficiently free of
external constraints (e.g., pressure by others or external
circumstances, such as a lack of funds) and internal

constraints (e.g., pain/discomfort, the effects of medication,
irrational fears or values that are likely to change over time).
Using this definition, it could be questioned whether the
patient in Experiment 2 is not under the influence of
external constraints (i.e., pressure from a religious leader).
Moreover, it seems that medical ethics are contradictory
with the law. A fully autonomous decision of a patient
wanting to commit euthanasia would be represented by the
same believed contributions to following moral duties as
those given in experiment 2. In the case of euthanasia, the
patient also makes a fully autonomous decision that will
lead to his death. However, in many countries, committing
active euthanasia is illegal. In countries where euthanasia is
permitted, it is usually only allowed when the patient is in
hopeless suffering. By the definition of Anderson and
Anderson, being in hopeless suffering would mean the
patient is not free of internal constraints (i.e., pain and
suffering) and therefore not capable of making fully
autonomous decisions. On the other hand, in the case of
hopeless suffering, it could be questioned whether one could
speak of maleficence when the patient is allowed to commit
euthanasia.
However, we would not like to argue against strict ethical
codes in professional fields such as health care. It is
important to act based on a consensus to prevent conflicts
and unnecessary harm. Just as doctors restrict their ‘natural’
behavior by maintaining a strict ethical code, we can also let
a robot restrict its behavior by acting through the same strict
ethical code.
Moreover, we may well want to aim for machines that
behave ethically better than human beings. Human behavior
is typically far from being morally ideal, and a machine
should probably have higher ethical standards (Allen et al.,
2000). By matching the ethical decision-making of expert
ethicists, the presented moral reasoner serves as a nice
starting point in doing so.
From a cognitive science perspective, an important
product of work on “machine ethics” is that new insights in
ethical theory are likely to result (Anderson & Anderson,
2008). As Daniel Dennett (2006) stated, AI “makes
philosophy honest”. Ethics must be made computable in
order to make it clear exactly how agents ought to behave in
ethical dilemmas. Without a platform for testing the
adequacy of a particular model of moral decision making, it
can be quite easy to overlook hidden mechanisms”
(Wallach, 2010).
According to Tronto (1993), care is only thought of as
good care when it is personalized. Therefore, we intend to
integrate the moral reasoner with Silicon Coppélia in future
research. This could be done in various manners. Different
applications might benefit from different ways of
implementation.
When developing a decision-support system in the
medical domain such as (Anderson, Anderson & Armen,
2006), it should have a strict ethical code. When there are
conflicting moral goals, the outcome of the moral reasoning
should always give the final answer on how to act.
Additionally, in consult with medical ethicists and experts
from the field in which the moral reasoner will be applied, it
may be necessary to add more rules to the system.

2202

However, when developing a companion robot or virtual
character that interacts with the patient, it may be more
beneficial to give a bit less weight to moral reasoning. Moral
goals could perhaps be treated the same as other goals that
motivate the robot’s behavior. In entertainment settings, we
often like characters that are naughty (Konijn & Hoorn,
2005). In entertainment, morally perfect characters may
even be perceived as boring. In Silicon Coppélia (Hoorn,
Pontier & Siddiqui, 2011), this could be implemented by
updating the affective decision making module. Morality
would be added to the other influences that determine the
Expected Satisfaction of an action in the decision making
process. By doing so, human affective decision-making
behavior could be further explored.

Acknowledgements
This study is part of the SELEMCA project within CRISP
(grant number: NWO 646.000.003). We would like to thank
Aimee van Wynsberghe for fruitful discussions.

References
Allen, C. Varner, G. & Zinser, J. (2000). Prolegomena to
Any Future Artificial Moral Agent. Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 12,
251–61
Anderson, M., Anderson, S., & Armen, C. (2005). Toward
Machine Ethics: Implementing Two Action-Based Ethical
Theories. Machine Ethics: Papers from the AAAI Fall
Symposium. Technical Report FS-05-06, Association for
the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, Menlo Park,
CA
Anderson, M.; Anderson, S.; & Armen, C. (2006).
MedEthEx: A Prototype Medical Ethics Advisor.
Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference on Innovative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence. Menlo Park, CA:
AAAI Press.
Anderson, M., & Anderson, S. (2007). Machine ethics:
Creating an ethical intelligent agent, AI Magazine, 28(4),
15-26.
Anderson, M., & Anderson, S. (2008). Ethical Healthcare
Agents, Studies in Computational Intelligence, 107,
Springer.
Anderson, M., & Anderson, S. (2010), Robot be Good,
Scientific American, October 2010, 72-77.
Banks, M.R., Willoughby, L.M., and Banks, W.A. (2008).
Animal-Assisted Therapy and Loneliness in Nursing
Homes: Use of Robotic versus Living Dogs. Journal of
the American Medical Directors Association, 9, 173-177
Barras C. (2009) Useful, loveable and unbelievably
annoying. The New Scientist, 22-23.
Buchanan, A.E. and Brock, D.W. 1989. Deciding for
Others: The Ethics of Surrogate Decision Making,
Cambridge University Press.
Dennett, D. (2006). Computers as Prostheses for the
Imagination. Invited talk presented at the International
Computers and Philosophy Conference, Laval, France,
May 3.
Gillon R. (1994) Medical ethics: four principles plus
attention to scope. BMJ. 309(6948), 184–188.

Guarini, M. (2006). Particularism and the Classification and
Reclassification of Moral Cases. IEEE Intelligent Systems,
21(4), 22–28.
Hoorn, J.F., Pontier, M.A., & Siddiqui, G.F., (2011).
Coppélius’ Concoction: Similarity and Complementarity
Among Three Affect-related Agent Models. Cognitive
Systems Research Journal, in press.
Kidd, C., Taggart, W., and Turkle, S. (2006). A Social
Robot to Encourage Social Interaction among the
Elderly. Proceedings of IEEE ICRA, 3972-3976
Konijn, E.A., & Hoorn, J.F. (2005). Some like it bad.
Testing a model for perceiving and experiencing fictional
characters. Media Psychology, 7(2), 107-144.
Mappes, T.A. & DeGrazia, D. (2001). Biomedical Ethics,
5th ed., McGraw-Hill, pp. 39–42.
Marti, P. Bacigalupo, M., Giusti, L., and Mennecozzi, C.
(2006). Socially Assistive Robotics in the Treatment of
Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia.
Proceedings of BioRob, 438-488.
Picard R (1997) Affective computing. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
Robins, B., Dautenhahn, K., Boekhorst, R.T., and Billard,
A. (2005). Robotic Assistants in Therapy and Education
of Children with Autism: Can a Small Humanoid Robot
Help Encourage Social Interaction Skills? Journal of
Universal Access in the Information Society. 4, 105-120.
Ross, W. D. (1930). The Right and the Good. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Rzepka, R., & Araki, K. (2005). What Could Statistics Do
for Ethics? The Idea of a Common Sense ProcessingBased Safety Valve. In Machine Ethics: Papers from the
AAAI Fall Symposium. Technical Report FS-05-06,
Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence, Menlo Park, CA.
Super, D.E. (1973). The work values inventory. In D.G.
Zytowski (Ed.), Contemporary approaches to interest
measurement. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Tronto, J. (1993). Moral Boundaries: a political argument
for an ethic of care. Routledge, New York.
Van Wynsberghe, A. (2012). Designing Robots for Care;
Care Centered Value-Sensitive Design. Journal of Science
and Engineering Ethics, in press
Wada, K., and Shibata, T. (2009). Social Effects of Robot
Therapy in a Care House , JACIII, 13, 386-392
Wallach, W. (2010). Robot minds and human ethics: The
need for a comprehensive model of moral decision
making. Ethics and Information Technology, 12(3), 243250.
Wallach, W., Franklin, S. & Allen, C. (2010). A Conceptual
and Computational Model of Moral Decision Making in
human and Artificial Agents. Topics in Cognitive Science,
2, 454–485.
Wallach, W., Allen, C., & Smit, I. (2008). Machine
morality: Bottom-up and top-down approaches for
modelling human moral faculties. AI and Society, 22(4),
565–582.
WHO (2010) Health topics: Ageing. Available from:
http://www.who.int/topics/ageing/en/

2203

