UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Towards a cognitive science of literary style: Perspective-taking in processing omniscient
versus objective voice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0sm5j246

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sato, Manami
Sakai, Hiromu
Wu, Jennifer
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Towards a Cognitive Science of Literary Style:
Perspective-Taking in Processing Omniscient versus Objective Voice
Manami Sato (msato@hiroshima-u.ac.jp)
Hiromu Sakai (hsakai@hiroshima-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, Hiroshima University
1-1-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima City, Japan 739-8524

Jennifer Wu (jjw012@ucsd.edu)
Benjamin K. Bergen (bkbergen@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0515

story-tellers, from marketing directors to kindergarteners to
shamans. The outstanding question for cognitive science is
how we go about understanding narratives, with all their
stylistic peculiarities. What cognitive operations do we
perform to go from a story to understanding?

Abstract
What are the consequences of narrative style for the cognitive
operations that comprehenders perform? Third person
narratives can adopt different voices. Omniscient voice has
access to the mental states of characters, while objective
voice only describes how characters would appear to an
observer. It’s currently unknown what cognitive
consequences different voices have for people processing
third person language. We hypothesize that in building
representations of described scenes, omniscient voice may
make comprehenders more likely to adopt the internal
perspectives of characters than objective voice. We tested this
prediction in a narrative-image matching study. Participants
read short passages describing a third person character in
either omniscient or objective voice. They then saw an image
that either depicted the described scene or not, and which
depicted the event from the perspective of the character or
not. Their task was to decide as quickly as possible whether
the image matched the narrative. In cases where the narrative
and image matched, participants were significantly faster to
indicate the correct decision when the narrative voice and the
image perspective matched—that is, an image from the
character’s perspective after an omniscient narration or an
image from a different perspective after an objective
narration. This finding provides the first evidence that
narrative voice affects the perspective from which
comprehenders represent described scenes.

Narrative Voice
A key feature of every narrative is that it is told using a
particular (though possibly variable) narrative voice. Here,
by way of illustration, is an example of two different
narrative voices that appear in the same text. Ernest
Hemingway’s The Old Man and the Sea features an
eponymous old man. Throughout the narrative, we read
different kinds of descriptions of him. Early on, we read:
The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the
back of his neck. The brown blotches of the benevolent
skin cancer the sun brings from its reflection on the tropic
sea were on his cheeks. The blotches ran well down the
sides of his face and his hands had the deep-creased scars
from handling heavy fish on the cords. But none of these
scars were fresh. They were as old as erosions in a
fishless desert.
Compare this with a passage that follows, as we’re getting
to know the old man a little better:

Keywords: language processing; perspective; narrative voice;
literary style; grammatical person; mental simulation

He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa
when he was a boy and the long golden beaches and the
white beaches, so white they hurt your eyes, and the high
capes and the great brown mountains. He lived along that
coast now every night and in his dreams he heard the surf
roar and saw the native boats come riding through it. He
smelled the tar and oakum of the deck as he slept and he
smelled the smell of Africa that the land breeze brought at
morning.

Introduction
Understanding the processes that underlie language
comprehension is among the primary concerns of cognitive
science, and justifiably so. Language is pervasively, and
uniquely, human. The study of the cognitive processes
underlying language comprehension has, also justifiably,
begun by focusing on how people process words or
sentences in isolation. Yet this is not language’s natural
state in the wild. We mostly interact with words and
sentences embedded in context—social, physical, and
linguistic. And one—though not the only—context in which
words and sentences appear is in narrative. Across cultures,
humans recount and process accounts of sequences of
events, whether purportedly fictive or factive. We’re all

Although these two passages both describe the old man in
the third person, they differ in terms of their narrative voice.
While the first describes properties of the old man that can
be viewed by an outside observer, the second omnisciently
enters the old man’s mind, so that the narrator is able to

959

recount aspects of the old man’s mental life that would only
be known to him.
For cognitive scientists, the first question is what the
consequences of narrative voice choices are for
comprehenders. Do we process omniscient voice differently
from objective voice? And if so, in what way? Yet, to date,
we know of no work addressing narrative voice and how it
affects language processing.

We pursued both of these questions through an
experiment looking at one property of narratives—narrative
voice—that presents itself as a viable candidate for
engaging internal perspectives in comprehenders. This is a
first step in applying tools used to address comprehension
processes to the stylistic details of narrative—a step in the
direction of a cognitive science of literary style.

Method
Perspective in Language Processing

In order to investigate whether third person language using
different narrative modes—objective or omniscient—
induces mental representations of events from different
perspectives in comprehenders, we adapted a method first
used by Brunyé et al. (2009). We began by creating pairs of
four-sentence narratives in English; one member of each
pair used omniscient voice and the other used objective
voice. Each pair of narratives concluded with the same
fourth sentence. Native speakers of English read one
narrative from each pair, and then saw a picture that either
depicted the scene described in the narrative or not. The
participant’s task was to decide whether the depicted event
could be part of the preceding story. We were only
interested in those trials in which the image did depict the
scene. These images depicted the scene from either an
internal perspective (as if the reader were the character
described in the narrative) or an external perspective (as if
the reader were an outside observer of the action performed
by the character). We predicted that if readers were more
likely to adopt an internal perspective when reading
omniscient voice narratives, this should make them faster to
indicate their judgments about the internal perspective
images following omniscient voice narratives, and
conversely, if they were more likely to adopt an external
perspective while processing objective voice narratives, then
objective voice should make them faster when confirming
matching external perspective images.

One thing that’s quite clear from recent work on language
processing is that comprehenders construct detailed mental
representations of scenes that they read or hear about. These
are variously described in different literatures as situation
models (Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998) or mental simulations
(Barsalou, 1999). It also seems clear that these mental
representations are often constructed from a particular
perspective within the described scene. Different features
seem to affect the perspective a comprehender will adopt
(D’Argembeau, Comblain, & Van der Linden, 2002; Frank
& Gilovich, 1989; Nigro & Neisser, 1983; Robinson &
Swanson, 1993), but these at the very least include the types
of actions the narrative describes (Borghi, Glenberg, &
Kaschak, 2004) and the grammatical person of the narrative
(for instance, 2nd versus 3rd person; Brunyé et al., 2009).
The effects of grammatical person on mental
representations are particularly relevant to voice—in fact,
deciding whether a narrative should use 1st person (I) or 3rd
person (he), is a dimension of voice. There’s been some
work (Brunyé et al., 2009) showing that when people
process 3rd person language, they are more likely to
mentally represent the described scenario from the
viewpoint of an outside observer (they adopt an external
perspective) than from that of a character (an internal
perspective). By way of comparison, 2nd person language
(about you) is more likely to induce an internal perspective.
And yet, not all third person narratives are alike, as the
Hemingway passages illustrate. There’s evidence that the
more a comprehender identifies with a character, the more
likely he or she is to adopt that character’s perspective when
mentally reconstructing the described scene (Libby &
Eibach, 2002; Libby, Eibach, & Gilovich, 2005).
So voice might make a difference. In cases where the
narrator omnisciently describes a character’s mental states,
it could well be that this draws the comprehender into
adopting that character’s perspective in mental
representations of the described scene. By contrast,
objective voice, which describes characters as they would be
viewed externally, might be more likely to induce external
perspectives in mental representations of described scenes.
This reasoning leads to two key questions. First of all, is it
ever the case that third person language can systematically
lead comprehenders to adopt an internal perspective, rather
than the external perspective that has previously been shown
to predominate with third person language? And second, if
it is, what is it about certain third person narratives that
leads comprehenders to adopt an internal perspective?

Participants
Fifty-eight native speakers of English who were
undergraduate students at the University of California, San
Diego participated in this study in exchange for course
credit. All participants reported normal or corrected-tonormal hearing and vision.

Language Materials
We created twenty-four pairs of narratives. Within each
pair, the two narratives were made up of three sentences that
differed, but they both ended with a fourth sentence that was
the same. Each narrative was entirely in the third person,
and used one of the two narrative modes: omniscient or
objective. Omniscient narratives included information about
the mental states of the protagonist, while objective
narratives only described externally visible features of the
protagonist. The final sentence in both conditions described
an event where the protagonist manipulated the given object
with her hand (e.g., she threw away, grabbed, peeled off, or
picked up the object). In addition to these twenty-four

960

critical narratives, which were paired with matching
pictures, as described below, we also created twenty-four
filler stories, half in the omniscient and half in the objective
mode. These were paired with non-matching pictures. Here
is a sample pair of critical narratives:

Procedure
Participants were tested individually. The experiment began
with a set of four practice trials, followed by the
experimental session, which was composed of twenty-four
criticals (requiring “yes” responses) randomly mixed with
twenty-four fillers (requiring “no” responses). In the
experimental session, each participant viewed twelve critical
and twelve filler item-sets in the omniscient narrative mode,
and twelve criticals and twelve fillers in the objective
narrative mode.
Each trial began with a fixation cross for 500 ms,
followed by the first sentence in the middle of the screen.
Participants pressed the spacebar as soon as they finished
reading the sentence, at which point it was replaced on the
screen by the next sentence. After the fourth and final
sentence, participants saw another fixation cross for 500 ms,
followed by a picture depicting, from either an internal or
external perspective, an image that either was or was not
part of the scene described in the story that they had just
read. Participants then indicated if the pictured event was
mentioned in the prior set of sentences, as quickly and
accurately as possible, by pressing a button (“l” for “yes” or
“a” for “no”).
Participants were asked to answer “yes” when the
depicted scene was part of the prior story. No instructions
were given regarding the different perspectives that images
used or the different narrative voices, so as not to draw
attention to these dimensions of the manipulation.
To ensure that participants paid equal attention to each of
the four sentences in the narratives, every trial was followed
by a comprehension question (after picture verification) that
addressed one of the four sentences in the set, in equal
proportions. We recorded the responses (i.e., “yes” or “no”)
and measured the reaction times for picture verification and
responses to comprehension questions.
The two independent variables, Narrative Mode
(Omniscient, Objective) and Picture Perspective (Internal,
External) were fully crossed and manipulated within
participants. The four experimental conditions produced by
crossing these two variables were equally assigned to four
lists in a Latin-square design, resulting in six experimental
items in each condition for each participant. Likewise, the
twelve omniscient and twelve objective filler stories were
followed by half internal, half external perspective pictures
that depicted objects unrelated to the preceding scene.

(1a) Third person omniscient narrative
She was very uncomfortable because her hands felt
sticky and there was still clay under her nails from her
ceramics class.
She desperately wanted to wash her hands, but could
not see a sink anywhere.
She could feel the clay drying even more and eyed the
small towel on the table.
She picked up the hand towel.
(1b) Third person objective narrative
She appeared out of breath when she rushed into the
room.
She looked down at the table, where there was a hand
towel.
Her hands were covered with clay, and she glanced
back and forth between her clay-covered hands and the
towel.
She picked up the hand towel.
In both narrative modes, the number of third person
pronouns she was matched (mean: 4.8 for omniscient, 4.4
for objective), and the total number of words used for each
set of items was similar (mean: 52.5 for omniscient and 56.3
for objective).

Image Materials
The experiment used forty-eight critical pictures (twentyfour internal and twenty-four external perspectives) and
twenty-four filler pictures (twelve internal and twelve
external perspectives). For each set of critical sentences,
corresponding pictures were taken to create a set that
depicted the event from the internal perspective (i.e., a
protagonist’s or performer’s viewpoint) as shown in Figure
1(a), and from the external perspective (i.e., an outside
observer’s viewpoint) as shown in Figure 1(b). Images were
photographs taken using a tripod to ensure that all internal
and all external images were taken from the same angle.
(a) Internal perspective

(b) External perspective

Predictions
We predicted that if third person omniscient narratives lead
participants to project themselves into the protagonist and
accept an internal perspective, participants should respond
faster to internal perspective pictures, whose perspective
matched that evoked by the preceding story, than to external
ones, which mismatched. Conversely, if third person
objective narratives drive participants to adopt an outside
observer’s perspective that has clear mental distance from
the protagonist, it should facilitate responses to external
perspective pictures.

Figure 1: Internal versus external perspective images

961

Results
Three participants were excluded for being left-handed, and
an additional three participants were excluded due to low
accuracy (below 80%) to picture verification or question
comprehension. One item was excluded for its low accuracy
rate (below 80%). The image, of sushi, may have been
problematic because it depicted a type of sushi not typically
available in the United States, which might have confused
participants. Extremely slow responses (those over 4000
ms), incorrect responses to picture verifications and/or to
comprehension questions, and responses that were more
than 2.5sd above or below the mean response time for each
participant were removed. This resulted in eliminating
11.8% of the data (3.0% exclusion due to incorrect picture
verification, 4.8% due to inaccurate response to
comprehension questions, and 4.0% due to the outliers).
Two-way Repeated-Measures ANOVAs revealed no
significant main effect of Narrative Mode (F1(1,51) = 1.0, p
= 0.3, η2p = 0.02; F2(1,22) = 1.4, p = 0.3, η2p = 0.06). Picture
Perspective produced a non-significant main effect in the
subject analysis (F1(1,51) = 1.3, p = 0.3, η2p = 0.03) but
reached a significant effect in the item analysis (F2 (1,22) =
6.9, p = 0.02, η2p = 0.24). However, as we predicted,
Narrative Mode and Picture Perspective produced
significant interaction effects (F1(1,51) = 6.6, p = 0.01, η2p =
0.12; F2(1,22) = 5.5, p = 0.03, η2p = 0.2) (Figure 2).
Planned pairwise t-tests showed that external-perspective
pictures were verified significantly faster after participants
read the third person sentences framed in the objective mode
than after their counterparts in the omniscient mode (mean
RTs for external-perspective pictures: 1510 ms after
omniscient narratives, 1385 ms after objective narratives; t1
= 2.3, p = 0.03; t2 = 2.1, p = 0.049). The converse was true
as well: internal perspectives were verified numerically
faster after reading sentences formulated in the omniscient
mode than after reading sentences in the objective mode.
However, the differences did not reach significance (mean
RTs for internal-perspective pictures: 1392 ms after
omniscient narratives, 1432 ms after objective narratives; t1
= 0.8, p = 0.4; t2 = 0.4, p = 0.7). The most robust difference
was found in the picture verification time after participants
read the omniscient narratives (mean RTs after reading
omniscient narratives: 1510 ms for external-perspective
pictures, 1392 ms for internal-perspective pictures; t1 = 2.6,
p = 0.01; t2 = 3.8, p = 0.001), while only a numerical
difference was found after participants read the objective
narratives (mean RTs after reading objective narratives:
1385 ms for external-perspective pictures, 1432 ms for
internal-perspective pictures; t1 = 1.1, p = 0.28; t2 = 0.1, p =
0.9).

Figure 1: Mean RTs for picture verification, demonstrating
an interaction effect between Narrative Mode (Omniscient
vs. Objective) and Picture Perspective (Internal vs.
External). Error bars indicate standard error.
In order to assess whether there could be a speedaccuracy tradeoff present in these data, we conducted an
error analysis. We ran Repeated-Measures ANOVAs with
Accuracy as the dependent measure and Narrative Mode
and Picture Perspective as the independent measures. These
revealed no significant main effects of Narrative Mode (Fs
< 1) or Picture Perspective (Fs < 1), nor any interaction
effect (Fs < 1).
We also conducted post-hoc analyses to determine
whether perspective adoption effects differed according to
participants’ sex; as the narratives all described a female
protagonist, it's possible that female participants were more
likely to adopt an internal perspective on the described
scenes. We had unbalanced numbers of male and female
participants (male = 15, female = 37). Three-way RepeatedMeasures ANOVAs with Reaction Time as the dependent
measure and Narrative Mode, Picture Perspective, and
Participant’s Sex as the independent variables did not show
a significant three-way interaction of Gender by Narrative
Mode by Picture Perspective (F1(1,50) = 2.4, p = 0.1, η2p =
0.05). This might indicate that perspective adoption is not
significantly affected by participants’ gender.

Discussion
We investigated the notion that language comprehenders
construct mental representations of described scenes by
adopting particular perspectives, perspectives that, by
hypothesis, might be affected by the narrative voice used.
Previous work (Brunyé et al., 2009) has shown that third
person language tends to elicit an external perspective on
described events, but we found that it did not do so across
the board. Rather, as predicted, the adopted perspective was
modulated by the type of narrative voice. Omniscient voice
made comprehenders significantly more likely to adopt an
internal perspective, while objective voice made them
quantitatively more likely to adopt an external perspective.

962

The asymmetry between the strong effect of omniscient
voice and the relatively weaker one of objective voice may
relate to the fact that all narratives and images in the
experiment described or depicted to the same female
protagonist. It's possible that there was a cumulative effect
over the course of the experiment whereby participants
came to identify with the protagonist. This might have
resulted in third person objective language, which according
to previous results should have facilitated external images,
instead driving internal mental representations of described
events.
In general, these results we observed are compatible with
previous work showing that language comprehenders not
only construct detailed mental representations of described
scenes, but do so from a particular perspective. Critically,
this study adds to the existing literature on perspective by
showing that person is not the only linguistic factor that can
push the comprehender’s adopted perspective around—
narrative voice appears to have a similar effect. The
perspective a comprehender adopts in constructing mental
representations of described scenes is the flexible product of
stylistic aspects of the narration itself. It is already known
that the same person does not always lead to the same
perspective in comprehension. Previous research conducted
by Brunyé et al. (2009) shows that first person I in an
isolated sentence is more likely to induce an internal
perspective, but when it’s embedded in a richer discourse
context, it tends to evoke an external perspective. Our
findings show a similar flexibility for third person language,
but whereas it is the presence or absence of a back-story that
has been shown to modulate perspective during first person
language processing, we found that the style of the narrative
context itself modulates perspective in third person language
processing.
Our specific finding is that when the protagonist’s internal
states are described, as in a third person omniscient
narrative, readers are more likely to adopt the visual
perspective of the relevant character. This may be related to
empathetic projection in which a reader engages with that
character (Carr et al., 2003; Decety & Sommerville, 2003;
Lamm, Batson, & Decety, 2007; Perrine & Decety, 2004).
Reading descriptions of the mental and emotional states of a
character might lead comprehenders to identify with and
imagine themselves as that character. As a result,
omniscient narration might not only lead to measurable
differences in the visual perspective comprehenders adopt,
but also influence the extent to which they adopt the
affective perspective of a character—the extent to which
they recreate, while reading, the emotions that a character
might experience (Havas, Glenberg, & Rinck, 2007).
Our results may also be related to resonant projection—
observers are more likely to find a situation resonant when
they share action-relevant characteristics with the actor,
such as a viewpoint in hand-object interacting events
(Bruzzo, Borghi, & Ghirlanda, 2008), similar motor
competence (Calvo-Merino et al., 2006), or relevant motor
knowledge or expertise (Calvo-Merino et al., 2010).

Readers do not adopt a fixed perspective that is evoked by
language, and it might be that the modulation of perspective
by narrative voice works similarly to these other factors that
influence projection.

Conclusion
In sum, the results we’ve reported here add to the existing
literature on perspective adoption in language
comprehension by showing that narrative style has an
impact on whether comprehenders view a described scene
from an internal or an external perspective. In some
circumstances, third person language can be just as effective
at transporting the comprehender into the described
experience of a character as second person language can.
Research like this shows the promise of using empirical
cognitive science methods to explore the effects of literary
style. Readers are, after all, humans, and reading is, after all,
a cognitive behavior. Understanding the effects of cognitive
style is well within our reach.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(A) “Typological Variation in Human Language and
Plasticity of Neurocognitive Systems (PI: Hiromu Sakai,
#23242020)” and Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B)
“Neurocognitive Basis for Language Learning through the
Processing of Input and Output (PI: Hiromu Sakai,
#20320060).”

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660.
Borghi, A. M., Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2004).
Putting words in perspective. Memory & Cognition, 32,
863–873.
Brunyé, T. T., Ditman, T., Mahoney, C. R., Augustyn, J. S.,
& Taylor, H. A. (2009). When you and I share
perspectives: Pronouns modulate perspective-taking
during narrative comprehension. Psychological Science,
20, 27–32.
Bruzzo, A., Borghi, M. A., & Ghirlanda, S. (2008). Handobject interaction in perspective. Neuroscience Letters,
441, 61–65.
Calvo-Merino, B., Ehrenberg, S., Leung, D., & Haggard, P.
(2010). Experts see it all: Configural effects in action
observation. Psychological Research, 74, 400–406.
Calvo-Merino, B., Grezes, J., Glaser, E. D., Passingham, E.
R., & Haggard, P. (2006). Seeing or doing? Influence of
visual and motor familiarity in action observation.
Current Biology, 16, 1905–1910.
Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C., &
Lenzi, G. L. (2003). Neural mechanisms of empathy in
humans: A relay from neural systems for imitation to
limbic areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of

963

Sciences of the United States of America, 100(9), 5497–
5502.
D’Argembeau, A., Comblain, C., & Van der Linden, M.
(2002). Phenomenal characteristics of autobiographical
memories for positive, negative, and neutral events.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 17(3), 281–294.
Decety, J., & Sommerville J. A. (2003). Shared
representations between self and other: A social cognitive
neuroscience view. Trends in Cognitive Science, 7(12),
527–523.
Frank, M., & Gilovich, T. (1989). Effect of memory
perspective on retrospective causal attributions. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(3), 399–403.
Havas, D. A., Glenberg, A. M., & Rinck, M. (2007).
Emotion simulation during language comprehension.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(3), 436-441.
Lamm, C., Batson, C. D., & Decety, J. (2007). The neural
substrate of human empathy: Effects of perspective-taking
and cognitive appraisal. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19(1), 42–58.
Libby, L. K., & Eibach, R. P. (2002). Looking back in time:
Self-concept change affects visual perspective in
autobiographical memory. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82, 167–179.
Libby, L. K., Eibach, R. P., & Gilovich, T. (2005). Here’s
looking at me: The effect of memory perspective on
assessments of personal change. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 88, 50–62.
Nigro, G., & Neisser, U. (1983). Point of view in personal
memories. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 467–482.
Perrine, R., & Decety, J. (2004). How would you feel versus
how do you think she would feel? A neuroimaging study
of perspective-taking with social emotions. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(6), 988–999.
Robinson, J., & Swanson, K. (1993). Field and observer
modes of remembering. Memory, 1(3), 169–184.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models
in language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123, 162–185.

964

