UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Towards historical cognitive science: the case of Ancient Greece

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6g2987vn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Glebkin, Vladimir

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Towards historical cognitive science: the case of Ancient Greece
V.V. Glebkin (gleb1514@gmail.com)
Gymnasium 1514, 12 Krupskoi Street
Moscow, 119311 Russia
Abstract
This study rests on the two basic ideas: that there has
been a visible development of cognitive skills from the Antiquity to nowadays, and that the text analysis is the only
way to bring it out. The author addresses the three eminent
works: Euclid’s Elements and the historical treatises by
Herodotus and Thucydides to reveal the notable peculiarities of the Ancient Greeks’ cognitive style in comparison
with the current cognitive models.

Introduction
Cognitive scientists traditionally look at language as a cognitive system. However, it is not the
only acceptable view on language within the scope of
cognitive science. The distinguished German historian
Reinhart Koselleck emphasized «a methodologically
irresoluble dilemma: that every history, while in process and as occurrence, is something other than what
its linguistic articulation can establish; but that this
"other" in turn can only be made visible through the
medium of language» (Koselleck 2004, 223; сf. Pocock 2009, 106119). Admittedly, this position may
just as well be applied to cognition: the way people
think is different from verbal representation, but we
cannot comprehend how the people of the 19th century
and earlier used to think and perceive the world without a scrupulous analysis of the texts they created.
Although such a view on text as a medium for revealing cognitive models is not widespread amongst cognitive scientists, there are a number of branches
within cognitive science that have emerged recently
(cognitive stylistics, cognitive poetics etc.), in which
scholars apply a cognitive analysis to particular texts,
mostly fiction (Attardo 2002; Culpeper 2002; Semino
2002; Tsur 2002; Emmott et al. 2007; Semino 2007).
However, we can hardly encounter any works that
provide us with a precise analysis of different types of
texts, created in the same historical epoch in order to
explicate general for these texts cognitive models. To
develop an elaborate methodology for such analysis is
not a matter of cognitive stylistics or cognitive poetics; it is merely a matter of a special branch of cognitive science which can be called historical cognitive
science.
This paper focuses on two case studies, but its
bottom line is to provide some conceptual pillars for
investigations in this field, in other words, to discover
some correlations between the narrative models of the
text construction and the cognitive models used by its
author. The concept of cognitive style will be the main
methodological tool for that. This concept is widely
applied in different types of researches (Rubin 1970;
Berzonsky & Ondrako 1974; Witkin et al. 1977;
Logan 1983; Roberge & Flexer 1983; Fuchs 1991;
McIntyre & Meloche 1995; Judice 1997; Riding &

1602

Rayner 1998; Riding & Rayner 2000; Tomes 2004;
cf. concept of mind style in Semino 2002; Semino
2007); although it cannot be called fairly clear-cut
(see some criticism in Tomes 2004, 4748), its gist is
quite transparent: a) cognitive styles characterize the
form rather than the content of cognitive activity; b)
they are pervasive dimensions which cut across the
disciplinary boundaries; c) they are stable over time;
d) they are bipolar, that is, they can be sorted out into
opposite pairs (field-dependency  independency;
holist  serialist thinking; adaptors  innovators etc.)
(Witkin et al. 1977, 1516; Riding & Rayner 1998, p.
20). The two peculiarities of my applying this term
here should be featured as follows: firstly, in this context I mean a cognitive style of a particular culture,
but not a particular person; in other words, I address
the mode of thinking common to a notable number of
culture bearers, involved in different types of intellectual activity; secondly, I seek for some criteria to
compare these modes and establish the foundations
for cultural-historical typology of cognitive styles.
The only parameter we will focus on is fielddependency  independency. Following H. Witkin,
the field-independent cognitive style characterizes the
tendency to differentiate objects from their surroundings whereas the field-dependent one stresses the
strict connection between surroundings and objects. It
concerns the subjects themselves as well; people of
the field-dependent style are more likely to follow
external instructions while field-independent style
people prefer to rest on the internal basis for their
actions (Witkin et al. 1977, 2-14).
The field-dependency  independency opposition, with some necessary corrections, seems to be a
fruitful pathway to fit the process of cognitive evolution in phylogenesis. Furthermore, it correlates quite
well with some classical researches in this field. I
mean the investigations of Vygotsky’s school of cultural-historical psychology or, more precisely, the
distinction between complex and conceptual thinking
(Vygotsky 1986(1934), 96-145) and the idea of field
binding (Samukhin et al. 1934; Vygotsky 1984
(1933/34)). Briefly, the essence of this approach can
be formulated as follows: unlike concepts which are
characterized by a rigid structure and a set of objective features, complexes have flexible and contextually dependent frames. In the case of complex thinking, subjects’ cognitive decisions are influenced by
their unique experience, and they cannot be described
by any general abstract model such as Aristotelian
logic. Vygotsky created this model mainly to explain
pre-school and primary school child cognitive development, and only outlined its application to phylogenesis. However, his followers applied this approach to different types of cultures and got the im-

portant results. Thus, Alexander Luria (1976), researching cognitive scenarios basic for Central Asia
dekchans, pointed out that those scenarios were triggered by psychological fields of their everyday activity. Particularly, the subjects could not see the abstract
principles used to classify a given set of objects and
failed to identify the odd one out; they found all the
objects useful for everyday life. As well, they could
not solve syllogisms, conceiving their elements as
independent propositions. Furthermore, their answers
were based on their everyday experience, and they
insisted that they could speak only about the things
they had seen before. Further investigations (e.g.,
Mikheev 1985; Tulviste 1991) confirmed that complex thinking and rigid links with the psychological
field of everyday experience can be called the bottom
line of the traditional cultures’ cognitive style.
At first sight our mind operates in a radically different way. Nevertheless, the investigations of R.
Frumkina and her colleagues (Frumkina & Mirkin
1986, Frumkina et al. 1991, Frumkina & Mikheev
1996, Frumkina 2007) found out that complex thinking characterizes cognitive decisions of educated persons in modern culture in a great number of everyday
situations. The only difference from the traditional
culture is that they can explain their decisions and
accommodate them to the experimenter’s requests. As
a generalization of these results, we can suppose that
our cognitive structure has several levels, where complex thinking occupies the lowest, strongly fielddependent level, while different types of theoretical
thinking are on the upper ones. In a concrete situation,
we, guided by circumstances, resort to the relevant
«floor» of our cognitive construction.
Given these standpoints as the background for
the further discussion, we have a reason to ask in
which cultures these floors emerge. It might seem that
they emerge alongside the emergence of a written
language and complex forms of social-economic activity in such large-scale civilizations as Ancient
Babylon or Ancient Egypt. However, this point is the
subject of serious objections. For instance, in Glebkin
2011 I address the Code of Hammurabi, i.e. the Babylonian law code, dated back to around the 18th century
B.C., and argue that, in dissonance with our expectations, the code structure and its layout are accounted
for by a complex thinking model. Consequently, the
point that the theoretical mode of thinking is a feature
of the Ancient Babylon culture cannot be taken for
granted and needs convincing evidence based on a
scrupulous analysis of concrete texts.
What cannot be cast in doubt is the fact that theoretical thinking is an important element of the Ancient
Greek culture. However, it is the beginning but not
the end of the investigation. The question is whether
the cognitive style dominant in this culture is similar
to the modern one, or it has some notable peculiarities. And, if the latter hypothesis is correct, can we
track the trajectory of cognitive evolution within the
theoretical mode of thinking? In order to answer this
question, I would like to consider the three eminent
works: Euclid’s Elements and the historical treatises
by Herodotus and Thucydides.

1603

The cognitive style of Euclid’s Elements
It is not a novel insight that modern mathematics
(at least, mathematics at school) rests on Euclid’s
Elements. If so, we might expect to see in this work
the familiar to us conceptual ideas and basic attitudes.
According to common sense, mathematics is not
grounded on any socio-cultural environment. Nevertheless, there are persuasive arguments for the opposite view. Thus, the eminent German historian and
philosopher Oswald Spengler in his book The Decline
of the West (Der Untergang des Abendlandes)
claimed that every culture has its own mathematics,
and the difference between the Ancient Greek
mathematical style and that of Modernity is crucial
(Spengler 1991 (1918), 41-69). So, let us have a more
precise look at the text of the Elements.
We start up with the definitions of the first book.
Here we encounter some surprises. For example, the
definition of a triangle goes like this: Of trilateral
figures, an equilateral triangle is that which has its
three sides equal, an isosceles triangle that which has
two of its sides alone equal, and a scalene triangle
that which has its three sides unequal (Heath 1956, 1,
2). In modern understanding an equilateral triangle is
a particular case of a triangle, and it sounds strange to
mark out a scalene triangle as a special type of triangles. However, for the Ancient Greeks the more perfect cannot be a particular case of the less perfect, and
it is an equilateral triangle which is a triangle par excellence. The next illustration of this principle is the
difference between the concepts of number and magnitude. The definitions related to magnitude are
placed in the fifth book of the Elements, whereas
those related to number are located in the seventh one
(Heath 1956, 2, 113-114, 277-278). Some of them are
identical, and we can render number as a particular
case of magnitude. However, for the Ancient Greeks
it is not the case. Number is more perfect than magnitude; unlike the latter, the former has its own visual
image, its own eúdo~. The idea of the perfect form,
based on a visual perception, is extremely important
for the Ancient Greek philosophy and culture. The
more perfect the entity is the more perfect form it has.
Thus, Parmrnides’ Being (t4 §n) and Plato’s Universe
(k3smo~) have the most perfect form, that is the form
of a sphere (Parmen. Fr. 7; Pl. Tym. 33b-34a).
The visual ground for cognition can be also illustrated by the “geometric algebra” of the second book.
Here, elementary algebraic formulas, such as (a+b)2 =
a2+2ab+b2, are proved by employing the language of
geometry (see fig. 1). This proof looks rather cumbersome (it occupies two pages, whereas an algebraic
proof fits into one line), but here we encounter the
fundamental limitations of the Ancient Greek mathematics. Such a “geometrization” of mathematics, its
dependence on the visual field determined its frontiers1; solution of some third and forth equations was
1

The “visual vector” of the Ancient Greek mathematics can
also be revealed in terminology. Thus, according to LiddellScott’s Greek-English Lexicon the basic meaning of

the maximum to reach in that scope. The only way to
take a further step in this field was to develop the abstract notation system of algebra which meant breaking the links between numbers and their visual
ground. Such breaking demanded radical cultural
transformations provided by medieval culture.

gives new opportunities for mathematics, particularly,
for the theory of functions.
So, summing up this part of the paper, I would
like to highlight the visual-field-dependence as the
important feature of the mathematics cognitive style.
Now, we move on to the Ancient Greek historical
treatises.

The cognitive style of Herodotus and
Thucydides

Fig. 1. A geometrical proof of the formula
(a+b)2 = a2+2ab+b2
It may therefore be interesting to sketch the bottom line of this process. From the Ancient Greek perspective, both the Universe and particular natural
things were self-sufficient entities, and such selfsufficiency was perceived as perfection (see, e.g.,
Arist. Phys II 192 b8-30). It means that they contained
within themselves a principle of their motion and
transformation. In the medieval Christian culture,
however, such a principle turns out to be situated outside the Universe. The Universe and particular things
become there signs of the transcendental reality, the
means to understand the scheme of God. The functional paradigm stands for the eidetic one. What it
means for mathematics can be clearly seen if we
compare views on number by Plotinus, whose “Enneads” is considered to be the outcome of the Ancient
Greek philosophical attitudes, and Augustine, the key
person of the early medieval philosophy. For Plotinus
numbers are placed between ›n (the One) and noàj
(the Divine Mind), having the higher rank than the
other eŒdota (ideas) (Enn. 6, 6, 8-14), whereas for
Augustine numbers are transformed into tools in
God’s hands, loosing in this their unique forms. Thus,
he introduces numbers, perceived by sense (numeri
sensibilis), numbers, moving over time (temporales
numeri) etc. (Epistola III, 2; De musica, VI, 57). The
diversity of types and forms of number entails the
release from visual-field-dependence, which in turn
qewršw is “to look at, view, behold”, e.g., “to view the public games”; qewr…a basically means “sending the stateambassadors to the oracles or games or being a spectator at
the theatre or games”, qeèrhma – “sight, spectacle, object of
contemplation”. Thanks to Aristotle these concepts were
shifted from the material world to the ideal one to characterize the process, product and object of intellectual contemplation.

1604

Let me start with the History by Herodotus. This
historian is called the "Father of History" because his
treatise is the first example of the elaborate systematic
analysis of a huge amount of historical data. To some
extent his status in science is similar to Euclid’s one.
Here, we focus on the first book of the History and
start up with the methodology. In order to give a more
precise analysis of the narrative structure of this book,
I first marked out three levels of narration: e x t e r n a l (the basic level where people are considered
social role-holders and their behavior is influenced by
their surroundings), i n t e r n a l (the level corresponding to feelings, thoughts and decisions of humans as free will persons), t r a n s c e n d e n t (the
level characterizing gods’ actions, fate, predestination
and other factors which are believed transcendent to
the human world). Then I divided the text into some
structural elements, namely: e v e n t s ; c a u s a l
r e m a r k s , situated both within an event and
between the events
(they explain why the event
develops or the subsequent events are connected in
this particular way), e x p o s i t i o n s , introducing
unknown for the readers, but important for the further
narration information about the venue of an event,
people engaged in it, etc.; philosophical, existential
et al. reflections and explanations. The events in turn
were sorted out into three groups: “time markers”, i.e.
some bare mentions to fill the time gap (e.g., “Not
long after the overthrow of the tyrants by the Lacedaemonians, the battle of Marathon was fought between the Athenians and the Persians” (Thuc. Hist., 1,
18; tr. by B. Jowett)) (E0); the single events described
briefly (E1); the events described in detail (E2)
(although it was not the absolute criterion, the detailed
description commonly had more than 2000
characters). Additionally, I recorded whether the
event is single or iterative.
Since a comprehensive analysis of all the aspects
of the narrative structure would doubtlessly lead to
another long article I will restrict myself to the analysis of the 1st chapter, just focusing on some observations that should be definitely included in such a debate.
Firstly, 19% of the 1st chapter is taken by the
events described in detail (E2)2. Given that 21% of the
chapter is devoted to ethnographic descriptions within
expositions, we can stress a slow speed of narration;
the historian’s view here is a sensitive to details view
of a spectator, but not a bird’s-eye view of a longterm researcher.
2

I counted the figure of characters in the Greek text.

The additional evidence for such visual-fielddependence is provided by the fact that 67% (55 from
82) of the events, described briefly (E1), turn out to
be spectacular descriptions resting on a visual perception, or, put another way, a kind of performance the
audience visualize at the theatre. Let me illustrate it
with an episode of the tyrannus Pisistratus returning
to Athens: “Presently his enemies who together had
driven him out began to feud once more. Then Megacles, harassed by factional strife, sent a message to
Pisistratus offering him his daughter to marry and the
sovereign power besides. When this offer was accepted by Pisistratus, who agreed on these terms with
Megacles, they devised a plan to bring Pisistratus
back which, to my mind, was so exceptionally foolish
that it is strange (since from old times the Hellenic
stock has always been distinguished from foreign by
its greater cleverness and its freedom from silly foolishness) that these men should devise such a plan to
deceive Athenians, said to be the subtlest of the
Greeks. There was in the Paeanian deme a woman
called Phya, three fingers short of six feet, four inches
in height, and otherwise, too, well-formed. This
woman they equipped in full armor and put in a chariot, giving her all the paraphernalia to make the most
impressive spectacle, and so drove into the city; heralds ran before them, and when they came into town
proclaimed as they were instructed: “Athenians, give
a hearty welcome to Pisistratus, whom Athena herself
honors above all men and is bringing back to her own
acropolis.” So the heralds went about proclaiming
this; and immediately the report spread in the demes
that Athena was bringing Pisistratus back, and the
townsfolk, believing that the woman was the goddess
herself, worshipped this human creature and welcomed Pisistratus” (Her. Hist., 1, 60; tr. by A. Godley). We can see that the pivot component of this episode is the visual image of Phya-Athena, and its structure in general addresses us to Aristophanes’ or
Menander’s comedy.
Secondly, the philosophical reflections are
expressed here not through the author’s words, but for
the most part by the extended remarks of the
characters in the dialogues. For instance, the idea of
happiness, extremely important for Herodotus and the
Ancient Greek culture in general, is put into the
mouth of the eminent Athenian legislator Solon in his
talk with Croesus, king of Lydia (Her. Hist., 1, 3033). The behavior of the characters and the context of
the talk are fairly close to Homer’s epos or the ancient
tragedy, where the spectator is expected to watch it.
Thirdly, in order to reveal the reasons for
historical events, Herodotus refers to both,
transcendent powers (fate, gods’ envy) and human
intensions dependent on their character, social rank,
view on the situation, etc. Most frequently his
interpretation is guided by the cumulative principle, in
other words, he gives a number of versions without
reconciling them. Importantly, however, transcendent
factors proved to be involved in human life as initial
reference points, and from the matter of fact human
quick-wittedness or stupidity appear the main reason
for the historical development. A good illustration for

1605

that is Herodotus’ view on oracles and signs. Given
the truth of the oracles as a point beyond doubt, he
points at the capacity to render oracles and signs as a
deciding factor to the successful action and puts the
reason for human failures in people themselves rather
than in fate or destiny (Hist.1,65; 1, 67-68; 1,71; 1, 91
etc.).
So, in sum, we can conclude, that for Herodotus
the cloth of history is woven by particular people who
implement their intentions and projects and take into
account various circumstances, from weather to
oracles and signs, to do their best in that.
Let us look now at the Thucydides’ treatise. At
first sight, his narrative manner has nothing in
common with the Herodotus’ one. The notable part of
events in the 1st chapter of his History is described
with time markers, and the descriptions, resting on a
visual perception, occupy just 13% (8 from 62) of the
briefly described events. However, in comparison
with Herodotus, the events described in detail occupy
here much more space (41.5%). Part of them (12.3%)
look quite “cinematic” stories (e.g., sea battle between
Corinth and Kerkyra (1, 48-53), or constructing the
walls around Athens (1, 89-93)), but the key place
here (29.2%) is occupied by talks and dialogues, invented by Thucydides. In these dialogues the characters state their views on the situation trying to convince the audience to follow their suggestions. Taking
into account their length and position within the text,
we can call them the core elements of Thucydides’
treatise. The analysis of these talks leads us to the two
main conclusions. Firstly, their composition
resembles Euripides’ tragedies. Similar to Herodotus,
these talks address a listener, but not a reader.
Secondly, even much more intensively than
Herodotus, Thucydides insists that human intentions
and reasons are the main factor of the historical
development. Transcendent level happens to be
omitted in his text.
The situation changes radically if we resort to the
medieval historiography. Let me illustrate these
transformations with The History of the Franks by
Gregory of Tours. Indeed, we can find here a number
of descriptions resting on a visual perception. However, all of them appear signs of transcendent reality,
the testimony of its presence in the material world.
Here is the illustration: “At that time Quirinus, bishop
of the church of Sissek, endured glorious martyrdom
in Christ's name. The cruel pagans cast him into a
river with a millstone tied to his neck, and when he
had fallen into the waters he was long supported on
the surface by a divine miracle, and the waters did not
suck him down since the weight of crime did not press
upon him. And a multitude of people standing around
wondered at the thing, and despising the rage of the
heathen they hastened to free the bishop. He saw this
and did not permit himself to be deprived of martyrdom, and raising his eyes to heaven he said: "Jesus
lord, who sittest in glory at the right hand of the Father, suffer me not to be taken from this course, but
receive my soul and deign to unite me with thy martyrs in eternal peace." With these words he gave up

the ghost, and his body was taken up by the Christians
and reverently buried” (1, 35; tr. by E. Brehaut).
Another important feature of this text is the lack
of direct causal links between events. Similar to
Augustine’s numbers historical events turn out for
Gregory of Tours the tools in God’s hands, which
leads us to breaking of the visual-field-dependence
and gives new opportunities for historiography.
Conclusion
Now, it is time to return to the general issue
raised in the introduction. It is not in doubt that the
Ancient Greek culture is theoretical, where we can
find most cognitive operations that we perform.
However, we can also encounter some special
features like visual grounding of cognitive operations.
All in all, the question is whether it is correct to speak
here about the cognitive development from antiquity
to nowadays, or to compare different cognitive styles
for the sake of revealing cognitive evolution means to
put the shoe on the wrong foot. There is some evidence to support the former hypothesis. Thus, M. de
Vega (2008) argues for the existence of two levels of
embodiment: a first-order embodiment is “strongly
grounded on current perception and action”, whereas
a second-order embodiment “is much more detached
from current perception and action” (ibid., 300). Similarly, we can single out at least two levels of embodiment for mathematics: the one for Euclid’s geometry
and the other for, say, a functional analysis. So, the
general point is that, following the more complex
challenges of modern life, the cognitive structure of
modern people has got more “floors”, and their cognitive styles have much more variations than they used
to have in Ancient Greece. The opposition “fielddependency  independency” seems quite productive
to describe this development.

Acknowledgements
I appreciate Mrs. Tatiana Malitskaya for help in
preparing this paper.
References
Attardo, S. (2002). Cognitive stylistics in humorous
texts. In E. Semino, J. Culpeper (eds.) Cognitive Stylistics. Language and cognition in text analysis. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: J. Benjamins Pub. Co., 231250.
Berzonsky, M. & Ondrako, M. (1974). Cognitive
Style and Logical Deductive Reasoning. The Journal
of Experimental Education, 43, 1, 18-24.
Culpeper, J. (2002). A cognitive stylistic approach to
characterization. In E. Semino, J. Culpeper (eds.)
Cognitive Stylistics. Language and cognition in text
analysis. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: J. Benjamins Pub.
Co., 251-277.
de Vega, M. (2008). Levels of embodied meaning:
From pointing to counterfactuals. In de Vega M.,
Glenberg A., Graesser A. (eds.) Symbols and embodiment: debates on meaning and cognition. Oxford;
New York: Oxford University Press, 285-308.

1606

Emmott, C., Sanford, A. & Dawydiak, E. (2007). Stylistics meets Cognitive Science: Studying Style in
Fiction and Readers' Attention from an Interdisciplinary Perspective. Style, 41, 2, 204-224.
Frumkina, R. (2007). Social'noe poznanie v kontekste
lingvistiki i psihologii. Obschestvennye nauki i
sovremennost' 1, 145-156.
Frumkina R. & Mirkin B. (1986). Semantika “konkretnoi» leksiki: psiholingvisticheskii podhod. Izvestiya
Akademii Nauk SSSR. Seriya Literatury i yazyka. 45,
1, 12-22.
Frumkina, R., Mikheev, A., Mostovaya, A. & Ryumina, N. (1991). Semantika i kategorizaciya. M.:
Nauka.
Frumkina, R. & Mikheev A. (1996). Meaning and
categorization. New York: Nova Science.
Fuchs, S. (1991) Metatheory as Cognitive Style. Sociological Perspectives, 34, 3, 287-301.
Glebkin, V. (2009). Chislo u Plotina i Avgustina. In
Krichevets A. (ed.) Chislo. M.: MAKS Press, 264272.
Glebkin, V. (2011). Hermeneutics and cognitive science: a preliminary approach. In B. Kokinov, A.
Karmiloff-Smith, N. J. Nersessian (eds.). European
Perspectives on Cognitive Science. Proceedings of the
European Conference on Cognitive Science EuroCosSci2011. Sophia: New Bulgarian University Press,
1-4.
Heath, Th. (1956). The thirteen books of Euclid’s
Elements. New York: Dover Publications.
Judice, N. (1997). Cognitive style: A threedimensional model. Ph.D. dissertation. Arizona State
University.
Koselleck, R. (2004). Futures past: on the semantics
of historical time. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Logan, J. (1983). Cognitive Style and Reading. The
Reading Teacher, 36, 7, 704-707.
Luria, A. (1976). Cognitive Development: Its Cultural
and Social Foundations. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
McIntyre, R. & Meloche, M. (1995). Cognitive Style
and Customer Orientation. Journal of Business and
Psychology, 10, 1, 75-86.
Mikheev, A. (1985). Svobodnaya klassifikaciya
nabora predmetov (eksperiment v Nagornom Karabahe). In Frumkina, R. (ed.). Lingvisticheskie i psiholingvisticheskie struktury rechi. M.: Institut
yazykoznapniya, 78-93.
Pocock, J. (2009). Political thought and history: essays on theory and method. Cambridge, UK; New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Riding, R. & Rayner, S. (1998). Cognitive styles and
learning strategies: understanding style differences in
learning and behaviour. L.: D. Fulton Publishers.
Riding, R. & Rayner, S. (2000). Cognitive styles.
Stamford, Conn.: Ablex Publishing Corp.
Roberge, J. & Flexer, B. (1983). Cognitive Style, Operativity, and Mathematics Achievement. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 14, 5, 344-353.
Rubin, R. (1970). Cognitive Style in Pregnancy. The
American Journal of Nursing, 70, 3, 502-508.

Samuhin, N., Birenbaum, G. & Vygotskii, L. (1934).
K voprosu o strukture demencii pri bolezni Pi-ka.
Sovetskaya nevropatologiya, psihiatriya i psihogigiena, 3,6, 97-136.
Semino, E. (2002). A cognitive stylistic approach to
mind style in narrative fiction. In E. Semino, J.
Culpeper (eds.) Cognitive Stylistics. Language and
cognition in text analysis. Amsterdam; Philadelphia:
J. Benjamins Pub. Co., 95-122.
Semino, E. (2007). Mind Style Twenty-five Years On.
Style, 41, 2, 153-173.
Spengler, O. (1991 (1918)). The decline of the West.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Tomes, Y. (2004). Cognitive style, achievement, and
ethnicity: A study in higher education. Ph.D. dissertation. Richmond, Virginia: Virginia Commonwealth
University.
Tsur, R. (2002). Aspects of Cognitive Poetics. In E.
Semino, J. Culpeper (eds.) Cognitive Stylistics. Language and cognition in text analysis. Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: J. Benjamins Pub. Co., 279-318.
Tulviste, P. (1991). The cultural-historical development of verbal thinking. Commack, N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers.
Vygotsky, L. 1984 (1933/34). Rannee detstvo. In Vygotsky, L. Sobranie sochinenii, 4. M.: Pedagogika,
340–367.
Vygotsky, L. (1986(1934)). Thought and language.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Witkin H., Moore C., Goodenough D., Cox P. (1977).
Field-Dependent and Field-Independent Cognitive
Styles and Their Educational Implications. Review of
Educational Research, 47, 1, 1-64.

1607

