UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Concept Map to Evaluate Learning by Searching

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2dk6483v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Saito, Hitomi
Egusa, Yuka
Takaku, Masao
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Concept Map to Evaluate Learning by Searching
Hitomi Saito (hsaito@auecc.aichi-edu.ac.jp)
Aichi University of Education, 1 Hirosawa, Igaya, Kariya, Aichi, 448-8542, Japan

Yuka Egusa (yuka@nier.go.jp)
National Institute for Educational Policy Research, 3-2-2 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 100-8951, Japan

Masao Takaku (TAKAKU.Masao@nims.go.jp)
National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0047, Japan

Makiko Miwa (miwamaki@ouj.ac.jp)
The Open University of Japan, 2-11 Wakaba, Mihama, Chiba, 261-8586, Japan

Noriko Kando (kando@nii.ac.jp)
National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan
contexts, and investigate how people acquire knowledge during their search and what influence search topics and situations have on their knowledge.
We used concept maps to evaluate the knowledge acquired
by the users and how their knowledge structure changed as
a result of their searching for information on the Web. The
concept map is a graphical representation that allows people to explicitly represent their knowledge (Novak & Gowin,
1984). The concept map consists of concept words, arrows
that connect the concept words, and linking words (link labels on the arrows.)
Concept maps have been used as measures to assess learners’ knowledge and understanding. Meagher (2009) reported
that the graph structures of concept maps became more complex from the first class in a course through the final exam.
Rebich and Gautier (2005) also showed that the total number
of useful items on post-course maps increased, while the total
number of weak items and misconceptions decreased. Concept maps are also used to compare expert knowledge structures with novice knowledge structures. Chi, Feltovich, and
Glaser (1981) compared the categories used by experts and
novices and their explanations about the problems to examine
the relationship between categorization and representation of
physics problems. They drew concept maps to compare expert explanations with novice explanations.
Some research on information seeking behaviors has used
concept maps as a means of measuring the change in a
learner’s knowledge. Vakkari and Pennanen (2003) explored
how a student’s conceptual structure is related to search tactics and search success. They reported that, between the
beginning and end of the overall task, different features of
the student’s conceptual structures were connected to search
success in terms of the useful documents they found. Cole,
Lin, Leide, Large, and Beheshti (2007) focused on how students’ mental model diagrams for a topic were represented in
an early exploration stage of the information-seeking process
and they suggested a 12-category classification schema of the
mental models. Our previous researches also have studied

Abstract
We defined learning while searching and browsing on the Web
as ”learning by searching.” We used concept map to evaluate
how users’ knowledge structure changed as a result of their
learning by searching. The influence of different topics and
different scenarios was also investigated. In the experiment,
participants were divided into divergent and convergent scenario groups. They were asked to assume the role of a journal
editor and search for information to be presented at an editorial
meeting. They performed two tasks within the topics of environment and travel. We compared the two concept maps drawn
by the participants before and after the search and analyzed the
web pages browsed by the participants during the tasks. The
results showed that the participants’ knowledge representation
dynamically changed through learning as a result of searching, and the topics and scenarios influenced their processes and
changed their conceptual structures before and after searching.
Keywords: Concept Map; Knowledge Structure; Information
Seeking on the Web; Learning by Searching

Introduction
Searching on the Web is more than just a tool for information
retrieval; it has used a tool for investigating, learning, and decision making. For instance, when people buy a new digital
camera, they often search and browse many digital camera
sites. During these activities, they learn and acquire knowledge about digital cameras (i.e., function, structure, price, design, and size). We define this learning through searching and
browsing on the Web as ”Learning by Searching.”
Learning by searching is considered a type of discovery
learning. Discovery learning is inquiry-based, constructivist
learning. The learner discover facts and relationships and new
truths on their own (Bruner, 1967). Discovery learning facilitates the learner’s spontaneous motivation and encourages
discovery, as compared with learning by teacher instruction
only. However, discovery learning is difficult for learners
and research suggests that the effects of discovery learning
are influenced by learning processes and the learner’s skill or
motivation. Learning by searching is considered to have the
same benefits and problems as the discovery learning, but the
factors that affect learning by searching have not been investigated. In this study, we focus on search topics and problem

953

(a) Map in pre-search

(b) Map in post-search

Figure 1: Concept map drawn by a participant for the environment topic in the divergent scenario.
how a user’s concept map differs before and after a search
(Egusa et al., 2010). A comparative analysis of the pre- and
post-search concept maps indicated that users significantly
changed their knowledge structures on a topic through learning by searching. However, there has been little research using concept maps as a measurement of how the user’s knowledge has changed through the search process. Our final goal
is to explore what and how people learn through searching
and how their search processes influenced their leaning.

ipants were recruited from various departments and universities in the Tokyo area. We selected participants who didn’t
have much experience and knowledge on the topics based on
their responses to a pretest questionnaire. They were divided
into two scenarios equivalent as to age, sex and major.

Topics
The participants were instructed to assume the role of a magazine editor and to gather information on the Web in preparation for a regular magazine series on environmental and travel
topics. The environment topic required the participants to introduce various environmental issues, while the travel topic
asked them to present various destinations for one-day trips
from Tokyo.

Methods
Experimental Design
In the experiment, we focused on the influences of the topics
(environment and travel) and scenarios (divergent and convergent). The participants were assigned to a factorial experiment that included two topics as within-subjects factors and
two scenarios as between-subjects factors. The two withinsubjects factors were counter-balanced.

Scenarios
There were two scenarios, divergent and convergent. In the
divergent scenario, the participants were required to gather
web pages for a series of articles to be a regular feature of
the magazine. In the convergent scenario, they were required
to gather pages for a single article of the regular feature. We
prepared tasks for each scenario of the two topics.

Participants
Thirty-two undergraduate students aged 20 to 23 years participated in this study (sixteen male and sixteen female). Partic-

954

(a) Environment

(b) Travel

Figure 2: The average number of common, lost, and new nodes in each task.
The instruction sets for the environment topic using the divergent scenario and the travel topic using the convergent scenario are shown in Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively.

investigate the relationship between the participants’ conceptual changes and their search behaviors.

Procedures

Numbers of Common, Lost, and New Nodes

The participants answered questions about their experience
using web search engines and the Internet on a searchexperience questionnaire. They were instructed on how to
create the concept maps and were given time to practice.
They then received their task instructions and drew a concept map for the assigned topic with a 10-minute time limit.
A blank sheet of paper with a single node of the topic, either environmental issues or one-day trips from Tokyo, was
provided for drawing the concept map.
After drawing the concept map, the participants conducted
a 15-minute search task. While performing the search task,
the log data were recorded using a plug-in software developed by our group. After completing each search task, the
participants were required to again draw a concept map about
the assigned topic and to answer questions about their prior
knowledge of the task, their interest in the topic, the difficulty
of the task, and the difficulty gathering information. They
were also asked to provide comments on the task. They then
repeated the task for the other topic, from the instruction stage
to answering the questionnaire.
After the two main tasks were completed, the participants
answered questions comparing the two tasks and the changes
in their knowledge after completing the task, and then were
asked to comment on how they felt about the changes between the two concept maps, i.e., before and after the web
search.
In the final session, the participants were asked to check
whether the same concept could be found on both concept
maps and, if such corresponding concepts were found, they
were assigned the same number.

Figure 1 shows the concept map drawn by a participant for
the environment topic in the divergent scenario. The node
enclosed in a double line show the center node. The nodes
enclosed in a dotted line with the same number show that the
participant checked these nodes as having the same meaning
in the final session.
We defined three types of change between the participants’
pre and post-search concept maps. The nodes that participants identified as having the same meaning in the pre and
post-search maps were defined as common nodes, nodes existing only in the pre-search map were defined as lost nodes,
and nodes first appearing in the post-search map were defined as new nodes. We then analyzed the number of common
nodes, new nodes, and lost nodes. For instance, Figure 1(a)
has four common nodes, 13 lost nodes, and 22 new nodes.

Results

Figure 2 shows the average number of common, lost,
and new nodes in each scenario of the two tasks. A 3way mixed ANOVA (analysis of variance) with scenario as
a between-subjects factor and topic and type of change as
within-subjects factors revealed that there is significant interaction between topic and type of change (F(2,60)=6.56,
p <.01). The number of lost and new nodes in the travel
topic were more than those in the environment topic (lost:
F(2,60)=21.98, p <.01; new: F(2,60)=8.81, p <.01). There
also were differences among the three types of change. In
the environment topic, the number of new nodes was more
than the other two types of nodes and the number of common nodes was less than the other two types of nodes
(F(2,60)=41.21, p <.01). In the travel topic, the number of
common nodes was less than the other two types of nodes
(F(2,60)=49.93, p <.01).

We analyzed the two (before and after search) concept maps
drawn by the participants to examine whether their knowledge representation of the topic changed. We also analyzed
the web pages browsed by the participants during the tasks to

In total, there were few common nodes and a relatively
large number of lost and new nodes. These results suggest
that the concept maps changed greatly after the web searches
were conducted.

955

(a) Environment

(b) Travel

Figure 3: The differences from pre to post-search in the number of nodes at each distance.

(a) Environment

(b) Travel

Figure 4: The percentage of phrases with a frequency of 1 or more than 2 for each topic.

Number of Nodes at Each Distance from the Center
Node

tor revealed significant interaction between scenario and distance (F(3,90)=14.40, p <.01). The amount of change at distances 1 and 2 in the divergent scenario occurred more than
those in the convergent scenario (distance 1: F(3,90)=27.90,
p <.01; distance 2: F(3,90)=14.23, p <.01). Differences
were also found for each distance in the convergent scenario.
The amount of change at distance 4 or more was more than
the other distances (F(3,90)=16.80, p <.01).

Regardless of the scenarios and topics, the participants’ maps
changed dynamically before and after searching. Next, we
examined whether or not there were any differences in the
position of each node in the map between scenarios and topics.
To analize differences in the position of each node, we defined distance in each node. Distance in each node is measured by the number of arrows following the center. Nodes
that were linked to more than two nodes and had more than
two distances were counted at each distance. We counted the
number of nodes at each distance from the center node, that
is, the node placed at the center of the concept map. Nodes
at distance 4 or higher were counted as in the same category.
Moreover, to clear the differences between scenarios and topics, we calculated the amount of change for each distance
from the pre to post-search maps by subtracting the number
of nodes at each distance in the post-search map from those in
the pre-search map. If the number of nodes in the post-search
map at distance n was more than that in the pre-search map,
the amount of change at distance n was considered a positive
value.
Figure 3 shows the amount of change at distances 1, 2,
3, and 4 or more for the two topics in each scenario. A
3-way mixed ANOVA with topic and distance as withinsubjects factors and the scenario as a between-subjects fac-

Frequency of Phrases Used in Nodes
The position of the nodes in the map were different for the
two scenarios. However, it is unclear whether or not these
differences were also found in the phrasing used by the participants. We therefore compared the changes in the phrases
used in the maps between the two scenarios and the two topics.
Before making our analysis, we extracted phrases included
in nodes from the participants’ concept map. These were
phrases in both the pre and post-search maps put together
with respect to each scenario and topic. Because these
phrases were spelled in several different ways, we adjusted
the differences based on the rules listed below. Finally, we
counted the frequency of the phrases.
• phrases expressed in different forms, such as ”東京”, ”
とうきょう”, and ”トウキョウ” (These phrases all mean
”Tokyo.”).

956

(a) Environment

(b) Travel

Figure 5: The number of SERP and nonSERP in each topic.
• phrases expressed with or without a particle, as in ”海面の
上昇” and ”海面上昇”.
• phrases expressed in abbreviated form or not, such as ”eco”
and ”ecology.”
• phrases with typographical errors.

was more than those of nonSERPs for the two topics (Environment: F(1,30)=18.16, p <.01; Travel: F(1,30)=42.20,
p <.01).

Discussion
We defined learning during searching and browsing on
the Web as ”learning by searching.” We investigated how
searchers’ conceptual knowledge of topics changed by comparing their before search and after search concept maps. The
influence of different topics and different scenarios was also
investigated. In the experiment, participants were divided
into divergent and convergent scenario groups. They were
asked to assume the role of a journal editor and search for
information to be presented at an editorial meeting. They
also performed two tasks under the topics of environment and
travel.
We analyzed the before and after search concept maps
drawn by the participants to examine whether their knowledge representation of the topic changed during the search.
The results show that their concept maps dynamically
changed after the search regardless of the topics or scenarios.
Egusa et al. (2010) also reported the same results. These results indicate that searching and browsing web pages strongly
influences a searcher’s knowledge structure of a topic. Why
did their conceptual structure change so dramatically? One
likely reason is that the participants searched and browsed
web pages that suited their interests, which allows them to
easily build new knowledge onto their existing knowledge
base. An alternate reason is that they had this knowledge already and they reconstructed their knowledge through learning by searching. However, these changes might be temporary and forgotten with the passage of time. We need to further examine the continuousness of learning by searching.
Results also demonstrated the influence of topics and scenarios. The number of lost and new nodes in the travel topic
was greater than those in the environment topic. These results
indicate that there are differences in the knowledge structures
for the topics and that the concept map can represent these
differences. Cole et al. (2007) also found the differences between the concept map drawn by history students and those
by psychology students.

Figure 4 shows the percentage of phrases used once and
more than twice in each task. On the whole, 80 % of
phrases were used only once. The results of the χ2 test
revealed significant differences between the two scenarios
in the post-search map (Environment:χ2 (1)=6.810, p <.01;
Travel:χ2 (1)=13.181, p <.01). The number of phrases occurring once in the convergent scenario was greater than those in
the divergent scenario for the two topics and the number of
phrases with a frequency of more than two in the convergent
scenario was less than those in the divergent scenario for the
two topics. There were no differences in the pre-search map.

Number of Web Pages Browsed
Finally, we examined the relationship between the participants’ conceptual changes and their search behaviors. We
focused on the web pages browsed by the participants during the task because their conceptual changes would be most
likely influenced by them. We extracted the web page URLs
from the browser logs. These URLs were classified by a logging tool as a search engine result page (SERP) or some other
page (nonSERP).
Figure 5 shows the average number of SERPs and nonSERPs for each topic. A 3-way mixed ANOVA with topic
and page type as within-subjects factors and scenario as a
between-subjects factor revealed a significant interaction between topic and scenario (F(1,30)=7.08, p <.05). In the environment topic, participants in the divergent scenario browsed
more SERPs and nonSERPs than participants in the convergent scenario (F(1,30)=10.27, p <.01). In the convergent
scenario, participants browsed more SERPs and nonSERPs
for the travel topic than the environment topic (F(1,30)=9.39,
p <.01). A significant interaction was also found between
topic and page type (F(1,30)=15.13,p <.01). The participants
browsed more nonSERPs for the travel topic than the environment topic (F(1,30)=12.55, p <.01). The number of SERPs

957

Differences between the scenarios were found in the node
distances and phrase frequencies. In the divergent scenario,
nodes placed near the center increased and nodes placed far
from the center decreased. On the other hand, nodes placed
far the center increased in the convergent scenario. As can
be seen from the examples in Figure 1, the node concepts
changed from general to specific as distance from the center
node increased. Therefore, the participants in the convergent
scenario acquire specific knowledge while the participants in
the divergent scenario acquire general knowledge. A similar
tendency was seen in the analysis of the frequency of phrases
used in the nodes. In the convergent scenario, the phrases
used once increased and the phrases used more than twice
decreased.
We also analyzed the web pages browsed by the participants during the tasks to investigate the relationship between
the participants’ conceptual changes and their search behaviors. Differences between the scenarios were only seen in
the environment topic. The number of SERPs and nonSERPs
in the divergent scenario was greater than those in the convergent scenario. This indicates that the participants in the divergent scenario searched and browsed quickly to gather a wide
scope of infomation about the environment topic, while the
participants in the convergent scenario browsed web pages
more minutely to gather detailed information about the specific theme of the environment topic. We presume that these
web page results relate to the above concept map results.
However, with the travel topic, we could not find differences
between the scenarios. We must analyze other process data
to explicitly capture the relationship between the searchers’
search processes and the changes in their knowledge representation.
Finally, we discuss on the significance of our study. In
this study, we compared different scenarios about the same
topic. We found that these differences of scenario influenced
breadth and depth of searching and quality of knowledge acquisition. In the discovery learning, it is also important to explicit relationship between how students explored and what
they learned for helping students learn and discover effectively.

Kando, N. (2010). Using a concept map to evaluate exploratory search. In Proceedings of the third symposium
on information interaction in context (pp. 175–184). New
York, NY: ACM.
Meagher, T. (2009). Looking inside a student’s mind: can
an analysis of student concept maps measure changes in
environmental literacy? Electronic Journal of Science Education, 13, 1–28.
Novak, D. J., & Gowin, B. D. (1984). Learning how to learn.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Rebich, S., & Gautier, C. (2005). Concept mapping to reveal
prior knowledge and conceptual change in a mock summit
course on global climate change. Journal of Geoscience
Education, 53, 355–365.
Vakkari, P., & Pennanen, M. (2003). Students’ conceptual
structure, search process, and outcome while preparing a
research proposal: a longitudinal case study. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology,
54, 759–770.

Appendix
A. Instructions for environment in divergent scenario
Please carry out this task as if you were in the following
situation: You are working as an editor for a news magazine
published by a national newspaper. Your chief has asked
you to gather information to introduce various environmental issues for a regular series that will begin with the next
issue. The chief will hold a meeting with other managers
from several departments to discuss this regular series.
In the meeting, the chief would like to present an overall picture of each article for the series. For that purpose,
you must gather various pieces of information that are sufficient for discussing which topic should be selected for each
article of the series, rather than gathering detailed information for just a single article in the series.
Please choose the most interesting topics for the readers. You have just 15 minutes to search the Web and find
the needed information. If you find a useful web page for
the topic, add it to the bookmarks.
B. Instructions for travel in convergent scenario

References

You are working as an editor for a travel magazine published by a major publishing company. Your chief has asked
you to gather information to introduce various one-day trips
for a regular series that will begin with the next issue. The
chief will hold a meeting with other managers from several
departments to discuss this regular series.
In the meeting, the chief would like to present the specific contents for one article of the series. For that purpose,
you must gather detailed information for a single article of
the series rather than information for several trips.
Please choose the most interesting topics for the readers. You have just 15 minutes to search the Web and find
the needed information. If you find a useful web page for
the topic, add it to the bookmarks.

Bruner, S. J. (1967). On knowing: Essays for the left hand.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and
novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Cole, C., Lin, Y., Leide, J., Large, A., & Beheshti, J. (2007).
A classification of mental models of undergraduates seeking information for a course essay in history and psychology: preliminary investigations into aligning their mental
models with online thesauri. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 58, 2092–
2104.
Egusa, Y., Saito, H., Takaku, M., Terai, H., Makiko, M., &

958

