UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Vection (self-motion perception) alters cognitive states, cognition of time, mental number
line and personality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1cm509gc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Seno, Takeharu
Taya, Shuichiro
Yamada, Yuki
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Vection (self-motion perception) alters cognitive states,
cognition of time, mental number line and personality
Takeharu Seno (seno@design.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of design, Kyushu University
4-9-1, Shiobaru, Minami-ku, Fukuoka, Japan

Shuichiro Taya (s.taya@qmul.ac.uk)
School of Biological and Chemical Science, Queen Mary Collage,
University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS

Yuki Yamada (yamadayuk@gmail.com)
Faculty of Human-Environment Studies, Kyushu University
6-19-1 Hakozaki, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka Japan

Keiko Ihaya (ihayakk@gmail.com)
Faculty of Human-Environment Studies, Kyushu University
6-19-1 Hakozaki, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka Japan

Hiroyuki Ito (ito@ design.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of design, Kyushu University
4-9-1, Shiobaru, Minami-ku, Fukuoka, Japan

Shoji Sunaga (sunaga@ design.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of design, Kyushu University
4-9-1, Shiobaru, Minami-ku, Fukuoka, Japan

Abstract

2004), quantity perception (Seno et al., 2011c) and
personality (Seno et al., 2011d) have been reported. In this
article we introduce our three examples that vection alters
cognitive states. Those examinations have not been
conducted before. Our experiments were the first challenges
of vection and multi dimensional human cognition.

We examined the relationship between cognitive states and
visually-induced self-motion perception, i.e. “vection”
(latency, duration and magnitude). It is often anecdotally
reported that time experienced in return travel (back to
the start point) seems shorter than time spent in
outward travel (travel to a new destination). Here, we
report the first experimental results showing that return
travel time is experienced as shorter than the actual time
because of perceiving vection. Secondary, we explore
how numbers are represented in depth in our mental space, we
asked participants to sequentially speak random numbers
while they observed forward/backward vection. We found
that participants tended to generate larger numbers when they
perceived backward self-motion. Finally, We found that all
the measures of vection correlated negatively with the degree
of narcissistic traits of participants.

Time perception and vection

Keywords: vection, time perception, mental number line,
personality

Introduction
Self-motion perception as determined by vision
alone is called ‘vection’ (e.g. Fischer & Kornmüller, 1930).
Stimulus attributes for effective vection induction have been
extensively studied (Seno et al., 2009). Recently, the
relationships between vection and cognition were examined.
Vection and attention (Seno et al., 2011a), time perception
(Seno et al., 20011b), cognitive bias (Palmisano & Chan,

A number of factors have been known to modulate
the subjective duration of the interval in time, e.g., attention
to time passage (e.g. Zakay & Block, 1997), subjective
event number in the stimulus presentation period (Poynter,
1989), whether the task is prospective or retrospective (e.g.
Doob, 1971) and the boredom impatience and anticipation
(Brown, 1985). Adding a dual task (in addition to the
evaluation of the interval time) increases the errors and
decreaseS the accuracy of evaluation (Brown, 1997 review).
As a new factor of determining experienced time, we show
that a return travel is perceived shorter in time than an
outward travel. We succeeded in showing that vection
strength modulate the shrinkage of the return travel. This
was a very new finding.

Method
We presented participants with virtual travel from Fukuoka,
Japan, to a world-famous city, such as Paris, and examined
subjective durations of stimulus movies, i.e. expanding-

2306

optic-flow or dynamic-random-dot (DRD). We presented
expanding flow during both the outward and return travels
under the optic-flow condition. A round trip was assigned a
cover story. Before the movie presentations, subjects
understood that they would be asked to estimate the time
durations of the stimulus presentation. We stated “Now we
will go to Paris from Fukuoka” before the first stimulus
presentation (outward trip). After the first stimulus
presentation and before the second stimulus presentation,
we stated “Now we will go back to Fukuoka from Paris”
(return trip). Stimulus images were presented on a display
with 1,024 × 768 pixel resolution and at 75 Hz refresh rate.
Each optic-flow display consisted of 16,000 randomly
placed white dots on a black background. The dots were
uniformly distributed within a simulated cube which
subtended 72 (horizontal) x 57 (vertical) deg in visual angle.
The stimuli were displayed on a 50-inch plasma display,
with a viewing distance of 57 cm. The optic-flow simulated
the forward or backward self-motion in constant-velocity
(16 m/s). The DRD was refreshed at 75 Hz and the numbers
of the dots were also 16,000. Twenty undergraduate
students participated in each condition. The physical
duration of stimulus presentations was 40 sec. Subjective
durations were orally reported.
There was additionally the static-plane condition.
A static random-dot plane was virtually placed 30 cm
farther than the optic-flow plane (Figure 1). The farther dot
plane effectively inhibited self-motion perception (e.g. Seno
et al., 2010).
There were three stimulus conditions, optic flow,
DRD and the static-plane conditions. The expected vection
strengths were strong, medium and nothing for optic flow,
static-plane and DRD conditions respectively. The
destination of the trip was randomly chosen from ten very
famous world cities (e.g. New York, Tokyo, etc.). The
expected vection strengths for the three conditions were
estimated from our previous study (Seno et al., 2010). Those
subjective strength were 60, 40, 0 for optic flow, Static
plane, and DRD respectively (100 was very strong vection
and 0 was no vection).

Results and discussion
In the optic-flow condition, return travel was
perceived as 5 sec shorter than the 40-sec physical
presentation duration (Z=6.49, p<0.01). In the static-plane
condition, the estimated duration in return travel was
slightly longer than that; however, it was still shorter than
40 sec (Z=3.02, p<0.05). In the DRD condition, there was
no shrinkage of the return travel.
We plotted the differences in subjective durations
between outward and return-travel trials (Figure 2). Positive
values indicated subjective time shortening in return travel
for the round-trip conditions. Only in the optic flow and
static-plane conditions, those values were significantly
larger than 0 (z=11.97, 4.83, respectively, p<0.01). That is,
return travel was perceived as significantly shorter than
outward travel in the two conditions.

Perceived time shrinkage was induced by
perceiving vection. The degree of the shrinkage was
correlated to the strength of vection. Miles et al. (2010)
reported that, depending on the vection direction,
daydreaming was oriented to the future or the past.
Considered together with our results, vection seems to have
some power to alter cognition.

Figure 1. A schematic illustration of the farther-plane
condition.

Figure 2. The shrinkage of the return travel. Error bars
indicate SEM.

Mental number line and vection
Previous studies have revealed a close connection
between the representation of numbers and space (see
Hubbard et al 2005 for a review); numerical magnitudes are
represented in a mental number line (MNL) in an ascending
order from left to right (e.g. Dehane et al 1993) and from
bottom to top (e.g. Schwarz and Keus 2004).
The representation of MNL is tightly linked with
our body motion. For example, Loetscher et al (2008) asked
participants to generate random numbers orally whilst
turning their head, and found that participants generated
‘small’ numbers more frequently when they turn their head
to the left than to the right. A correlation between the
magnitude of generated numbers and the direction of
saccades has also been reported (Loetscher et al 2010):
participants made rightward saccades just before they
generated the larger numbers while they made leftward
saccades when generated the smaller numbers.

2307

Previous studies have only examined the MNL on
the 2D plane. The goal of this study was to explore spacenumber interaction in the front-rear direction by using
induced vection. Specifically, we asked participants to
complete the random number generation task whilst they
perceived the forward/backward body motion induced by
expanding/contracting optic flows. This challenge was quite
new and there has never been such study.

Method
In each trial, whilst observing the optic-flow, the
participants had to report orally four different numbers.
Instruction was given as follows: “Please speak four
different numbers in the interval between 0 to 100 as
random as possible.” To make sure of the occurrence of
vection, there was a 10 s interval between stimulus onset
and the start of the task (for the delay of vection induction).
Ten participants generated 8 numbers (4 x 2 trials) and the
other ten participants generated 16 numbers (4 x 4 trials) for
each direction of the optic-flow. The expanding and
contracting trials were randomized. Twenty participants
observed optic-flows in a dark chamber.
The perception of optic flow-induced vection was
verified in a separate session after conducting the number
generation session, when the magnitude and duration of
vection with the same visual stimuli was measured.

Personality
In our previous studies, we noticed that there were
considerable individual differences between vection latency,
duration and magnitude. Moreover, these individual
differences appeared to be consistently exhibited, regardless
of the stimulus conditions, i.e. an observer who perceived
longer and stronger vection in one experiment also
perceived longer and stronger vection in other vection
experiments. These observations suggest that vection
correlates with long-lasting characteristics of the
participants. It has been reported that some cognitive
abilities correlate with properties of personality (DeYong et
al., 2005). For example, the performance of mental rotation
(Ozer, 1987) or the magnitude of the attentional blink
(McLean & Arnell, 2010) correlated with personality. A
positive affectation influences performance in a variety of
cognitive tasks (Ashby et al., 1999). The ‘Big Five’ factors
of personality (openness, conscientiousness, extraversion,
agreeableness, neuroticism) have also been found useful in
predicting some everyday behaviors (Paunonen and Ashton,
2001). Therefore we thought that vection might also
correlate with the personality traits of participants. We
believe that the personality is one important aspect of
human cognition. Thus this examination was one new
challenge for vection and cognition.

Method

Results and discussion
The average of the generated numbers was
significantly larger with the contracting motion than with
the expanding motion (two-tailed paired t-test: t19 = 2.83, p
< .05) (Figure 3). We found no bias such that observers
generated numbers in an ascending or a descending
sequence. The results showed that the sensation of selfmotion could bias the magnitude of generated numbers,
suggesting that, together with the previous results
(Loetscher, et al. 2008, 2010), the representation of
numerical magnitudes is tightly linked with our body
motion. The present results suggest that the smaller
numbers are represented in a front space while the larger
numbers are represented in a rear space.

We used an optic flow of expansion as vection
stimulus. The duration of the stimulus was fixed at 40
seconds. Thirty adult volunteers participated in the
experiment. Eight trials were conducted and the observers
were asked to press a button when they perceived selfmotion. At the end of each trial, the observers were also
instructed to rate the subjective strength of vection using a
magnitude estimation on a scale from 0 (no vection) to 100
(very strong vection).
After the vection task, the observers completed
three questionnaires. The first included scales of public and
private self-consciousness, which were Japanese versions of
Fenigstein’s original index (Sugawara, 1984; Fenigstein et
al., 1975). The second was the Narcissistic Personality
Inventory Short Version (NPI-S; Oshio, 1999), based on the
Narcissistic Personality Inventory developed by Raskin and
Hall (1979). The third was related to the Big Five
personality factor scales (Japanese version by Saito et al.,
2001).

Results and discussion

Figure 3. The average of generated numbers. Error bars
indicate SEM.

The results of the vection study were consistent
with those found in our previous studies (the average
vection latency, duration and magnitude were 12.25 seconds,
21.98 seconds, and 38.74, respectively), confirming the
validity of the vection measures. Vection latency and totalNPI-S score were positively correlated (r2 = 0.47, p <
0.0001), whereas duration or magnitude and total-NPI-S
score were negatively correlated (r2 = 0.28, p < 0.003; r2 =

2308

0.19, p < 0.02, respectively) (Figure 4). No other
comparisons between the three vection measures and
personality scale scores showed any significant correlations.
We found that the more narcissistic the observer
was, the weaker the perception of vection was.

Figure 4. Correlations between vection measures (a: latency;
b: duration; c: magnitude) and total-NPI-S score.

Conclusion
We here showed three examples that vection alters
our cognitive states. They were all new findings. Vection
induced shrinkage of time of the return travel. Vection
revealed our mental number line in depth. Vection and
personality were correlated. Further examinations of the
relationship between vection and cognitive states should be
done in the future.
Acknowledgments
The first author was aided by Japan Society for Promotion of
Science.
References
Ashby FG., Isen Am., Turken AU. 1999 “A
Neuropsychological Theory of Positive Affect and Its
Influence on Cognition” Psychological Review 106 529-550
Brown, SW. 1985 “Time perception and attention: The
effects of prospective versus retrospective paradigms and
task demands on perceived duration.” Perception and
Psychophysics 38 115-124
Brown, SW. 1997 “Attentional resources in timing:
Interference effects in concurrent temporal and nontemporal
working memory task” Perception and Psychophysics 59 11181140.
Doob, LW. 1971 “Patterning of time” New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Fenigstein A, Seheier M E, Buss A H, 1975 “Public and
private self-consciousness: Assessment and theory”
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 43 522Fischer M H, Castel A D, Dodd M D, Pratt J, 2003
“Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of attention”
Nature Neuroscience 6 555-556
Hubbard EM, Piazza M, Pinel P, Dehaene S, 2005

“Interactions between number and space in parietal
cortex” Nature Review Neuroscience 6 435-448
Loetscher T, Schwarz U, Schubiger M, Brugger P, 2008
“Head turns bias the	  brain’s internal random
generator” Current Biology 18 R60-62
Loetscher T, Bockish C J, Nicholls M E R, Brugger P, 2010
“Eye position predicts what number you have in mind”
Current Biology 20 R264-265
Miles, LK., Karpinska, K., Lumsden, J., Macrae, CN. 2010
“The meandering mind: Vection and mental time travel”
PLoS One 5:e10825
Oshio A. 1999 “Narcissistic personality and friendship in
high-school students” The Japanese Journal of
Personality 8 1-11 (in Japanese)
Ozer, DJ. 1987 “Personality, Intelligence, and Spatial
Visualization: Correlates of Mental Rotations Test
Performance” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 53 129-134
Paunonen SV., Ashton MC. “Big five factors and facets and
the prediction of behavior” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 81 524-539
Palmisano, S, Chan, AY. 2004 “Jitter and size effects on
vection are immune to experimental instructions and
demands” Perception 33 987-1000
Poynter, D. 1989 “Judging the duration of time intervals: A
process of remembering segments of experience. Time
and human cognition: A life-span perspective” Advances
in Psychology 59 305-33
Raskin RN., Hall CS. 1979 “A narcissistic personality
inventory” Psychological Reports 45 590
Zakay, D. Block, RA. 1997 “Temporal cognition” Current
Directions in Psychological Science 6 12-16.
Dehaene S, Bossini S, Giraux P, 1993 “The mental
representation of parity and numerical magnitude”
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 122 371396
Saito, T., Nakamura, T., Endo, T., & Yokoyama, M. 2001
“Standardization of Big Five scales using the adjective
check list” Kyushu University Psychological Research 2
135-144 (in Japanese)
Schwarz W, Keus I M, 2004 “Moving the eyes along the
mental number line: comparing SNARC effects with
saccadic and manual responses” Perception &
Psychophysics 66 651-664
Seno, T., Ito, H. & Sunaga, S. 2009 “The object and
background hypothesis for vection” Vision Research 49
2973-2982
Seno, T., Ito, H., Sunaga, S., 2010 “Vection aftereffect from
expanding/contracting stimuli” Seeing & Perceiving 23
273-294
Seno T, Ito H, Sunaga S, 2011a “Attentional load inhibits
vection” Attention, Perception & Psychophysics.
Seno T., Ito H., Sunaga S. 2011b “Self-motion perception
compresses time experienced in return travel”
Perception 40 497-499
Seno T., Taya S., Ito H., Sunaga S. 2011c “Mental number
line in depth revealed by vection” Perception, 40, 12411244.
Seno, T., Yamada, Y. & Ihaya K. 2011d “Narcissistic
people cannot be moved easily by visual stimulation”
Perception, 40, 1390-192
Sugawara K. 1984 “An attempt to construct the selfconsciousness scale for Japanese” Japanese Journal of
Psychology 55 184-188 (in Japanese)

2309

