UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
“What” versus “How” in Nonvisual Whole-Body Movement

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/65p8157x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Yamamoto, Naohide
Hirsch, Dale A.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

“What” versus “How” in Nonvisual Whole-Body Movement
Naohide Yamamoto (n.yamamoto@csuohio.edu)
Dale A. Hirsch (d.a.hirsch@csuohio.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cleveland State University
2121 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44115, USA
Abstract
Dissociable processes for conscious perception (“what” processing) and guidance of action (“how” processing) have been
identified in visual, auditory, and somatosensory systems. The
present study was designed to find similar dissociation within
whole-body movements in which the presence of vestibular information creates a unique perceptual condition. In two experiments, blindfolded participants walked along a linear path
and specified the walked distance by verbally estimating it
(“what” measure) and by pulling a length of tape that matched
the walked distance (“how” measure). Although these two
measures yielded largely comparable responses under a normal walking condition, variability in verbal estimates showed
a qualitatively different pattern from that in tape-pulling when
sensory input into walking was altered by having participants
wear a heavy backpack. This suggests that the “what” versus
“how” dissociation exists in whole-body movements as well,
supporting a claim that it is a general principle with which perceptual systems are organized.
Keywords: Perception; action; somatosensory system;
vestibular sense; walking

Introduction
It has been well documented that perceptual systems contain two separable modes of information processing (Milner
& Goodale, 1995; Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982): One is to
consciously recognize a stimulus (so-called “what” processing) and the other is to locate it in space and guide action
toward it (so-called “how” or “where” processing). For example, a neurological patient who suffered from visual form
agnosia was not able to verbally report the orientation of a
slot presented in front of her, but was nevertheless able to
put a card in the slot in a normal manner (Goodale, Milner, Jakobson, & Carey, 1991). Such dissociation between
“what” and “how” (or “where”) has been most clearly established in the visual system, but similar distinctions have also
been made in the auditory system (Anourova et al., 2001; Belin & Zatorre, 2000; Kaas & Hackett, 1999; Maeder et al.,
2001; Rauschecker, 1998; Romanski et al., 1999) and somatosensory system (Aglioti, Beltramello, Bonazzi, & Corbetta, 1996; Halligan, Hunt, Marshall, & Wade, 1995; Kammers, van der Ham, & Dijkerman, 2006; Marcel, 2003;
Paillard, 1999; Paillard, Michel, & Stelmach, 1983; Reed,
Klatzky, & Halgren, 2005; Rossetti, Rode, & Boisson, 1995;
Sathian et al., 2011; Sittig, Denier van der Gon, Gielen, &
van Wijk, 1985; Van Boven, Ingeholm, Beauchamp, Bikle,
& Ungerleider, 2005; Westwood & Goodale, 2003). These
converging findings suggest that separate processing of conscious perception and action guidance (or stimulus location)
is a general principle with which perceptual systems are organized. However, in virtually all of the previous studies concerning this dissociation within the somatosensory system,

actions were carried out only with body parts, while the body
itself remained stationary (e.g., hand or finger movement; for
a review, see Dijkerman & de Haan, 2007). In the present
study, we explored whether similarly dissociable processes
underlie whole-body movements (i.e., walking).
Whole-body movements such as walking present a unique
perceptual condition because they encompass not only somatosensory information about motion of each body part but
also vestibular information about acceleration and velocity of
the entire body. It has been shown that somatosensory perception can be altered in the presence of vestibular inputs (Bottini
et al., 1995; Ferrè, Bottini, & Haggard, 2011), which may be
due to the fact that somatosensory and vestibular information
are processed in an integrated fashion in largely overlapping
areas of the brain (Bottini et al., 1994; Fasold et al., 2002;
Guldin & Grüsser, 1998; Schwarz & Fredrickson, 1971). For
example, Ferrè et al. demonstrated that sensitivity to tactile
stimuli can be increased by caloric vestibular stimulation, and
they also showed that this perceptual enhancement was specific to the somatosensory system. Findings like this indicate
that vestibular inputs affect the operation of the somatosensory system, suggesting that somatosensory processes underlying whole-body movements are not identical to those subserving partial-body actions. Thus, it should not be assumed
that similar dissociation between conscious perception and
action guidance would be found in whole-body movements as
well. Rather, it is an open question that should be addressed
empirically.
To address this issue, we conducted two experiments in
which blindfolded participants walked along a linear path and
indicated the walked distance by using two types of measures: One was driven by a motoric response in which participants pulled a length of tape that matched the walked distance (Philbeck, Woods, Kontra, & Zdenkova, 2010). The
other was verbal estimation of the walked distance, which required conscious awareness of how far they had walked. Although we hypothesized that these two measures are based on
dissociable processes (i.e., “what” process for verbal estimation and “how” process for tape-pulling), we did not simply
look for different patterns of response from them. Even if information about the walked distance was processed in a unified manner for verbal estimation and tape-pulling, they could
still yield distinct patterns of data because the post-perceptual
transformation required to translate the internal representation of the (already processed) distance information into a behavioral output might be carried out differently for each mode
of response (Figure 1A). Thus, a stronger test on whether dissociable processes exist in whole-body movements can be

2558

done by altering sensory input into nonvisual walking and
observing how the patterns of response are modulated relative to baseline patterns observed under a normal sensory
condition (Foley, 1977; Philbeck & Loomis, 1997). If verbal estimation and tape-pulling were subserved by two separate processes (Figure 1B), it would be more likely that these
processes were affected differently by the alteration of sensory input. As a consequence, patterns of response in the two
measures would also change differently from the baseline. On
the other hand, if a sole process underlay both verbal estimation and tape-pulling (Figure 1A), the altered sensory input
would cause some common change in both measures (e.g.,
both verbal estimates and lengths of tape pulled doubled).
These possible changes from the baseline can be observed
even if responses in verbal estimation and tape-pulling were
generated by different output transformations, because there
is no logical ground to postulate that these post-perceptual
transformations should also be modified by the sensory alteration; rather, it would be more reasonable to assume that they
should remain unchanged.

A. Single-process model
Perceptual
process

Sensory
input

Unified
process for
“what” and
“how” (or
“where”)

Output
transformation

Behavioral
response

Verbal
estimation

Tape-pulling

B. Dual-process model

Sensory
input

“What”
process
“How”
(or “where”)
process

Verbal
estimation

Tape-pulling

Figure 1: Schematic diagrams describing two theoretical
models of perceptual processing for whole-body movements.
(A) A unified process underlies whole-body movements. Responses in verbal estimation and tape-pulling are both controlled by the single process. Different shapes of the arrows representing output transformation indicate the possibility that the same output from the perceptual process can
be transformed differently into verbal estimation and tapepulling. (B) Two separate processes subserve whole-body
movements. Responses in verbal estimation and tape-pulling
are based on outputs from “what” and “how” processes, respectively.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, healthy adult participants walked without
vision under a normal walking condition. It has been shown
that verbal estimation of visually specified distance and motoric responses to indicate it (such as tape-pulling) tend to
yield similar, if not identical, patterns of response when
they are performed by neurologically intact individuals under a normal viewing condition (Philbeck & Loomis, 1997;
Philbeck et al., 2010). Thus, it was predicted that similar patterns of data would be observed in the two response modes.
They would form a basis with which changes caused by altering sensory input into nonvisual walking (implemented in
Experiment 2) were evaluated.

Method
Participants Twelve students (6 males and 6 females, 18–
27 years of age) at Cleveland State University volunteered in
return for extra credit in psychology courses.
Materials and Design Participants walked linear distances
of 1–6 m without vision at their own natural pace. A sighted
experimenter walked with them while supporting their arm
for safety reasons, but no assistance was provided for walking. Participants first walked 3- and 5-m distances, once
apiece. They then walked distances of 1, 2, 4, and 6 m six
times apiece in random order. These 26 trials were performed
in one session. First two trials were used only to acquaint
participants with the experimental procedure and therefore
excluded from analyses. A long (at least 15 m) and loose
measuring tape was used for tape-pulling. For each walked
distance, participants made both a tape-pulling response and
a verbal estimate. Thus, the experiment utilized a 2 (gender)
× 2 (response mode) × 4 (walked distance) factorial design.
Both response mode and walked distance were within-subject
variables. Participants were run individually.
Procedure Prior to the experiment, participants were given
an opportunity to practice pulling the tape. While standing
still, they held one end of the measuring tape and the experimenter extended it so that it was parallel to the floor. A paper
clip was attached to the tape at an arbitrary distance (generally in the range of 1–6 m) and participants pulled the tape
until the paper clip reached their hands. They used a handover-hand motion to pull the tape, rather than pulling it by
one hand while holding accumulated tape by the other hand.
Participants viewed how the paper clip approached them as
the tape was reeled in. This was repeated a few more times
with different distances to the paper clip until participants felt
acquainted with the tape-pulling procedure.
Following the practice session, participants wore a blindfold and hearing protectors (noise reduction rating: 21 dB) to
obscure their vision and hearing. They were then guided to a
nearby hallway in which the experiment was conducted. They
were disoriented before taken to the hallway, and thus had no
clear idea about where they were in the building during the
experiment. This manipulation was included because prior

2559

A. Constant Error in Experiment 1
●
●

Tape−pulling
Verbal estimation

5

Indicated Distance (m)

B. Variable Error in Experiment 1
0.8

Standard Deviation of Responses (m)

6

●

4
●
●

3

●

2
●

1

●
●

0

0.7

●
●

Tape−pulling
Verbal estimation
●

0.6
0.5

●
●

0.4

●

0.3

●
●

0.2

●
●

0.1
0.0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

Walked Distance (m)
C. Constant Error in Experiment 2
●
●

Tape−pulling
Verbal estimation

Indicated Distance (m)

5

4
●
●

3
●
●

2
●
●

1

3

4

5

6

D. Variable Error in Experiment 2
0.8

Standard Deviation of Responses (m)

6

2

Walked Distance (m)

●
●

0

0.7

●
●

Tape−pulling
Verbal estimation

0.6
●

0.5
0.4

●

●
●

0.3

●
●

0.2
●
●

0.1
0.0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

Walked Distance (m)

1

2

3

4

5

6

Walked Distance (m)

Figure 2: Mean constant and variable errors in estimation of walked distances in Experiments 1 and 2. They are shown as a
function of response mode and walked distance. The dashed diagonal lines in panels A and C indicate accurate estimation of
the walked distances (i.e., constant error = 0). Error bars represent ±1 standard error of the mean.
knowledge about the environment could influence nonvisual
distance perception (Philbeck & O’Leary, 2005).
In the beginning of each trial, participants stood at a fixed
starting position and held one end of the measuring tape in
their preferred hand. The rest of the tape was untangled and
placed on the floor. In addition, participants were given a
5-digit random number and asked to remember it until they
completed the trial. Because this number was typically retained in memory by rehearsal, this concurrent task was intended to interfere with subvocal counting of steps in walking and draws in tape-pulling that could otherwise be used to
aid distance judgement. By discouraging participants from
utilizing this counting strategy, their distance perception and
its indicators were more based on somatosensory and vestibular information acquired during walking. Participants’ accu-

racy in recalling this number ranged from 54.17% to 91.67%
in both experiments (mean = 80.03%), suggesting that they
attempted to memorize the numbers and it was sufficiently
challenging to make the counting difficult. When participants
were ready to start the trial, they proceeded straight ahead
until they were told to stop at an appropriate distance. They
then turned to face the starting position and pulled a length
of the measuring tape so that it matched the walked distance.
They marked the end of the pulled tape with their fingers and
handed it to the experimenter. Subsequently, they gave a verbal estimate of the walked distance by using a distance unit
of their choice. Most participants used ft, and a few used
m or cm. They were encouraged to be as accurate as possible by using fractions (e.g., .25 m) when necessary. They
were also instructed to derive the verbal estimate from the

2560

walked distance, not from the length of tape they just pulled.
Finally, participants repeated the 5-digit number, and were
guided back to the starting position for the next trial. Participants walked in the same direction in all trials. No feedback
was given to participants during the experiment.

findings from Experiment 2 would be evaluated: We manipulated sensory input into nonvisual walking in Experiment 2
to create an altered walking condition and investigated how
constant and variable errors would change compared to those
observed in Experiment 1.

Data Analysis Lengths of tape pulled and verbal estimates
of walked distances were analyzed by calculating constant
and variable errors. Constant errors represent how accurately
participants indicated the walked distances by tape-pulling
and verbal estimation. They were obtained by computing the
mean amount of tape pulled and the mean verbal estimate for
each walked distance. Variable errors characterized participants’ consistency in responding to the same walked distance
and were defined by standard deviations of six responses to
each walked distance. Constant and variable errors were analyzed separately by split-plot analyses of variance (ANOVAs)
with participants’ gender as a between-subject factor and response mode (tape-pulling and verbal estimation) and walked
distance (1, 2, 4, and 6 m) as within-subject factors. All Ftests conducted in this study were corrected for nonsphericity by using Greenhouse–Geisser epsilon when appropriate.
Generalized eta squared (ηG 2 ) values are reported as effect
size statistics (Bakeman, 2005; Olejnik & Algina, 2003).

Experiment 2

Results
Constant Error Figure 2A shows mean constant errors in
Experiment 1 as a function of response mode and walked
distance. Participants generally made larger errors as they
walked farther. In addition, tape-pulling tended to yield increasingly larger errors than verbal estimation as the walked
distance increased. These observations were supported statistically by the main effect of walked distance, F(3, 30) =
68.01, p < .001, ηG 2 = .60, and the interaction between response mode and walked distance, F(3, 30) = 4.82, p =
.049, ηG 2 = .056. A post-hoc contrast comparing the difference between the two response modes at 6 m against those
at other distances had a large effect, F(1, 11) = 5.17, p =
.044, ηG 2 = .32, suggesting that tape-pulling and verbal estimation produced similar patterns of errors for the most part,
except at the longest distance (6 m). Other effects and interactions did not reach statistical significance in the ANOVA.
Variable Error Figure 2B shows mean variable errors in
Experiment 1 as a function of response mode and walked distance. Participants responded less consistently as the walked
distance became longer. Although tape-pulling responses
tended to be more variable than verbal estimates, the difference between them was not substantial. Consistent with these
observations, only the main effect of walked distance was significant, F(3, 30) = 16.45, p < .001, ηG 2 = .24.

Discussion
As predicted, when participants walked under a normal condition and attempted to specify walked distance, largely comparable responses were yielded from tape-pulling and verbal
estimation. These data constituted a baseline against which

To change sensory input into nonvisual walking, we asked
participants to wear a heavy backpack during Experiment 2.
Under this altered condition, it was expected that verbal estimation and tape-pulling would yield divergent patterns of
response, if they were subserved by dissociable “what” and
“how” processes. Given that these two measures mostly produced statistically indistinguishable data in Experiment 1,
any differentiation between them would be indicative of the
dissociation between conscious perception and action guidance in whole-body movements.

Method
Participants Twelve participants (6 males and 6 females,
21–53 years of age) from the Cleveland State University community volunteered in return for monetary compensation or
extra credit in psychology courses. None of them participated in Experiment 1. A new group of participants were
recruited for Experiment 2 to avoid demand characteristics
in the backpack manipulation. That is, if the same participants were asked to perform the tasks twice with and without
the backpack, it would be relatively obvious to them that the
backpack was intended to affect their performance.
Materials, Design, Procedure, and Data Analysis Experiment 2 was conducted in the same manner as in Experiment 1
except that each participant wore a backpack that weighed between 1/5 and 1/6 of their body weight. This weight range
was adopted from previous studies in which the same backpack manipulation successfully induced measurable effects
on distance perception (e.g., Proffitt, Stefanucci, Banton, &
Epstein, 2003). To determine the appropriate weight of the
backpack, each participant’s body weight was measured before beginning the experiment. Participants put on the backpack when they were positioned at the starting position in
the hallway for the first trial. They kept wearing it until all
trials were completed. The backpack weight varied between
10.20 kg and 19.96 kg among participants (mean = 13.58 kg).

Results
Constant Error Mean constant errors in Experiment 2 are
plotted in Figure 2C as a function of response mode and
walked distance. Compared to Experiment 1, constant errors
observed in the present experiment, especially those yielded
from verbal estimation, tended to be larger (i.e., participants
showed a tendency to indicate the walked distances to be
shorter). This change was more prominent in verbal estimation than in tape-pulling, resulting in comparable responses
from them throughout the range of walked distance used in
the present study. Consistent with this observation, only the

2561

main effect of walked distance was significant, F(3, 30) =
159.90, p < .001, ηG 2 = .68.
Variable Error Figure 2D shows mean variable errors in
Experiment 2 as a function of response mode and walked
distance. Variable errors in tape-pulling kept increasing as
participants walked farther, just like variable errors in Experiment 1. On the other hand, variable errors in verbal
estimation exhibited a qualitatively different pattern: Participants’ responses at 6 m were as consistent as those at
4 m. This observation was supported statistically by the significant interaction between response mode and walked distance, F(3, 30) = 4.98, p = .020, ηG 2 = .050, and a posthoc contrast comparing the difference between tape-pulling
and verbal estimation at 6 m with those at other distances,
F(1, 11) = 8.13, p = .016, ηG 2 = .42. The only other effect
that was significant in the ANOVA was the main effect of
walked distance, F(3, 30) = 18.15, p < .001, ηG 2 = .29.

Discussion
The backpack manipulation exerted two noticeable effects in
the present experiment: (1) It caused greater underestimation
of walked distance (i.e., larger constant error), especially in
verbal estimation at longer distances, which removed the difference between the two measures observed in Experiment 1;
and (2) variable errors in verbal estimation did not show further increase beyond the 4-m distance, while those in tapepulling showed steady increase as a function of walked distance as in Experiment 1. Given that the overall pattern of
constant errors exhibited by tape-pulling and verbal estimation was mostly the same as that observed in Experiment 1,
much importance may not be attributable to the change in
constant errors in Experiment 2. However, the fact that altered sensory input into nonvisual walking only affected response consistency in verbal estimation suggests that processes underlying verbal estimation and tape-pulling are dissociable. Thus, a sign of dissociation between conscious perception and action guidance within whole-body movements
was found in the present experiment.

General Discussion
The present study was designed to explore whether dissociable processes for conscious perception and action guidance can be found in whole-body movements, in which the
presence of vestibular information creates a unique perceptual condition. To that end, nonvisually perceived walked
distance was assessed by two modes of response: One required explicit recognition of the walked distance (verbal estimation) and the other was primarily controlled by a motor action (tape-pulling). When sensory input into nonvisual
walking was altered by having participants carry additional
weight, variability in verbal estimates was markedly modulated. On the other hand, variability in tape-pulling responses
largely remained unchanged. This suggests that information
about walked distance is processed with qualitatively different levels of precision for verbal estimation and tape-pulling,

showing a sign of dissociation between the process underlying conscious perception and that subserving action guidance
in whole-body movements. This result builds upon previous
findings that the same dissociation is present in visual, auditory, and somatosensory systems (e.g., Belin & Zatorre, 2000;
Dijkerman & de Haan, 2007; Milner & Goodale, 1995), supporting a claim that it is a general principle with which perceptual systems are organized.
Although the present study successfully showed the initial evidence for dissociation between conscious perception
and action guidance in whole-body movements, several questions are still unanswered. Most notably, it remains to be seen
whether the pattern shown by variable errors in Experiment 2
is extendable to longer walked distances. A follow-up study
should be carried out by expanding the range of walked distance. The follow-up study should also include a larger number of participants so that Experiments 1 and 2 can be statistically compared; such an analysis was not possible in the
present study due to the lack of statistical power. Furthermore, the fact that underestimation of walked distance was
exacerbated by the backpack manipulation in Experiment 2
was somewhat counterintuitive: Considering that those participants had to expend a greater amount of energy for walking a given distance, it may be more reasonable to expect
that they would judge the distance to be longer, not shorter
(Proffitt et al., 2003). Similarly, it is not readily clear why the
additional weight increased, not decreased, precision of verbal estimates at the 6-m distance. Further research should be
carried out to fully understand these important details.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported in part by Cleveland State University Research and Creative Achievement Award to N.Y.

References
Aglioti, S., Beltramello, A., Bonazzi, A., & Corbetta, M.
(1996). Thumb-pointing in humans after damage to somatic sensory cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 109,
92–100.
Anourova, I., Nikouline, V. V., Ilmoniemi, R. J., Hotta, J.,
Aronen, H. J., & Carlson, S. (2001). Evidence for dissociation of spatial and nonspatial auditory information processing. NeuroImage, 14, 1268–1277.
Bakeman, R. (2005). Recommended effect size statistics for
repeated measures designs. Behavior Research Methods,
37, 379–384.
Belin, P., & Zatorre, R. J. (2000). ’What’, ’where’ and ’how’
in auditory cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 965–966.
Bottini, G., Paulesu, E., Sterzi, R., Warburton, E., Wise,
R. J. S., Vallar, G., et al. (1995). Modulation of conscious experience by peripheral sensory stimuli. Nature,
376, 778–781.
Bottini, G., Sterzi, R., Paulesu, E., Vallar, G., Cappa, S. F.,
Erminio, F., et al. (1994). Identification of the central
vestibular projections in man: A positron emission tomog-

2562

raphy activation study. Experimental Brain Research, 99,
164–169.
Dijkerman, H. C., & de Haan, E. H. F. (2007). Somatosensory processes subserving perception and action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 189–239.
Fasold, O., von Brevern, M., Kuhberg, M., Ploner, C. J., Villringer, A., Lempert, T., et al. (2002). Human vestibular cortex as identified with caloric stimulation in functional magnetic resonance imaging. NeuroImage, 17, 1384–1393.
Ferrè, E. R., Bottini, G., & Haggard, P. (2011). Vestibular
modulation of somatosensory perception. European Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 1337–1344.
Foley, J. M. (1977). Effect of distance information and range
on two indices of visually perceived distance. Perception,
6, 449–460.
Goodale, M. A., Milner, A. D., Jakobson, L. S., & Carey,
D. P. (1991). A neurological dissociation between perceiving objects and grasping them. Nature, 349, 154–156.
Guldin, W. O., & Grüsser, O.-J. (1998). Is there a vestibular
cortex? Trends in Neurosciences, 21, 254–259.
Halligan, P. W., Hunt, M., Marshall, J. C., & Wade, D. T.
(1995). Sensory detection without localization. Neurocase,
1, 259–266.
Kaas, J. H., & Hackett, T. A. (1999). ’What’ and ’where’ processing in auditory cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 1045–
1047.
Kammers, M. P. M., van der Ham, I. J. M., & Dijkerman,
H. C. (2006). Dissociating body representations in healthy
individuals: Differential effects of a kinaesthetic illusion on
perception and action. Neuropsychologia, 44, 2430–2436.
Maeder, P. P., Meuli, R. A., Adriani, M., Bellmann, A.,
Fornari, E., Thiran, J.-P., et al. (2001). Distinct pathways
involved in sound recognition and localization: A human
fMRI study. NeuroImage, 14, 802–816.
Marcel, A. (2003). The sense of agency: Awareness and ownership of action. In J. Roessler & N. Eilan (Eds.), Agency
and self-awareness: Issues in philosophy and psychology.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Milner, A. D., & Goodale, M. A. (1995). The visual brain in
action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Olejnik, S., & Algina, J. (2003). Generalized eta and omega
squared statistics: Measures of effect size for some common research designs. Psychological Methods, 8, 434–
447.
Paillard, J. (1999). Body schema and body image: A double
dissociation in deafferented patients. In G. N. Gantchev,
S. Mori, & J. Massion (Eds.), Motor control: Today and
tomorrow. Sofia, Bulgaria: Academic Publishing House.
Paillard, J., Michel, F., & Stelmach, G. (1983). Localization without content: A tactile analogue of ’blind sight’.
Archives of Neurology, 40, 548–551.
Philbeck, J. W., & Loomis, J. M. (1997). Comparison of
two indicators of perceived egocentric distance under fullcue and reduced-cue conditions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23, 72–

85.
Philbeck, J. W., & O’Leary, S. (2005). Remembered landmarks enhance the precision of path integration. Psicológica, 26, 7–24.
Philbeck, J. W., Woods, A. J., Kontra, C., & Zdenkova, P.
(2010). A comparison of blindpulling and blindwalking
as measures of perceived absolute distance. Behavior Research Methods, 42, 148–160.
Proffitt, D. R., Stefanucci, J., Banton, T., & Epstein, W.
(2003). The role of effort in perceived distance. Psychological Science, 14, 106–112.
Rauschecker, J. P. (1998). Parallel processing in the auditory
cortex of primates. Audiology and Neuro-Otology, 3, 86–
103.
Reed, C. L., Klatzky, R. L., & Halgren, E. (2005). What
vs. where in touch: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 25, 718–
726.
Romanski, L. M., Tian, B., Fritz, J., Mishkin, M., GoldmanRakic, P. S., & Rauschecker, J. P. (1999). Dual streams
of auditory afferents target multiple domains in the primate
prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 1131–1136.
Rossetti, Y., Rode, G., & Boisson, D. (1995). Implicit processing of somaesthetic information: A dissociation between where and how? NeuroReport, 6, 506–510.
Sathian, K., Lacey, S., Stilla, R., Gibson, G. O., Deshpande,
G., Hu, X., et al. (2011). Dual pathways for haptic and
visual perception of spatial and texture information. NeuroImage, 57, 462–475.
Schwarz, D. W. F., & Fredrickson, J. M. (1971). Rhesus
monkey vestibular cortex: A bimodal primary projection
field. Science, 172, 280–281.
Sittig, A. C., Denier van der Gon, J. J., Gielen, C. C. A. M.,
& van Wijk, A. J. M. (1985). The attainment of target
position during step-tracking movements despite a shift of
initial position. Experimental Brain Research, 60, 407–
410.
Ungerleider, L. G., & Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical visual systems. In D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale, &
R. J. W. Mansfield (Eds.), Analysis of visual behaveior.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Van Boven, R. W., Ingeholm, J. E., Beauchamp, M. S., Bikle,
P. C., & Ungerleider, L. G. (2005). Tactile form and location processing in the human brain. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102, 12601–12605.
Westwood, D. A., & Goodale, M. A. (2003). A haptic sizecontrast illusion affects size perception but not grasping.
Experimental Brain Research, 153, 253–259.

2563

