UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Counts in Mandarin Chinese: A Study of Individuation and Quantification

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/66k674bm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Cheung, Pierina
Li, Peggy
Barner, David

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Counts in Mandarin Chinese: A Study of Individuation and Quantification
Pierina Cheung
mpcheung@uwaterloo.ca
Department of Psychology
University of Waterloo

Peggy Li

David Barner

pegs@wjh.harvard.edu
Laboratory for Developmental Studies
Harvard University

barner@ucsd.edu
Department of Psychology
University of California, San Deigo

classifiers in the context of mass interpretation confirms the
claim that in the absence of classifiers, [noun] predicates in
Chinese are interpreted as mass” (p. 108). Under this
account, classifiers do not merely reflect the meaning
provided by the noun, but actually supply units of
individuation and quantification, just as English mass nouns
require unitizers like “piece” to specify the unit.
Several studies have provided evidence for the view that
only count nouns in mass-count languages lexically specify
units of individuation. In one study, using a word extension
task, Lucy found that when presented with an entity (e.g., a
cardboard box), and asked to judge which of two
alternatives was more similar, English speakers preferred a
shape-matched choice (e.g., a plastic box) whereas Yucatec
Mayans divided their choices between the shape-matched
choice and a substance-matched alternative (e.g, a piece of
cardboard; see also Lucy & Gaskins, 2001). In a subsequent
study, Imai and Gentner (1997) found a similar result in
Japanese speakers who were more likely to extend novel
words on the basis of substance than on the basis of object
kind relative to English speakers.
In more recent work, Huang and colleagues (Huang &
Lee, 2009; Huang, 2009) used familiar words to examine
noun semantics in Mandarin-speaking adults and children.
Using a picture verification task, they found that Mandarinspeaking adults judged sentences containing a bare noun
(yizi ‘chair’) as acceptable when these nouns were used to
refer to either a whole object or just a piece of an object
(e.g., yizi, or ‘chair’, was acceptable for a whole chair or
half of a chair). However, when a sortal classifier was added
to the noun (zhang yizi ‘a chair’), adults rejected pictures
depicting object parts, while children continued to accept
them. Based on this finding, they concluded that, first,
learning sortal classifiers “initiates children into learning
how individuals and non-individuals are encoded in the
language” (Huang, 2009: 150), and second, nouns do not
have individuated meanings independent of classifiers (see
also Borer 2005). Thus, on their view, the combination of a
classifier and noun specifies criteria for individuation.
Huang and Lee’s interpretation of these findings is
tempered, however, by the fact that many of the nouns they
considered to be count in English were in fact syntactically
flexible, and could be used as either count or mass in
English. For example, the word ‘apple’ in English can refer
to either individuals or nonindividuated stuff, depending on
syntax (e.g., some apple vs. some apples). If we assume that
noun meanings are the same cross-linguistically, Mandarin
speakers might also be willing to accept whole and parts for
the flexible nouns in a bare noun phrase because of the
different meanings these nouns allow, just as English

Abstract
By some accounts, speakers of classifier languages such as
Mandarin or Japanese, which lack count-mass syntax, require
classifiers to specify individuated meanings of nouns. This
paper examines this view by testing how Mandarin speakers
interpret bare nouns and use classifier knowledge to guide
quantification in four studies. Using a quantity judgment task,
Study 1 found that Mandarin speakers interpret nouns like
English speakers, regardless of their syntactic status as mass
or count in English. Study 2 showed that Mandarin speakers
quantified broken objects like English adults, again
suggesting that Mandarin nouns specify criteria of
individuation. Studies 3 and 4 together showed that classifiers
are not typically required for individuation, except when the
reference of nouns is semantically ambiguous (e.g., rock,
string) and can denote either objects or substances. In sum,
we argue that individuation can be specified lexically in
classifier languages like Mandarin, and does not depend on
classifier syntax.
Keywords: individuation; quantification; nouns; classifiers;
word learning; Mandarin; mass-count syntax.

Introduction
Languages differ in how they express reference to kinds of
things. In English and other Indo-European languages,
countable things like dogs and cups are typically referred to
using count syntax (e.g., those are dogs), whereas
uncountable entities like milk and sand are expressed as
mass nouns (e.g., that is some milk). However, other
languages, like Mandarin Chinese, make no such syntactic
distinction. Instead, nouns in Mandarin, and related
classifier languages like Japanese and Tsotsil Mayan, act
much like mass nouns in English (Allan, 1980; Chierchia,
1998). Nouns cannot co-occur directly with numerals (*san
bi ‘three pen’), but instead require classifiers (CLs) for
counting (san CL-zhi bi ‘three pens’, is literally translated to
‘three CL-stick pen’). Based on this syntactic distinction,
some researchers have argued that nouns in classifier
languages may not specify individuation lexically. Instead,
languages like Mandarin may rely on classifiers – i.e.,
words like “bit” and “piece” – to syntactically specify units
of individuation, resulting in a fundamental difference in
how nouns encode meaning cross-linguistically (e.g., Borer,
2005; Huang & Lee, 2009; Lucy, 1992).
For example, according to Lucy (1992), in classifier
languages such as Yucatec Mayan, all lexical nouns “are
unspecified as to unit since they all require supplementary
marking (i.e., numeral classifiers) in the context of numeral
modification” (p. 73). Similarly, in her discussion of
Mandarin Chinese, Borer (2005) argues that, “the need for a
classifier projection to license counting vs. the absence of

210

speakers might be willing to accept either whole or parts
depending on the syntax affixed to the flexible noun. 1
In support of the view that noun meanings do not differ
between mass-count and classifier languages, several recent
studies show that count syntax is not necessary for
individuation, and that both English mass nouns and bare
nouns in classifier languages can specify individuation.
First, several researchers have argued that English mass
nouns are not limited to denoting non-individuals (e.g.,
Barner & Snedeker, 2005; Chierchia, 1998). Take, for
example, the English mass noun ‘furniture,’ ‘a piece of
furniture’ cannot refer to just a leg of a chair, but must
denote a whole individual (e.g., a chair). Only ‘a piece of a
piece of furniture’ can refer to the leg of a chair. This
suggests that mass nouns like ‘furniture’ do provide natural
atomic units for counting, namely anything that counts as a
“piece” (Doetjes, 1997). This intuition has been supported
by experimental studies that probe how mass-count syntax
affects quantity judgments. When asked to decide which of
two sets contains “more furniture,” participants base
quantity judgments on number (e.g., judging that six tiny
pieces of furniture are more furniture than two large pieces),
despite basing judgments on volume for other mass nouns
that denote substances (Barner & Snedeker, 2005). These
findings show that English mass nouns can specify
individuation, despite lacking overt count syntax.
Moreover, recent studies have found evidence that many
nouns in classifier languages also supply criteria for
individuation (Barner, Inagaki & Li, 2009; Li, Chen, Barner,
& Carey, under review). In the absence of classifiers,
speakers of both Japanese and Tsotsil Mayan based quantity
judgments on number to the same extent as English
speakers for words like ‘cup’, ‘furniture,’ and ‘ketchup’. For
mass-count flexible nouns in English such as ‘string’ and
‘apple,’ English speakers quantified by number when the
nouns were presented in count syntax (more apples) and by
volume when in mass syntax (more apple). Japanese
speakers, who received no syntactic cues, made quantity
judgments in-between the count and mass groups of English
speakers’ judgments, sometimes judging by number and
sometimes by volume. This is consistent with the hypothesis
that both count and mass readings are available to Japanese
and English speakers for flexible nouns, and that syntax
selects from universally available lexical meanings.
Subsequent studies have also found that cross-linguistic
differences may be much smaller than first reported, are
present only when entities are physically ambiguous, and
can be made to disappear depending on testing context (e.g.,
Li, Dunham, & Carey, 2009). Importantly, several studies

have argued that cross-linguistic differences are more likely
attributable to lexical statistics rather than to noun
semantics. For example, English subjects may be more
likely to infer that novel nouns denote object kinds because
count nouns are more frequent than mass nouns in English.
Speakers of classifier languages, however, need not make
such syntactic inferences, and thus may rely more on the
physical properties of novel referents to make their
judgments, resulting in more variable responding for
ambiguous entities (e.g., Imai & Mazuka, 2003; Colunga &
Smith, 2006; Li & Gleitman, 2001; Barner et al., 2009).
In summary, a review of recent work on cross-linguistic
individuation provides mixed evidence for the claim that, in
absence of classifiers, nouns do not specify individuation in
languages like Mandarin, Japanese, and Tsotsil Mayan. We
believe, however, that the current body of evidence more
strongly supports the position that noun semantics are not
different cross-linguistically, and that some nouns in
classifier languages do provide criteria for individuation just
like nouns in mass-count languages. The current study
provides even stronger evidence for this position. We
assessed how speakers of Mandarin Chinese interpret
familiar nouns (Study 1), whether they accept parts of
broken objects as units for quantification (Study 2), and
whether classifiers change how nouns are interpreted, or are
instead semantically inert (Studies 3 and 4).

Study 1
Using a quantity judgment task (Gathercole, 1985; Barner &
Snedeker, 2005), we tested the hypothesis that bare nouns in
Mandarin do not individuate unless classifiers are present.
We reasoned that, if bare nouns do not individuate in
absence of classifier syntax, Mandarin speakers should
quantify by volume rather than by number, or quantify
randomly across different types of nouns. On the other hand,
if nouns can lexically specify individuation, even in absence
of classifiers, Mandarin speakers should quantify by number
for nouns denoting object kinds (e.g., chair), and by volume
for nouns denoting substance kinds (e.g., mustard). For
nouns that are used flexibly as either mass or count in
English (e.g., string, apple), Mandarin judgments should fall
in-between the mass and count judgments, and should vary
from one item to the next, depending on the degree to which
each word favors an individuated meaning crosslinguistically. To explore this, we tested subjects with two
kinds of flexible words – those that continue to apply to a
referent in both mass and count forms after the thing has
been cut into pieces (e.g., string) and those that can only be
used in mass syntax to name the cut referent (e.g., apple).

Method

1

Other issues such as object functionality arise with Huang and
Lee’s study. For example, subjects sometimes noted that the part of
a depicted object could still potentially function as a whole
individual of that kind (e.g., a torn pair of pants as kuzi ‘pants’
could still function as a pair of pants). Thus, it seems likely that
results would have differed if they had tested subjects with only
translations of English count nouns, using only pictures of clearly
non-functional parts.

Participants Fifty-six participants were recruited from
universities in Taiwan, with 14 participants assigned to one
of the following four noun types (categorized according to
their English syntax): count nouns, mass nouns, ‘apple’ type

211

flexible nouns, and ‘string’ type flexible nouns.2
Procedure All participants completed a quantity judgment
task. They were shown photographs of two characters: one
had two large objects or two large portions of substances
and the other had four small objects or four small portions
of substances. The combined volume of the four small
objects or portions was always less than that of the two large
objects or portions. Participants were asked to choose which
of the two had “more”. Instructions were written in Chinese
above the photographs, and all questions were presented
without classifiers (Shui you bijiao duo [noun]?; Who has
more [noun]?).
There were eight nouns for each of the four noun types.
For example, the ‘count’ condition included nouns such as
‘bag’ and ‘balloon,’ and the ‘mass’ condition included
nouns such as ‘black pepper’ and ‘mustard.’ The two
flexible noun lists differed with respect to the salience of
their individuated meanings, and in particular, whether their
count forms could be used to name pieces of their referents
(e.g., half a rock, or half an apple). Eight words satisfied this
criterion (e.g., apple, donut), and the remaining eight did not
(e.g., rock, string). We will henceforth refer to the first
flexible list as ‘Flexible A’ and the second as ‘Flexible B.’ 3

forms them. English speakers rely on mass-count syntactic
cues when making judgments; however, since Mandarin
lacks such cues, speakers relied instead on each referent’s
physical properties.
Next, we conducted an items-analysis to examine whether
adults responded differently to the two types of flexible
nouns. Since participants were more likely to stick to one
way of responding throughout the study for flexible nouns,
item-analysis was more sensitive to detecting differences
across noun types. We found a similar pattern of results
(Count > Flexible A > Flexible B > Mass), but the itemsanalysis also revealed that participants quantified more by
number for Flexible A than Flexible B nouns (Count vs.
Flexible A: t2(22) = 13.13, p < .001; Flexible A vs. Flexible
B: t2(14) = 5.58, p < .001; Flexible B vs. Mass: t2(14) =
53.46, p < .001). Mandarin speakers were slightly more
likely to quantify by number for flexible nouns if their
English count-noun equivalent only applied to whole
referents (e.g., apple, donut), relative to flexible nouns
whose English count-noun equivalents applied equally well
to a whole object or its parts (e.g., string, rock).
Overall, this set of data suggests that Mandarin noun
meanings do not differ fundamentally from nouns in
English, and that semantic criteria which predict mass-count
usage in English predict the judgments of subjects tested in
Mandarin. These data suggest that semantic differences in
nouns drive syntactic usage in English, rather than syntax
driving the creation of new meanings.

Results and Discussion
An ANOVA comparing noun types (Count, Flexible A,
Flexible B, vs. Mass), with percentage of judgments by
number as a dependent variable, found a significant
difference across noun types (F1(3, 52) = 24.88, p < .001,
ηp2 = 0.59; F2(3, 28) = 1444.76, p < .001, ηp2 = 0.99). Pairwise t-tests by subjects-analysis revealed that judgments
based on number were most frequent for count nouns
(100%), and least often for substance-mass nouns (0%):
Count > Flexible A and Flexible B > Mass (Count vs.
Flexible A: t1(26) = 2.15, p < .05; Flexible A vs. Flexible B:
t1(26) = .74, n.s.; Flexible B vs. Mass: t1(26) = 4.92, p <
.001). Replicating Barner et al. (2009)’s results with
Japanese speakers, quantity judgments by number for masscount flexible nouns were in-between count nouns and mass
nouns (Flexible A: 75.0%; Flexible B: 62.5%). These results
indicate that Mandarin speakers share the same conceptual
distinction on the two kinds of flexible nouns as English
speakers. Across languages, the referents of these flexible
nouns can be represented either as objects or as the stuff that

Study 2
Study 1 provides one form of evidence against the claim
that count syntax is necessary for individuation. In Study 2,
we sought converging evidence for this claim using a
different method. As noted by Huang and Lee (2009), if
Mandarin nouns do not specify individuation, then
Mandarin speakers should differ from English speakers with
respect to how they refer to the parts of broken objects.
Previous studies have shown that English-speaking children,
unlike adults, often treat parts of objects as units for
quantification (e.g., three pieces of a broken fork as being
“more forks” than two whole forks; Brooks, Pogue, &
Barner, 2011; Shipley & Shepperson, 1990). By some
accounts, these failures suggest an inability to use the
semantic criteria of nouns to guide quantification. Thus, if
Mandarin nouns lack criteria of individuation, then adult
speakers should resemble English-speaking children, and
should treat pieces of broken objects as units of
quantification.
In their study, Huang and Lee (2009) found that
Mandarin adults often accepted bare nouns as labels for
parts of broken objects. However, as mentioned above, their
study included many flexible nouns, whose referents may
also be construed as unindividuated by speakers of English
when count syntax is not provided (e.g., some apple). In
Study 2, we addressed this concern by using nouns that
were unambiguously count in English. Also, we varied the
syntactic framing of nouns by testing some subjects with

2
English language is part of the school curriculum in Taiwan,
and thus participants in our study would have received training in
English. Although proficiency with English can potentially
influence participants’ responses, our participants likely do not
speak English fluently on a daily basis (see Yeh & Gentner, 2005).
3
Most nouns were selected using the MacArthur Communicative
Development Inventory (Fenson 1994). A group of 13 English
speakers provided ratings that corroborated our categorization of
whether the noun was a count noun, mass noun, or mass-count
flexible noun. Another group of 12 English speakers verified the
distinction between flexible A and flexible B nouns. They were
asked to judge for each flexible noun whether cutting the thing in
question would result in two (“Imagine one [noun]. Imagine that it
is cut in half. Are there now two [noun]s?”).

212

classifiers and some without. If Mandarin nouns do provide
criteria of individuation, then Mandarin speakers should
behave like their English counterparts and quantify by
whole objects regardless of whether a classifier is present.
However, if nouns do not provide criteria of individuation,
Mandarin speakers should only reliably choose the side with
whole objects when a classifier is present.

subjects using the flexible nouns from Study 1, and
manipulated whether the words were presented with
classifiers using a quantity judgment task. We predicted
that, with the addition of a sortal classifier, Mandarin
speakers should unambiguously quantify by number, just as
English speakers do when presented with flexible nouns in
count syntax.

Method

Method

Participants Twenty-one native Mandarin-speaking adults
who had not participated in Study 1 were recruited from
universities in Taiwan, and were assigned randomly to one
of two conditions.
Procedure There were two tasks. In the quantity judgment
task, one of the two characters always had two whole
objects while the other character had one object cut into
three pieces. The objects tested were named by count nouns
in English (e.g., cup, ball, shoe), and were a subset of nouns
from Study 1. In the counting task, participants saw either
three or four objects, one of which was cut into three pieces.
They were asked to count the set using a noun (e.g., How
many [shoes] are there?) and to give a numerical response.
The quantity judgment task was always presented before the
counting task.
Participants were tested in Mandarin, and heard
instructions containing either a bare noun phrase (n=10) or a
sortal classifier-noun phrase (n=11). In the quantity
judgment task, participants were asked, Shui you bijiao duo
(CL) [noun]? (Who has more (CL) [noun]?). In the counting
task, participants were asked, “Zheli you duoshuo (CL)
[noun]? (Here have how-many (CL) [noun]?).

Participants
Sixty-four
native
Mandarin-speaking
participants were recruited in Taiwan as in Study 1.
Procedure All participants completed a quantity judgment
task. Half of the participants were tested on the Flexible A
list, and half on the Flexible B list from Study 1; half of
each group was assigned to the bare noun condition and half
to the classifier condition, resulting in 16 subjects per group.
In the classifier condition nouns were presented with a sortal
classifier, whereas nouns in the bare noun condition were
not. All else was identical to Study 1.

Results and Discussion
An ANOVA with Noun Type (Flexible A vs. Flexible B)
and Syntactic Frame (Bare vs. Classifier) as between
subjects factors found a significant effect of Syntactic
Frame (F1(1,60) = 8.19, p < 0.01, ηp2 = .120; F2(1, 14) =
47.15, p < 0.001, ηp2 = .771). Participants quantified
significantly more by number in the classifier condition
(85.2%) than in the bare noun condition (62.9%; see Figure
1). For the items-analysis, but not the subjects-analysis,
there was a main effect of Noun Type, F2(1,14) = 12.62, p <
0.01, ηp2 = 0.47. Subjects quantified by number slightly
more for the Flexible A list relative to the Flexible B list
(80.8% vs. 67.3%). There was no interaction between
Syntactic Frame and Noun Type.

Results and Discussion
Participants overwhelmingly gave whole object responses
in both tasks regardless of whether the sortal classifier was
present. For both conditions, responses were near 100% on
average for the quantity judgment task and at 100% for the
counting task. For the quantity judgment task, there was no
significant difference in how often participants gave whole
object responses between the classifier (90.9%) and bare
noun conditions (100%; t(19) = .95, p = .35).4 The finding
that adults counted and quantified whole objects in the bare
noun condition suggests that judgments were guided by
lexical criteria of individuation rather than by classifier
syntax. This provides further evidence that nouns in
Mandarin do provide criteria of individuation

Study 3

Figure 1. Percentage of judgments by number for flexible A
and B nouns across the three conditions - the bare noun and
original classifier conditions (from Study 3), and the
classifier emphasized condition (from Study 4).

Studies 1 and 2 show that sortal classifiers are not required
to specify individuation for nouns in Mandarin. However,
just as English count syntax can disambiguate meanings for
flexible nouns, one might expect that sortal classifiers can
do the same in Mandarin. To explore this, Study 3 tested

To conclude, we found that classifiers did affect quantity
judgment for flexible nouns, leading to more judgments
based on number relative to the bare noun condition.
However, somewhat surprisingly, the presence of a sortal
classifier did not lead participants to choose by number

4

Non-parametric tests using Mann-Whitney U revealed the
same pattern of results and found no difference across the two
conditions.

213

100% of the time, as one would expect if the classifier were
the primary cue for specifying individuation in Mandarin.
This finding also suggests that the possibility that adults in
our study were implicitly adding the classifier they have
come to associate with the noun when making quantity
judgments in the bare noun condition seems unlikely.

interpretation because it does most of the time in ordinary
speech. Consistent with this idea, recent work on online
sentence comprehension in Mandarin suggests that mensural
classifiers (i.e., measure words) has a stronger influence on
referential selection than sortal classifiers (Klein, Carlson,
Li, & Tenanhaus, in press).

Study 4

General Discussion

Although it is possible that participants in Study 3 were
relatively insensitive to classifiers when interpreting
ambiguous nouns, it is also possible that subjects simply
failed to notice their presence when reading the study
stimuli. In Study 4 we addressed this concern by underlining
the classifiers to emphasize their presence. We expected that
when the classifiers are salient to subjects, they should use
them to disambiguate the interpretation of flexible nouns.

Four studies investigated the claim that bare nouns in
Mandarin Chinese do not specify criteria of individuation,
and that individuation is introduced by sortal classifiers.
Study 1 found that Mandarin speakers do not differ from
speakers of English when making quantity judgments for
familiar nouns. For example, Mandarin speakers based
judgments almost exclusively on number for English count
nouns. For mass-count flexible nouns such as ‘apple’ or
‘rock’, Mandarin speakers relied on lexical semantics to
determine the units for counting, and made judgments that
were roughly between those of English mass and count
judgments, suggesting that across languages speakers can
access both the individuated and unindividuated
interpretations of flexible words. Overall, the current results
were similar to those of English and Japanese speakers
reported in Barner et al. (2009), and suggest that nouns in
Mandarin individuate, despite lacking count syntax, and do
so even when classifiers are not explicitly used.
Consistent with this, Study 2 found that Mandarinspeaking adults did not quantify parts of broken objects like
English-speaking preschoolers (see Brooks et al., 2011;
Shipley & Sheppersen, 1990), which provides evidence
against the claim that Mandarin nouns lack criteria of
individuation. Together, the findings in Studies 1 and 2
suggest that Mandarin noun meanings are no different than
noun meanings in English - Mandarin nouns like yizi ‘chair’
or pingguo ‘apple’ denote kinds of countable individuals.
If individuation is not specified by classifier syntax, what
is the role of sortal classifiers in noun phrases? Are
classifiers completely inert semantically, or can they
sometimes contribute to the compositional semantics of a
noun phrase? Findings from Studies 3 and 4 shed light on
these questions by testing mass-count flexible nouns. Here,
we found an effect of classifier syntax on quantity
judgments; participants were more likely to base judgments
on number when classifiers were added to flexible nouns.
However, adding a classifier did not always have this effect;
instead, as shown by Study 4, subjects attended
systematically to classifiers only when their presence was
made highly salient to subjects. Our suggestion is that
subjects typically ignore classifiers because nouns normally
provide the relevant content themselves. For adults, lexical
meanings supply criteria of individuation, and may be
supplemented by knowledge of the relative frequency of
different meanings in everyday speech (e.g., the fact that
‘apple’ is frequently used to refer to whole apples rather
than to apple-stuff).
The view that lexical semantics can provide the criteria of
individuation for nouns in classifier languages such as

Method
Participants Twenty additional participants were recruited
as in the previous studies.
Procedure Procedures were identical to Study 3, with the
exception that classifiers were underlined in the written
instructions.

Results and Discussion
With the classifier emphasized, participants now quantified
by number 100% of the time for both Noun Types (Flexible
A: 100%; Flexible B: 99%; see Figure 1). An ANOVA with
Noun Type (Flexible A vs. Flexible B) and Classifier
Presentation (Original, Emphasized) as between subjects
factors found a significant effect of Classifier Presentation
(F1(1,48) = 7.70, p < 0.01, ηp2= .138; F2(1,14) = 65.92, p <
0.001, ηp2= .825). Participants quantified by number
significantly more often when the classifier was underscored
(99.4%) than when it was not (85.2%; see Figure 1). No
other effects were found by the subjects-analysis. The itemsanalysis again revealed an effect of Noun Type (F2(1,14) =
12.62, p < .01, ηp2= .474). Also, there was a significant
interaction between Noun Type and Classifier Presentation
in the items-analysis (F2(1, 14) = 5.23, p < .05, ηp2= .272).
This was driven by the fact that Noun Type only mattered
for the original presentation (Study 3) but did not matter for
the new presentation (Study 4), since participants were at
ceiling in quantifying by number.
Underlining the classifiers led our subjects to quantify by
number 100% of the time, suggesting that classifiers can
disambiguate between ambiguous noun meanings in
Mandarin, much like mass-count syntax in English.
However, unlike English subjects who rarely ignore masscount information, subjects in Study 3 sometimes ignored
classifiers when reading instructions. This suggests that
classifiers may add little information that is not already
provided by the head noun, and typically act mainly as
syntactic agreement. In the case of flexible nouns, subjects
may draw on their knowledge of the relative frequency of
individuated and unindividuated usages – e.g., quickly
assuming that ‘apple’ should get an individuated

214

together numerical language: children’s use of default
units of quantification. Developmental Science, 14, 44-57.
Chierchia, G. (1998). Plurality of mass nouns and the notion
of ‘semantic parameter’. Events and Grammar, 70, 53–
103.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L.B. (2003). The emergence of
abstract ideas: Evidence from networks and babies. In L.
Saitta (Ed.), Philosophical Transactions by the Royal
Society B. Theme Issue: ‘The abstraction paths: fro
experience to concept’, 1205-14.
Doetjes, J. (1997). Quantifiers and selection: On the
distribution of quantifying expressions in French, Dutch
and English. Ph. D. thesis, Leiden University, HAG, The
Hague.
Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznick, J.S., Bates, E., Thal, D., &
Pethick, S. (1994). Variability in early communicative
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59(5), 1-173.
Gathercole, V.C. (1985). ‘He has too much hard questions’:
The acquisition of the linguistic mass-count distinction in
much and many. Journal of Child Language, 12, 395-415.
Huang, A. (2009). Count-mass distinction and the
acquisition of classifiers in Mandarin-speaking children.
Master’s thesis, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Huang, A., & Lee, T. H-T. (2009). Quantification and
individuation in the acquisition of Chinese classifiers. In
Otsu, Y. (Ed.), Proceedings of the 10th Tokyo Conference
on Psycholinguistics (pp. 117-141). Japan: Keio
University.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study on
early word meaning. Universal ontology and linguistic
influence. Cognition, 62, 169–200.
Imai, M., & Mazuka, R. (2007). Revisiting language
universals and linguistic relativity: language-relative
construal of individuation constrained by universal
ontology. Cognitive Science, 31, 385-414.
Klein, N., Carlson, G.N., Li, R., Jaeger, T.F., Tanenhaus,
M.K. (In press). Classifying and massifying incrementally
in Chinese language processing. In Diane Massam (Ed.),
A Cross Linguistic Exploration of the Count Mass
Distinction. Oxford University Press. Oxford, England.
Li, P., Dunham, Y., & Carey, S. (2009). Of substance: The
nature of language effects on entity construal. Cognitive
Psychology, 58, 487-524.
Li, P, Chen, F., Barner, D., & Carey, S. (under review).
Concepts of object and substance kinds: A comparison of
speakers of English and of Tsotsil Mayan.
Lucy, J. (1992). Grammatical Categories and Cognition.
Glasgow, Scotland: Cambridge University Press.
Lucy, J. & Gaskins, S. (2001). Grammatical categories and
the development of classification preferences: a
comparative approach. In S.C. Levinson & M. Bowerman
(Eds.),
Language
Acquisition
and
Conceptual
Development (pp. 257-83). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Shipley, E, & Shepperson, B. (1990). Countable entities:
Developmental changes. Cognition 34, 109-136.

Mandarin and Japanese corroborates previous studies in
English where English-speaking adults quantify over
individuals when nouns such as ‘furniture’ or ‘jewelry’ are
used in mass syntax (Barner et al., 2009; Barner &
Snedeker, 2005). This suggests that syntax is not the only
means that supplies criteria of individuation. In English, the
individuation can be expressed syntactically, if the word is
used in count syntax (e.g., apples) or through the lexical
concept itself (e.g., furniture).5 In languages that lack count
syntax such as Mandarin, however, the lexical concept alone
can determine individuation.
To summarize, the current studies provide strong
evidence that nouns have similar semantic content crosslinguistically, regardless of variation in their syntactic
expression. Nouns in classifier languages such as Mandarin
and Japanese encode individuation like nouns in English,
and can express this content without requiring the overt use
of classifiers. Not only are classifiers unnecessary for
individuation in Mandarin, but they also appear to be
relatively weak cues to meaning. Unless their presence in a
sentence is explicitly highlighted, Mandarin speakers often
overlook them, and rely instead on the nouns themselves to
determine interpretation. This suggests that in Mandarin,
when the meaning of a noun phrase is ambiguous, speakers
may rely on other contextual and pragmatic information
rather than syntactic cues to disambiguate reference. In
contrast, in mass-count languages like English, mass-count
syntax often performs this disambiguating function.
Outside these ambiguous cases, like string, apple, rock, etc.,
speakers of classifiers languages converge on similar
interpretations as speakers of mass-count languages,
suggesting that nouns encode individuation in the same way
across syntactically diverse languages.

Acknowledgments
We thank Su-chin (Susan) Shih, Lichun Chang, Alice Fang,
Ally Chuang, Paul Chien, Te-Hsin Liu, and Becky Huang,
Yaling Hsiao, and Lai Yin Yung for assistance with data
collection. Finally, we thank Susan Carey for discussions on
experimental manipulations.

References
Allan, K. (1980). Nouns and Countability. Language, 56,
541–567.
Barner, D, Inagaki, S., & Li, P. (2009). Language, thought,
and real nouns. Cognition, 111, 329-344.
Barner, D., & Snedeker, J. (2005). Quantity judgments and
individuation: Evidence that mass nouns count.
Cognition, 97, 41–46.
Borer, H. (2005). In name only. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Brooks, N., Pogue, A., & Barner, D. (2011). Piecing
5
Interestingly, object-mass nouns such as furniture are often
used in count syntax in other languages (e.g., French). This
suggests that in languages where nouns are obligatorily marked as
mass or count, individuation must be syntactically licensed.

215

