UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What explains variability in brain regions associate with Theory of Mind in a large sample of
neurotypical adults and adults with ASD?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1w48n19x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Dufour, Nicholas
Redcay, Elizabeth
Young, Liane
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What explains variability in brain regions associated with Theory of Mind in a large
sample of neurotypical adults and adults with ASD?
Nicholas Dufour1, Elizabeth Redcay2, Liane Young3, Penelope L Mavros1, M Joseph Moran4,
Christina Triantafyllou1,5, John Gabrieli1,5, and Rebecca Saxe1,5
1. Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
2. Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
3. Department of Psychology, Boston College
4. Psychology Department, Harvard University
5. McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT
opposite pattern, hyperactivation, in ASD (Dichter, Felder,
& Bodfish, 2009).
One explanation of these conflicting results may be that
sample sizes are small, and individual variability is large.
Small samples of individuals with ASD are problematic
because individuals with ASD may be highly heterogeneous
in their neural responses (e.g., Hasson et al., 2009). Small
samples of NT participants are equally problematic, because
they allow for calculation of only the mean response, not the
distribution. Understanding the distribution is critical if
neural measures are to be useful in a clinical setting. For
most clinical applications, it is more important to be able to
describe the neural activity pattern of each specific
individual, relative to typical and atypical distributions. For
example, using fMRI to help diagnose ASD would require
comparing each individual to the typical distribution.
In order to measure the distribution of responses in ToM
brain regions of NT participants, we aggregated data
collected over 5 years from 477 NT participants. This large
sample allowed us to investigate variability in ToM region
responses, and measure any difference between NT
participants and adults with ASD, with unusually high
sensitivity. The main goal of the current paper is therefore to
compare the response in these regions in a large sample of
NT participants and a moderate sample of high-functioning
adults with ASD. In order to do so, we also (i) identify and
remove variance in the measured response, associated with
basic experimental parameters such as the stimulus
modality, number of stimuli, or experimental task, and (ii)
test whether the response of ToM regions is related to basic
demographic factors that may be relevant for ASD,
including gender, age, and IQ.

Abstract
Theory of mind (‘ToM’) tasks elicit highly reliable neural
activity across individuals and experimental paradigms. We
compared activity in a very large sample of neurotypical
(‘NT’, N=477) individuals, and a group of high functioning
individuals with autism spectrum disorders (‘ASD’, n=27),
using both region of interest (‘ROI’) and whole-brain
analyses. Although ToM activity showed significant and
reliable individual differences, these differences were not
explained by participant gender or age, or most experimental
parameters. Furthermore, there were no differences between
ASD and NT individuals. These results imply that the social
cognitive impairments typical of ASD can occur without
gross changes in the size or response magnitude of ToM brain
regions.
Keywords: Theory of mind; ASD; fMRI; TPJ; PC;
precuneus; MPFC; DMPFC; MMPFC

Introduction
Theory of Mind (‘ToM’) is the capacity to represent the
mental states of others (Premack & Woodruff, 1978).
Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) appear to
have particular difficulty with aspects of ToM. In particular,
children with ASD are disproportionately delayed on tasks
that tap inferences about other people’s beliefs (BaronCohen, 1989). The neural mechanism of this deficit remains
unknown. However, in neurotypical (NT) adults and
children, fMRI studies reveal a remarkable reliable group of
brain regions recruited during ToM tasks. These regions
include the left and right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ
and LTPJ), right anterior superior temporal sulcus (rSTS),
the medial precuneus (PC), and the medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) (U. Frith & Frith, 2003). Thus, a tempting
hypothesis is that dysfunction of the brain regions typically
implicated in ToM is responsible for the social cognitive
impairments observed in ASD.
Previous attempts to characterize the function of ToM
brain regions in adults with ASD have yielded conflicting
results. Some studies suggest that ToM regions are
hypoactive (i.e., produce a smaller or less selective
response, (Kennedy & Courchesne, 2008; Lombardo,
Chakrabarti, Bullmore), while other studies find no
difference between ASD and NT individuals (Gilbert, Bird,
Brindley, Frith, & Burgess, 2008), and still others find the

Methods
Typical Participants: Data were analyzed from 477 NT
participants (M=25.2 years, range: 18-69 years; 179 male).
IQ was measured in 60 of these participants (IQ 84-141,
M=117.5, SD=12.4). Participants provided informed
consent, in accordance with the guidelines of the MIT
Committee on the Use of Human Experimental Subjects
(COUHES), and were compensated approximately $30 per
hour for their time.
ASD Participants: 27 individuals with a clinical diagnosis
of ASD (M=33.9yrs, range 18-66yrs; 20 male) were

312

included, having volunteered to participate in one of two
(Moran et al., 2011; Redcay et al., 2012) previous studies.
The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) was
administered to 23 of the 27 ASD participants (ADOS
communication score M=3.2, SD=1.3; ADOS social score
M=5.8, SD=1.8). For 24 of the ASD participants, IQ
measures were obtained by the Kaufman Brief Intelligence
Test (IQ 69-141, M=116.3, SD=16.8). For direct NT vs.
ASD comparison, a set of 24 NT participants (collectively
termed ‘matched’) were chosen based on pairwise similarity
with the ASD participants on IQ, age, and gender (age 2054, M=29.9 years, SD=8.8 years; IQ 84-141, M=116.3,
SD=14.5; 19 male).

(Mental>Control) was masked with the six hypothesis
spaces; all voxels contiguous with the peak voxel and
significant at p < 0.001, within a 9mm radius, were defined
as the ROI. From each ROI three parameters were extracted:
the peak voxel t-value, the size of the ROI (number of
voxels included), and the mean T. The presence or absence
of an ROI was used as a fourth parameter. The reliability of
ROI parameters was assessed by split-half analysis. Contrast
images were derived from even versus odd runs in each
participant. ROIs were picked using a minimum cluster size
of 10 and a significance level of p < 0.05. The correlation of
the ROI even and odd parameter values was measured
across participants.
Every subject for whom we had complete demographic
and experimental data was then included in a multivariate
general linear model (GLM). The resulting model was a
seven-column (age, gender, group, modality, coil, number
of stimuli, and the mean term) predictor matrix and included
data from 383 participants. For the binary statistic that
indicated whether or not the ROI of interest was identified
in a given subject, the GLM presumed a binomial
distribution and a logit linker function. The GLM used a
normal distribution otherwise. Continuous regressors were
mean-centered prior to regression. Correction for multiple
comparisons was performed with Bonnferroni correction,
across all predictors and all dependent measures, within
each ROI. In total there were six predictors for the four ROI
parameters, a total of 24 comparisons per ROI; thus effects
were taken to be significant if p < 0.0021. Any relationship
significant at p < 0.01 is discussed as a ‘trend.’
An identical procedure was conducted for the matched
group, except that coil and modality did not vary within and
thus were omitted. IQ was added to the predictor matrix,
resulting in a total of 20 comparisons per ROI, and a
significance threshold of p < 0.0025. Any relationship found
to have a significance 0.01 < p < 0.0025 is discussed as a
trend.

fMRI Tasks All participants were presented with verbal
narratives in English that described a character and his/her
mental states (Mental condition) or described physical
objects and events (Control condition). The stimuli were
presented either visually as text on a screen, or aurally
through headphones. After reading or hearing the narrative,
participants performed one of 4 tasks. These tasks
correspond to the functional localizers used in (DodellFeder, Koster-Hale, Bedny, & Saxe, 2010; Kliemann,
Young, Scholz, & Saxe, 2008; L. Young & Saxe, 2008; L.
Young & Saxe, 2009; L. Young, Camprodon, Hauser,
Pascual-Leone, & Saxe, 2010; L. Young, Nichols, & Saxe,
2010; L. Young, Scholz, & Saxe, 2011) and unpublished
data.
fMRI Methods: Participants were scanned on a 3T Siemens
scanner at the Martinos Imaging Center at the McGovern
Institute for Brain Research at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (n=468) or at the Massachusetts General
Hospital (n=36). NT participants were scanned between
2006 and 2011. ASD participants were scanned between
2007 and 2010. Matched NTs were scanned between 2007
and 2010. Functional data were acquired using single echo
gradient echo echo-planar-imaging with voxel size 3.125 x
3.125 x 4.000 mm (TE=30 ms, flip angle=90°, TR either 2.5
(n=36) or 2 secs (n=468)). Participants were scanned on
either a 12-cahnnel or a 32-channel receive coil, both
Siemens products. Data were analyzed using SPM2 or
SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk) and in-house software.
The data were realigned to account for motion, smoothed
with a 5 mm Gaussian kernel and normalized to a standard
template in Montreal Neurological Institute space.

Whole-brain analyses: Whole-brain analyses were
conducted for the contrast of interest (Mental>Control), in
order to identify effects on the ToM brain regions. To
correct for comparisons, nonparametric whole-brain
analysis
was
performed
using
SnPM
(http://www.sph.umich.edu/ni-stat/SnPM/). Each test used
3mm variance smoothing and 5,000 permutations, with no
global normalization, grand mean scaling, or threshold
masking. The corrected p-value for filtering was 0.05, with
a threshold of 3, and a voxel-cluster combining theta value
of 0.5. Permutations were repeated for each predictor of
interest; all demographic and experimental predictor
variables were included as nuisance regressors using
modified SnPM plugins. Because (to foreshadow our
results) we find a lack of significant differences between
ASD and NT participants, we also examined the results
using a substantially more lenient threshold: regions were
considered significant if composed of a contiguous cluster
of at least ten voxels at a t-value of 3 or greater, as this

ROI Analyses: Six functional ROIs (ROIs) from the ToM
network were defined in individual participants, using the
contrast Mental>Control, consistent with previous literature
(e.g. (U. Frith & Frith, 2003; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003)):
RTPJ, LTPJ, PC, dorsal and middle MPFC (DMPFC and
MMPFC) and rSTS.
To identify individually-defined functional ROIs, initial
“hypothesis spaces” were defined as the 9mm radius sphere
centered about local maxima for each region, in the group
random effects analysis performed on all 477 NT
participants (see figure 1). Each participant’s contrast image

313

corresponds to p < 0.001 (uncorrected). This more lenient
threshold is consequently a more stringent test of the
hypothesis that there are no differences between the groups.

response magnitude of ToM brain regions is explained by
ASD status. The first set of analyses compared all of the
individuals with ASD (n=27, 23 male) to all of the NT
individuals (n=439, 179 male). In these analyses, no
parameter of any ROI was significantly predicted by the
group membership (ASD vs. NT) of the individual (p > .09
for all ROIs). The ASD participants were similar to NT
participants on the ROI measures considered; no ASD
participant fell outside of 3 standard deviations on any
measure or any ROI, and only one ASD participant fell
outside 2 SDs. In a second set of analyses, we compared
individuals with ASD (N=24, 19 male) to a group of
matched NT individuals (N=24, 19 male). Again, we found
no significant difference between groups on any ROI
parameter (all p > 0.01). The new parameter of IQ was
found to predict larger sized PC ROIs (p = 0.0064,
β=2.591±2.699, +1.7 voxels/IQ point) at the level of a trend.
Finally, the effect of ADOS score was considered. For this
analysis, participants were restricted to those from the ASD
group. None of the parameters significantly predicted any
measured ROI parameter, even at the level of the trend.
The choice of coil had the largest effect. The 32-channel
coil produced significantly greater peak (means: p = 0.0004,
β = 0.610±0.470, 1.21 units higher in 32-channel ROIs) and
mean T values (means: p = 0.0006, β=0.309±0.212, 0.62
units) in all ROIs except DMPFC and PC compared with the
12-channel coil. PC mean (p = 0.0030, β = 0.253±0.260,
0.541 units) and peak T (p = 0.0039, β = 0.480±0.509, 1.01
units) was increased in the 32-channel as well, but at the
level of a trend. The 32-channel coil additionally
significantly increased the size of the RTPJ (p = 0.0001, β =
40.35±30.38), and increased the probability of finding the
RSTS (p = 0.0087, β = 1.354±1.589, 152% more likely) and
its size (p = 0.0030, β = 24.495±25.203, 58.7 voxels larger)
at the level of a trend. We also found an unexpected effect
of number of stimuli: as the number of stimuli used in the
experiment increased, the probability of identifying regions
in the medial prefrontal cortex (MMPFC and DMPFC)
decreased (means: p=0.0073, β=-0.067±0.079, ~ -2%/

Results
ROI results
Six functional ROIs (ROIs) from the ToM network were
defined in individual participants, using the contrast
Mental>Control, consistent with previous literature (U.
Frith & Frith, 2003; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003): RTPJ (in
414/504, or 82.1%), LTPJ (77.2%), PC (84.7%), DMPFC
(60.1%), MMPFC (64.7%) and rSTS (65.5%).
The goal of this project is to explain individual
differences in the size and magnitude of brain regions
involved in ToM. Before testing individual differences,
however, it was critical to determine that (i) there was
variability in these measures, and (ii) the differences
between individuals on these measures are reliable (i.e. that
inter-individual differences do not simply reflect noise in
the measurement). All ROI parameters showed reasonable
variability. The standard deviation of the peak T-value
ranged between 1 and 2, and the standard deviation of ROI
size (in voxels) ranged from 60 to 90 voxels. In order to test
whether this variability reflects stable individual differences,
we compared the ROI measurements within individuals.
ROIs were picked independently from even and odd runs in
the 235 participants from whom we had more than three
runs of data. RTPJ was identified in 72% of participants,
LTPJ in 66%, PC in 75%, DMPFC in 55%, MMPFC in
53%, and rSTS in 56%. Correlations between the even and
odd parameter values (mass, x coordinate, etc.) and across
subjects had an average Pearson’s r-value of 0.51. These
correlations were all significant at p < 0.001, and all but two
at p < 0.0001. Thus, the ROI parameters are reliable within
subject, making it worthwhile to explain inter-subject
variability.
Next we used multivariate general linear regression
analyses to estimate whether any variance in the size or

Figure 1: (A) Histogram of the DMPFC ROI peak T value for NT participants (teal) overlaid with the ASD participants (red). (B) Whole
brain random effects analysis of the main effect, Mental > Control, in the full sample, corrected for multiple comparisons with
permutations; axial slice shown at z = 22mm. Visible are RTPJ, LTPJ, DMPFC, and PC. (C) Histogram of the RTPJ ROI peak T value for
NT participants (teal) overlaid with the ASD participants (red).

314

peak T = 4.32, 736mm3), the left posterior lobe ([-44, -60,
38], peak T = 4.31, 488mm3), the left cingulate gyrus ([-16,
-56, 26], peak T = 4.24, 424mm3), left inferior temporal
gyrus ([-58, -28, -20], peak T = 4.24, 208mm3), the right
posterior insula ([40, -24, 12], peak T = 4.12, 304mm3),
right precentral gyrus ([32, -26, 68], peak T = 3.81, 168
mm3), right superior temporal gyrus ([44, -60, 34], peak T =
3.77, 232mm3), and the left posterior cingulate ([-14, -54,
14], peak T = 3.76, 104mm3).

stimulus) at the level of a trend. There were no significant
effects of age or gender on any parameter of any region.
In sum, ROI analyses suggest that while individuals differ
reliably in the size and response magnitude of brain regions
associated with ToM, these neural parameters are not
affected by whether an ASD diagnosis. Experimental
parameters, such as the MRI coil used, and demographic
variables, such as IQ, explain some of the variance across
individuals. Within the range of ADOS scores in the current
sample, autism severity does not explain variance in ROI
parameters, either. However, ROI analyses (and especially
the three ROI parameters) provide a limited window on the
brain, so to look further for differences between groups in
ToM brain regions, we next conducted whole brain
analyses.

Discussion
The main question we sought to address in this paper was
whether individuals diagnosed with ASD show differences
in the magnitude or extent of activity in ToM brain regions,
compared to a large sample of NT participants. To this end,
we aggregated data across multiple experiments to produce
a large sample of NT individuals (N=477) and a moderate
sample of high functioning ASD individuals (N=27). Before
directly comparing them, we tested whether neural
responses to Mental stimuli were reliable within participants
and variable across participants, in the NT population. They
were. Next, we tested whether the magnitude of neural
responses to Mental vs Control stimuli differed between
groups, either in targeted regions of interest or in whole
brain analyses. For the most part, these analyses identified
no reliable differences between groups, especially in the
previously hypothesized ToM brain regions. These results
suggest that differences between these groups of participants
in ToM brain regions, if they exist, are small and could not
be used to diagnose ASD.
We used two complementary analysis strategies: ROI
analyses focused on previous identified ToM brain regions
are more sensitive, whereas whole brain analyses find group
differences anywhere in the brain, and are less restricted.
For both kinds of analyses, we conducted two comparisons
by regression with simultaneous nuisance regressors to
control for demographic and experimental variance: the
ASD group vs. the whole group of NT individuals, and the
ASD group vs. NT individuals matched to the ASD group
on age, gender, IQ and experimental parameters. For both
comparisons, we found no reliable differences between
groups in the size, response magnitude, or probability of
identifying above-threshold voxels, in any ToM ROI.
Indeed, the ROI parameters of individuals with ASD fell
squarely within the distribution of typical values, almost
never straying more than 2SD from the typical means. Also,
ADOS scores of the ASD participants did not predict any
ROI parameter, even at the level of a trend.
In the whole brain analyses, the results of group
comparisons depended on the thresholds used for correcting
for multiple comparisons. Permutation-based correction,
which estimates the false positive rate empirically, revealed
no significant differences between the two complete groups.
When we reduced the sample to just the matched NT group,
we found one region, in the right middle occipital gyrus,
which showed increased response to Mental than Control
stimuli in the NT group, but not the ASD group. However,

Whole brain analysis results
In the whole-brain analyses, the main effect identifies brain
regions significantly recruited during Mental compared to
Control conditions, controlling for variance explained by
any of the nuisance regressors. This analysis identified
robust activation in all of the regions previous associated
with ToM, including RTPJ, LTPJ, medial PC and posterior
cingulate, MPFC, and anterior STS. It also identified
activation in other regions, including the left superior frontal
gyrus (BA8 and BA6), the left medial frontal gyrus (BA8),
regions of right middle frontal gyrus (BA6, BA8, BA9), the
right superior temporal gyrus (BA38) and the right inferior
frontal gyrus (BA47). Also present was activity in the
cingulate (BA24) and anterior cingulate (BA32), as well as
the thalamus (BA24) and the right amygdala.
Next, we compared activation in the full sample of
individuals with ASD vs. NT. Regions were significant if
the difference between activation during mental versus
control tasks was greater in one group than in the other.
When these analyses were corrected for multiple
comparisons using permutations, we observed no regions of
significant group differences. A more lenient threshold
revealed a small region in the right cingulate gyrus ([2, 14,
22], peak T 3.5, 128mm3) with a greater condition
difference in ASD than NT groups. In this region, ASD
participants showed greater deactivation in the control
condition, but no difference during the Mental condition.
There were no regions with greater difference between
conditions in the NT participants.
We also compared the ASD group to a smaller matched
group. When correcting for multiple comparisons with
permutations, we again failed to find any regions significant
for the ASD>NT contrast. More lenient traditional
thresholds also failed to reveal any significant regions. In
the reverse contrast (NT > ASD), a single region was found
in the right middle occipital gyrus ([36, -62, -8], peak T =
5.09, 1032mm3) when corrected with permutations. This
region was again identified using the more lenient threshold
([36, -62, -8], peak T = 5.8, 784mm3), along with regions in
the left middle temporal gyrus ([-48, 10, -44, peak T = 4.44,
304mm3), the right middle posterior cingulate ([26, -68, 12],

315

since this region did not show a higher response to Mental
than Control stimuli in the overall main effect analysis of all
participants, and is not typically associated with any kind of
social cognition, we are cautious about making strong
claims based on this effect.
Because these results suggest a null result - namely, no
difference between groups - we also examined the same
analyses at a more lenient threshold that could reveal true
differences between groups that are just below the threshold
for significance. Again we found no regions more active in
the full NT sample, compared to the ASD group. A small
(128 mm^3) region in right cingulate gyrus appeared more
active in participants with ASD at this threshold; in this
region, ASD participants showed greater deactivation to the
control condition than NT participants. Reducing the sample
to just the matched NT participants, and using the lower
threshold, produced a number of small regions showing
greater activation in NT than ASD participants. However,
none were in any region in the main effect analysis of
Mental > Control stimuli. Thus, we could not identify any
region that both (a) was reliably recruited for Mental more
than Control stimuli in 477 NT individuals, and (b) showed
less activity in the same contrast, in individuals with ASD.
Using a similar analysis strategy, we also found that age
and gender do not affect activity in ToM brain regions; nor
do the modality of the stimuli (visual vs aural) or the
experimental task. Thus, although individual differences in
ToM brain regions are reliable and robust, they are not
explained by simple demographic or experimental variables.
The absence of an effect of gender is particularly
noteworthy, because the full sample contained a large
number of male and female participants. Behavioral
measures of ToM often reveal an advantage for female
participants (Baron‐Cohen, Wheelwright, Hill, Raste, &
Plumb, 2001; Baron-Cohen, Jolliffe, Mortimore, &
Robertson, 1997); apparently this advantage is not due to
grossly different ToM brain regions.
One significant factor was the coil used. The 32channel coil has documented higher SNR (Triantafyllou,
Polimeni, & Wald, 2011); we found that this difference
translated into larger ROIs that were more likely to be
detected in individual participants. Thus, our results suggest
that for individually-defined ROI analyses, the increased
SNR of the 32-channel coil provides a clear benefit. On the
other hand, increasing the number of stimuli per condition
did not have the same benefit: medial prefrontal regions
were less likely to be identified, in experiments using more
stimuli. This unexpected effect could reflect habituation,
after more than 20 stories about characters’ false beliefs.
With regard to our key null results, the current study
has advantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, the
large sample size provides more power and sensitivity to
detect effects where they exist. In particular, although our
sample of ASD individuals was only moderately large, the
very large sample of NT individuals included gives us very
high confidence on the true mean of the ROI parameters in
NT individuals. Finding that the ASD population mean does

not differ from the NT mean is thus strong evidence that
these groups’ data cannot be attributed to different
population distributions.
However, these results cannot be interpreted as ruling
out any differences in the neural mechanisms for ToM in
individuals with ASD. One qualification of the current
results is that the parameters measured here provide only a
limited measure of a region’s function. Other measures
include the functional connectivity of each region and
within-region spatial pattern of responses (Biswal, Zerrin
Yetkin, Haughton, & Hyde, 1995; Haxby et al., 2001).
Participants with ASD may differ in these other measures of
ToM region function (Kleinhans et al., 2008). Indeed work
in our lab using multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA)
demonstrated the existence of reliable differences between
ASD and NT individuals (Koster-Hale, Saxe, and Young,
submitted).
Another qualification is that the ASD participants in the
current sample are very high functioning. Although they
meet diagnostic criteria for ASD (and have been shown to
have behavioral deficits in ToM tasks in a previous study,
Moran et al., 2011), these individuals are highly verbal and
pass first-order false belief tasks. Thus, our results do not
rule out gross differences in the ToM regions of lowerfunctioning individuals with ASD. On the other hand, the
individuals in our sample are diagnosed with ASD because
of disproportionate difficulties with social interaction and
communication, and are similar to populations used in
previous fMRI studies. Also, we found no evidence that
within our participants, increasing ASD severity had any
effect on the measured ROI parameters. So the current
results imply that social cognitive impairments can occur
without gross changes in the size or position of ToM brain
regions. Collectively, the current results provide strong
evidence that the neural differences between high
functioning adults with ASD and NT participants are not
due to gross changes in the magnitude of ToM brain region
activity.
These results leave open a number of key questions.
First, it will be key to identify the neural differences
between adults with ASD and NT individuals that account
for behavioral differences in ToM. One key possibility is
that individuals with ASD are highly heterogeneous, so that
different neural sources explain the behavioral delays in
different individuals. If so, the group-average analyses used
here may have limited sensitivity to detect those differences.
Second, the current study focused on adults. It will be
important in future research to test whether the
developmental trajectory of ToM brain regions differs in
children with ASD compared to NT children, even if the
mature states of the system are reasonably similar. Finally, it
would be useful to extend these analyses to lowerfunctioning individuals with ASD. Nevertheless, the
implication of this study is that social-cognitive
impairments can occur without large changes in the
activation of ToM brain regions.

Acknowledgements
316

This paper is based upon work supported by the Simons
Foundation, the National Science Foundation (grant
095518), the Dana Foundation, a National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (grant 0645960),
and a John Merck Scholars Grant. The authors wish to
acknowledge Marina Bedny, Emile Bruneau, Hyowon
Gweon and Jorie Koster-Hale for collecting fMRI data.

other-reflection in autism. Social Cognitive and
Affective Neuroscience, 3(2), 177-190.
Kleinhans, N. M., Richards, T., Sterling, L., Stegbauer, K.
C., Mahurin, R., Johnson, L. C., et al. (2008).
Abnormal functional connectivity in autism spectrum
disorders during face processing. Brain, 131(4), 10001012.
Kliemann, D., Young, L., Scholz, J., & Saxe, R. (2008). The
influence of prior record on moral judgment.
Neuropsychologia, 46(12), 2949-2957.
Lombardo, M. V., Chakrabarti, B., Bullmore, E. T., &
Baron-Cohen, S. (2011). Specialization of right
temporo-parietal junction for mentalizing and its
relation to social impairments in autism. NeuroImage,
Moran, J. M., Young, L. L., Saxe, R., Lee, S. M., O'Young,
D., Mavros, P. L., et al. (2011). Impaired theory of
mind for moral judgment in high-functioning autism.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
108(7), 2688-2692.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee
have a theory of mind. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
1(4), 515-526.
Redcay, E., Dodell‐Feder, D., Mavros, P. L., Kleiner, M.,
Pearrow, M. J., Triantafyllou, C., et al. (2012).
Atypical brain activation patterns during a face‐to‐face
joint attention game in adults with autism spectrum
disorder. Human Brain Mapping,
Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about
thinking people:: The role of the temporo-parietal
junction in. NeuroImage, 19(4), 1835-1842.
Triantafyllou, C., Polimeni, J. R., & Wald, L. L. (2011).
Physiological noise and signal-to-noise ratio in fMRI
with multi-channel array coils. NeuroImage, 55(2),
597-606.
Young, L., Camprodon, J. A., Hauser, M., Pascual-Leone,
A., & Saxe, R. (2010). Disruption of the right
temporoparietal junction with transcranial magnetic
stimulation reduces the role of beliefs in moral
judgments. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(15), 6753.
Young, L., Nichols, S., & Saxe, R. (2010). Investigating the
neural and cognitive basis of moral luck: It’s not what
you do but what you know. Review of Philosophy and
Psychology, 1(3), 333-349.
Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2008). The neural basis of belief
encoding and integration in moral judgment.
NeuroImage, 40(4), 1912-1920.
Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2009). An fMRI investigation of
spontaneous mental state inference for moral
judgment. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(7),
1396-1405.
Young, L., Scholz, J., & Saxe, R. (2011). Neural evidence
for “intuitive prosecution”: The use of mental state
information for negative moral verdicts. Social
Neuroscience, 6(3), 302-315.

References
Baron‐Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J., Raste, Y., &
Plumb, I. (2001). The “Reading the mind in the eyes”
test revised version: A study with normal adults, and
adults with asperger syndrome or high‐functioning
autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
42(2), 241-251.
Baron-Cohen, S., Jolliffe, T., Mortimore, C., & Robertson,
M. (1997). Another advanced test of theory of mind:
Evidence from very high functioning adults with
autism or asperger syndrome. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 38(7), 813-822.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1989). The autistic child's theory of mind:
A case of specific developmental delay. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied
Disciplines, 30(2), 285-297.
Biswal, B., Zerrin Yetkin, F., Haughton, V. M., & Hyde, J.
S. (1995). Functional connectivity in the motor cortex
of resting human brain using echo‐planar mri.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 34(4), 537-541.
Dichter, G. S., Felder, J. N., & Bodfish, J. W. (2009).
Autism is characterized by dorsal anterior cingulate
hyperactivation during social target detection. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 4(3), 215-226.
Dodell-Feder, D., Koster-Hale, J., Bedny, M., & Saxe, R.
(2010). fMRI item analysis in a theory of mind task.
NeuroImage,
Frith, U., & Frith, C. D. (2003). Development and
neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London.Series B:
Biological Sciences, 358(1431), 459-473.
Gilbert, S. J., Bird, G., Brindley, R., Frith, C. D., & Burgess,
P. W. (2008). Atypical recruitment of medial
prefrontal cortex in autism spectrum disorders: An
fMRI study of two executive function tasks.
Neuropsychologia, 46(9), 2281-2291.
Hasson, U., Avidan, G., Gelbard, H., Vallines, I., Harel, M.,
Minshew, N., et al. (2009). Shared and idiosyncratic
cortical activation patterns in autism revealed under
continuous real‐life viewing conditions. Autism
Research, 2(4), 220-231.
Haxby, J. V., Gobbini, M. I., Furey, M. L., Ishai, A.,
Schouten, J. L., & Pietrini, P. (2001). Distributed and
overlapping representations of faces and objects in
ventral temporal cortex. Science, 293(5539), 24252430.
Kennedy, D. P., & Courchesne, E. (2008). Functional
abnormalities of the default network during self-and

317

