UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Whose turn is it anyway? Same- and cross-person compound contributions in dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1m64f44z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Howes, Christine
Healey, Ptarick G.T.
Purver, Matthew

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Whose turn is it anyway?
Same- and cross-person compound contributions in dialogue
Christine Howes, Patrick G. T. Healey, Matthew Purver
{chrizba, ph, mpurver}@eecs.qmul.ac.uk
Queen Mary University of London
Interaction, Media and Communication Research Group
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
London E1 4NS, UK
Abstract
In natural conversation people sometimes build larger
grammatical, semantic and pragmatic units out of multiple turns or installments. The incremental and collaborative character of these ‘compound contributions’
presents challenges for theories of natural language processing. Compounds produced over successive turns by
one person have often been analysed in essentially the
same way as compounds produced by multiple people.
In some recent accounts this putative equivalence has
been taken as evidence for the claim that within- and
cross-person language processing are fundamentally interchangeable. However, in this paper we present an
analysis of compound contributions in a corpus of ordinary dialogues which shows that same- and crossperson compound contributions are constructed in different ways and have diﬀerent semantic and pragmatic
eﬀects on the organisation of dialogue. In particular,
we show that they diﬀer in the pragmatic environments
in which they occur and that they have diﬀerent consequences for subsequent turn-taking and interpretation.
This asymmetry highlights the need for models of dialogue that account for not just the inherent incrementality of dialogue, but the diﬀerent status of each contributor towards a turn-in-progress.
Keywords: Dialogue; compound contributions.

Introduction
Compound contributions (CCs) – dialogue contributions
that continue or complete an earlier contribution, see e.g.
(1) – are the paradigm case of coordination in dialogue
and constitute a critical test case for theories of natural
language processing.
(1) Daughter:
Dad:
Daughter:

Oh here dad, a good way to get
those corners out
is to stick yer ﬁnger inside.
well, that’s one way.
[from Lerner (1991)]

CCs are of interest to dialogue theorists because they
provide evidence about how contributions can cohere
with each other at multiple levels – syntactic, semantic
and pragmatic (though of course they are not the only
way). They also indicate the radical context-dependency
of conversational contributions, which can, in general, be
highly elliptical without disrupting the ﬂow of the dialogue. CCs are a dramatic illustration of this: speakers
must rely on the dynamics of the unfolding context (linguistic and extra-linguistic) in order to guarantee successful processing and production.

Much of the work on CCs has studied cross-person
cases, in diﬀerent disciplines and under a variety of different names, including collaborative completions (Clark,
1996; Poesio and Rieser, 2010), co-constructions (Sacks,
1992), joint productions (Helasvuo, 2004), and split utterances (Purver et al., 2006).
Linguistic studies show that grammatical constraints
are respected across speaker and hearer (see e.g. Gregoromichelaki et al., 2009). In Finnish (which has rich
inﬂectional morphology), and Japanese (a verb-ﬁnal language), cross-person CCs within a single clause conform
to the strict syntactic constraints of the language, despite the change in speaker (Helasvuo, 2004; Hayashi,
1999).
From a psycholinguistic point of view, the phenomenon of CCs seems compatible with mechanistic approaches as exempliﬁed by the Interactive Alignment
model of Pickering and Garrod (2004), which claims
that, all things being equal, it should be as easy to complete another’s sentence as one’s own. According to this
model, speaker and listener ought to be interchangeable
at any point. A similar stance is taken by the grammatical framework of Dynamic Syntax (DS: Cann et al.,
2005). In DS, parsing and production are taken to employ the same mechanisms, leading to a prediction that
CCs ought to be strikingly natural (Purver et al., 2006).
From an organisational point of view, it has been
claimed that turn-taking operates not on individual
conversational participants, but on ‘parties’ (Schegloﬀ,
1995). For example, a couple talking to a third person
may organise their turns as if they are one ‘party’, rather
than two separate individuals. Lerner (1991) speculates,
following Sacks (1992), that cross-person compound contributions can clarify the formation of such parties, as
they reveal a relationship between syntactic mechanisms
and social organisation. He claims that this provides evidence of one way in which syntax can be used to organise
participants into “groups”.

1697

Because a sentence is obviously a prototypical
instance of that thing which is done by a unit. Normally, some single person. That then permits it –
for those who have the wit to do it – to be a way
that some non-apparent unit may be demonstrated
to exist.

We get, then, a kind of extraordinary tie between
syntactic possibilities and phenomena like social organization. That is, an extremely strong way that
these kids go about demonstrating that, for one,
there is a group here, is their getting together to
put this sentence together, collaboratively. (Sacks,
1992, p145)
These diﬀerent approaches all treat cross-person compound contributions as being in some sense equivalent
to turns produced by a single participant, in syntactic,
semantic or pragmatic terms. However, there are few
studies of same-person CCs, and those that there are
(e.g. Goodwin, 1979; Walker, 2004) focus on the subset
of expansions, which add material to an already potentially complete contribution (2), excluding completions,
which involve the addition of syntactic material which
is required to make the whole compound contribution
(syntactically) complete (3).
(2) T:
G:

It’ll be an E sharp.
Which will of course just be played as an F.
[BNC G3V 262-263]

(3) D:

Well I do know last week thet=uh Al was
certainly very pause 0.5s
pissed oﬀ
[Lerner (1996), p260]

R:

Like cross-person expansions, same-person ones are
viewed as a highly productive way of utilising grammatical constraints for interactional purposes. Walker (2004)
notes “it would seem that increments can be added to
almost any possibly complete turn at talk, placing the
practice alongside other generic conversational practices
such as self- and other-initiated repair” (p167).
This type of treatment again suggests that there
should be no diﬀerences to supplying a continuation to
a prior turn, regardless of who produced the initial contribution. However, none of these studies have directly
compared same- and cross-person CCs. We here present
a corpus study to bridge this gap.

Hypotheses
We examine two basic questions. First, whether the internal construction of CCs i.e., the syntactic and pragmatic ways in which the component parts are tied together, is the same in the same- and cross-person cases.
Second, the external organisation of CCs; whether CCs
as a whole are integrated into conversational organisation in the same way as as a conventional turn.
Following the existing literature we analyse the internal structure of the CC in terms of; a) the syntactic relationship between the components i.e. whether they are
expansions or completions (as described above), b) repair i.e. whether the continuation of the CC is used to
perform an edit or amendment on the antecedent and
c) separation i.e. how closely together the antecedent

and continuation parts of a CC are normally placed. For
the external organisation of CCs we examine the pragmatic organisation of the sequences in which CCs occur.
Speciﬁcally, the patterns of turn-taking (who will speak
next) and ratiﬁcation (who acknowledges or responds to
the CC). We also consider the placement of CCs with respect to backchannels. Backchannels are short acknowledgements like ‘aha’ or ‘mmm’, often produced in overlap with a speakers turn, which provide feedback to a
speaker but don’t typically lead to a change of speaker.
If there is no fundamental syntactic or cognitive difference between same- and cross-person CCs (e.g. Pickering and Garrod, 2004; Cann et al., 2005) then, all
things being equal, we would expect that they should
have the same distribution of expansions/completions,
repairs and antecedent-continuation separations.
Hypothesis 1 Same-person and cross-person CCs have
the same patterns of internal construction.
In addition, if a CC functions as a single turn that just
happens to have been produced in two (or more) parts
(potentially by more than one person), rather than being a distinctive form of contribution, then they should
be integrated into the conversation as a whole in the
same way as non-compound turns. This would predict
that the patterns of backchannels, turn-taking and ratiﬁcation should, all things being equal, be the same for
CC and non-CC turns. Moreover, this external organisation should be the same for both same-person and
cross-person CCs. In a typical conversational sequence
once a speaker has ﬁnished someone else will usually –
although not always– speak next. Similarly, people do
not normally acknowledge or ratify their own turns.
Hypothesis 2 The people who produce a CC should be
less likely than other participants to speak next. They
should also be less likely than other participants to ratify
or acknowledge the CC.

Method
To investigate similarities and diﬀerences between sameand cross-person CCs, a corpus analysis of CCs in the
spoken portion of the British National Corpus (BNC:
Burnard, 2000) was carried out. This part of the corpus contains a large number of genuine spoken dialogues
across a wide range of people and situations, allowing
us to examine the prevalence of CCs in a variety of dialogues not restricted to the task-based dialogues which
previous corpus studies tend to have analysed.

Materials and procedure
For this exercise, the portion of the BNC annotated
by Fernández and Ginzburg (2002), chosen to maintain
a balance between what the BNC deﬁnes as contextgoverned (drawn from a particular domain e.g. business
meetings, school classes, radio interviews) and demographic (recorded by volunteers during their daily lives)

1698

dialogue, was used. This portion comprises 11,469 sunits – roughly equivalent to sentences1 – taken from
200-turn sections of 53 separate dialogues.
Annotation scheme The dialogues were annotated
according to the protocol outlined in Purver et al. (2009),
and summarised in table 1, below.
Tag
endcomplete

Value
y/n

Explanation
For all s-units: does this s-unit end
in such a way as to yield a complete
proposition or speech act?
continues s-unit ID For all s-units: does this s-unit continue the proposition or speech act
of a previous s-unit? If so, which?
repairs
number For continuations: does the start
of words of this continuation explicitly repair words from the end of the antecedent? If so, how many?
starty/n
For continuations: does this contincomplete
uation start in such a way as to be
able to stand alone as a complete
proposition or speech act?

twice as many same-person CCs (726) as cross-person
CCs (329) – see table 2.
Many CCs have at least one s-unit intervening between
the antecedent and continuation. In same-person cases,
once we have excluded the within-turn CCs, this must
always be the case; the intervening material is usually a
backchannel (63%) or single other s-unit (32%, often e.g.
a clariﬁcation question), but two intervening s-units are
possible (4%) with up to six being seen. In cross-person
cases, 88% are adjacent or separated only by overlapping
material, but again up to six intervening s-units were
seen, with a single s-unit most common.

Completeness
As can be seen from table 3, the end- and startcompleteness ﬁgures for same- and cross-person CCs are
strikingly similar. The majority of both same- and crossperson continuations (71% to 72%) continue an already
complete antecedent, with only 28-29% therefore being
completions.

Table 1: Annotation tags

person:

Results
person:
overlapping
adjacent
sep. by overlap
sep. by backchnl
sep. by 1 s-unit
sep. by 2 s-units
sep. by 3 s-units
sep. by 4 s-units
sep. by 5 s-units
sep. by 6 s-units
Total

Sameall
N
0
840
320
460
239
31
5
4
1
2
1902

%
0
44
17
24
13
2
0
0
0
0

acrossN
%
0
0
0
0
0
0
456 63
229 32
31
4
3
0
4
1
1
0
2
0
726

Antecedent
end-complete
Continuation
start-complete
Repair

Cross(all)
N
%
18
5
262 80
10
3
17
5
16
5
4
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
329

Total

Y
N
Y
N
Y
N

Sameall
N
1367
535
224
1678
77
1825
1902

%
72
28
12
88
4
96

acrossN
%
513 71
213 29
99 14
627 86
34
5
692 95
726

Cross(all)
N
%
236 72
93 28
45 14
284 86
32 10
297 90
329

Table 3: BNC completeness and repair

Table 2: BNC antecedent/continuation separation
As discussed in Howes et al. (2011), the transcription
conventions used when compiling the corpus can aﬀect
the raw results; in particular, the BNC convention of
dividing contributions into “sentence-like units”, and in
transcribing overlapping interruptions by interlocutors
in linear time order, may result in an over-estimate of
the number of same-speaker within-turn CCs. However,
even excluding such within-turn and overlapping cases,
and looking only at across-turn cases, there are over
1
S-units are deﬁned as “sentence-like divisions of a text”,
and utterances are deﬁned as “stretches of speech usually
preceded and followed by silence or by a change of speaker”.
Utterances may consist of many s-units; s-units may not extend across utterance boundaries. While s-units are therefore
often equivalent to complete syntactic sentences, or complete
functional units such as bare fragments or one-word utterances, they need not be: they may be divided by interrupting
or overlapping material from another speaker.

These ﬁgures are even more striking when we consider
the placement of arbitrary split points. In the experiment reported in Howes et al. (2011), artiﬁcial CCs were
created in text chat dialogues, resulting in only 37% of
fake CCs having a split point at a point where the antecedent could be considered end-complete (i.e. expansions) with 63% therefore appearing to be continuations.
This can be taken as evidence that participants in dialogue tend to wait for syntactic cues that suggest a
possible opportunity for speaker change (referred to by
conversation analysts as ‘transition relevance places’) before taking the ﬂoor – even where they construct their
contribution as a continuation to a prior utterance.

Repair
Although we are using only limited notion of repair,
which only takes into account the amount of repetition
or reformulation of words from the end of the antecedent
at the start of the continuation, we believe that repair,
as formulated, can be taken as an index of the diﬃculty
of integrating the continuation to the syntactic material oﬀered in the antecedent. This being the case, then
under a model in which speakers and hearers are interchangeable (such as the interactive alignment model) the

1699

proportion of repairs should be the same in same-person
CCs as cross-person CCs, as there should be no increased
diﬃculty in integrating one’s continuation to another’s
antecedent as there would be to one’s own. There should
also not be any eﬀects of where the split point occurs on
the prevalence of repair.
However, cross-person continuations are signiﬁcantly
more likely to repair their antecedents than same-person
cases (32/329, 10% vs. 34/726, 5%; χ2(1) = 9.82, p =
0.002), showing that there are diﬀerences between distributions of same- and cross-person CCs. In other words,
although the distributions regarding completeness were
equivalent and supported Hypothesis 1, it isn’t this simple, and there appear to be additional constraints associated with continuing another’s prior contribution that
do not necessarily apply when continuing one’s own.

Backchannels
Similarly, there are diﬀerent distributions of CCs in
which the continuation follows a backchannel between
same- and cross-person CCs. Same-person cases are
more often produced as a response to a backchannel
(63% of across-turn cases follow a backchannel, whilst
even discounting adjacent cases only 40% of cross-person
CCs do) suggesting that shaping one’s next turn as a response to feedback is a common strategy in dialogue.
Note also that 13% of all s-units in the corpus sample were backchannels2 so there are actually a greater
proportion of same-person cases following a backchannel than would be expected by chance, suggesting that
backchannels may be used as a cue for participants to
perform a continue grounding act (Traum, 1994).

CA categories
In terms of speciﬁc types of CCs, the most common of
the CA categories are Lerner’s (1996) hesitation-related
opportunistic cases, which make up 3-5% of same- and
10% of cross-person CCs, meaning cross-person opportunistic cases are more common than same-person ones
(same, across-turn 36/726, 5% vs. other 32/329, 10%;
χ2(1) = 8.53, p = 0.003). Interestingly, the breakdown of
cases into those where the antecedent ends with an unﬁlled versus a ﬁlled pause also shows a diﬀerence between
same- and cross-person cases: an other person is more
likely to oﬀer a continuation after an unﬁlled pause, than
after a ﬁlled pause (antecedents ending in ‘er(m)’ 35 continued by same, 13 by other; ending in ‘<pause>’ 19 continued by same, 19 by other; χ2(1) = 4.77, p = 0.03). This
ﬁnding backs up claims by Clark and Fox Tree (2002)
that ﬁlled pauses can be used to indicate that the current speaker’s turn is not yet ﬁnished and thus have the
eﬀect of holding the ﬂoor.
2
This ﬁgure is based on the BNC part of speech tags,
and as such may incorrectly include some answers to yes/no
questions.

Lerner’s compound TCU cases (instead of, said/
thought etc, if-then and when-then) account for 2-3% of
same-person and 1% of cross-person CCs, though note
that these could be underestimates, as his non-syntactic
cues (e.g. contrast stress and prefaced disagreements)
could not be extracted. Rühlemann’s (2007) sentence
relative cases come next with 1-2%.
In contrast, the most common pattern (for same- and
cross-person CCs) is the addition of an extending clause,
either a conjunction introduced by ‘and/but/or/nor’
(36-42%), or other clause types with ‘so/whereas/nevertheless/because’, and the (other) category.

Next speaker
To see if there are any eﬀects on turn-taking or apparent party-membership, the 329 cross-person CCs were
further annotated according to who spoke after the continuation and whether the conversation was dyadic or
multiparty. Of the 53 dialogues, 34 were dyadic and 19
multiparty (though as observed in Eshghi (2009), many
segments of multiparty dialogue are also dyadic in nature, we leave this to one side). This equates to 4919
turns in dyadic dialogues, in which there were 204 crossperson CCs (4.15%) and 2961 turns in multiparty dialogues with 125 cross-person CCs (4.22%). These proportions are not diﬀerent (204/4919, 4% vs. 125/2961,
4%; χ2(1) = 0.03, p = 0.87), which is surprising – if crossperson CCs are used to indicate party-membership we
might expect a greater proportion in the multiparty dialogues. This could be taken to suggest that parties are
not common in these annotated dialogues.
There is no diﬀerence in the proportion of occasions
in which the participant who contributed the continuation also provides the next contribution, thus holding the
ﬂoor (50/204, 25% vs. 26/125, 21%; χ2(1) = 0.600, p =
0.44, in line with the ﬁgure of 3/15, 20% reported in
Szczepek, 2000a). However, in all dialogues the proportion in which the supplier of the continuation retains
the ﬂoor is lower than in general. For all annotated
s-units in the dialogues there is no change of speaker
in 41% of cases, compared to 23% of cases following
a cross-person CC (4791/11469, 41% vs. 76/329, 23%;
χ2(1) = 44.424, p < 0.001), suggesting that the continuation is treated as a separate turn and that interlocutors
supplying a continuation do not assume they have a right
to retain the ﬂoor.

Ratification
Supporting the idea that ratiﬁcations ought to be more
common in dyadic dialogues, if only appropriate when
addressed to the original speaker, cross-person CCs are
ratiﬁed or rejected by the initial speaker in (marginally)
more cases in dyadic than multiparty cases (82/204, 40%
vs. 37/125, 30%; χ2(1) = 3.769, p = 0.052). This does
suggest that in dyadic dialogues cross-person CCs are

1700

more often interpreted by the antecedent owner as addressed towards them, potentially as a form of repair
which requires acknowledgement or ratiﬁcation, and not
interpreted as simply the mechanistic articulation of predictable material by another.
Cross-person CCs are also more likely to be ratiﬁed
or rejected in completions than expansions (59/93, 63%
vs. 79/236, 34%; χ2(1) = 24.600, p < 0.001). This is
surprising if completions are merely the vocalisation of
already predicted material (as in the interactive alignment model, for example), or if they are taken to be explicit acknowledgements (in a grounding model) as they
should not then need either explicit evaluation or additional completion by the contributor of the antecedent.
In total, 138/329 (42%) of cross-person CCs are ratiﬁed; which is not rare, suggesting that cross-person continuations are often treated as not part of the same single
unit as the antecedent. In a grounding model this suggests that these cases are those which are taken to be
repairs, or new discourse units though note that we cannot distinguish between these possibilities. However, if
they are treated as repairs then they are not treated as
within-party repairs analogously to self-repairs, because
these should also not require ratiﬁcation.

Discussion
Contrary to the predictions of Hypothesis 1, although
there are similarities between same- and cross-person
CCs, for example in the distributions of expansions versus completions, there are also signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
Cross-person continuations are more likely to start with
explicit repair/reformulation of the antecedent. This
suggests that people use CCs to do diﬀerent things in
the same and cross-person cases. Repairs are interesting
in this context because they are not predictable continuations of the preceding contribution and therefore provide a counter-example to the idea that CCs are appropriately analysed as essentially the same turn but with
a switch of producers. Perhaps more interestingly, they
also suggest the operation of a more strategic process. It
is generally observed that people avoid repairing other
people’s turns (known in Conversation Analysis as the
preference for self repair; Schegloﬀ et al., 1977). The
observed pattern might be one that we would expect if
cross-person CCs, in virtue of being constructed as a
continuation of the speakers utterance, provide a device
that enables a less exposed or ‘face-threatening’ form of
other repair (as Lerner (1993) hypothesised). This works
as a repair strategy to the extent that the completed CC
is understood as ‘belonging’ to the producer of the antecedent of the CC. However, as we go on to discuss, our
observations about patterns of turn-taking suggest that
this is not straightforwardly the case.
Opportunistic CCs (after a ‘<pause>’ or ‘erm’ ) are
in general more likely to be cross-person cases; however

there are again pragmatic constraints – cross-person CCs
are more likely where the antecedent ends in an unﬁlled
rather than a ﬁlled pause. This suggests participants are
aware of turn-taking or sequential expectations, and that
speaker and hearer roles carry diﬀerent responsibilities.
There also seem to be diﬀerent places when sameand cross-person continuations are oﬀered; the majority
of cross-person continuations are adjacent to their antecedents, whilst even considering within-turn cases this
is not so for same-person continuations. Same-person
continuations are far more likely to follow a backchannel
or single other s-unit than cross-person cases, suggesting
that it may be the feedback from one’s interlocutor(s)
that leads to producing something syntactically tied to
one’s own prior contribution.
Contrary to Hypothesis 2, ratiﬁcations are oﬀered following a cross-person CC; something which should be
rare if the speaker of the antecedent were treating the
continuation as if they themselves had just ﬁnished their
turn. The assumption that cross-person CCs operate as
a single turn that just happens to have been produced
by more than one interlocutor, is perhaps an artefact
of syntactic analyses that idealise away from the key organisational features of conversation. The evidence from
CCs suggests that they might be better characterised as
separate contributions that build parasitically on prior
contributions, meaning that syntax is not an organising
structure in the production of dialogue, but a resource
that can be ﬂexibly exploited by participants.
That ratiﬁcations were also more likely to be oﬀered
following a completion rather than an expansion, suggests that completions can also not be taken to be solely
grounding devices, but must also be being treated by the
antecedent owner as at least potentially repairing the incomplete antecedent (in which case an acknowledgement
is appropriate).
This means that although one can unproblematically
ﬁnish or continue another’s utterance, this does not give
it the same status as if they had completed or continued
it themselves and has consequences for how we model
CCs in particular and dialogue in general. There are
several ways in which this might be approached. Either continuations by another are generally treated as
repairs (and not exclusively as particularly strong forms
of acknowledgement) or they are not taken to be acknowledgements at all. Given that continuations tend
to be oﬀered when common ground is presumed to be
shared it could be the case that it is the presumption of
shared common ground which requires acknowledging,
or rejecting. Alternatively, it might be the fact that the
incoming participant is aligning themselves with the initial speaker that requires acknowledgement, and not the
content itself.
From a dialogue modelling perspective, we would want
to be able to tell when a human agent’s contribution con-

1701

tinues some prior contribution -either their own or the
system’s- in order to correctly analyse the semantics of
the discourse, which is non-trivial given that antecedents
do not have to be (and often are not) incomplete, or adjacent to the continuation.
The system should also be able to produce naturalistic continuations, and respond appropriately (e.g. by
acknowledging a continuation from the user) including
in terms of turn-taking. One example is the use of expansions – the system need not compute a complete sentence, but could use previously parsed input as a starting point. As dialogue models are very often in highly
constrained contexts in which the system seeks information from the user, appropriate strategies involving CCs
could be using incomplete antecedents to invite a user
completion (for example, the travel agent system might
ask “You want to go to. . . ?”) and appendor questions
(“. . . by bus?”) – see Hough (2011), for a preliminary
outline of such a system.

Acknowledgments
This was part of my PhD. This research was supported
by the Dynamics of Conversational Dialogue project,
funded by the UK ESRC (RES-062-23-0962).

References
Burnard, L. Reference Guide for the British National
Corpus (World Edition). Oxford University Computing Services http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/docs/
userManual/, 2000.
Cann, R., Kempson, R., and Marten, L. The Dynamics
of Language. Elsevier, Oxford, 2005.
Clark, H. H. Using Language. Cambridge University
Press, 1996.
Clark, H. H. and Fox Tree, J. E. Using uh and um in
spontaneous speaking. Cognition, 84(1):73–111, 2002.
Eshghi, A. Uncommon Ground: The Distribution of Dialogue Contexts. Ph.D. thesis, Queen Mary University
of London, 2009.
Fernández, R. and Ginzburg, J. Non-sentential utterances: A corpus-based study. Traitement Automatique
des Langues, 43(2), 2002.
Goodwin, C. The interactive construction of a sentence
in natural conversation. In Psathas, G., editor, Everyday Language: Studies in Ethnomethodology, pages
97–121. Irvington Publishers, New York, 1979.
Gregoromichelaki, E., Sato, Y., Kempson, R., Gargett,
A., and Howes, C. Dialogue modelling and the remit
of core grammar. In Proceedings of IWCS. 2009.
Hayashi, M. Where grammar and interaction meet: A
study of co-participant completion in Japanese conversation. Human Studies, 22(2):475–499, 1999.
Helasvuo, M.-L. Shared syntax: The grammar of coconstructions. Journal of Pragmatics, 36(8):1315–
1336, 2004.

Hough, J. Incremental semantics driven natural language generation with self-repairing capability. In
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP), pages 79–84. Hissar, Bulgaria, 2011.
Howes, C., Purver, M., Healey, P. G. T., Mills, G. J., and
Gregoromichelaki, E. On incrementality in dialogue:
Evidence from compound contributions. Dialogue and
Discourse, 2(1):279–311, 2011.
Lerner, G. Collectivities in action: Establishing the relevance of conjoined participation in conversation. TextInterdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse,
13(2):213–246, 1993.
Lerner, G. H. On the syntax of sentences-in-progress.
Language in Society, pages 441–458, 1991.
Lerner, G. H. On the “semi-permeable” character of
grammatical units in conversation: Conditional entry
into the turn space of another speaker. In Ochs, E.,
Schegloﬀ, E. A., and Thompson, S. A., editors, Interaction and Grammar, pages 238–276. Cambridge
University Press, 1996.
Pickering, M. and Garrod, S. Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27:169–226, 2004.
Poesio, M. and Rieser, H. Completions, coordination,
and alignment in dialogue. Dialogue and Discourse,
1:1–89, 2010.
Purver, M., Cann, R., and Kempson, R. Grammars as
parsers: Meeting the dialogue challenge. Research on
Language and Computation, 4(2-3):289–326, 2006.
Purver, M., Howes, C., Gregoromichelaki, E., and
Healey, P. G. T. Split utterances in dialogue: A corpus
study. In Proceedings of the 10th Annual SIGDIAL
Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL 2009
Conference), pages 262–271. Association for Computational Linguistics, London, UK, 2009.
Rühlemann, C. Conversation in Context: A CorpusDriven Approach. Continuum, 2007.
Sacks, H. Lectures on Conversation. Blackwell, 1992.
Schegloﬀ, E. A. Parties and talking together: Two
ways in which numbers are signiﬁcant for talk-ininteraction. Situated Order: Studies in the Social Organization of Talk and Embodied Activities, pages 31–
42, 1995.
Schegloﬀ, E. A., Jeﬀerson, G., and Sacks, H. The preference for self-correction in the organization of repair
in conversation. Language, 53(2):361–382, 1977.
Traum, D. A Computational Theory of Grounding in
Natural Language Conversation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Rochester, 1994.
Walker, G. On some interactional and phonetic properties of increments to turns in talk-in-interaction. In
Couper-Kuhlen, E. and Ford, C. E., editors, Sound
Patterns in Interaction: Cross-linguistic Studies from
Conversation. John Benjamins, 2004.

1702

