UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why is A Few Sometimes A Lot?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dz48099

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Pogue, Amanda
Jalabi, Adel
Le Corre, Mathieu

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why is A Few Sometimes A Lot?
Amanda Pogue (amanda.pogue@uwaterloo.ca)
University of Waterloo, Department of Psychology,
200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada

Adel Jalabi (ajalabi@uwaterloo.ca)
University of Waterloo, Department of Psychology,
200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada

Mathieu Le Corre (mlecorre@uwaterloo.ca)
University of Waterloo, Department of Psychology,
200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada
Abstract
It is not surprising to find that the quantity picked out by
terms like a few and a lot is context dependent. We can easily
accept that a few books might be 10 books, yet a lot of
smartphones might only be 4 smartphones. The current paper
posits that there are two hypotheses that can explain can
explain this context dependency: the Definite Number
Hypothesis (DNH), and the Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis
(GQH). The DNH suggests that the term a few corresponds to
a definite range of values, and may pick out a larger quantity
only if the range seems implausible for the given context. The
GQH suggests that context-dependency is actually built into
the meaning of a few. Experiment 1 supports the intuition that
there is variability in the quantity that a few picks out based
on context. The findings of Experiments 2 and 3 support the
Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis.
Keywords: quantity-judgment;
psycholinguistics; context

quantifiers;

semantics;

Introduction
When we consider terms such as a few and a lot, we
intuitively know that relative to each other a few will always
be smaller than a lot; however, what does this tell us about
how we should evaluate the quantity that they represent
across different sets in the world? One potential strategy is
to assume that a few is always a small quantity and that a lot
is always a large quantity. However, this strategy may lead
us astray. For example, in Experiment 1 we find that 19
English-speaking adults suggest that a few friends on
Facebook® is about 76 friends, whereas a lot of houses
owned by a single individual is approximately 4.3 houses.
Given this finding, it seems highly unlikely that the
aforementioned strategy is the best for describing how we
evaluate these terms in the wild. How then might we be
dealing with these terms?
There is no doubt that we must be using some sort of
contextual information to guide our interpretations. But how
do we do this? We constructed and consider two
hypotheses. On the Definite Number Hypothesis, the
meaning of a few corresponds to a definite range of values –
namely, small subitizable quantities (2 to 4 or 5). It was
predicted that this range might be determined by
comparison to other similar quantity terms using pragmatics
(see: Grice, 1989; Barner, Brooks, & Bale, 2011). Given

that adults could easily select other terms such as a couple
or a pair to represent 2 items, and terms such as several or a
handful to represent slightly larger quantities, it was
predicted that people could interpret the term a few with
relation to these quantity terms, and therefore give a few a
definite range of 3 to approximately 5. However, when
speakers use a few Xs in contexts where 3 to 5 Xs is an
extremely atypical quantity of Xs (say, Facebook friends),
hearers interpret what the speakers have said by making a
post-hoc adjustment from the definite meaning of a few (i.e.,
3 to 5) to the smallest plausible quantity, say about 70 for
Facebook friends. On the Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis,
the meaning of a few is inherently context-sensitive, much
like the meaning of gradable adjectives like small, or tall. In
other words, the range of quantities corresponding to a few
cannot be fully specified in the abstract; it can only be
specified given some particular context. For example, there
is no sense in asking what degree of height corresponds to
small in general. Rather, one must know what type of
individual is being measured, and what is the typical height
for that type of individual (see: Kennedy, 2007; Syrett,
Kennedy, & Lidz, 2010). The same may be true for the
range of quantities that correspond to a few (i.e., one may
have to know what type of individual is being quantified,
and what is the typical quantity in which such individuals
are found).
Both hypotheses are consistent with the fact that the
numerical value associated with a few varies with context.
Therefore, that fact alone cannot adjudicate between them.
However, they attribute this variability to different factors.
According to the Definite Number Hypothesis, the
variability of a few is a function of whether the quantities in
the range of its meaning (i.e., 3 to 5) are plausible; if they
are not, then one adjusts to the smallest plausible value for
the context at hand. In contrast, according to the Gradable
Quantifier Hypothesis, the likelihood of finding 3 to 5
individuals of a given type matters not at all. Rather, all that
matters is the typical quantity in which these individuals
cluster. In the current paper, we test these hypotheses in two
ways. First, in Experiment 1 we confirm the intuition that
there is variability in the quantities associated with a few. In
Experiment 2, we ask whether one observes variability in
the quantities associated with a few, even in contexts where

2192

3 to 5 are highly plausible quantities. Finally, in Experiment
3, we ask whether speakers associate a few with various
quantities when they have information about typical
quantities, but no information concerning whether 3 to 5 are
plausible quantities. Whereas the Definite Number
Hypothesis predicts that there should be no variability in the
quantities associated with a few in Experiments 2 and 3, the
Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis predicts the opposite
pattern of results.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we aimed to look at what quantities
English-speaking adults attribute to the terms a few and a lot
with regards to common every day scenarios. Participants
were asked to estimate values of a few and a lot when they
were used in context of various common real world
situations. It was expected that participants’ responses
would be affected by context (the estimated average for
each situation), such that the overall averages given for both
a few and a lot would vary for each scenario based on the
average.

Methods
Participants Nineteen fluent English-speaking adults (M =
20.7 years old, 15 females) were recruited from the
University of Waterloo. Participants received partial course
credit for participating in the study.
Materials and Procedure Participants were asked to fill
out a questionnaire where they were required to estimate the
values associated with a series of one-sentence scenarios.
Twenty different scenarios were constructed. Fourteen of
the scenarios were about types of things individuals might
own / have (dogs, cats, cars, computers, bicycles, books,
children, guitars, smartphones, houses, DVDs, shirts,
pennies, and TVs), and the remaining 6 items were about
things and events in the world (trees in a park, apples picked
in an outing, goals scored in a season, emails received over
a week, friends on Facebook, and photos tagged online).
Half of the items were expected a priori to have very small
averages (Small Quantity Items), and the other half were
expected to have relatively higher reported averages (Large
Quantity Items). Each of the scenarios were described by
one sentence containing the target term a few (1), or a lot
(2), and were paired with a question asking the participant to
evaluate how many items were described in each scenario.
Additionally, the questionnaire included items asking
participants to evaluate what the average might be for each
scenario (3).
(1) Dan has a few friends on Facebook. How many
friends do you think he has on Facebook?
(2) Dan has a lot of friends on Facebook. How many
friends do you think he has on Facebook?
(3) What is the average number of friends that people
might have on Facebook?

The questionnaire contained all 60 test items. Each of the
terms (a few, a lot, and average) were presented in separate
blocks. The order of the scenarios was counterbalanced
across blocks, and the order of the blocks was
counterbalanced across participants. Each block appeared on
a separate page.

Results
Participants were elicited to pick a number to answer each
of the test items. Since they were not given specific numbers
to choose from their responses were fairly variable. As a
result, before conducting any analyses we ran a recursive
outlier detector on the responses made by each participant
per test item, and removed any data points that were deemed
to be outliers by the PJ Outlier program (Van Selst &
Jolicoeur, 1994). Using this measure we deleted 3.6% of the
responses. We then conducted a 2x2 repeated measures
ANOVA with Quantifier (a few, a lot, and average) and
Test Item as the repeated measures, and Subject Gender and
Order as the between subjects measures. The results
indicated an effect of Test Item (F(19,19) = 3.055, p <
.001), and an interaction of Test Item and Quantifier
(F(38,38) = 2.655, p < .03). Indicating that the results differ
based on the individual test items, and that the quantifier
used plays a role in the results for each test item. There was
no effect of Quantifier, Subject Gender, or Order, nor any
other significant interactions (ps > .1).
We conducted several planned comparisons to investigate
the interaction. As predicted there was a significant
difference between the Small Quantity Items (M = 1.48),
and the Large Quantity Items (M = 73.57) when the
participants were asked to estimate the means for the items
(t(18) = 9.89, p < .001). Similarly, we found a difference
between the Small Quantity Items (M = 2.26), and the Large
Quantity Items (M = 20.63) when the participants were
asked to estimate what was meant by a few (t(18) = 6.4, p <
.001), and a difference between the Small Quantity Items
(M = 4.96), and the Large Quantity Items (M = 264.34)
when the participants were asked to estimate what was
meant by a lot (t(18) = 6.69, p < .001).

Experiment 2
Both the Definite Number Hypothesis and the Gradable
Quantifier Hypothesis can explain the variability found in
Experiment 1. In Experiment 2 we ask if we can find
contexts where having 3 to 5 items is highly plausible, but
where people interpret a few as picking out quantities larger
than 5.
Experiment 2 provided participants with contexts where
the use of a few could plausibly be used felicitously to
describe 3 to 5 items, or could also be used to describe a
potentially larger quantity based on the participants’ world
knowledge. Participants were also asked to give a
plausibility rating for scenarios such as in (4) which
incorporated the numbers 3 to 5 rather than using the terms
a few or a lot. The Definite Number Hypothesis predicts a
very low plausibility rating for all contexts where a few

2193

picks out a quantity greater than 5. Alternatively, the
Gradable Number Hypothesis is more agnostic about the
role of plausibility, but might predict that the all of the
contexts where a few picks out quantities larger than 5
should be considered plausible.
(4) Martha has four friends on Facebook.

Methods

the items that were rated as having at least medium
plausibility (3 out of 5 or higher). Of the items analyzed, the
number of friends on Facebook was the only one where
subjects associated a large quantity with a few, but where
quantities between 3 and 5 were judged as having low
plausibility. This provides evidence that a few is genuinely
gradable.
Table 1: Mean responses given for “a few X” in Experiment
1 (noted by*) and Experiment 2, and the mean plausibility
rating for each corresponding trial in Experiment 2

Participants Forty-four fluent English-speaking adults (M
= 20.4 years old, 25 females) were recruited from the
University of Waterloo. Participants received partial course
credit for participating in the study.

Test Item

Materials and Procedure Participants were asked to fill
out a questionnaire where they were required to estimate the
values associated with a series of one-sentence scenarios
(Estimation Survey). Seven new scenarios were constructed.
These scenarios included: silver cars in a parking lot, trips to
the mall / gym / library in a semester, upper year students in
a first year class, movies watched in a semester, and
instances of eating pizza in a year. These items were chosen
because it was predicted by the authors that they were
contexts where a few could pick out a quantity larger than 5,
but that they could plausibly be used in scenarios with
quantities between 3 to 5. Unlike in Experiment 1, each of
the scenarios was used in just a single trial that used the
target term a few. The order of the scenarios was
counterbalanced across participants.
Each participant completed a second survey following the
Estimation Survey. The second survey (Plausibility Survey)
included the 7 new scenarios introduced in Experiment 2,
and 9 of the items from Experiment 1 (specifically items
where a few picked out larger quantities). Each context was
turned into a one sentence scenario which incorporated a
number between 3 to 5 (e.g., “There are three silver cars
parked in the UW parking lot today.”). Participants were
asked to rate the plausibility for each of these sentences on a
scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is highly implausible, and 5 is very
plausible. The Plausibility Survey was always completed
after the Estimation Survey, and was always presented on a
separate page. The order of the scenarios was randomized
between old and new items, and was counterbalanced across
participants.

Results
Table 1 reports the average plausibility ratings for all the
test items rated in Experiment 2, and the average quantity
associated with a few for each of these items.1 The items are
listed in decreasing order of plausibility. Table 1 shows that
subjects associated quantities larger than 5 with several of
1
Note: Similar to Experiment 1 participants were asked to make
personal judgments and the responses varied greatly. A test for
outliers (Van Selst & Jolicoeur, 1994) suggested that 6.82% of
responses be removed due to being significant outliers. The data
reported in Table 1 excludes the outliers in Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2.

E-mails in a week
Trips to the mall in a
semester
Trips to the gym in a year
Trips to the library in a
semester
Upper year students in a first
year class
Movies watched in a semester
Apples picked in an outing
Books
Photos tagged online
Pennies in a jar
Shirts
Pizzas eaten in a years
DVDs
Silver cars in the parking lot
Trees in a park
Friends on Facebook

Plausibility
of 3-5
4.42
4.42

A Few
8.39*
4.02

4.28
4.28

8.18
5.73

4.19

10.61

4.19
3.94
3.89
3.78
3.78
3.75
3.75
3.67
3.19
3.08
2.5

6
8.28*
10.16*
27.16*
25*
10.89*
9.85
8.28*
8.1
18.5*
76.26*

Experiment 3
Experiments 1 and 2 provide evidence that adults use
context to adjust their interpretations of a few and a lot.
Experiment 2 further showed that it is unlikely that this
effect is as a result of the participants interpreting the use of
the term a few as being infelicitous.
Experiment 3 provides further evidence that a few must
be gradable, as predicted by the Gradable Quantifier
Hypothesis. In Experiment 3 participants are told about
novel objects that people from Southern Mexico like to
collect. It was assumed that the participants had little to no
experience with people from Southern Mexico or the things
that they like to collect, thus, the participants could not use
any of their prior knowledge to make inferences. Instead, we
provided the participants with information about the average
number of each of the objects owned by individuals, and
then asked them to estimate how many items are picked out
by a few or a lot for each of the novel items. Since the
participants have no prior experience with the objects, and
since we did not provide them with any information about
the plausibility of individuals only owning 3 to 5 of the
items, participants must rely on the information provided to
them.

2194

The Definite Number Hypothesis predicts that in
Experiment 3, all participants would say that a few is 3 to 5
items regardless of the provided average information.
Conversely, the Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis predicts
that the number that a few picks out in Experiment 3 should
vary depending on the context.

Methods
Participants Sixteen fluent English-speaking adults (M =
21.6 years old, 10 females) were recruited from the
University of Waterloo. Participants received partial course
credit for participating in the study.
Materials and Procedure Participants were seated at a
computer table beside an experimenter. The study was
composed of three parts: two training tasks, and the main
task. First, the participants were introduced to the format of
the task. They were instructed that they would be told some
short stories. Accompanying these stories would be pictures
displayed on the computer screen. They were instructed that
when the stories were completed that they would be asked
questions about the stories. In order to respond to these
questions the participants were asked to make a selection
between three cards visible on the screen. Participants
would indicate the answer they thought was correct.
Additionally, they were told that only two of the cards
would have visible answers, and if they did not think that
the correct answer was on the visible cards that they should
choose the blank card.
In the first training task participants were given three
trials where they were asked to locate specific items (e.g.,
toy car, teddy bear, 2 monkeys) using the three card
response system, and received feedback on their choices.
In the second training task participants were introduced to
a picture of a novel object, and were told that it was a kind
of object that people in Southern Mexico like to collect.
They were then shown a slide that looked like the top left
box in Figure 1, and told (5). For the second training task
the number of items shown on the screen was either 2 or 3.
They heard three stories with three different individuals,
each with the same number of items. Participants were then
asked to guess how many of the novel objects a fourth
individual might own, and were given the choice between
the same number of items from the previous slides (2 or 3),
and another amount (1 or 5). The purpose of this training
trial was to determine if the participants could abstract
average information from three short stories. There were
two trials in the second training task. No feedback was
given on these trials.
(5) This is Sarah, and she has this many Xs.
The test trials were identical to the second training task,
except the design of the question response slide. On each
trial participants were told stories about a novel object that
people in Southern Mexico like to collect. They were told
about three individuals, and were shown how many objects

each of those individuals owned. Each participant heard 4
stories, of which half of the stories were about characters
who owned an average of 5 of the novel stimulus item
(Small Quantity Context), and the other half were about
characters that owned an average 40 of the novel stimulus
item (Large Quantity Context). The novel stimuli items
were always presented inside of a box shaped like a rotated
card. The size of the box, and the size of the items remained
constant throughout the story slides, and in the question
response slide. It was assumed that visual cues such as the
density of the items should provide evidence to indicate a
difference between the quantities presented in the story
slides, and those on the question response slides.

Figure 1: Example of Experiment 3 design. Row 1: an
example of the slides that correspond with each of the three
stories in the Small Quantity Context. Row 2: example of
the slides that correspond with each of the stories in the
Large Quantity Context. Row 3: the 4th character, the test
question, and question response slide.
After hearing about how many items three characters had,
participants were introduced to a fourth character and were
told that the character “has <a few / a lot> of Xs.” After
hearing this statement, participants were shown the question
response slide with the three cards, and were asked to
estimate how many of the novel objects they thought that
the fourth character had. Participants had the option to pick
between three cards: 10, 20, and blank, for each of the
stories. If the participant chose the blank card they were
asked to estimate how many items should be on the card.
Each term was used once per context, and the order of the
terms and contexts were counterbalanced across
participants.

Results
Figure 2 reports the percentage of response by card choice
for each of the conditions in the task. As predicted by the
Definite Number Hypothesis 93.75% of the participants
chose the blank card in the Small Quantity Condition in the

2195

a few trial, and reported that the quantity picked out for a
few in this trial should be ~3.9. However, contrary to the
Definite Number Hypothesis only 25% of the participants
picked the blank card in the Large Quantity Condition,
reporting that the quantity picked out for a few in this trial
should be ~3.3. The remaining 6.25% and 75% respectively
chose the small quantity card indicating that the quantity
picked out for a few for these trials should be 10.
Participants were significantly more likely to pick the blank
card in the Small Quantity Condition for a few than in the
Large Quantity Condition (χ2(1, N = 16) = 9.091, p < .01).
Additionally, participants were significantly more likely to
pick the blank card in the Large Quantity Condition for a lot
than in the Small Quantity Condition (χ2(1, N = 16) = 4.900,
p < .03).
Small (10)

Large (20)

Other (Blank)

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
A Few Glicks (5)

A Few Pimwits
(40)

A Lot Soubas (5)

A Lot Mows (40)

Figure 2: Percent per response type for each trial in
Experiment 3.

General Discussion
The results of the experiments presented in this paper
provide direct evidence that there is variability in the
quantities picked out by the term a few, and that this
variability can be explained by context. This finding is
highly unsurprising – no one would argue that context plays
a role in the interpretation of all quantifiers. However, we
set out to investigate more than just the effect that context
has on the quantities picked out by a few, and endeavored to
figure out how context is having this effect. We speculated
that there are two hypotheses that could explain the role that
context is playing for a few: 1) the Definite Number
Hypothesis, and 2) the Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis.
According to the Definite Number Hypothesis, the
variability of a few is a dependent on whether the quantities
in the range of its meaning (i.e., 3 to 5) are plausible. If the
quantities are not within the range of its meaning (like in the
case of Facebook friends), then they must be adjusted to the
smallest plausible value for the context at hand.
Alternatively, according to the Gradable Quantifier
Hypothesis, the likelihood of finding 3 to 5 individuals of a
given type is not what matters, but rather the typical
quantity in which these individuals cluster. These two

hypotheses made separate predictions regarding the
outcomes of Experiments 2 and 3 in this paper.
In Experiment 2, the Definite Number Hypothesis
predicted that participants would rate all of the contexts that
for which quantities plausibly fall within its range as being
highly plausible, and those for which quantities do not
plausibly fall within its range as being implausible. The
Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis makes no such prediction,
and is not constrained in its meaning. Thus, it should have
predicted that the plausibility ratings given by participants
should not depend on the plausibility of the quantities
falling within a specific range. The findings of Experiment 2
go against the predictions of Definite Number Hypothesis,
as there was evidence for several items that do not fall
within the range of a few’s definite meaning, yet were rated
as being plausible scenarios. Though the prediction made by
the Definite Number Hypothesis did hold true for the
context involving friends on Facebook, but only for that one
context. The results of Experiment 2 consequently seem to
imply that people do not expect a few to have a definite
range that requires post-hoc adjustments for larger contexts.
In order to further test these hypotheses, in Experiment 3
the only context information made available to participants
was average information. Participants could not rely on their
prior knowledge with the novel items to determine whether
the definite range of quantities picked out by a few in the
Definite Number Hypothesis is plausible for the novel
contexts. Thus, the Definite Number Hypothesis predicted
that participants should indicate that the quantity picked out
by a few in all contexts should fall within the range of
meaning (i.e., 3 to 5). On the other hand, the Gradable
Quantifier Hypothesis predicted that a few would pick out a
quantity relative to the typical quantity (i.e., average) for
each context. Consequently, it would predict that the
responses for the Small Quantity Condition would be
different from the responses for the Large Quantity
Condition. The results of Experiment 3 support the
hypothesis predicted by the Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis,
in that there was a significant difference in the responses
given for the different context scenarios. Conversely the
Definite Number Hypothesis only correctly predicted the
responses for the Small Quantity Condition.
One potential limitation of Experiment 3 is that it is
possible that while participants were not explicitly supplied
with information that confirmed or denied the probability of
3 to 5 items being plausible quantities in the novel contexts,
the participants may have inferred that the 3 to 5 would be
implausible in the Large Context Condition. While this may
be the case, when the results of Experiment 3 are considered
with respect to the results of Experiment 2, which suggested
that that we still see variability in the quantities picked out
by a few despite 3 to 5 being plausible quantities for the
given contexts, the Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis still
provides a better explanation for the data.
The future direction of this research aims to investigate
several questions left open by the findings in this paper.
First, if the Gradable Quantifier Hypothesis is true, how

2196

does context tell us what quantity is picked out by a few?
The answer to this question can perhaps be found by
determining the semantic form of a few and other gradable
quantifiers with respect to the form of gradable adjectives.
Secondly, it would be interesting to investigate whether all
quantifiers are gradable like a few, or if it is the case that
only some quantifiers are gradable in this way; it would be
interesting to study what makes a specific quantifier
gradable. Finally, the structure of gradable quantifiers seems
like it would be very difficult to acquire. Given that both a
few and a lot can be used in variable contexts to mean either
a small quantity, or a relatively large quantity, how do
children learn that what is important about gradable
quantifiers is the context in which they are used, and not a
definite number range?
The results of the present study support the Gradable
Quantifier Hypothesis, suggesting that context-dependency
is built into the meaning of terms such as a few, and rejects
the Definite Number Hypothesis. This finding opens up a
host of interesting questions about the gradability of other
terms, and the acquisition of gradable quantifiers. Current
research in the authors’ lab aims to answer these questions
with future and ongoing studies.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the members of the Developmental Science Lab
and the members of the Developmental division in the
Department of Psychology at the University of Waterloo for
the useful feedback. A.P. would also like to thank Christie
Haskell, Jonathan Fugelsang, and Hugh Rabagliati for the
statistics advice. This research was supported by a grant to
M.L. from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada.

References
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the
unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children's
pragmatic inference. Cognition, 188, 87-96.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kennedy, C. (2007). Vagueness and Grammar: The
Semantics of Relative and Absolute Gradable Adjectives.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 30, 1-45.
Syrett, K., Kennedy, C., & Lidz, J. (2010). Meaning and
Context in Children’s Understanding of Gradable
Adjectives. Journal of Semantics, 27, 1-35.
Van Selst, M., & Jolicoeur, P. (1994). A solution to the
effect of sample size and skew on outlier elimination.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47A, 631-650.

2197

