UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Zero anaphora and object reference in Japanese child-directed speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6bv76372

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Smith, Cybelle
Frank, Michael

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Zero anaphora and object reference in Japanese child-directed speech
Cybelle Smith

Michael C. Frank

cybelle@umd.edu
Department of Linguistics
University of Maryland

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

Fernald and Morikawa (1993) noted that Japanese mothers
used far fewer noun labels and the labels they used were generally more diverse, including onomatopoeia and diminutive
forms as well as the prototypical labels used by American
mothers. In addition, Japanese, unlike English, is a pro-drop
language, meaning that the subject and object of verbs may
be omitted. This omission is known as “zero anaphora.” For
example, when an English speaker might say “the dog barks,”
a Japanese speaker might say only “barks.” One study suggests that zero anaphora in Japanese may lead to increased
difficulty in early verb learning (Rispoli, 1995), but to our
knowledge, no work has examined the direct relationship between zero anaphora and object reference, in Japanese or any
other language.
What effect does the varied use of noun-labels and
anaphora (especially zero anaphora) have for Japanese word
learners? Under a pure cross-situational analysis, the sparse
mappings between words and objects in this language might
be very difficult to overcome. If objects that are being talked
about often go unnamed in Japanese, a pure cross-situational
learner might be more likely to learn, for example, “bark”
rather than “dog” for the concept of a dog. If, however, word
learners do not treat utterances as independent entities, but
instead resolve reference within a topical discourse—a set of
utterances about a particular topic—the problems posed by
changing object labels and zero anaphora might be mitigated.
A learner could figure out what topic was being talked about
and then assume that future utterances refer to this topic, even
if it was not named.
Recent work has taken up the suggestion that children could potentially aggregate information about word
meanings—as well as other knowledge about a particular object referent—not just across sentences but also across these
topical discourse units (Rohde & Frank, under review; Frank,
Tenenbaum, & Fernald, in press). On this kind of view, a
first utterance establishes the topic (in the cases we examine, often a simple object referent), and then future utterances
contribute new information (Clark, 1996). For such a learner,
zero anaphora might not be as problematic if the discourse
topic were already known.
The current study examined zero anaphora in Japanese
from this perspective. We conducted a reanalysis and annotation of Japanese infant- and child-directed speech from the
Fernald and Morikawa (1993) study, focusing on anaphora.
We asked when zero anaphora was used within topical discourses, in comparison with object naming and the use of
other pronouns. We found that although overall rates of
anaphora were much higher for Japanese mothers compared

To learn the meanings of words, children must connect referents in the world around them with the sounds they hear. One
proposed mechanism for this process is cross-situational word
learning: tracking associations between words and objects
across time. We consider the problem of anaphora for a crosssituational word learner: after an object has been introduced
it is unlikely to be named in every succeeding reference to it.
This problem is particularly pronounced in Japanese, which
uses “zero anaphora,” where pronouns can be omitted from utterances. We analyze a corpus of Japanese mothers talking to
children about sets of objects, originally recorded by Fernald
and Morikawa (1993). Overall rates of anaphora were much
higher for Japanese mothers compared with English mothers.
Zero anaphora was primarily used when the discourse topic
was already established, suggesting that a discourse-finding
strategy may be important for word learning in Japanese. In
addition, unexpectedly, due to the existence of zero anaphora
as a common referential strategy, pronouns were more likely
to be used when the topic was new than when it was given
(reversing common results for English).
Keywords: Child-directed speech; Japanese; zero anaphora;
discourse analysis; language acquisition.

Introduction
From the perspective of a scientist, early word learning seems
a difficult problem. Although infants quickly learn to pair
sound sequences in their caregivers’ speech with concepts
and entities in their environment, it is still uncertain how they
associate words and concepts. One proposed mechanism for
this process is cross-situational word learning: tracking associations between words and objects across time (Siskind,
1996; Yu & Smith, 2007). Though possible for even very
young children in simple contexts (Smith & Yu, 2008) and in
principle feasible for large lexicons (Blythe, Smith, & Smith,
2010), the effectiveness of pure cross-situational learning in
natural contexts is still unknown.
One issue for cross-situational learning in the natural learning environment is anaphora: the use of shortened—or even
absent—expressions that refer back to a previously-named
entity. If learners are keeping track of associations between
words and objects, the tendency towards anaphoric reference
should cut down considerably on these associations. Although anaphora is pervasive in language use, object names
are typically repeated frequently in the speech of Englishspeaking mothers to their children (Fernald & Morikawa,
1993). This repetition has allowed models of cross-situational
word learning to succeed in establishing word-object mappings even in small natural datasets (Yu & Ballard, 2007;
Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2009).
Repetition of object labels is not nearly as prevalent in
some other languages, however. In the same study that established the presence of repetition in English mothers’ speech,

989

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for each file in the FM Corpus.

with English mothers, zero anaphora was primarily used
when the discourse topic is already established. Also, we
found a trade-off between zero anaphora and pronominal
anaphora that caused pronouns to be more likely when the
discourse topic was newly established. This sensitivity of
zero and pronominal anaphora to the discourse topic suggests
that a discourse-finding strategy may be even more important
for Japanese-learning children than it is for English learners.

Utts = utterances, Length = length in minutes and seconds.
Age Grp

Code

Gend

Age

Utts

Length

6mos

J29
J30
J31
J32
J33
J34
J35
J36
J37
J2
J3
J7
J8
J11
J13B
J18
J20
J23
J26
J4
J5
J9
J10
J12B
J16
J19
J24
J27
J28

M
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
F
M
F
F
M
M
F
M
M

6
5
6
6
5
5
5
6
5
14
13
11
11
12
12
13
13
11
12
18
18
18
20
18
21
21
19
19
18

208
158
299
203
342
322
334
127
289
325
346
594
364
285
269
331
241
384
280
354
186
268
297
385
330
410
295
325
301

10:59
10:25
12:51
12:57
11:28
11:51
13:17
10:51
11:33
19:50
15:53
19:36
16:35
15:18
11:49
17:40
14:43
12:51
12:40
18:11
10:50
16:29
13:51
15:54
12:47
15:02
15:50
14:47
14:36

Methods
Corpus Materials
12mos

Our data consisted of a set of transcribed videos of objectcentered play between mothers and children in their homes,
from a study by Fernald and Morikawa (1993). While
the original corpus contained both American and Japanese
mother-child pairs, the current analysis focuses primarily on
the Japanese mothers (American data was analyzed in Frank
et al., in press). Discourse from 29 Japanese mother-child
pairs with audio and video data was analyzed. The infants
were divided into three age groups: 5-6 months (N=9, 5
males), 11-14 months (N=10, 5 males), and 18-21 months
(N=10, 5 males).
Prior to recording, mother and child played comfortably together with the child’s toys. Next, the child’s own toys were
removed and the video recording began. During the video the
mothers were asked to play with the child using three standardized pairs of toys: dog and pig, car and truck, and brush
and box. The mother was asked to play with the toys “as she
normally would.” The toys were introduced one pair at a time
and removed before introduction of the following pair. The
ordering of whether the dog and pig were introduced first or
the car and truck were introduced first was counterbalanced
across trials, but the brush and box were always introduced
last (and only for the older two groups).
Towards the end of the play session, mothers of children
from the two older age groups were asked to hide the toys and
get the child to retrieve them using words alone. Because this
scenario might affect how the mother referred to the objects
(indeed it was inserted in order to elicit object names), we
only considered utterances prior to this “hiding game.” We
also excluded utterances with sound and audio issues (167),
and those spoken by the mother to the experimenter. In total,
8852 utterances taken from 6 hours and 51 minutes of video
were analyzed in the current study.

18mos

to the infant, what object or objects (if any) were being referred to. An object was considered to be referred to if A) the
mother said the name of the object or B) the mother used a
pronoun that the annotator judged to refer to the object. Although other toys and objects were occasionally referred to
in the corpus, in the following analysis we will only examine
references made to the six toys that were standardized across
participating dyads (dog, pig, car, truck, brush, and box).
In Japanese, baby words for toys are often derived from
onomatopoeia. We counted misnomers and onomatopoeia as
references to the toy under clearly referential circumstances.
For misnomers, this was when e.g. “moomoo” (“moo-moo,”
meaning “cow”) was used in reference to the pig. We also
counted alternative labels, such as “omocha” (“toy”) and
“nuigurumi” (“stuffed animal”), as references. However, we
did not count misnomers and alternative labels as cases of
“object naming,” which we defined in a more restricted sense,
described below. We counted onomatopoeia-derived noun
phrases as references to objects, but not onomatopoeia that
was used to describe sounds or actions. Our annotator made
judgments about when the mother was using phrases such as
“wanwan” as a noun and when she was using them to indicate
sounds or actions that the toy was making. Thus, “wan-chan”
(“Mr. woof”) and, in some cases, “wanwan” (“woof-woof”),
were coded as referring to nouns.
In Japanese, objects are frequently referred to without use
of an explicit noun or pronoun. As noted above, grammat-

Conventions for Annotating Object Reference
A native Japanese speaker first divided the mothers’ speech
into “utterances,” or segments of speech separated by pauses,
on the basis of prosodic and syntactic cues. Most utterances
ranged from a single word to a complete sentence; complete
sentences were usually not counted as multiple utterances unless there was a pause or interruption of the speaker’s turn.
Next, using the video and transcript data, a native Japanese
speaker annotated, for each utterance spoken by the mother

990

Engl
i
shPr
onoun
JapanesePr
onoun
JapaneseZer
o

Pr
opor
t
i
onofTot
alRef
er
ences

0.
8

0.
6

0.
4

Anaphora Use Across Languages

0.
2

0.
0

questing objects from the child and saying thank you. A plot
of references to the six toys over a single video is presented
in Figure 2, as a representative discourse structure.
We report three main sets of analyses. First, simple univariate counts of pronominal and zero anaphora. Second, analyses of transitions between different kinds of reference. Third,
changes in use of zero anaphora across the corpus.

Am
Jp
6mont
hs

Am
Jp
12mont
hs

Our first analysis counted pronominal and zero anaphora proportions in the corpus at each age. We normalized these
counts by the total number of object references that were
identified (including all anaphoric references)1 . These data
are shown in Figure 1, along with English data on pronoun
use in object references from Rohde and Frank (under review).
Several trends are apparent in these data. First, pronoun use
is approximately equivalent between English and Japanese
speakers. Speakers of both languages use pronouns approximately one-third of the time. Second, Japanese use of zero
anaphora constitutes an additional third of all object references. Unlike the English-speaking mothers, Japanesespeaking mothers were using anaphora more often than not
to refer to the toys that they were playing with. Finally, pronoun use declined with the age of the children in our sample.
This trend was somewhat modest compared with the large
cross-linguistic differences, but was nevertheless significant
in a simple linear regression predicting pronoun use by age
in months (β = -.005, p <.001). However, this age difference
likely reflects the fact that videos were shorter for the 6 month
old group than the other two groups. As will be discussed below, pronoun use declined substantially over the discourse for
all three age groups, and so proportion of pronoun use in the
6 month old group might have been inflated by the shorter
video—and hence shorter discourse—length.

Am
Jp
18mont
hs

Figure 1: Proportion of total references that used pronominal or
zero anaphora for American (Am) and Japanese (Jp) dyads. Error
bars show standard error of the mean across dyads.

ical subjects and objects are frequently omitted in Japanese,
where in English they would be marked using a pronoun. We
included implicit subjects and objects as intended referents,
but gave them a special marking. Whenever the subject or object of a verb or the noun modified by an adjectival phrase was
omitted, we counted it as a case of implicit reference to the
omitted noun, or “zero anaphora.” We did not count objects
as being referred to if they were a missing instrument of action, the possessor of an object that was explicitly mentioned,
or if they had a spatial or some other relationship to the objects that were mentioned. While each of these might sometimes qualify as zero anaphora, our annotation scheme treated
them conservatively (hence, zero anaphora counts would if
anything be higher under a revised scheme).
We further categorized non-zero references to objects into
two types: those that used a referential pronoun and those
that named the object. We counted a reference as “naming”
the object when: 1. the utterance was marked as referring to
the object by our annotator and not marked as being a case of
zero anaphora, 2. the utterance contained one of a list of character strings found in words for the referred object (including
common misspellings), and 3. the English gloss (created by
a second native speaker for the original Fernald & Morikawa,
1993 study) contained one of a list of possible glosses for
words for the referred object. We counted a pronoun as being
used referentially when: 1. the utterance was marked as referring to the object by our annotator and not marked as being
a case of zero anaphora, 2. the utterance contained one of a
list of pronouns, and 3. the reference had not already been
marked as object naming.

Discourse Continuity in Japanese
We next examined how likely each mother was to refer to
the same object in two consecutive utterances. This analysis
was used by Frank et al. (in press) as a first-pass indicator
that discourse references to objects were relatively continuous. A high probability of repeated reference to an object
suggests that a learner who “smoothed” their guesses about
reference across time would be relatively successful. If they
didn’t know what a particular utterance was referring to, they
could just guess that the referent was the same as in the previous utterances in the discourse.

Results

Continuity of Reference We calculated transition probabilities between referential and non-referential utterances of

Mothers talked about each toy in alternating bouts of utterances. They frequently used onomatopoeia, and engaged in
“social routines” (Fernald & Morikawa, 1993), such as re-

1 In the Japanese data, 281 out of 3642 references (7.7%) were
marked as “ambiguous” as to whether the toy was referred to or not.
Only non-ambiguous cases were used in the first analysis.

991

box
brush
truck
car
pig
dog

name
pronoun
zero

0

20

40

60

80 100

140

180

220

260

utterance
Figure 2: References to the six main toys in a sample video. Toys are plotted on the Y axis and blue lines signal that the toy was referred to
in a particular utterance. name = object naming, zero = zero anaphora.

Table 2: Transition probabilities between referential and non-referential utterances of various types. P(Y|X) refers to the probability that in
the current utterance an object is referred to using Y given that in the previous utterance it was referred to using X. zero = zero anaphora,
name = object naming, nonref = nonreferential utterance.

X
name
zero
pronoun
other

P(name|X)
.25
.04
.10
.05

P(zero|X)
.12
.28
.15
.06

P(pronoun|X)
.06
.05
.19
.11

various types.2 As in our previous work, transition probabilities were first calculated for each of the six toys, then averaged together, weighted by the number of times each toy
was referred to in the video (or referred to using a particular
reference type, as appropriate).
Mothers varied considerably in how likely they were to refer to an object in two consecutive utterances. The probability of referring to an object in the next utterance given it
was referred to in the current utterance ranged between .20
and .57 for each mother (mean = .43). Probability of repeated
reference remained relatively stable when calculated for the
utterances in each age group, although it tended to rise with
the age of the child, from .39 at 6 mos, to .44 at 12 mos, and
.47 at 18 mos. Overall these levels were somewhat lower than
those for English-speaking dyads.
When we removed utterances that consisted of
backchanneling—checking for a response from the child—
such as “nn,” “n?,” “a,” and “hai hai hai” (“yes, yes, yes”),
this slightly increased the probability of consecutive reference (mean = .49), and decreased variance between mothers.
This analysis suggests that the higher tendency of Japanese
mothers to use backchanneling, combined with the lower
overall frequency of object reference, may account for the
difference between Japanese and English-speaking dyads.

P(other|X)
.02
.01
.03
.08

P(nonref|X)
.55
.62
.53
.70

anaphora is used more after naming, then transition probabilities should be asymmetric: p(zero|name) should be higher
than p(name|zero).
Results are summarized in Table 2. The largest trend was
for referential utterances to be followed by non-referential utterances, indicating (as above) that Japanese discourses contained more non-referential speech overall than in English.
Nevertheless, there were still distinct trends in which referential strategies were used earlier in discourses. Zero anaphora
after object naming was three times as likely as object naming after zero anaphora. Zero anaphora after pronominal
anaphora was three times as likely as pronominal anaphora
after zero anaphora. Surprisingly, pronouns were more likely
to be used before object naming than after it, unlike in English
(Ariel, 1990; Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 1993).

Changes in Anaphora Use Across the Discourse
Zero Anaphora Over Time In our third analysis, we examined how often mothers used zero anaphora at different
points in the discourse. For each utterance that referred to
one of the six main toys, we calculated the number of times
the object had been mentioned prior to that utterance. We call
this the “number of previous references” (NPR) for the utterance. If an utterance refers to the dog for the fifth time in a
video, that utterance has an NPR of 4. Next, we collapsed
all references with a particular NPR across mothers and toy
referents, and calculated the proportion of the time the references used zero anaphora.
The proportion of time that mothers referred to an object
using zero anaphora increased with the log of the NPR at
all ages (Figure 3). We created a mixed effects model of
zero anaphora usage, with age group and NPR as fixed effects and mother as a random effect with random intercept
and slope with respect to NPR. Because of the very large
number of observations, we used the z approximation to esti-

Transitions Between Reference Types We next examined
transitions between referential and non-referential utterances
of various types, including zero anaphora, pronouns, and object naming. The goal of this analysis was to understand
the directionality of zero anaphora use in discourse. If zero
2 We calculated transition probabilities between utterances both
counting and discounting cases where the referent was ambiguous.
However, none of the transition probabilities besides those for the
“other” category changed by more than .02 when the ambiguous
cases were counted as non-reference, and so we count them as nonreference in the current analysis.

992

and pronominal anaphora decreases substantially. However,
object naming only decreased slightly at higher NPRs. For
the first 20 times the mother referred to an object, the proportion of the time that she named the object stayed relatively
flat. In other words, zero anaphora increases over time at the
expense of pronominal anaphora, rather than object naming.
We also extracted discourses of consecutive references to
the same object, and examined zero anaphora, pronominal
anaphora and object naming at each “utterance position” in
the discourse. The first utterance of a discourse has an utterance position of 1, the second has an utterance position of 2,
etc. We examined a total of 791 discourses of three or more
consecutive references to an object. Once again, the proportion of zero anaphora use increased with the log of the utterance position, and the proportion of pronominal anaphora
decreased. For the first six utterance positions, the sum of the
proportion of zero anaphora use and pronominal anaphora use
was flat. (Over 90% percent of the discourses we examined
were six or fewer utterances long). This analysis again indicates that the proportion of zero anaphora rises at the expense
of pronominal anaphora before having any effect on the proportion of references that name the object.

1

2

5

10

20

50

20

50

12mos

1

2

5

10

18mos

0

.
5

1

Pr
opor
t
i
onZer
oAnaphor
a
0
0
1
.
5

.
5

1

6mos

1

2
5 10 20
50
NumberofPr
ev
i
ousRef
er
enc
es

General Discussion
We examined patterns of anaphora use in child-directed
speech by Japanese mothers of infants aged 6, 12 and 18
months. We found that Japanese mothers used far more total
anaphora than English-speaking mothers, although pronominal reference was about equally likely in Japanese and English. We examined the transition probabilities between zero
anaphora, referential pronouns, and object naming, finding
that pronouns are more likely to occur earlier in the discourse,
while zero anaphora is more likely to follow both pronouns
and object naming. Finally, we assessed how object naming and anaphora use evolve over the discourse, using two
measures: the number of previous references to an object and
the utterance position in discourses of consecutive reference.
Zero anaphora use rapidly accelerated over the discourse at
the expense of pronouns, while object naming persisted at a
steady rate that only gradually declined later on.
These findings give insight into how object reference varies
between languages like English, which have a two-tiered system of nominal and pronominal reference, and those like
Japanese that have a third possibility: zero anaphora. In English, both pronoun use and elision are more likely when the
referent is given information (MacWhinney & Bates, 1978).
From this one might expect that both pronominal and zero
anaphora use would increase with the givenness of the referent in Japanese.
However, the distribution of pronoun types differs drastically between these languages: both personal and demonstrative pronouns are frequent in English, while in Japanese,
most pronouns are demonstrative, and zero anaphora is used
in place of personal pronouns most of the time. According
to Gundel’s hierarchy of givenness (Gundel et al., 1993), per-

Figure 3: Proportion of total references that use zero anaphora as a
function of the number of previous references to the object (NPR),
plotted separately by age group. NPR depicted on a logarithmic
scale, NPRs with fewer than 10 data points were dropped. A loess
curve was fitted to each plot.

mate significance for individual coefficients. We found that
zero anaphora use increased significantly with NPR (β =
.049,p < .001), while age group had no effect (β = −.001,
ns). We modified the model to include the interaction term
of age group and NPR as a fixed effect, and found that the
resulting coefficient was nonsignificant (β = −.002, ns).
We also examined whether mothers were more likely to use
zero anaphora when referring to some toys than others. We
created a mixed effects model with age group, NPR and toy as
fixed effects and mother as a random effect with random slope
and intercept with respect to NPR. There was no significant
effect of any of the toys with the exception of the box, which
had significantly higher zero anaphora use compared to all
other toys (β values ranged between -.79 and -1.08, p < .001
for each of the other toy coefficients when box was used as
the referent). This is likely due to the fact that mothers would
repeatedly ask their children to “open” and “close” the box
without specifying a direct object. We find this an intriguing
hint that some objects may be referred to via associated verbs,
especially when they provide salient action affordances.
Zero Anaphora vs. Other Reference Our final analyses
examined the proportion of zero anaphora use as compared
to the proportion of pronominal anaphora and object naming (Figure 4). As the log of the number of previous references increases, zero anaphora use increases substantially

993

Pr
opor
t
i
onofRef
er
ences

Pr
opor
t
i
onofRef
er
ences

1.
0
0.
8
0.
6
0.
4
0.
2
0.
0
1

5

10

1.
0
0.
8

TypeofRef
er
ence
Ot
her

0.
6

Zer
o

0.
4

Pr
onoun

0.
2

Name

0.
0

25

NumberofPr
evi
ousRef
er
ences(
l
og)

1

2

4

Ut
t
er
ancePosi
t
i
on

8

Figure 4: Proportion of total references that involve object naming, zero anaphora, or referential pronouns, as a function of the number
of previous references to the object (NPR) and utterance position. NPR and utterance position depicted on a logarithmic scale, NPRs
and utterance positions with fewer than 10 data points were dropped. Utterance position calculated using all discourses of three or more
consecutive references to an object.
sonal pronouns and zero anaphora are used only when the
referent is in focus, but demonstratives can also be used when
it is out of focus but in working memory. By Grice’s maxims, this leads to demonstrative pronouns being used more
frequently when there is a topic shift, or when the referent
has been introduced non-linguistically (Gundel et al., 1993;
Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 2004). In our data, Japanese
pronouns were more likely to be used in reference to an object the first time it was referred to than at any other point in
the discourse. This suggests that in Japanese child directed
speech pronoun use may signal topic change (e.g. “look at
this!”), rather than topic continuity.
As suggested originally by Fernald and Morikawa (1993),
pure word-object mapping in Japanese might be a very hard
problem: Only about a third of references name the object,
while the other two-thirds make use of pronouns and zero
anaphora. Moreover, references to objects in Japanese (as in
English) are not evenly distributed in discourse. But if children have some sense of what the current topic of discourse
is—what is given, and what is new—this problem might be
somewhat alleviated. A Japanese-learning infant could infer
the topic of conversation and then assume that future comments, whether using names or anaphora, referred to that
topic. Thus, this study underscores the importance of topical discourse in early word learning, suggesting that tracking
the topic of conversation across utterances may be even more
crucial to word learning success in pro-drop languages.

Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Fernald, A., & Morikawa, H. (1993). Common themes
and cultural variations in japanese and american mothers’
speech to infants. Child Development, 64(3), 637–656.
Frank, M., Goodman, N., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009). Using speakers’ referential intentions to model early crosssituational word learning. Psychological Science, 20(5),
578.
Frank, M., Tenenbaum, J., & Fernald, A. (in press). Social
and discourse contributions to the determination of reference in cross-situational word learning. Language, Learning, and Development.
Gundel, J., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993). Cognitive
status and the form of referring expressions in discourse.
Language, 69, 274-307.
Gundel, J., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (2004, September).
Demonstrative pronouns in natural discourse. In Proceedings of daarc-2004. Sao Miguel, Portugal.
MacWhinney, B., & Bates, E. (1978). Sentential devices
for conveying givenness and newness: A cross-cultural developmental study. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 17, 539–58.
Rispoli, M. (1995). Missing arguments and the acquisition
of predicate meanings. Beyond names for things: Young
childrens acquisition of verbs, 331–352.
Rohde, H., & Frank, M. (under review). Markers of topical
discourse in child-directed speech.
Siskind, J. (1996). A computational study of cross-situational
techniques for learning word-to-meaning mappings. Cognition, 61(1-2), 39–91.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics. Cognition, 106(3), 1558–1568.
Yu, C., & Ballard, D. (2007). A unified model of early word
learning: Integrating statistical and social cues. Neurocomputing, 70(13-15), 2149–2165.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2007). Rapid word learning under uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological Science, 18(5), 414.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Akiko Knott for her invaluable annotation
work, and to Stephan Meylan for advice on using the mechanical turk interface to rekey our transcripts.

References
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing Noun-Phrase Antecedents. London: Routledge.
Blythe, R., Smith, K., & Smith, A. (2010). Learning times for
large lexicons through cross-situational learning. Cognitive
Science, 34(4), 620–642.

994

