A Learned Label Modulates Object Representations in 10-Month-Old Infants
Katherine E. Twomey (k.twomey@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK

Gert Westermann (g.westermann@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK
Abstract

infants in the first year of life (Althaus & Westermann,
2016; Plunkett, Hu, & Cohen, 2008). This work illustrates
the effect of labels on online processing in these very young
infants; however, whether such in-the-moment attention
translates to differences in longer-term, learned
representations in infants of this age is not clear.
While to our knowledge no study has explicitly examined
the effect of learned labels on early representation, there has
been a wealth of studies in early label learning and
categorization. Infants show their first evidence of word
learning from as early as six months (Bergelson &
Swingley, 2012) and show signs of mapping novel words to
objects in looking time tasks from around 10 months
(Mather & Plunkett, 2010; Schafer & Plunkett, 1998;
Werker, Cohen, Lloyd, Casasola & Stager, 1998). In the
categorization literature, multiple studies show that longterm experience with everyday objects such as pets affects
the category representations infants bring to bear in the lab
(e.g., Kovack-Lesh, McMurray, & Oakes, 2014). In
particular, in a carefully controlled training study Bornstein
& Mash (2010) asked caregivers to train their 3-month-old
infants with multiple exemplars of a novel object category
via daily booklet-reading sessions. After two months,
trained infants were invited to take part in a 3D object
examining/categorization task, together with another group
of untrained infants. The training changed infants’ online
behavior: relative to untrained infants with no previous
experience of the novel category, trained infants showed no
learning during a familiarization phase in which they were
presented with previously-seen exemplars. Thus, evidence
suggests that (a) word learned over time affect infants intask responses and (b) category representations formed over
time also affect these responses. Here, we ask about the
relationship between the two; specifically, whether longerterm learning of labels in very early development can shape
object representations.
Thus, in a training/familiarization study we asked parents
of 10-month-old infants to train their children with two
novel toy objects at home over a week (seven sessions),
labeling one object (labeled object) but not the other (nonlabel object). We then recorded infants’ looking times in a
familiarization/preferential looking task using an eyetracker. First, images of the two objects were presented
individually, in silence, on a computer screen. We
hypothesized that if object labels affect early object
representations, we should observe differences in infants’

Despite substantial evidence for a bidirectional relationship
between language and representation, the roots of this relationship
in infancy are not known. The current study explores the
possibility that labels may affect object representations at the
earliest stages of language acquisition. We asked parents to play
with their 10-month-old infants with two novel toys for three
minutes, every day for a week, teaching infants a novel word for
one toy but not the other. After a week infants participated in a
familiarization task in which they saw each object for 8 trials in
silence, followed by a test trial consisting of both objects
accompanied by the trained word. Infants exhibited a faster decline
in looking times to the previously unlabeled object. These data
speak to the current debate over the status of labels in human
cognition, supporting accounts in which labels are an integral part
of representation.
Keywords: representation, word
acquisition, linguistic relativity

learning,

language

Since Whorf (1940), scientists have been amassing evidence
for a link between how we use language and how we
represent the world. Much of this evidence comes from
crosslinguistic studies which demonstrate that different
(grammatical) structures interact with speakers’ range of
conceptual representations, for example space (Majid,
Bowerman, Kita, Haun, & Levinson, 2004), time
(Boroditsky, 2001) and color (Roberson, Davidoff, Davies,
& Shapiro, 2005). The effects of language on representation
have also been observed within a single language (e.g.,
Johanson & Papafragou, 2016; Son, Doumas, & Goldstone,
2010). For example, Lupyan (2016) asked adults to draw
either “a triangle” or “a three-sided polygon” and found
differences in the size and orientation of the shapes drawn
by the two groups. While the strength and direction of this
relationship has long been debated (for a review, see Slobin,
1996), there is consensus that language and representation
interact in both perceptual and abstract domains.
Perhaps not surprisingly given the ubiquity of the
relationship between language and representation, there is
evidence that it begins early in development (for a review,
see Robinson, Best, Deng, & Sloutsky, 2012). Recent work
indicates that the relationship may begin at least at the same
time as the onset of language learning. For example, looking
time studies demonstrate that the presence of a label can
direct 12-month-old infants’ attention to commonalities
between category exemplars (Althaus & Plunkett, 2015),
and that labels can guide online category formation in

680

looking times to the previously labeled and the non-labeled
stimuli. We did not anticipate that these beginner word
learners would show robust label-object associations (c.f.,
Horst & Samuelson, 2008). However, given that even partial
knowledge of the mapping could influence infants’ looking
times (Yurovsky, Fricker, Yu, & Smith, 2014), after
familiarization infants also saw a single preferential looking
test trial in which both images appeared simultaneously,
accompanied by the label.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-four 10 month-old infants (12 girls; M = 10m, 23d;
SD = 14.15d, range = 9m, 26d – 11m, 13d) participated. All
infants were typically developing and monolingual English
learning with no family history of color blindness. Data
from an additional four infants were excluded for fussiness
(as defined by failure to start or complete the eyetracking
task due to excess movement and/or crying); 2),
experimenter error (1), and low eyetracker sample rate (<
35%; 1). All but three participants had completed all seven
training sessions (7 sessions: 21; 6 sessions: 3). All
participants returned for the second session approximately a
week after the first (6 days: 2; 7 days: 19; 8 days: 3).
Families were recruited by contacting caregivers who had
previously indicated interest in participating in child
development research. Caregivers’ travel expenses for both
visits were reimbursed and infants were given a storybook
for participating.

Figure 1: Stimuli used in the current study.

Procedure and Design
Visit 1: Play session. Objects’ color and label were
counterbalanced between participants such that for each
object, half the infants received a blue exemplar and half
received a red exemplar, with the constraint that each infant
received one red and one blue object. Each exemplar served
as the label object for half of the infants (label condition)
and the no-label object for the other half of the infants (nolabel condition).
First, the experimenter showed the caregiver the two
objects and asked them whether their child had similar toys
at home. Substitute items were available, however no child
had prior experience of the objects. The experimenter then
explained that she would demonstrate a play session, with
the goal of teaching the infant a word for one of the objects.
She then asked the caregiver to conduct a similar play
session for three minutes, every day for a week and
explained that they would be invited to return to the lab after
seven days to take part in a simple looking-time study,
which would involve the child watching static images on a
computer screen.
The play session took place in a quiet, infant-friendly
room with the caregiver present at all times. Before the
session began, the experimenter emphasized that caregivers
should not invent a name for the no-label object: only the
label tanzer should be used, and only in reference to the
labelled object. The experimenter then sat opposite the
infant on the floor and introduced both toys by holding them
in front of the infant and allowing the infant to take the toys
in their own time. While the infant was looking at the toy
the experimenter referred to them using a label or a pronoun
as appropriate, for example “Look, a tanzer!” (label), “Look
at this!” (no-label). During the course of the play session the
experimenter explained to the caregiver that they should
encourage their child to interact with both toys for an
approximately equal amount of time, and that their child
should be allowed to play with both toys at the same time
(to encourage comparison; Oakes, Kovack-Lesh, & Horst,
2009). Infants heard the label approximately twice every
fifteen seconds. After the play session caregivers were given

Stimuli
Play sessions. 3D stimuli are depicted in Figure 1, and
consisted of two age-appropriate wooden toy objects
(castanets and two wooden balls joined with string), chosen
because they are novel to 10-month-old infants (Fenson et
al., 1994). Objects were approximately equal in size and
were painted either red or blue using non-toxic paint. The
label was tanzer, a pseudoword selected because it is
plausible in English and was used in a previous
developmental study (Horst & Twomey, 2012).
Looking time task. Familiarization stimuli consisted of
digital photographs of the individual training objects
presented centrally on a white background. Test stimuli
consisted of photographs of the training objects presented
side-by-side on a white background. The auditory stimulus
for the test phase consisted of the phrase Look! A tanzer!
spoken by a female speaker from the local area and recorded
and edited for timing and clarity in Audacity 2.0.6. The
phrase onset was at 4000ms, label onset at 5127ms, and
label offset at 6000ms. Calibration and attention getter
stimuli were a short video of a bouncing cartoon bird,
accompanied by a jingling sound.

681

the toys, written instructions and a sticker chart on which to
record their play sessions.

was counterbalanced between children. The test trial was 12
s long, with auditory stimulus beginning at 4000 ms, label
onset at 5172 ms and offset at 6000 ms. The test trial
continued for 6 s post label offset to allow sufficient time to
exhibit a response (Bergelson & Swingley, 2012).

Visit 2: Looking time task. The looking time task took
place in a quiet, dimly-lit testing room. Children were seated
on their caregiver’s lap 50-70 cm in front of a 21.5” 1920 x
1080 computer screen at a 60 cm viewing distance. A Tobii
X120 eyetracker located beneath the screen recorded the
child’s gaze, and a video camera above the screen recorded
the caregiver and child throughout the procedure.
Caregivers were instructed not interact with their child or
look at the screen during the task to avoid biasing their
child’s behavior.
The eyetracker was first calibrated using a five-point
infant calibration procedure. We displayed an attentiongrabbing animation in the four corners and center of a 3 x 3
grid on a grey background accompanied by a jingling noise,
and recorded infants’ orientation to it with a key press.
Calibration accuracy was checked and repeated if necessary
(n = 1).
The attention-grabbing stimulus then appeared in the
center of the screen. Immediately after the infant oriented
towards the attention-grabbing stimulus, the experimenter
began the familiarization phase using a keypress.
Familiarization stimuli were presented individually in
silence for 10 s. Infants saw eight identical images of the
previously-labeled stimulus and eight identical images of
the no-label trials, interleaved. Whether the label or no-label
image was shown first was counterbalanced between
children. Each trial was immediately followed by the
attention-grabbing stimulus. Subsequent trials were
advanced manually by the experimenter once the infant had
reoriented to the screen, or began automatically after 5s.
Immediately following the familiarization trials a single
test trial was presented in an identical manner. Left-right
positioning of the objects (castanet/ball and label/no-label)

Coding and data cleaning
Timestamps for which the eyetracker failed to reliably
detect either eye were excluded. Familiarization stimulus
AOIs were centered on the single image and measured
approximately 950 by 700 pixels. Test AOIs were centered
on the two images and measured 766 by 435 pixels.
Individual gaze samples were numerically coded (1 = AOI
look, 0 = background look) to create a raw looking time
measure.

Results
Familiarization phase
Individual looking time samples (numerically coded; 1 =
AOI look, 0 = background look) were submitted to a
binomial mixed effects model using the R package lme4
(version 1.1-10; Bates, Mächler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015).
The model included fixed effects of trial (1 – 16) and label
(centered; 0.5 = label, -0.5 = no-label), a trial-by-label
interaction term, and random intercepts for participant and
stimulus (this was the maximal model that converged; Barr,
Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013).
As is typical in looking time studies, target looking
decreased across familiarization (main effect of trial: beta =
-0.032, SE = 0.0036, z = -8.83, p < .0001), and did so fastest
across training for no-label stimuli (trial x label interaction:
beta = 0.014, SE = 0.0072, t = 1.99, p < .05). Specifically,
mean looking per trial decreased from 5422ms on the first
label trial to 2887ms on the last label trial, but 5696ms on

Figure 3: Proportion looking to the labeled target per 50 ms time bin during the test trial. Looking significantly different
from chance (0.50) is indicated by a red line; systematic looking is indicated by asterisks; * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

682

the first no-label trial to 2733ms on the last no-label trial.
Whether the stimulus has been previously trained with a
label had no independent effect on overall looking times
(main effect of label: beta = -0.033, SE = 0.069, t = -0.47, p
= .63; cf. Capelier-Mourguy, Twomey & Westermann,
under review).

Samuelson, & Burdinie, 2014). However, when infants were
trained with novel stimuli (e.g., Bornstein & Mash, 2010)
similar effects of prior experience were found. Our results
offer converging evidence that prior experience affects intask behavior, showing that even a relatively small amount
of additional linguistic experience – in this case, as little as
21 minutes over seven days – can affect infants’ responses
in-task.
However, infants in our study faced an added challenge.
Not only did we ask them to encode two new objects, but
we also asked them to attach a new label to one of them.
Infants of this age are at the very beginnings of language
acquisition (Fenson et al., 1994) and exhibit more fragile
word learning than older children; for example, in a recent
preferential looking study this age group increased looking
towards the referents of frequently-heard words around 2.5
– 5.0 s after hearing labels (Mather & Plunkett, 2010). We
replicate this finding: infants looked to the target 3 s after
label offset. However, both objects were novel before
training: our results demonstrate that 10-month-olds will
treat a novel word as familiar after only a week of
experience. Importantly, infants were not reminded of the
novel word during their second visit, and did not receive a
training session on that day. Thus, we can be confident that
they responded to the label based on retrieval of the
association from long-term memory; to our knowledge, this
is the first study to demonstrate long-term novel word
learning in infants of this age.

Test phase
To establish whether infants responded to the auditory label
we calculated the proportion of target looking out of all AOI
on the test trial. Proportion target looking for each 50 ms
time bin is depicted in Figure 3. Systematic fixation of
target/distractor was defined where looking differed
significantly from chance (0.50) for at least 150 ms
(Holmqvist et al., 2011).
We defined the prelabeling phase from 0 – 6367ms,
which includes 367 ms from label offset for preparation of
the saccade (Swingley, 2009), and the postlabeling phase as
6368 ms to 12,000 ms. Infants showed no overall systematic
preferences during either the prelabeling (t(23) = -0.64, p =
.53; one-sample, chance = 0.5; all tests two-tailed) or
postlabeling (t(21) = -0.13, p = .90; note two participants
did not provide data in the postlabeling phase), and no
difference between these phases (t(21) = -0.65, p = 0.52).
However, as can be seen in Figure 3, fine-grained inspection
of the unfolding of looking over time reveals that infants
showed a late response to the label, increasing their target
looking to above-chance levels 2.5 s after the label offset, in
line with recent work examining 10-month-old infants’ label
disambiguation (Mather & Plunkett, 2010).

Mechanism
These results have several possible interpretations.
Perhaps the most straightforward explanation is that the
prior experience during training may have increased infants’
attention to the labeled object at test. That is, despite our
request to the contrary, infants may have spent more time
engaging with one of the two objects during training. Infants
of this age have a well-documented novelty preference
(Fantz, 1964); that is, they will engage preferentially with
items that are new (and therefore interesting), relative to
items that are familiar (and therefore less interesting). The
object infants had played with the most would be more
familiar, and would therefore elicit less attention (lower
looking times) during familiarization. Although we cannot
rule out this possibility, we consider this unlikely. On this
account, the fact that caregivers were teaching their child a
label could unconsciously – or indeed consciously – bias
them towards the labeled object, particularly as object
names dominate maternal speech (Fernald & Morikawa,
1993). If anything, then, we would expect infants have more
experience of the labeled than the no-label object. If so, the
no-label object would have been most novel and should
have elicited the longer looking times. In fact, we found the
opposite.
Rather than resulting from the amount of experience
infants received with each object, the patterns in looking
time may stem from differences in infants’ representation of
the labeled versus the no-label objects. In fact, looking time

Discussion
In the current study, 10-month-old infants were trained over
a week with two 3D objects and taught a novel label for just
one of them. Infants were subsequently familiarized in
silence with these objects in a looking-time study, and
finally presented with a preferential looking trial in which
they saw both objects accompanied by the label. Overall,
infants maintained interest for longer in label than no-label
stimuli. Critically, given that all 3D object training and
familiarization for each object was identical except for the
presence of the label during the play sessions, this study
demonstrates that a learned label can affect infants’ object
representations. For the first time, then, this study traces the
start of the relationship between language and representation
to infants less than a year old.
Several studies have shown that infants’ experience
outside the lab affects their in-task performance. For
example, Hurley & Oakes (2015) showed that 4-month-old
infants with experience of pet cats and/or dogs at home paid
more attention to the diagnostic features of cat and dog
stimuli (i.e., the head) than their peers without pets at home.
However, there was no difference in visual inspection
strategies when stimuli were faces or vehicles. In these
“pet” studies, stimuli were drawn from infants’ everyday
environment. Participants therefore came to the lab with
substantial and prolonged experience (see also Perry,

683

differences were driven by a drop in looking to the no-label
stimulus just over halfway through familiarization. This
finding suggests that relative to the label stimulus, the nolabel stimulus was more familiar to infants, begging the
question of why the label stimulus should be most novel,
and speaks to the recent debate concerning status of labels
in object representations.
On the invitations-to-form-a-category (henceforth
invitations) account, infants have an innate bias towards
linking word representations with category representations.
Importantly, the two are represented qualitatively
differently. While object representations are learned from
perceptual experience, labels play a top-down, supervisory
role, serving as high-level, conceptual markers of category
membership (Waxman & Markow, 1995). When a label
becomes associated with an object it acts as an “invitation to
form a category” indicating that it should also be applied to
new items providing they are sufficiently similar; however
labels are not integrated into object representations. In sharp
contrast, the labels-as-features account assumes that labels
are simply features of perceptual object representations
(Gliozzi, Mayor, Hu & Plunkett, 2009; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004). Labels are integrated into object representations in
the same way as color or shape; thus, the word strawberry
and the color red will have the same qualitative status in a
speaker’s representation of the fruit. More recently,
Westermann & Mareschal (2014) argued that labels are
represented separately from objects, but critically, in the
same representational space. On this compoundrepresentations account, labels are neither simple features
of object representations nor a different type of structure
altogether. Instead, labels are perceptual representations
which become associated with object representations over
time.
In the context of the current study, the invitations account
predicts that there should be no difference in looking to the
labeled and no-label stimuli, because labels do not affect
individual object representations1. This is not what we
found. On the labels-as-features account, if an object
appears consistently with a label, the label is incorporated
into the object representation. When the object appears
without the label, then, what infants experience is different
from the learned representation. Thus, infants’ greater
looking to the labeled stimulus is in line with the labels-asfeatures account. However, the compound representation
account also makes this prediction: when a compound labelobject representation is formed, a missing label will increase
the novelty of the object relative to its representation. Note
that we are not claiming that the learned label renders the
representation more robust, but rather that the label becomes
incorporated into (invitations account) or associated with
(compound representations) the representation over
learning. Given the present data, then, we must remain
agnostic as to whether labels are encoded as part of or
separately
from
object
representations.
However

computational work is underway to tease apart the labels-asfeatures and compound-representations accounts (e.g.,
Capelier-Mourguy et al., 2016).
Overall, the current study provides converging evidence
that long-term learning experience has a marked effect on
in-lab behavior – a critical point for our interpretation of the
wealth of existing infant studies. We also demonstrate word
learning from limited exposure in infants at the earliest
beginnings of the language acquisition journey. Most
importantly, however, we show for the first time that
language has long-term effects on nonlinguistic
representation before the end of the first year, demonstrating
that language affects the way we see the world right from its
very beginnings.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the ESRC International Centre
for Language and Communicative Development (LuCiD).
The support of the Economic and Social Research Council
[ES/L008955/1] is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Althaus, N., & Plunkett, K. (2015). Categorization in
infancy: labeling induces a persisting focus on
commonalities. Developmental Science.
Althaus & Westermann (2016). Labels constructively shape
categories in 10-month-old infants. Journal of
Experimental
Child
Psychology,
doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2015.11.013
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255–278.
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015).
Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1 – 48.
Bergelson, E., & Swingley, D. (2012). At 6–9 months,
human infants know the meanings of many common
nouns. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 109(9), 3253–3258.
Bornstein, M. H., & Mash, C. (2010). Experience-based and
on-line categorization of objects in early infancy. Child
Development, 81(3), 884–897.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?:
Mandarin and English speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1–22.
Capelier-Mourguy, Twomey & Westermann (2016). A
neurocomputational model of the effect of learned labels
on infants’ object representations. 38th Annual Cognitive
Science Society Meeting, Philadelphia, Pennysylvania,
USA.
Fantz, R. L. (1964). Visual experience in infants: Decreased
attention familar patterns relative to novel ones. Science,
146(668-670).
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J.,
& Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early

1

Although this account does predict that learned labels shape
category representations; we are currently testing this prediction.

684

communicative development. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 59(5), R5–+.
Fernald, A., & Morikawa, H. (1993). Common themes and
cultural variations in Japanese and American mothers’
speech to infants. Child Development, 64(3), 637–656.
Gliozzi, V., Mayor, J., Hu, J. F., & Plunkett, K. (2009).
Labels as features (not names) for infant categorization: A
neurocomputational approach. Cognitive Science, 33(4),
709–738.
Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2008). Fast mapping but
poor retention by 24-month-old infants. Infancy, 13(2),
128–157.
Horst, J. S., & Twomey, K. E. (2012). It’s taking shape:
shared features influence children’s novel noun
generalizations. Infant & Child Development.
Hurley, K. B., & Oakes, L. M. (2015). Experience and
distribution of attention: Pet exposure and infants’
scanning of animal images. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 16(1), 11–30.
Johanson, M., & Papafragou, A. (2016). The influence of
labels and facts on children’s and adults’ categorization.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 144, 130–
151.
Kovack-Lesh, K. A., McMurray, B., & Oakes, L. M. (2014).
Four-month-old infants’ visual investigation of cats and
dogs: Relations with pet experience and attentional
strategy. Developmental Psychology, 50(2), 402–413.
Lupyan, G. (2016). The paradox of the universal triangle:
concepts, language, and prototypes. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 0(ja), 1–69.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., &
Levinson, S. C. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(3), 108–114.
Mather, E., & Plunkett, K. (2010). Novel labels support 10month-olds’ attention to novel objects. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105(3), 232–242.
Oakes, L. M., Kovack-Lesh, K. A., & Horst, J. S. (2009).
Two are better than one: Comparison influences infants’
visual recognition memory. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 104(1), 124–131.
Perry, L. K., Samuelson, L. K., & Burdinie, J. B. (2014).
Highchair philosophers: the impact of seating contextdependent exploration on children’s naming biases.
Developmental Science, 17(5), 757–765.
Plunkett, K., Hu, J. F., & Cohen, L. B. (2008). Labels can
override perceptual categories in early infancy.
Cognition, 106(2), 665–681.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I. R. L., & Shapiro, L.
R. (2005). Color categories: Evidence for the cultural
relativity hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 50(4), 378–
411.
Robinson, C. W., Best, C. A., Deng, W., & Sloutsky, V. M.
(2012). The role of words in cognitive tasks: What,
when, and how? Frontiers in Psychology, 3.

Slobin, D. I. (1996). From “thought and language” to
“thinking for speaking.” Rethinking Linguistic Relativity,
17, 70–96.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology-General,
133(2), 166–188.
Son, J. Y., Doumas, L. A., & Goldstone, R. L. (2010).
When do words promote analogical transfer? The
Journal of Problem Solving, 3(1), 4.
Swingley, D. (2009). Onsets and codas in 1.5-year-olds’
word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language,
60(2), 252.
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12-to 13month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29(3), 257–
302.
Westermann, G., & Mareschal, D. (2014). From perceptual
to language-mediated categorization. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 369(1634), 20120391.
Whorf, B. L. (1940). Science and linguistics. Bobbs-Merrill.
Yurovsky, D., Fricker, D. C., Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2014).
The role of partial knowledge in statistical word
learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(1), 1–22.

685

