A Nonlinear Dynamical Systems Theory Perspective on Dual-Processing
Accounts of Decision-Making under Uncertainty
Marieke M. J. W. van Rooij (m.vanrooij@bsi.ru.nl)
Behavioral Science Institute,
Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Luis H. Favela (luis.favela@ucf.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Cognitive Sciences Program
University of Central Florida, USA

Abstract

working of the human mind in terms of two
qualitatively distinct cognitive systems, and are
referred to as type 1/type 2 (Goodwin & Wason,
1972), System 1/System 2 (Stanovich, 1999), or
intuitive/deliberative
(Kahneman,
2003).
Moreover, these two kinds of cognitive systems
tend to be differentiated along the following
dichotomies: unconscious/conscious, fast/slow,
automatic/controlled,
emotional/rational,
intuitive/rule-based, etc. There have been, and
continues to be, broad applications of these
dualistic frameworks. These include, but are not
limited to, social judgment (Doherty & Kurtz,
1996), stereotyping (Bodenhausen, Macrae, &
Sherman, 1999; Wilson, Lindsey, & Schooler,
2000), learning and problem-solving (Sun,
Slusarz, & Terry, 2005), creative thinking (Allen
& Thomas, 2011), and perhaps most famously,
decision-making and judgment under uncertainty,
which we will discuss below as a special case.
The aforementioned phenomena have been
investigated and explained in terms of two
distinct cognitive systems or processes. However,
although they are all “dual-process” theories,
many of the models utilize slightly different
characterizations of what is being “dualprocessed.” For the purposes of the current work,
we will utilize “dual-processing” as referring to
System 1, which is fast-working, implicit, and
affect-related, and System 2, which is slowworking, explicit, and, analytic.

Dual-processing accounts of reasoning have
gained renewed attention in the past decade,
particularly in the fields of social judgment,
learning, and decision-making under uncertainty.
Although the various accounts differ, the
common thread is the distinction between two
qualitatively different types of reasoning:
explicit/implicit, rational/affective, fast/slow, etc.
Consequently, much research has focused on
characterizing the two different processes. Less
extensive are the attempts to find mediators that
influence which process is used. In this paper, we
argue that the missing perspective on these dualprocessing theories is rooted in dynamical
systems theory. By shifting the perspective to the
dynamic interaction and transitions between
different types of reasoning, we provide a
theoretical framework for dual-processing with
an emphasis on phase transitions. As a special
case, we focus on dual-processing in decisionmaking and judgment under uncertainty for
which we will propose suggestions for future
experimental evaluation.
Keywords: decision-making under uncertainty;
dual-processing; nonlinear dynamical systems
theory; phase transitions

Dual-Process Theories of Reasoning
Dual-processing accounts of reasoning go back
to one of the oldest ideas in psychology, namely,
that the human mind is not driven by a single,
unified process but by two. Exemplars of such
ideas include Plato, Hermann von Helmholtz,
William James, and Sigmund Freud (Frankish &
Evans, 2009).
The history of psychological frameworks for
conceptualizing capacities of the mind—
especially in terms of decision-making and
reasoning—culminated in the 1970s with dualprocess theories. Dual-process theories have
taken on various forms (e.g., see Evans, 2008 for
a review). Nevertheless, there are some common
features. First, these theories tend to explain the

Criticism
Dual-processing theories of reasoning are not
without opposition (for a recent discussion, see
Evans & Stanovich, 2013). Here we highlight
three points of criticism we think are most
prominent and crosscutting. We refer to these as
conceptual vagueness, evidence, and transition.
Perhaps the most fundamental challenge
facing dual-process theories is a lack of
conceptual clarity. As noted above, although for

1673

current purposes we refer to dual-processing
phenomena in terms of System 1 and System 2,
there are a number of other labels that are readily
used, e.g., Type 1 and Type 2, or intuitive vs.
deliberate processing. In addition, although the
features that fall under each category can be
delineated (e.g., Evans & Stanovich, 2013;
Frankish & Evans, 2009), it is unclear whether
the literature is consistent in the use of such
categorizations and if the features are agreed
upon. For example, the term unconscious is
readily used as a feature describing System 1,
and conscious as a feature describing System 2.
Though, what does conscious and unconscious
even mean? Theoretical terms that refer to the
domain of the “mental” are particularly burdened
with the need to be conceptually clear precisely
because they are inaccessible directly to third
person, objective scientific practice. The lack of
such clearly defined and operationalized terms is
a particular weakness of dual-process theories
that rely on one process being slow and
conscious, whereas the other is fast and
unconscious.
Another critique of dual-process theories
stems from a lack of sufficient empirical
evidence. This point is interweaved with the
previous critique stemming from conceptual
vagueness. It is difficult to have evidence for
something if it is unclear what that something is.
If we do not know what it is to be conscious or
unconscious, it is tough to say that data is
evidence of it. Along these lines, without clear
conceptual distinctions between System 1 and
System 2 features, the question will remain
whether there is sufficient empirical evidence to
support the strong dichotomy (e.g., Kruglanski &
Gigerenzer, 2011; Osman, 2004).
The final critique is the unwarranted strong
focus on static rather than dynamic properties of
reasoning. Scarcely any attention has been
directed to the transition from one form of
processing to another. The current understanding
of factors that influence dual-processing strictly
focus on static and binary relationships such that
the factors necessary to cause one system to
activate do not cause the other system to activate.
For example, meta-cognitive difficulty has been
found to activate System 2 (Alter, Oppenheimer,
Epley, & Eyre, 2007), but it is unknown how or
exactly when the activation occurs.
Note that it is not our aim to merely reiterate
the existing criticisms to dual-processing models.
Our starting point is the phenomenon. For
example, the difference between calculating two
plus two and 17 times 24 is that for most of us,

the latter likely involves a combination of mental
gymnastics, finger counting, and putting pen to
paper whereas the answer to the first
immediately comes to mind (cf. Winerman,
2012). Consequently, instead of discussing
questions about the validity of dual-processing as
a model for cognitive performance, we propose
an entirely different take. We propose treating
the transition between different types of
cognitive processes in terms of nonlinear
dynamic change, which, as we will show, makes
the discussion about the strict dichotomy of dualprocesses theories obsolete.

Our Proposal: A Nonlinear Dynamical
Systems Theoretical Approach to
Dual-Processing
Although there are several theoretical and
methodological challenges facing dual-process
theories of reasoning, there have been strides
made towards more nuanced and sophisticated
accounts. Evans and Stanovich (2013) put
forward a theoretical approach to dualprocessing in terms of default responses that can
be intervened upon by higher-order reasoning
processes. This account provides a potential
response to the transition critique discussed
above and avoids the pitfalls associated with
models that place features of cognitive
processing necessarily within a framework of
binary categories. Instead, there are types of
processing that share System 1 or System 2
characteristics. Cognitive processing can occur
in both kinds of properties—for example,
conscious and unconscious—such that it is not
the binary nature of properties that distinguish
the kinds of thinking so much as the processes
underlying the thinking that differentiates them.
Additionally, Wastell (2014) has attempted to
address the issue of conceptual vagueness by
appealing to the concepts of complexity theory,
particularly the notion of emergence. Wastell’s is
a theory of human reasoning that tries to bring
together emergence and modularity theory. He
asserts that reasoning, “is a product of our
interaction with the environment and our innate
ability to create, store, and utilize virtual
reasoning modules” that “emerge” from moduleenvironment information fit (2014, p. 354-355).
As Evans and Stanovich prudently note, there
is a lot of work still to be done, as the
development of dual-process theories—not to
mention human reasoning in general—is an
evolving project that is likely to continue to
develop (2013). In the spirit of contributing to

1674

this evolving project, we present a nonlinear
dynamical systems theory perspective on
qualitative transitions in human reasoning, with
emphasis on the case of decision-making under
uncertainty.

Sudden change, multistability, and hysteresis
are three of the eight known catastrophe flags
(Gilmore, 1981). All eight catastrophe flags are
behavioral properties of nonlinear dynamical
systems at the level of their dynamics, although
some (e.g., hysteresis and multistability) can also
be observed at the level of the system behavior
itself. Observing catastrophe flags around
qualitative change is a strong indicator that the
system of interest is a nonlinear dynamical
system, and that the observed change is
indicative of a phase transition. Catastrophe flags
have been observed in relation to a broad range
of human behavioral changes. The most
extensive and successful applications of
nonlinear dynamical systems theory to human
behavior are to human development (e.g., Thelen
& Smith, 1998; van Geert, 1994), movement,
action, and perception (e.g., Fajen & Warren,
2003; Haken, Kelso, & Bunz, 1985; Richardson,
Marsh, Isenhower, Goodman, & Schmidt, 2007;
Warren, 1984).
Applications to human higher-order cognition
are less numerous for at least two reasons: First,
the dominant computational-representational
paradigm in cognitive science resulted in a
strong focus on stable states rather than change
(cf. Stephen & Van Orden, 2012). Second, in
addition to issues related to localizing cognitive
functions in the brain (cf. Anderson, 2014),
defining precise boundaries around cognitive
systems (e.g., Chemero, 2009; Favela &
Chemero, 2016) and properly accounting for
relevant degrees of freedom in cognitive systems
can be very challenging (cf. Kelso, 1995). There
have a number of successes though. One
particular empirically compelling demonstration
of a higher-order cognitive phase transition is by
Van Orden and colleagues (1999), who identified
homophones as a bifurcation phenomenon.
In the following section, we present a case
study demonstrating the application of nonlinear
dynamical systems theory with an emphasis on
phase transitions to inform a novel approach to
dual-processing in decision-making. It is
important to note that the concept of a “phase
transition” is not merely a metaphor for physical
change; it refers to real change in a system. A
phase transition is nature’s mechanism of
qualitative change. It provides a way to explain
the existence of qualitatively different behaviors
within a continuum.

Nonlinear Dynamical Systems Theory
A system can be thought of as a set of parts that
have relationships to one another, especially
when the integrated elements accomplish a
shared or defined task (Norman & Kuras, 2006).
Almost all systems are dynamic, i.e., their
behavior changes over time. Dynamical systems
theory refers to the mathematical understanding
of change and stability in dynamic systems.
Dynamical systems theory provides the tools to
describe, model, and evaluate interactions and
transitions between qualitatively different
behaviors without demanding the definition of
qualitatively different systems. Dynamic systems
behaviour can be nonlinear, i.e., the output is
disproportionally related to the input due to
multiplicative
interactions
between
its
components (Carello & Moreno, 2005; van Rooij,
Nash, Rajaraman, & Holden, 2013). This can
result in sudden unexpected qualitative
transitions from one stable behavior to the next.
These kinds of transitions are particularly
relevant for a different understanding of dualprocessing phenomena in reasoning.
To illustrate how nonlinear dynamical systems
theory can shed new light on dual-processing
phenomena in reasoning, let us take a look at the
transition of ice to liquid water. At certain
critical values of pressure and temperature (e.g.,
0° Celsius at sea-level), the tiniest change in
either can cause the ice to rapidly become liquid
whereas at other values a much larger change
may not result. This change between two
qualitatively different states of water is called a
phase transition. Phase transitions can be
anticipated or accompanied by universal
dynamical patterns, so-called catastrophe flags
(Gilmore, 1993; Isnard & Zeeman, 1976; Thom,
1972). For example, although common
understanding is that the transition of liquid back
into ice occurs at 0° Celsius, in reality water does
not freeze until it is -4° Celsius. This means that
between 0° and -4° Celsius, water is multistable,
and the transition of ice into water—and vice
versa—does not necessarily occur at the same
temperature value. Moreover, a so-called
hysteresis effect is observed: After ice turns into
water due to increasing temperature, a
significantly larger decrease in temperature is
needed to re-establish the previous solid state.

1675

Case Study: Dual-Processing as Phase
Transition in Decision-Making and
Judgment under Uncertainty

thought of as the dependent variable of a system,
that is, the target of measurement in an
experiment. Control parameters are variables
that guide a system’s dynamics. Control
parameters can also be thought of as independent
variables of a system. Note however that
although it can be helpful to think of control
parameters as independent variables and order
parameters as dependent variables, it is important
to keep in mind that the relationship between
order and control parameters is not exactly the
same as that of dependent and independent
variables. The control variable does not cause
the system’s behavior. This is partially due to a
“slaving” relationship between order and control
parameters (Haken, 1988/2006). Although
control parameters are intertwined with the
dynamics exhibited by the order parameter, the
relationship is nonlinear.
Identifying the order and control parameters
allows for the development of models that
capture the full range of a system’s dynamics. In
the same way that the interaction between
pressure and temperature results in phase
transitions of water, we must therefore discover
variables that lead the cognitive system through
its possible states in decision-making. Following
Thelen and Smith (1998), such a task can be
summed up as follows: First, identify the order
parameter of interest. Second, characterize the
qualitatively different behaviours corresponding
to different values of the order parameter. Third,
describe the dynamic trajectory of the order
parameter. Fourth, identify points of transition.
Finally, identify potential control parameters and
manipulate putative control parameters to
experimentally generate transitions.
Recently, we utilized these steps to
demonstrate catastrophe flags in the behavioral
transition between risk-seeking and risk-averse
strategies in a simple risky choice task (van
Rooij, Favela, Malone & Richardson, 2013a,
2013b) and similarly in the preference between
immediate and delayed rewards (van Rooij &
Richardson, 2014). The success of these studies
bolsters the case for taking nonlinear dynamical
systems theoretic approach to dual-processing.
Another factor hypothesized to affect decision
making in terms of dual-processing is cognitive
load. Cognitive load refers to the demand that
cognitive activities place on working memory
(e.g., Miller, 1956). When System 1 is under
heavy cognitive load, its ability to correct
System 2 decreases, which can lead to more
unexpected decision behavior. For example,
increased cognitive load results in higher than

As noted above, that humans have multiple
decision-making capabilities is an idea that has
reoccurred over the history of psychological
theorizing. One commonality among such
theories (e.g., Plato, Helmholtz, Kahneman, etc.)
is that these multiple kinds are distinct, modular,
and cognitively encapsulated processes. Such a
treatment is faced with serious theoretical and
methodological challenges stemming from issues
related to conceptual vagueness and lack of
empirical evidence. One particular criticism,
which we think has not received enough
attention, stems from understanding the
transitions among these various capabilities. Our
main claim is that such transitions are best
understood as phase transitions.

Suggestions for Experimental Evaluation
Taking a nonlinear dynamical systems theoretic
view on dual-processing phenomena in decisionmaking under uncertainty means we need to
study the transitions in cognitive processing
along the continuum of reasoning from ultraquick memory retrieval to slow explicit
processing. This requires finding the transition
itself, which includes identifying order and
control parameters that characterize the
underlying system.
Finding the Transition. In a clever series of
experiments, Alter et al., (2007) devised ways in
which they could activate their version of
System 2. For example, they found that
participants presented with information that was
difficult to read were less prone to reasoning
biases typically associated with System 1 and
concluded that incidental experiences of
difficulty or “disfluency” activated System 2.
Unfortunately, in each of the experiments, only
two conditions were used. The obvious extension
to this type of work would be to present
participants with a gradual change in legibility of
the presented information in order to find the
actual transition, and see whether this is indeed
discontinuous (as dual-processing theories
suggest) or continuous.
Finding the Order and Control Parameters.
Order parameters capture macroscopic states of
a system (Haken, 1988/2006). These order
parameters determine the behavior of individual
parts of the system. Order parameters can also be

1676

expected levels of risk aversion (Benjamin,
Brown, & Shapiro, 2013). We hypothesize that
cognitive load may act as a so-called splitting
factor, i.e., an order parameter influencing the
moment of occurrence of the phase transition.

Anderson, M. L. (2014). After phrenology:
Neural reuse and the interactive brain.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Benjamin, D. J., Brown, S. A., & Shapiro, J. M.
(2013). Who is ‘behavioral’? Cognitive ability
and anomalous preferences. Journal of the
European Economic Association, 11(6), 12311255.
Bodenhausen, G. V., Macrae, C. N., & Sherman,
J. S. (1999). On the dialectics of
discrimination: Dual processes in social
stereotyping. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope (Eds.).
Dual Process Theories in Social Psychology
(pp. 271–90). New York: Guilford.
Carello, C. & Moreno, M. A. (2005). Why
nonlinear methods? In M. A, Riley & G. C.
Van Orden (Eds.), Tutorials in Contemporary
Nonlinear Methods for the Behavioral
Sciences (pp. 1-25). Retrieved March 10, 2012
from www.nsf.gov/sbe/bcs/pac/nmbs/nmbs.jsp
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical embodied cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Doherty, M. E., & Kurz, E. M. (1996). Social
judgement theory. Thinking & Reasoning, 2(23), 109-140.
Evans, J. S. B. (2008). Dual-processing accounts
of reasoning, judgment, and social cognition.
Annu. Rev. Psychol., 59, 255-278.
Evans, J. S. B., & Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Dualprocess theories of higher cognition advancing
the debate. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 8(3), 223-241.
Fajen, B. R., & Warren, W. H. (2003).
Behavioral dynamics of steering, obstacle
avoidance, and route selection. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 29, 343.
Favela, L. H., & Chemero, A. (2016). The
animal-environment system. In Y. Coelllo &
M. H. Fischer (Eds.), Foundations of
Embodied Cognition: Volume 1 (pp. 59-74).
New York, NY: Routledge.
Frankish, K., & Evans, J. S. B. T. (2009). The
duality of mind: an historical perspective. In In
Two Minds: Dual Processes and Beyond (pp.
1-29). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gilmore, R. (1993). Catastrophe theory for
scientists and engineers. Courier Corporation.
Goodwin, R. Q., & Wason, P. C. (1972).
Degrees of insight. British Journal of
Psychology, 63, 205-212.
Haken, H. (1988/2006). Information and selforganization: A macroscopic approach to
complex systems, third edition. New York,
NY: Springer.

Discussion & Future Directions
Attempts to characterize the workings of the
human mind in terms of two cognitive systems
or processing, as well as debates about the
conceptual strength of these characterizations,
distract from a more fundamental issue: Starting
with the phenomenological distinction between
slow/deliberate and fast/intuitive reasoning, it is
the interactions between these processes as well
as the dynamic control that should be the focus
of scientific inquiries into the subject.
Accordingly, this requires an approach rooted in
nonlinear dynamical systems theory.
Nonlinear dynamical systems are also referred
to as complex systems, and are formed from
(many) parts such that the behavior of the system
is irreducible or deducible from the properties of
the parts (Norman & Kuras, 2006). In other
words, the behavior of complex systems is
dominated by the dynamic interactions between
parts rather than the properties of the parts
themselves (Van Orden, Holden, & Turvey,
2003, 2005).
Most natural systems are complex in the ways
just described. A clear example is the human
brain. Not only is brain activity constantly
interacting and controlled by behavioral and
environmental factors (e.g., Van Orden, Hollis,
& Wallot, 2012), but emerging, global-level
properties such as consciousness are not easily
captured in one-to-one relations between single
neurons or even single areas of the (Anderson,
2014). A growing body of literature indeed
places human cognition firmly within a
framework of nonlinear dynamical systems or
complex systems theory. We believe dualprocessing theories could also be understood
within this framework and outlined possibilities
for experimental evaluation.

References
Allen, A. P., & Thomas, K. E. (2011). A dual
process account of creative thinking.
Creativity Research Journal, 23(2), 109-118.
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., &
Eyre, R. N. (2007). Overcoming intuition:
Metacognitive difficulty activates analytic
reasoning.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: General 136(4), 569.

1677

Haken, H., Kelso, J. S., & Bunz, H. (1985). A
theoretical model of phase transitions in
human
hand
movements.
Biological
cybernetics, 51, 347-356.
Isnard, C. A., & Zeeman, E. (1976). Some
models from catastrophe theory in the social
sciences. The Use of Models in the Social
Sciences. Tavistock, London, UK.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on
judgment and choice: Mapping bounded
rationality. American Psychologist, 58, 697720.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The
self-organization of brain and behavior.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Gigerenzer, G. (2011).
Intuitive and deliberate judgments are based
on common principles. Psychological Review,
118, 97-109.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven,
plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity
for processing information. Psychological
review, 63(2), 81.
Norman, D. O., & Kuras, M. L. (2006).
Engineering complex systems. In D. Braha, A.
A., Minai, & Y. Bar-Yam (Eds.), Complex
Engineered
Systems:
Science
Meets
Technology (pp. 206-245). Berlin: Springer.
Osman, M. (2004). An evaluation of dualprocess theories of reasoning. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review 11(6), 988-1010.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R.
W., Goodman, J. R., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007).
Rocking together: Dynamics of intentional and
unintentional
interpersonal
coordination.
Human movement science, 26, 867-891.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational?
Studies of individual differences in reasoning.
Mahwah, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stephen, D. G., & Van Orden, G. (2012).
Searching for general principles in cognitive
performance: Reply to commentators. Topics
in Cognitive Science, 4, 94-102.
Sun, R., Slusarz, P., & Terry, C. (2005). The
interaction of the explicit and the implicit in
skill learning: a dual-process approach.
Psychological review, 112, 159-192.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1998). Dynamic
systems theories. In W. Damon (Ed.),
Handbook of Child Psychology: Theoretical
models of human development (Vol. 1, 5th ed.,
pp. 563–634). New York, NY: Wiley.

van Geert, P. (1994). Dynamic systems of
development: Change between complexity and
chaos. Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., Podgornik, M.
N., & Aitchison, C. S. (1999). What
swimming says about reading: Coordination,
context, and homophone errors. Ecological
Psychology, 11, 45-79.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T.
(2003).
Self-organization
of
cognitive
performance.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 132(3), 331-350.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T.
(2005). Human cognition and 1/f scaling.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
134(1), 117-123.
Van Orden, G., Hollis, G., & Wallot, S. (2012).
The blue-collar brain. Frontiers in Physiology,
3, 1-12.
van Rooij, M. M. J. W., Favela, L. H., Malone,
M. L., & Richardson, M. J. (2013a). A
Dynamical Model of Risky Choice. In M.
Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I.
Waschsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1510-1515). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
van Rooij, M. M., Favela, L. H., Malone, M., &
Richardson, M. J. (2013b). Modeling the
dynamics of risky choice. Ecological
Psychology, 25(3), 293-303.
van Rooij, M. J. W., Nash, B., Rajaraman, S., &
Holden, J. G. (2013). A fractal approach to
distribution analysis and dynamic inference.
Frontiers
in
Physiology,
4.
doi:
10.3389/fphys.2013.00001
van Rooij, M. M. J. W, & Richardson, M. J.
(2014). Delay Discounting Explained with a
Two-attractor
Nonlinear
Model.
6th
International Nonlinear Science Conference
2014, 20-22 March 2014, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
Warren, W. H. (1984). Perceiving affordances:
visual guidance of stair climbing. Journal of
experimental psychology: Human perception
and performance, 10(5), 683.
Wastell, C. A. (2014). An emergence solution to
the reasoning dual processes interaction
problem. Theory & Psychology, 24, 339-358.
Wilson, T. D., Lindsey, S., & Schooler, T. Y.
(2000). A model of dual attitudes.
Psychological review, 107, 101-126.
Winerman, L. (2012). A machine for jumping to
conclusions. Monitor on Psychology, 43(2), 24.

1678

