A perspective on all cognition? A study of everyday environments from the
perspective of distributed cognition.
Nils Dahlbäck (nils.dahlback@liu.se)
Mattias Kristiansson (mattias.kristiansson@liu.se)
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University
SE-58183 Linköping, Sweden

Hutchins & Klausen, 1996; Dekker, Nyce, & Myers, 2013,
navigation teams on the bridges of large vessels (Hutchins,
1995b, Lützhöft, 2004, Lützhöft & Dekker, 2002) operating
theatres (Hazlehurst, Gorman, & McMullen 2008;
Hazlehurst, McMullen, & Gorman 2007). This is by some
scholars taken as a defining feature of the field, as when
Rogers and Ellis (1994), to take one example, writes that
distributed cognition is an approach which takes as the
fundamental unit of analysis “a collection of individuals and
artefacts and their relations to each other in a particular
work practice”. And this characterization seems also to fit
studies of very different settings and in very different
historical periods, such as Tribble’s work on actors’
memory for their role and lines in early modern theatre
companies, such as Shakespeare’s plays when they were
first performed (Tribble, 2005; Tribble & Sutton, 2011)
There are a number of features that these environments
have in common. First, they consist of teams of many
persons with specialized tasks and who have specialized
training in performing these tasks. Second, they take place
in or rather also consist of a specialized technical
environment, which is specially designed to support the
tasks being performed by the operators as individuals and
the system as a whole.
In contrast to the views on distributed cognition as a kind
of cognition particular to specific environments mentioned
above, Hutchins claims that distributed cognition is not a
kind of cognition but a perspective on all cognition (2013),
despite the fact that almost all empirical work within the
framework of distributed cognition has been on professional
teams working to solve tasks which require the coordination
of many agents and their tools to succeed.
One feature that characterizes this approach to distributed
cognition is that it keeps the ‘cognitivist’ view of cognition
as computation. “I do believe that the computation observed
in the activity of the larger system can be described in the
way cognition has been traditionally described – that is, as
computation realized through the creation, transformation,
and propagation of representational states (Hutchins, 1995b,
p.49). This definition is further specified: ”…the actual
implementation of many interesting computations is
achieved by other than symbolic means. For our purposes,
‘computation’ will be taken, in a broad sense, to refer to the
propagation of representational state across representational
media. This definition encompasses what we think of as
prototypical computations (such as arithmetic operations),
as well as a range of other phenomena which I contend are

Abstract
Distributed cognition is a perspective that primarily has been
applied to complex socio-technical systems such as flight
decks of commercial airliners, or operating rooms where
professionals perform cognitive tasks in environments
specifically designed for this. For some scholars distributed
cognition is exactly this kind of specialized cognitive system.
On the other hand it has been claimed by some workers in the
field that distributed cognition is not a kind of cognition but a
perspective on all cognition. We have therefore studied an
environment very different from the systems previously
studied, namely single people’s homes. We find that there are
many similarities between the home and the specialized
socio-technical environments. To us this suggests that the
specially designed complex environments can be seen as
specialized cases of the general principles of distributed
cognition which are not reflections of “particular work
practices” but of general features of human cognition.
Keywords: everyday
memory practices.

cognition;

distributed

cognition;

Introduction
Situated and distributed cognition is not one but many
closely related views on or approaches to cognition, which
all have in common that cognition is not viewed solely a
process residing in the head of the agent, but instead
cognitive processes exist in, or at least are influenced by, the
agents physical and social environment (Hollan, Hutchins,
Kirsh, 2000). There seems however not to be any consensus
between workers in the field on how these closely related
but different approaches relate to each other. For Robbins
and Aydede (2009, p 3) “situated cognition is the genus, and
embodied, enactive, embedded, and distributed cognition
and their ilk are species”, though they note that this usage is
not standard, and it is not difficult to find competing views.
For instance, Zhang & Norman (1994) claim that distributed
cognition has three key components: (1) Embodiment of
information that is embedded in representations of
interaction, (2) Coordination of enaction among embodied
agents, and (3) Ecological contributions to a cognitive
ecosystem, which suggests that in their view at least
embodied cognition is a sub-aspect of distributed cognition.
And Sutton (e.g. 2006) takes a still wider perspective on
distributed cognition, which includes embodied and situated
aspects among also others.
When it comes to empirical research, almost all the
studies on distributed cognition that we are familiar with are
detailed studies of complex socio-technical systems, such as
flight decks of commercial airliners (Hutchins, 1995a,

734

fundamentally computational but which are not covered by
a narrow view of computation” (Hutchins, 1995, p.118)
Computation is here thus seen as something wider than
formal computation in a strict sense. Our interpretation is
that this concerns representations that have some kind of
combinatorial syntax, and that the transformations of the
representations are made partly based on the agents’
understanding of also the semantics of the representations.
Another feature is that cognitive systems can exist on
many levels which makes it similar to Cognitive Systems
Engineering (Woods and Hollnagel 1983, 2005). Systems
consisting of one or more agents (persons) and their
physical environment including specially designed cognitive
tools can have cognitive properties in their own right which
are not the same as the cognitive properties of e.g. the
agents in the system. One clear example of this is in
Hutchins (1995a) analysis of the flight deck of a
commercial airliner, where he states that “To call speed
bugs a "memory aide" for the pilots is to mistake the
cognitive properties of the reorganized functional system for
the cognitive properties of one of its human components.
Speed bugs do not help pilots remember speeds, rather they
are part of the process by which the cockpit system
remembers speeds” (Hutchins, 1995a, p.283).
Another feature of this version of distributed cognition is
its emphasis on the close connection between cognition and
culture. “I am proposing an integrated view of human
cognition in which a major component of culture is a
cognitive process (…) and cognition is a cultural process”
(Hutchins, 1995b, p 354). A corollary of this is that the
historical and cultural development of cognitive systems
and functions is important for understanding its current
workings, which for instance forms an important part of the
analysis of the cockpit as a cognitive system.
But, as mentioned above, most if not all empirical work
on distributed cognition has been in complex sociotechnical environments, and it is clear that this perspective
has helped us understand hitherto unobserved aspects of
these environments. The question that we have sought an
answer to is then: what can be seen from this perspective
when studying agents and environments very different from
those previously studied. To do this, we have conducted a
cognitive ethnography in an environment possibly
maximally distant from the ones mentioned above, namely
home environments and single individuals. Previous work in
everyday environments by e.g. Kirsh (1995) has primarily
focused on theoretical aspects of distributed cognition in
such environments with examples illustrating the theoretical
points made. There are also empirical studies from home
environments which have focused on the management of
particular tasks such as medication management (see Palen
& Aaløkke, 2006). But to our knowledge no previous study
has been conducted and presented of homes as distributed
cognitive systems in their own right.
On first appearances, it would seem that an apartment
with one person living there, is very different from the
complex specialized socio-technical environment previously

studied, and that therefore many of the features mentioned
above will not be present there. The aspects in focus in this
study are that an apartment is in a sense more of a multipurpose device than an environment for one or a few
cognitive tasks, and it is not designed to support cognitive
tasks per se. Further, there is no professional training in
solving the cognitive tasks for the person living there. And
finally, while there certainly is a long historical tradition
behind the design of a home and how it is furnished today,
this historical development has as far as we can tell, not
been driven primarily by a concern for successful
performance in cognitive tasks.
So what can we actually see when viewing this kind of
environment from the perspective of distributed cognition?
We are of course not claiming that one perspective is in any
absolute sense better than another, but as with any changes
in perspective, some aspects become more visible and some
become less visible. There are two closely related questions
we address here: First, what can be seen in the home as a
cognitive system when viewed from the perspective of
distributed cognition. Second, which are the differences
between
the
previously
studied
socio-technical
environments and the home.

The Cognitive Ethnography
Eight homes have been studied during a period of two years.
The total number of hours in the field and to a lesser extent
on the phone with the informants equals roughly 70 hours
distributed across 48 occasions of observations, video
recordings, and interviews. The time for real-life meetings
varied from one and a half hour to four hours. Telephone
chats were no longer than 10 minutes.
In-home interviews, telephone chats, and photographs
have been used to study the physical settings more broadly.
Some activities have been studied more closely. These
include leaving home, grocery shopping, cooking and
keeping track of the near future. The data collection has
been explorative and has therefore not been absolutely
balanced across the homes. Some homes have been studied
in more detail and across more occasions than others. All
homes except from one are single individual households,
and all residents have been studied doing individual
activities. Despite this, as in any ethnography, the data
collection is conducted in a social context.
Two of the homes have been studied specifically in
relationship to when residents are about to leave home. For
these homes video-recordings have been the primary source
of data. The participants wore a head mounted camera
(GoPro Hero 2) for about one hour before leaving their
home, but with no researcher or other person present during
this period. In total the video analysis is based on three
hours of video distributed across six occasions of leaving
home (Kristiansson, Wiik & Prytz, 2014).
The residents’ age span from 70 to 88, and they all
manage everyday life by themselves. All except two live in
apartments in central areas of a medium-sized city in
Sweden. Two live in the outskirts of the same municipality.

735

Five live in one to two-room apartments. Two in large four
room apartments and one in a house. Below the participants
are anonymized and referred to by an alias.
The analytical work can be described as a combination of
bricolage (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2013) and as following a
funnel-approach (Agar, 2008). Bricolage is not a completely
systematic approach. Instead analytical tools are used freely
across the material to note patterns and themes in the
material. The funnel-approach is Agar’s name for the
inductive approach of over time focusing on indicative
aspects of the material. This consequentially means that the
analysis focus on some aspects. For this article the funnelapproach has been used to zoom in on indicative aspects of
the material in relationship to principles and characteristics
of distributed cognition. Distributed cognition has therefore
been used as the primary analytical tool. For more details on
the ethnographic method see Kristiansson (2016).

transform multi-purpose spaces when performing specific
activities.

Cognitive tools
In all environments we find standard tools for remembering
future tasks, such as calendars and post-it notes, but also
here we see a large variability in how these are used.
In Felicia’s office she has notes on several spots but
mostly on a notice-board. On a couple of occasions when
the observer does walking interviews in her apartment she is
cued by notes on and around the board. For instance at one
occasion there is an information sheet on a table below the
board. When passing she stops and says that she has
forgotten to tell about this event, something that she had
planned to do. Putting written information and reminders on
open places is one way she uses external information to
remind herself. Another way appears at a sit-down
discussion with Felicia about her recent activities. While
Felicia browses through her calendar she suddenly finds a
sticky note far in the back. She reads it and quickly says that
she has already finished this intention. Putting information
in less prominent places in this way is another way Felicia
aims to remind herself. Also, it seems that when intentions
become really important or urgent for Felicia objects or
notes related to the target activity are placed in the hallway
area which is normally stripped from explicit information.
Therefore, despite that Felicia uses written information a
lot and to some extent concentrates it in one room her
practices of using it is not confined to one kind. This can be
contrasted with the case of Beatrice’s home.
Beatrice is the participant that seems to use the largest
quantity of cognitive tools that hold symbolic informational
content. These uses of cognitive tools are the type of
processes that the most resembles distributed cognition that
has been observed in professional settings. Except from the
card-index system that will be described below Beatrice has
a pocket calendar, a wall calendar, a list of people that have
invited her which she should invite back, a diary, a
catalogue over read books, a to-do paper with five
categories, a work-in-progress shopping list and more. For
specifics of a few of them see below.
The pocket calendar presents a new week on each page
turn, and the calendar is located next to the phone in the
kitchen. This is a deliberate strategy because this is where
most entrances are made. The calendar is almost full every
day roughly two weeks onward. The calendar has two
bookmarks. One silk-ribbon to mark where she last time
ended moving information to her diary and one red card to
signify the present.
She has a well-organized social life which is managed
with a set of cognitive tools. For instance, at the back of the
calendar she has a page with names ordered in a list. The
order of the list signifies in which order she owes her
friends an invitation. A cross next to the name means that
they have managed to invite her two times before. Crossed
out names means that she has invited them back and that
they therefore are even. Next to the list she has a space

Notes from the field study
In this section we will give some examples from the field
work, which in the following section will be analyzed with
respect to the features of distributed cognition previously
presented. In this paper we concentrate on a subset of
potential aspects previously used in research on distributed
cognition: functional spaces, cognitive tools, routines for
cognitive tasks, and the cultural historical development. In
Kristiansson (2016) additional aspects are discussed.

Functional spaces supporting cognitive tasks
All participants have spaces for which they have more or
less deliberately assigned functionality. All have for
instance a spot for their home keys, but the particular
solutions differ. Felicia has a metal cup on a bench in the
hallway where she drops the keys every time coming home,
while Greta puts the keys into a pocket of the jacket when
coming home, and Charles always puts the keys on the high
bench next to the apartment door. Despite the fact that they
all have routines for this, these routines are not adhered to as
strict as in professional environments. The routines can
perhaps in some cases be seen as ideals for how they should
do. For instance, on one occasion the observer points out
that the keys are not on the bench where he claims they
always are, he replies with a joking comment meaning that a
non-adherence to a rule or ideal was revealed (“Nu kom du
på mig”).
Both the hallway and the kitchen commonly have
designated areas that serve cognitive tasks. In some cases an
area such as a kitchen table is used both for placing things to
be remembered to bring when leaving the home and having
meals. One participant, Felicia, has instead of using the
kitchen concentrated written information and reminder notes
regarding future events to a room, “the office”, in the back
of her large four-room apartment. In this office she has
notes on several spots but mostly on a notice-board. The
particular solutions across the studied cases differ but they
all either have specific spaces used for memory purposes, or

736

where she sketches on constellations over soon-to-come
invitations. Currently there are two clusters of names that
corresponds to the list of names. Some names have arrows
to both constellations. Most often she only keeps track of
her own social debts. She also mentions some aspects of
some individuals on the list. Some are more tired and cannot
invite back in the same pace as others. Some cannot visit at
all and are handled with the tool below. One couple only
comes once a year and need to be planned accordingly.
Placed next to the phone in the kitchen is a to-do-list that
hold six categories: to buy (no groceries since they are
managed separately), to visit, to phone, to write, to invite
and, to fix.
This paper with categories leads to the fact that there are
few reminder notes spread across her home. Also, because
every type of future intention has a designated external spot
spatially close to the other kinds, the sheet of paper works as
a good overview tool. First, this shows just as previous
research within work settings, that the specifics of external
representations shape coordination of internal processes and
external structures. Second, it also shows that the specifics
of how reminder notes are used can partly determine their
functionality. Altogether, what is apparent from the
observations of Felicia and Beatrice is that in terms of notetaking the inter-individual differences between these
distributed systems are large.

An extended example
We will in the final part of this section present a longer
illustration of the use of the cognitive tools and spaces. This
is based on an analysis of a head mounted video recording
made without any observer present.
At one occasion Moa five minutes before leaving home
for an exercise session searches for something. The object(s)
turns out to be two cards, one that looks like a bus card and
one that looks like an exercise card, both of which she needs
for the current occasion of leaving home. This search is
interesting because it highlights functional relationships
between residents and the home environment that involve
physical resources out of plain sight that in the past have
been shaped as a consequence of previous occasions of
similar activities, where Moa in a stressful situation needs to
use a combination of opportunistic actions and different
deliberate mental resources to gain knowledge of the her
own cognitive systems.
A number of objects and spaces were involved in the
search: (a) the pockets of a small handbag located on a chair
in the kitchen, (b) the pockets of a medium sized shoulder
bag for exercise located on the kitchen table, (c) pockets on
a number of jackets located on a rack in the hallway, (d) the
top of a larger kitchen bench, (e) the top of a portion of the
kitchen sink, (f) the top of a smaller bench in the hallway,
and (g) the top of a larger bench in the hallway. At a quick
glance the search started with the shoulder bag, then past the
spaces over to the rack, and back to the kitchen past the
spaces, then she searches handbag and finally the shoulder
bag once again where she finds the cards. The entire search
takes about two minutes. The top surfaces were during this
short episode quickly visually looked at when passing by.
If we look closer on how the specific search of the
shoulder bag and the jackets evolves we can see something
that can be interpreted as a trade-off between fast and
opportune actions and deliberate guiding decisions. When
Moa searches the jackets she does not search all the jackets
equally. Six jackets are searched with relatively distinct
hand movements while the pockets of one jacket is searched
with quicker in-and-out movements. The last two jackets on
the racket (as seen from the entrance) she stops and stares at
and determines not to search. These are the two thickest
jackets on the racket. Moa likely has a more or less rough
idea of when the last time she used the cards was. This
knowledge conjoined with the knowledge of that it is
currently spring makes it unlikely that the cards should be
found in jackets intended for winter. There is therefore what
can be seen as a trade-off of the opportune actions
sequences of searching jackets and the ongoing guiding
thoughts of when to stop the sequence of search. Moa uses
what seems to be deliberate remembering processes in
combination with physical search. For the jackets in the case
of Moa this combination of resources appear to be an
efficient search heuristic for this occasion. But if we look at
the search of the shoulder bag from a similar perspective we
instead see something that from an outside perspective is
inefficient.

Routines for cognitive tasks
Cognitive tools or spaces are of course not enough in and of
themselves. They need to be put into use, preferably through
routine practices which we see many instances of. Moa, for
instance, has a number of functional spaces in the kitchen
and hallway where important objects are located. Before
leaving home objects are moved from one of these spaces to
another as a preparation for leaving. These spaces are also
iteratively browsed almost every time when she passes them
before leaving home, which leads to that important items are
being moved, sometimes in many steps, to the bag-to-bring
that is always located on the kitchen table. The kitchen table
is also the functional space located farthest away from the
exit door, which means that the other spaces will be scanned
a final time just before leaving the apartment.

Cultural historical development
Many practices come from people’s experiences of other
people’s practices. Consider again Beatrice. One of her
cognitive tools is a card-index system over all social dinners
she have made during the last 50 years. The index includes
dates, invited guests, what she (and her husband) served,
and comments. The idea to the card-index system, she says
she remembers clearly, comes from the mother of a friend
from her youth that used a similar card-index system. “I
found it really smart”, she says, and also says that she
started using the card index shortly after she married her
husband, with the incentive to not serve the same thing
twice to the same guest.

737

The black shoulder bag consists of six pockets: a large
pocket, a large side pocket and four small side pockets.
Small side pocket 2 is closed from start. When Moa
searches the shoulder bag the first time she has previously,
about five to ten minutes ago, interacted with the bag
several times for other reasons related to the packing of the
bag. Interactions these times have been with the large
pocket and the large side pocket. The fact that Moa has
interacted with the bag previously we can take into account
when we view how she searches the bag. The first time Moa
searches the bag she starts by looking into the large side
pocket, stretching the opening with her hands. The missing
thoroughness here is not strange given she has had her hand
into that pocket before. Then she tilts the bag so that the
small side pocket 2 is turned towards the head of Moa. (This
is where the two cards later will be found.) After searching
other pockets with her hands she will again interact with this
pocket by quickly touching the pocket. It appears that she
takes micro-decisions as she goes along similar to the way
she made decisions about what jackets to search.
We have seen that Moa makes decisions as she goes
along. We have also seen that decisions can sometimes be
detrimental. We can have ideas of why Moa skipped
searching some jackets given what we know about external
conditions of weather and jackets. It is harder from the
video to know why she does not initially searches small side
pocket 2 even though she appears to consider it. But
something we can see in the video is that the target pocket
also contained a pair of glasses. The glasses was not a flat
object. When she takes that object out from that pocket she
does that quickly and puts it in another bag next to the
shoulder bag. Here we can think of two paths of why she
initially decided to not search this pocket. The first one is
about her previous interaction with the content of the pocket
(not captured by the video). This could be the last time she
used the cards but it could also be the moment when she put
the unidentified object into that pocket. A possibility is that
this created an idea of that this space already has an object
which therefore would override the pocket as a space for the
two cards. Another decision path is about the physical
features of cards. If we view the shape of the pocket, small
side pocket 2 is the only side pocket that clearly have a
content, and that content is for certain not a flat object. This
is because it is closed and the ratio of the size of the pocket
and the content of the pocket creates a wrap around the nonflat object. This suggests that the reason for Moa skipping
searching small side pocket 2 could have nothing or little to
do with remembering but instead about interpretative
processes of the pocket’s features.

Our findings suggest that even though the home is not an
environment specifically designed for solving one specific
(professional) cognitive task or function, when looked at
from the perspective of distributed cognition a number of
interesting similarities with the more commonly studied
complex socio-technical environments are revealed. Parts of
the environments are designed or modified to serve one or
more cognitive tasks, in many cases retrospective but more
commonly prospective memory, and similar to the sociotechnical environments previously studied, the use of these
is often done through particular routines where the place,
tool, and the routine together serve a cognitive function.
It should be noted that we see a large variation in the
concrete implementation of these functions in the eight
environments we have studied. For instance, one informant
(Beatrice) has developed a large number of specialized tools
for several cognitive tasks. Since the studies of professional
environments in most cases concern only one instance of
these, we however cannot say whether this is a difference
between professional and non-professional environments.
It must also be noted that there are instances of cognition
in home environments such as visits by home healthcare
professionals which creates a combination of professional
and non-professional environments (see Kristiansson, 2013,
Dahlbäck, Kristiansson, Stjernberg, 2013 & Palen &
Aaløkke, 2006). Therefore the contrast we make here
between the two kinds should not be seen as two discrete
cases, but rather two endpoints on a continuum.
There are further reasons for not seeing professional and
non-professional environments as fundamentally different
kinds. All participants display levels of expertise in how
they manage their daily chores. How they for cognitive
tasks shape, use and interpret their physical environments is
for instance based on their knowledge of their own
practices. Of course such mechanisms establishes a
cognitive connectivity between the agent and aspects of
their environment that equals to some sort of expertise.
Further, despite the fact that participants for most daily
chores have not received professional training there are
cases when participants have experiences (of cooking,
financial management, healthcare etc.) from their previous
working lives that feeds expertise into their management of
daily life. Thus, this lends support to Kirsh’s (2009) claim
that most people become experts or near experts in dealing
with their everyday environments.
Similar to professional environments, we also found
examples of a kind of cultural knowledge accumulation of
the cognitive elements in the home environments, where the
informants tell us how some of their routines and tool
designs are learned from or influenced by older generations.
What we did not see in this study is any form of socially
distributed memory, which of course is a natural
consequence of the fact that we have studied environments
with only one person. But it is for instance interesting to
note that one informant, Beatrice, decided to develop a
complex memory tool for remembering social events when
her husband has passed away, which can be interpreted as a

Discussion
We asked in the introduction two questions. First, what can
be seen in the home as a cognitive system when viewed
from the perspective of distributed cognition. Second, which
are the differences between the previously studied sociotechnical environments and the home.

738

transformation of a distributed memory system initially
comprising of two persons to a one person system with the
same function when one of them is no longer there. So the
details of the distributed memory system changes with
changing circumstance while keeping the basic
functionality.
Despite the differences between the two prototypical
cases of professional and non-professional environments we
have described, the pattern that emerges is one of a
continuum in cognitive functioning between the everyday
environment and the complex socio-technical environments
previously studied from the perspective of distributed
cognition. We have also as yet unpublished studies of e.g.
families with children, which, while of course differing in
details, show no fundamental differences with what we
present here. To us this suggests that the specially designed
complex environments can be seen as specialized cases of
the general principles of distributed cognition which are not
reflections of “particular work practices” but of general
features of human cognition.

Hollnagel, E., & Woods, D. D. (1983). Cognitive systems
engineering: new wine in new bottles. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 18, 583–600.
Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265–288.
Hutchins, E. (2013). The cultural ecosystem of human
cognition. Philosophical Psychology, (September), 1–16.
Hutchins, E., & Klausen, T. (1996). Distributed cognition in
an airline cockpit. In Y. Engeström & D. Middleton
(Eds.), Cognition and Communication at Work (pp. 15–
34). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artifical
Intelligence, 73, 31-68.
Kirsh, D. (2009) Problem solving and situated cognition. In:
Robbins, P., & Aydede, M. (Eds.). The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kristiansson, M. (2013). The case of cognitive ecology for
cognitive processes in everyday life situations.
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2778–2783). Berlin:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2013). Den kvalitativa
forskningsintervjun (Andra uppl). Studentlitteratur AB.
Lützhöft, M. (2004). “The technology is great when it
works”: Maritime Technology and Human Integration on
the Ship’s Bridge. Doctoral Disseration, Linköping
University.
Lützhöft, M. H., & Dekker, S. (2002). On Your Watch:
Automation on the Bridge. Journal of Navigation, 55(1),
83–96.
Palen, L. & Aaløkke, S. (2006). Of Pill Boxes and Piano
Benches: "Home-made" Methods for Managing
Medication. Proceedings of 20th anniversary conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 79-88).
Banff: ACM.
Robbins, P., & Aydede, M. (Eds.). (2009). The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Rogers, Y., & Ellis, J. (1994). Distributed cognition: An
alternative framework for analysing and explaining
collaborative working. Journal of Information
Technology, 9(2), 119–128.
Sutton, J. (2006). Distributed cognition: Domains and
dimensions. Pragmatics & Cognition, 14(2), 235–247.
Tribble, E. B. (2005). Distributing Cognition in the Globe.
Shakespeare Quarterly, 56(2), 135–155.
Tribble, E. B., & Sutton, J. (2011). Cognitive Ecology as a
Framework for Shakespearean Studies. Shakespeare
Studies, 39, 94–104.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. (1994). Represesentations in
Distributed Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87–
122.

Acknowledgments
We thank Corinna Kruse, Fredrik Stjernberg and LarsChrister Hydén for help with the analysis of the field study,
and Richard Wiik and Sofia Lindvall for help with the
fieldwork and initial analysis. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for helpful comments on an earlier version of this
paper.

References
Agar, M. H. (2008). The Professional Stranger: An informal
introduction to ethnography (Second Edi). Bingley:
Emerald Group Publishing.
Dahlbäck, N., Kristiansson, M., & Stjernberg, F. (2013).
Distributed Remembering Through Active Structuring of
Activities and Environments. Review of Philosophy and
Psychology, 4(1), 153-165.
Dekker, S. W. A., Nyce, J. M., & Myers, D. J. (2013). The
little engine who could not: “rehabilitating” the individual
in safety research. Cognition, Technology and Work, 15,
277–282.
Hazlehurst, B., Gorman, P. N., & McMullen, C. K. (2008).
Distributed cognition: An alternative model of cognition
for medical informatics. International Journal of Medical
Informatics, 77(4), 226–234.
Hazlehurst, B., McMullen, C. K., & Gorman, P. N. (2007).
Distributed cognition in the heart room: how situation
awareness arises from coordinated communications
during cardiac surgery. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 40(5), 539–51.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E. & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed
cognition: toward a new foundation for human-computer
interaction research. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction, 7(2), 174-196.
Hollnagel, E., & Woods, D. (2005). Joint Cognitive
Systems: Foundations of Cognitive Systems Engineering.
Boca Raton: CRC Press.

739

