A Tale of Two Disasters: Biases in Risk Communication
Matthew B. Welsh1 (matthew.welsh@adelaide.edu.au)
Sandy Steacy2 (sandy.steacy@adelaide.edu.au)
Steve H. Begg1 (steve.begg@adelaide.edu.au)
Daniel J. Navarro3 (daniel.navarro@unsw.edu.au)
1 - Australian School of Petroleum, University of Adelaide, Australia
2 – School of Physical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Australia
3 – School of Psychology, University of NSW, Australia
Abstract
Risk communication, where scientists inform policy-makers
or the populace of the probability and magnitude of possible
disasters, is essential to disaster management – enabling
people to make better decisions regarding preventative steps,
evacuations, etc. Psychological research, however, has
identified multiple biases that can affect people’s
interpretation of probabilities and thus risk. For example,
availability (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973) is known to
confound probability estimates while the descriptionexperience gap (D-E Gap) (Hertwig & Erev, 2009) shows low
probability events being over-weighted when described and
under-weighted when learnt from laboratory tasks. This paper
examines how probability descriptions interact with real
world experience of events. Responses from 294 participants
across 8 conditions showed that people’s responses, given the
same described probabilities and consequences, were altered
by their familiarity with the disaster (bushfire vs earthquake)
and its salience to them personally. The implications of this
for risk communication are discussed.
Keywords: description-experience gap; risk communication;
decision making; availability; bias.

Introduction
People make decisions based on their perception of risks.
They also demand that others (e.g., policy makers) propose
methods to mitigate risks. Such proposals are often costly
to implement and there may be financial or other costs
should a risky event occur. It is, therefore, important that
risk perception matches reality. Psychological research,
however, indicates that people are subject to a range of
biases that lead to mis-perception of probabilities leading to
inconsistent trade-offs and sub-optimal decisions (see, e.g.,
Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Lichtenstein, Fischhoff, &
Phillips, 1982; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973, 1974).
The L’Aquila verdict, which saw 6 scientists convicted of
manslaughter for failing to adequately communicate
earthquake risk prior to the event, shocked the scientific
community and prompted urgent re-appraisal of methods
used to convey information about low-probability, highimpact events. Prior to the trial, an international commission
convened to investigate the earthquake’s predictability - and
the communication of its risk - recommended that risk
assessments be formalised through authoritative operational
earthquake forecasting (OEF). It also suggested that social
scientists develop methods for communicating risk to the
public and decisions makers (Jordan et al., 2011).

Research on seismic aspects of OEF is progressing with
new models being developed and tested (see, e.g.,
Marzocchi, Lombardi, & Casarotti, 2014; Steacy et al.,
2014). However, progress on communication remains a
major topic of discussion (Jordan et al., 2014).

Biases in Risk Perception
Given the above, it seems valuable to review psychology’s
findings about how people interpret risk (i.e., the probability
of an undesirable outcome). A variety of known effects
seem relevant to how a person, faced with information being
provided by an expert, might interpret that information and
thus react. Some central examples are discussed below.
Prospect Theory and the Description-Experience Gap
Prospect Theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) describes
how the majority of people respond when facing risky
choices in simple gambles such as: ‘Take $100 now’ or
‘Win $250 if this coin toss comes up heads and nothing
otherwise’. In such instances, people are risk averse when
dealing with gains and risk seeking for losses. They also act
as if low probabilities are higher than they actually are and
as if high probabilities are lower.
Many of these observations, however, are shown to
reverse in situations where, instead of being told the
probabilities, people have to learn them from an
environment – the so-called Description-Experience Gap
(hereafter, D-E Gap; Hertwig & Erev, 2009).
Risk communication, of course, involves both described
probabilities (from the scientists or government) and the
probability for risky events that each member of the
‘audience’ has learnt from their environment.
Availability
Availability (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973) describes the
tendency of people to weight the likelihood of events
according to how available such events are to memory. This
makes sense in that, when operating in a natural
environment, the number of instances of an event recalled
should depend on how many such events have been seen.
It can leads to biased estimates of probability, however,
where an event’s availability differs from its actual rate of
occurrence. For instance, media coverage focusses on
‘interesting’ – and often rare – events; the result being that
people overestimate the likelihood of events (e.g., terrorist

544

attacks) that receive coverage while underestimating
probabilities for events that are less often reported upon.
Key aspects of availability are the familiarity and salience
of events – that is, how well known they are to the person
and how memorable (for a discussion of this, see Sunstein,
2005). For example, most people are aware of (i.e., familiar
with) the risks of house fires but these are more salient to
someone who has seen such a fire than to people who have
simply heard about them. Both familiarity and salience
affect the availability of people’s memories of particular
events and thus their estimates of their probabilities.
Given this, it seems likely that people’s recalled
probabilities will differ markedly from the actual
probabilities of occurrence for the disasters.
Format Changes
Another effect known to alter interpretation of probabilities
is changes to presentation formats. For example, there is
evidence that people prefer natural frequencies (e.g., ‘1 in
100’) to percentages (Cosmides & Tooby, 1996; Gigerenzer
& Hoffrage, 1995) and even those who dispute this (Sloman
et al., 2003) agree that the way probabilities are presented
can enhance or impede people’s understanding of them.
Relative vs Absolute Change
Finally, it is possible that people are more sensitive to
relative than absolute change, leading to the expectation that
people’s reaction to a disaster risk may (depending on the
presentation of the information) be influenced by the degree
to which the probability has changed as well as by the final
probability itself (Stone, Yates, & Parker, 1994).

Aims and Objectives
Given the above, the central aim of this paper is to
determine what effects play a role in predicting behaviour
when the described probability of a disaster needs to be
integrated into a person’s pre-existing knowledge – learnt
from their experiences with such disasters in the real world.
A key question, then, is whether people’s behaviour will
be better predicted by Prospect Theory or the D-E Gap?
Prospect Theory predicts that low probability events will be
overweighted while the D-E Gap predicts the opposite.
Availability, meanwhile, suggests that people’s learnt
probabilities will be biased by their familiarity with and
direct experience of the disaster they are being asked about.
Given this, the aim is to interrogate people’s experience
with disasters and use this and their responses to illuminate
the probabilities they have ‘learnt’ from the environment.

Method
Participants
Participants were 294 residents of Adelaide (152 female,
133 male and 9 identifying as other) ranging from 13 (see
below) to 63 (M = 25.8, SD = 8.7).
Initial recruitment was undertaken via fliers placed
around the University of Adelaide, which indicated that only

Adelaide residents over 18 could participate. A significant
amount of snowball sampling occurred as participants
forwarded the survey link to friends and family, however,
leading to the inclusion of one respondent who was only 13.
Of the participants, 12 had not completed high school and
46 were high school graduates. The remainder included: 99
who had attended but not yet graduated university; 87 with
bachelor degrees; and 50 with higher degrees. Participants
received a $20 gift voucher for completing the experiment.

Materials
An online survey was designed, which asked participants:
for demographics; to select their response to a hypothetical
disaster; and then describe their experience with disasters of
that type. The survey questions are expanded on below.
Demographics
Participants provided their age, identified gender, level of
education and length of residency in Adelaide.
Disaster Questions
The experiment used a 2x2x2 between-subjects design.
(NB: the sample was limited by funding constraints to being
slightly underpowered for a 2x2x2 design, it is sufficient for
2x2 interactions.) The scenario described to participants that
they had inherited a $400,000 house in the Adelaide Hills
and, following this, scientists had revised the probability of
a disaster (that would destroy the house) occurring in that
area up to 1% per annum for the next 10 year period.
Familiarity. The first condition was familiarity with
disaster type. Two disasters were included: earthquakes and
bushfires as these reflect different experiences for Adelaide
residents. Bushfires, while rare in an absolute sense (i.e., the
probability of an individual being affected in any given year
is very low) are familiar to Adelaide residents, with major
events occurring at a rate of 6-7 per decade, historically
(Luke & McArthur, 1978), and multiple, less severe fires
occurring every year – with Country Fire Service (CFS)
data recording ~12/year in the 2001-2015 period across
Greater Adelaide’s peri-urban area (CFS, 2015).
Earthquakes, by comparison, are unfamiliar, with only 30
perceptible quakes since records began 132 years ago (i.e.,
~0.23 events per year) and none having caused damage
since a M5.5 event in 1954. By these data, bushfires are ~50
times as frequent in Adelaide as earthquakes.
Format. The second condition was the format used to
express the disaster probability – either a percentage (e.g.,
1%) or natural frequency (e.g., 1 in 100). Otherwise,
probabilities were identical across conditions with a 1% p.a.
chance of the disaster occurring across the next decade.
Magnitude. The final condition was the magnitude change
in probability and was either 10 or 100. That is, while the
final (annual) probability of the disaster was 1%, this was
described as having been increased from either 0.1% or

545

0.01% - or the natural frequency equivalents.
Options. In all cases, participants selected from the same
set of four responses. These were: 1) Do nothing; 2) Spend
$10,000 on preparing the house to better cope with the
named disaster and reduce the probability of it being
destroyed by half; 3) Spend $20,000 on preparing the house
to better cope with the named disaster and reduce the
probability of it being destroyed by three-quarters; and 4)
Sell the house at a $40,000 loss.
These options thus reflect increasingly extreme immediate
responses to the revised disaster probabilities and, in that
sense, are ordinal. They also, however, form (approximate)
pairs in expected value terms, with the EV of options 1 and
4 both being approximately -$40,000 when considered
across the 10 year period of increased risk – while options 2
and 3 are both valued at approximately -$30,000. (These
approximate values were used as it seemed unlikely that
participants would use probability theory to calculate the
precise values; i.e., that a 1% p.a. risk equates to a 9.56%
chance of disaster across the decade). Given this, the choice
data is more appropriately regarded as nominal.

odds of a participant selecting a particular option seems to
be affected by the manipulations with people about twice as
likely to select to “Do nothing” rather than something in the
low familiarity (Quake) and percentage formats conditions,
Odds Ratio = 2.45 and 2.25, respectively. Participants in the
frequency format conditions were, similarly, twice as likely
to choose to sell the house as not, Odds Ratio= 1.98.
Table 1. Percentages of participants selecting each option
overall and by condition.
Do
$10K $20K Sell
Total
nothing prep
prep
house
20.1
42.2 20.1 17.7
100
Overall
Familiarity

Quake
Fire

13.6
6.5

18.7
23.5

9.5
10.5

8.8
8.8

50.7
49.3

Format

Perc.
Freq.

13.3
6.8

21.8
20.4

8.8
11.2

6.5
11.2

50.3
49.7

To assist in seeing interaction effects, Figure 1 shows the
proportion of participants selecting each of the options,
divided simultaneously by both familiarity and format.

Experience Questions.
In addition to the demographic and main experimental
questions, five questions captured participants’ real world
experience with the disasters they were asked about. The
first two of these asked: how many such events the
participant recalled having occurred in Adelaide; and how
many of those recalled events caused significant damage.
Three questions asked about the disaster’s salience to the
participant. Specifically, whether: 1) the participant; 2) their
friends/family; or 3) people in their local area, had suffered
injury or property loss from such a disaster.

Procedure
Participants accessed the survey in their own time using the
URL and an identifier code on tear-off tabs at the bottom of
the fliers. After an initial page describing the basics of the
experiment, participants were sorted into groups according
to which of the 8 identifier codes they entered
(corresponding to the possible condition combinations).
They were then shown the disaster question for that
condition and asked to select their response. After this they
were asked the five follow-up questions and four
demographic questions. Finally, they were asked to enter
their email address (to arrange gift voucher pick-up). Most
participants completed the task in less than 10 minutes.

Results
Initial analyses indicated that the magnitude manipulation
was having no effect (main or interaction), therefore results
are discussed without further mention of this. Table1 shows
the percentage of participants selecting each of the four
options – overall and, separately, divided by the familiarity
and format conditions.
Looking at Table 1, one sees three instances where the

Figure 1: Participant responses by familiarity and format.
As was seen in Table 1, both manipulations affect
responses and Figure 1 suggests an interaction effect – with
participants seeing the earthquake version of the task with
percentage probabilities far more likely (41%) to do nothing
than any other group (~13% across the three other groups).
A 2x4 Chi-square test confirmed that familiarity was
significantly associate with participant choice, χ2 = 9.2, p =
.036. Analysis of residuals indicated the familiarity effect
was driven by more participants selecting option 1 (do
nothing) in the unfamiliar (Earthquake) condition relative to
the familiar (Bushfire) condition.
The effect of format was also significant, with people
presented probabilities in natural frequency format tending
towards more active responses. Specifically, the format
change equated to a ‘upward’ shift of half a category on
average. Again, a 2x4 Chi-square test indicated that format
was significantly associated with participant choice, χ2 =
10.8, p =.012. The residuals of this test told a similar story,
with differences in the proportion of people choosing to do
nothing in the percentage format being significantly higher
than in the natural frequency format – although here there
was also a significant difference for option 4 (sell house),

546

selected by more people in the frequency format. That is,
the frequency format discouraged doing nothing and
encouraged the most extreme response (sell house).
Table 2. Log-linear analysis of 4x2x2 contingency table.
Interactions
G2
df
p
1 Choice*Format*Familiarity
38.6 10 <.001
2 Choice*Format
12.6
3
.006
3 Choice*Familiarity
12.0
3
.007
4 Format*Familiarity
.06
1
.807
5 Choice*Format (No Familiarity)
26.5
6 <.001
6 Choice*Familiarity (No Format)
25.9
6 <.001
13.9
4
.008
7 Format* Familiarity (No Choice)
Note: rows 2-4 and 5-7 differ according to whether G2 is
calculated after collapsing across the 3rd condition or after
removing its effect. Note 2: G2 ≈ χ2.
To assess the interaction effect, a 4x2x2 (choice x
familiarity x format) log-linear analysis was conducted.
Looking at its results in Table 2, one sees that most
associations are significant – excepting between Format and
Familiarity (row 4, which reflects the near-equal numbers in
the conditions). Rows 2 and 3 correspond to the above 2x4
tests and provide similar results. The key point from the
table, however, is the highly significant 3-way interaction
(row 1) – that is, format and familiarity interact with choice
both individually and when considered together.

for bushfires. That is, the lower probability events
(earthquakes), while recalled less often than the base rate
predicts, are disproportionately better remembered than the
more common bushfires – by a factor of 10.

Figure 2: Scatterplot of predicted (residency x base rate)
vs actual recalled number of bushfires. Red datapoints are
outliers with (from left) 50, 80 and 1000 recalled fires.

Availability of Experience
Recalled Events.
Peoples’ recollection of disasters was tested simply by
asking them to indicate how may such events they recalled
from their residency in Adelaide and how many resulted in
“widespread” damage. As no participants had resided in
Adelaide long enough to recall the 1955 earthquake, no
participants should have recalled earthquakes causing
damage, making this comparison with the bushfire group
redundant. Given this, Figures 2 and 3 show only the total
number of disasters recalled plotted against the predicted
numbers based on participant’s length of residency in
Adelaide and the observed base rates of occurrence.
Looking at Figures 2 and 3, one can see marked
differences in the numbers of events recalled, with 7 being
the highest value provided by a participant for number of
earthquakes recalled whereas, in the bushfire condition,
several values were close to 100 and the highest was 1000
(requiring the log scale seen in Figure 2).
A similarity between the two figures, however, is seen in
the consistent under-recollection of disasters. That is,
people recalled fewer bushfires and earthquakes than the
base rates suggest they have experienced – and this effect
was far stronger in the bushfire condition where the typical
number recalled was less than 10 but the prediction was
more than 200. Calculation of the proportion of recalled
over experienced events across the two conditions shows a
clear difference, with average proportion recalled being 0.54
(median = 0.22) for earthquakes and 0.05 (median = 0.02)

Figure 3: Scatterplot of predicted (residency x base rate)
vs actual recalled number of earthquakes.
Interestingly, the number of recalled events seems largely
unrelated to the participants’ choices by in the experimental
task – as shown in the mean rank data in Table 3.
Table 3. Mean rank of proportion of events recalled.
Choice
Earthquake
Bushfire
Do nothing
123.6
176.1
$10K preparations
113.1
170.4
$20K preaprations
134.6
169.5
Sell House (-$40K)
125.6
170.9
Analysis of differences between the groups in Table 2
was undertaken via a 2x4 (familiarity x choice) ANOVA,
run - due to the skewed data - on the ranked proportion of
events recalled (as per Conover & Iman, 1981). This
confirmed the difference in proportion of events recalled
between the earthquake and bushfire familiarity groups, F(1,
283) = 21.3, p <<.001 but indicated no significant difference
between the proportion of events recalled by participants
making different choices, F(3, 283) = 0.27, p = .848, and no
interaction effect between choice and disaster type.
Salience.
The salience, to an individual, of the disaster type they were
asked about was scored on a 0-3 scale according to how
many of the three, salience questions they answered ‘yes’.

547

The data for bushfires and earthquakes are shown in Figures
4 and 5, respectively. Comparing these figures, one sees,
firstly, that salience differs markedly between the bushfire
and earthquake groups – as expected, given our sample.
Most (59%) of the bushfire group had non-zero salience,
compared to only 14% of the earthquake group.
Looking at the Figures together, though, one can see hints
of the same pattern of results – increased salience seems to
push people away from the two (financially) worse options
(doing nothing or selling the house) and towards paying for
preparations to reduce the risk to their house.

Figure 4: Participant responses by salience (bushfire).

Figure 5: Participant responses by salience (earthquake).
Given only two people scored 3 on salience in either
disaster condition, scores of 2 and 3 were grouped as ‘high’
salience for a 3x4 (salience x choice) chi-square test
examining data from both disaster types simultaneously.
This showed a significant association between salience and
participants’ choices, χ2(6) = 22.1, p = .002. Examination of
residuals indicated this result was driven by an increased
tendency for people with salience zero to elect to ‘do
nothing’ and a decreased tendency for them to select ‘$20K
preparations’, whereas people with salience 1
disproportionately selected ‘$10K preparations’ and those
with higher salience ‘$20K preparations’.
Running the same analysis on just the bushfire data
produced near-identical results but a 2x4 (salience x choice)
chi-square test conducted on the earthquake data alone
failed to reach significance – despite the similarity in
patterns noted above, χ2(3) = 3.8, p = .300 – indicating that
the overall effect is primarily driven by the bushfire data.

Discussion
These results provide a number of insights into difficulties
facing people interested in the communication of disaster

risk. Practical points relating to risk communication are
discussed in the two following sections, prior to a discussion
of theoretical implications in terms of Prospect Theory and
the Description-Experience Gap.

Familiarity and Format
Two of our three manipulations showed clear effects:
familiarity with disaster type; and the probability
presentation format. The first is perhaps unsurprising, as one
might expect that familiarity with a disaster might affect
how one responds to it - and knowing how one should
respond is likely to reduce the tendency (seen in our data) of
people to do nothing when faced with an unfamiliar disaster.
The second observation, that people respond more
strongly when shown probabilities in a natural frequency
format than percentages seems more surprising but accords
with Gigerenzer and Hoffrage’s (1995) suggestion that
people better understand this format. That is, it suggests that
percentages may be an added level of abstraction that
detracts from the immediacy of the risk communication.

Availability: Recalled Disasters and Salience
Interestingly, despite the clear effect of the disaster
familiarity condition, the number/proportion of disasters
recalled by participants had no bearing on their responses.
That is, people who remembered more or fewer disasters
relative to the ground truth did not differ from one another
in terms of their responses to our questions. The clearest
trend from this data was that, for both types of disaster,
people tended to recall fewer than the base rate of
occurrence suggested they had experienced.
By contrast with recollection, salience clearly affected
responses with people having had more direct experience of
disasters inclined to take stronger precautions but also to
avoid overreaction, as selling the house in our example
would be classified (in expected value terms, at least). The
implications of this for risk communication are awkward in
that it suggests that messages need to be tailored according
to whether a person has had salient experience of a disaster
– as those without such may overreact or fail to act when
presented with the same information to which a more
experienced person will react appropriately.

Theoretical Implications
The recalled experience and salience data have implications
for how best to approach risk communication. That people
tended to underestimate the occurrence of disasters fits with
the Description-Experience Gap understanding of learnt,
low probabilities – tending to be lower than the true
probability – rather than the Prospect Theory assumption
that low probability events will be overweighted.
However, the fact that the less common of the two
disasters (earthquakes in the Adelaide context) shows
higher rates of recall suggests that earthquakes are rare
enough to be more memorable than bushfires – making
them more available and thus causing their occurrence to be
underestimated less than the more common bushfires.

548

This has implications for situations where smaller scale
disasters occur relatively frequently – specifically, that
people will tend to markedly underestimate the rate of
occurrence of these, possible as a result of memory
limitations – in both encoding numbers of similar,
unremarkable events and then in retrieval when asked to
recall a number of such events.

Future Research
The results suggest a number of directions. First is an
attempt to more rigorously examine experience – that is, the
roles of familiarity, recalled events and salience. How these
relate to one another may shed further light on when and
how to communicate risk. A first step would be to examine
the different salience questions separately as it seems
unlikely that these will be equally predictive (e.g., personal
loss may have more impact than losses in the local region).
A second step would be to conduct the reverse of the
familiarity condition used herein – that is, test a sample in a
location where earthquakes are more common and bushfires
rarer to ensure that it is the manipulation and not differing
characteristics of these disasters driving the results.
Finally, future work should pay closer attention to the
question of what is the right thing to do? Despite a brief
discussion of expected value, the decision here was complex
enough that no cut-and-dried correct answer existed. Given
the goal of improved risk communication, it is important,
however, to know if people are reacting appropriately –
which requires a correct answer for comparison.

Conclusions
A person’s familiarity with a disaster - and its salience to
them - impacts how they interpret and respond to events
with the same risks. The unfamiliar earthquake risk in our
experiment disproportionately produced inaction, while low
salience did the same or pushed people to overreact. People
with personal experience of disasters, by comparison,
tended to prepare and try to mitigate their effects.
Also of interest was the observation that presenting
probabilities as natural frequencies resulted in people taking
more active steps to mitigate or avoid the disaster.
Finally, our results offer insights into how people learn
the probabilities of disasters from the real world, the biases
that tend to affect these and how these interact with biases
known to affect described probabilities.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a University of Adelaide
interdisciplinary research fund (IRF) grant. MBW and SBH
acknowledge support from the CIBP group’s industry
sponsors: B.G. Group, ExxonMobil, Santos and Woodside.
DJN was supported by the ARC Future Fellowship scheme.

References
CFS (Producer). (2015, 22/01/2016). Fires in the peri-urban
area of Greater Adelaide. [Map] Retrieved from

www.cfs.sa.gov.au
Conover, W. J., & Iman, R. L. (1981). Rank transformations
as a bridge between parametric and nonparametric
statistics. The American Statistician, 35(3), 124-129.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1996). Are humans good
intuitive statisticians after all? Rethinking some
conclusions from the literature on judgment under
uncertainty. Cognition, 58, 1-73.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102(4), 684-704.
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description–experience
gap in risky choice. Trends in cognitive sciences, 13(12),
517-523.
Jordan, T., Chen, Y.-T., Gasparini, P., Madariaga, R., Main,
I., Marzocchi, W., . . . Zschau, J. (2011). Operational
Earthquake Forecasting: State of Knowledge and
Guidelines for Implementation. Annals of Geophysics.
Jordan, T., Marzocchi, W., Michael, A., & Gerstenberger,
M. (2014). Operational earthquake forecasting can
enhance earthquake preparedness. Seismological
Research Letters, 85(5), 955-959.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect Theory: an
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47(2),
263-291.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & Phillips, L. D. (1982).
Calibration of probabilities: the state of the art to 1980.
In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic & A. Tversky (Eds.),
Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Luke, R. H., & McArthur, A. G. (1978). Bush fires in
Australia. Bush Fires in Australia.
Marzocchi, W., Lombardi, A. M., & Casarotti, E. (2014).
The establishment of an operational earthquake
forecasting system in Italy. Seismological Research
Letters, 85(5), 961-969.
Sloman, S. A., Over, D., Slovak, L., & Stibel, J. M. (2003).
Frequency illusions and other fallacies. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 91(296-309).
Steacy, S., Gerstenberger, M., Williams, C., Rhoades, D., &
Christophersen,
A.
(2014).
A
new
hybrid
Coulomb/statistical model for forecasting aftershock
rates. Geophysical Journal International, 196(2), 918923.
Stone, E. R., Yates, J. F., & Parker, A. M. (1994). Risk
communication: Absolute versus relative expressions of
low-probability risks. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 60(3), 387-408.
Sunstein, C. R. (2005). Precautions against What-The
Availability Heuristic and Cross-Cultural Risk
Perception. Alabama Law Review, 57, 75.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: a
heuristic for judging frequency and probability.
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207-232.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.

549

