A Twist On Event Processing: Reorganizing Attention to Cope with Novelty in
Dynamic Activity Sequences
Jessica E. Kosie (jkosie@uoregon.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA

Dare A. Baldwin (baldwin@uoregon.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA

Abstract
Fluent event processing appears to critically involve
selectively attending to information-rich junctures within
continuously unfolding sensory streams (e.g., Newtson, 1973).
What counts as information-rich would seem to depend on a
variety of factors, however, including the novelty/familiarity
of such events, as well as local opportunity for repeated
viewings. Using Hard, Recchia, & Tversky’s “Dwell-time
Paradigm,” we investigated the extent to which viewers’
attention to unfolding activity streams is affected by
novelty/familiarity and a second viewing. Viewers’ dwell
times were recorded as they advanced twice each through three
slideshows varying in familiarity but equated on other
dimensions. Dwell time patterns revealed reorganization on a
number of fronts: a) familiarity elicited decreased dwelling
overall, b) dwell-time patterns changed systematically on
second viewing, and c) familiarity modulated the specific
nature of change associated with repeated viewing. These
findings illuminate reorganization in attention as action
information is first encountered and then quickly incorporated
to guide event processing.
Keywords: action segmentation; event processing

Skill at making sense of human action is essential to normal
adult functioning. Imagine, for example, an everyday event
such as cooking together with someone else. Among other
things, this seemingly mundane activity requires fluently
interpreting one’s partner’s ongoing activity and the causal
effect it has on the world, seamlessly integrating all of this
with an unfolding interpretation of any linguistic
contributions that co-occur, and coordinating one’s own
activity stream to mesh with an understanding of what the
other is dynamically enacting or plans to enact. Although the
complexity of the processing involved is immense, action
processing at the adult level appears to be so fluent that errors
are rare and processing occurs largely outside of conscious
awareness.
Much remains mysterious about the mechanisms
subserving everyday event processing. In recent years,
however, considerable progress has been made in relation to
one particular component of event processing: segmentation.
Event segmentation involves transforming continuously
unfolding sensory information into discrete units that can be
remembered, categorized, and described with language.

In principle, there are infinite possible ways to segment any
sensory stream; it is therefore striking that observers asked to
identify event boundaries within continuously flowing
activity display considerable agreement, and this agreement
holds at multiple levels of event representation. The event
boundaries viewers nominate typically coincide with goal
transitions, and viewers readily scale their segmentation up
or down, as the task demands, in terms of the grain at which
they identify event boundaries (e.g., Newtson, 1973; Zacks,
Tversky, & Iyer, 2001). For example, at a coarse-grain level,
viewers tend to nominate transitions between higher-level
tasks (e.g., in a food preparation sequence, the transition
between an actor closing an oven door and turning to wash
some dirty dishes). At a more fine-grain level, viewers
identify smaller-scale events within these tasks (e.g., lifting a
cookie pan, placing the cookie pan in the oven, grasping the
oven door, closing the oven door). Viewers’ judgments at
these different levels of generality display alignment, such
that coarse-gain boundaries tend to align with boundaries at
the fine-grain level, suggesting that viewers organize event
segments hierarchically in their processing (Zacks &
Swallow, 2007). Adults’ segmentation is relatively robust to
at least minor novelty, as well.
Several sources of evidence indicate that segmentation
occurs spontaneously as viewers process unfolding sensory
streams, and may be largely accomplished via implicit
mechanisms. For one, magnetic resonance recordings
conducted during passive event viewing display
neurophysiological activity that selectively correlates with
segment boundary judgments participants provided on a
subsequent, second viewing of the behavior stream (e.g.,
Zacks et al., 2001). As well, action boundaries implicitly
“intrude” on participants’ processing as they carry out
unrelated tasks, such as detection of an unrelated stimulus
(e.g., Huff, Papenmier, & Zacks, 2012). For example,
reaction times reveal that participants process the segmental
structure of unfolding behavior while they engage in a change
detection task.
Hard, Recchia, and Tversky (2011) recently introduced
another valuable implicit measure of action segmentation: the
“dwell-time paradigm.” In this task, slideshows are
constructed by selecting frames at a regular increment from

1337

digitized event videos (e.g., one frame every 500 msec).
Viewers advance through slideshows at their own pace by the
click of a mouse; latencies between mouse clicks index their
“dwell time” to each slide. When dwell times are referenced
to event boundary judgments (subsequently provided either
by slide show viewers themselves, or by other viewers),
systematic dwell-time patterns emerge: a) viewers tend to
dwell longer on slides coinciding with event boundaries
relative to points occurring within event units (henceforth
termed a “boundary advantage”), and b) dwelling is longest
to slides coinciding with coarse-grain level boundaries
relative to more fine-grain level boundaries. Importantly,
dwell-times arising when adults view the same set of slides
in scrambled order do not reveal such patterns to the same
degree. Thus dwell-time patterns appear to simultaneously
reflect both the extraction of segmental structure as viewers
process an unfolding activity sequence, and the hierarchical
organization of the segments they extract. Also noteworthy is
that viewers’ dwell times to coarse-grain level slides
positively predicted their subsequent recall score for the
activity sequences they viewed. The fact that dwell times
make contact with event memory helps to validate dwell
times as a psychologically meaningful measure of action
processing.
One might question why dwell times tend to increase at
event boundaries. Zacks and colleagues’ (Kurby & Zacks,
2008; Zacks, Kurby, Eisenberg, & Haroutunian, 2011) Event
Segmentation Theory provides a natural account for the
phenomenon. They suggest that event processing is
fundamentally a process of predictability monitoring, with
information value being highest where predictability is low.
Event boundaries appear to represent just such informationrich predictability “troughs” within activity streams. As one
event comes to a close, uncertainty abounds regarding what
will occur next. Once the subsequent event is underway,
predictability surges, only to plummet again as that event
approaches completion. Imagine, for example, one detects
another initiating a reach for a coffee mug. Motion in the
midst of this reach is highly predictable (the hand predictably
configures to prepare to grasp the mug as it approaches the
mug), but once the reach is completed, predictability
suddenly plummets: many subsequent alternatives for action
arise. The actor might lift the mug, push it away, spin it
around, or simply hang on to it for a time. At such boundaries,
predictability is low and viewers gain highly relevant
information to interpret the motion stream. Thus selectively
attending to event boundaries – regions of “predictable
unpredictability” – conceivably facilitates event processing.
Viewers appear to capitalize on a broad range of clues to
identify segment boundaries whether explicitly reporting on
the location of event boundaries or using more implicit
methods such as the dwell-time paradigm. These clues
include expectations/inferences about goals and intentions, as
well as physical motion parameters (e.g., motion change,
velocity change, motion acceleration/deceleration, and

change in motion directory) (e.g., Zacks, 2004; Zacks,
Kumar, Abrams, & Mehta, 2009). Statistical regularities also
inform judgments about segment boundaries (Baldwin,
Andersson, Saffran, & Meyer, 2008). The sensory stream
possesses an inherent predictability structure; some
phenomena tend to succeed one another with greater
regularity than others. For example, within everyday
intentional activity, the act of chopping a vegetable would be
more likely to follow the act of grasping a knife than would
the act of opening a refrigerator door. When predictability is
high, small-scale acts cohere into larger event units.
Conversely, junctures at which predictability is low reflect
event boundaries. Put another way, growing familiarity with
predictability structure produces increasing access to the
segmental structure of activity streams. One implication of
this account is that viewers’ processing will change as
familiarity with the predictability structure of the sensory
stream grows.
Meyer, Hard, and Baldwin (in preparation) recently
documented that dwell-times are sensitive to reorganization
in attentional patterns that accrue as familiarity with segmentrelated predictability structure arises during statistical
learning. One group of adults (knowledgeable viewers)
viewed a digitized video depicting a novel activity sequence
with underlying statistical regularities (i.e., a ten-minute
“exposure corpus” with four randomly combined “actions” –
each composed of a fixed triad of small-motion elements,
such as feel-blow-look), after which they advanced at their
own pace through slides extracted once every 500 msec from
the same exposure corpus. A second group (naïve viewers)
provided dwell times to the same slideshow without having
had any prior opportunity to acquire the statistical regularities
through viewing the exposure corpus video. After slideshow
viewing, both groups provided discrimination judgments for
pairs of short videos, with each pair depicting one “action” (a
statistically regular triad from the exposure corpus) and one
“part-action” (a sequence actually viewed, but spanning a
low-predictability transition from the exposure corpus).
Several noteworthy findings emerged. First, discrimination
judgments revealed better-than-chance discrimination
accuracy for “action” segments relative to “part-action” foils,
but only in the knowledgeable condition, in which viewers
had watched the digitized video of the exposure corpus prior
to viewing the dwell-time slideshow. Thus, as expected, only
those who received extended exposure to the statistical
regularities within the novel activity sequence appeared to
have achieved a solid knowledge of the segmental structure
of the activity stream overall. Second, dwell-time patterns
differed for those in the knowledgeable versus naïve
conditions. In particular, knowledgeable viewers displayed
the predicted action-level boundary advantage in dwell times
indicative of sensitivity to the higher-level segmental
structure defined by the statistical regularities inherent in the
exposure corpus. In contrast, no comparable boundary
advantage emerged for dwell-times in naïve viewers, who

1338

had lacked prior opportunity to acquire the statisticallydefined segmental structure of the exposure corpus. Lastly,
only those in the knowledgeable condition who displayed
strong discrimination performance revealed the segmentrelated boundary advantage in dwell-times.
All in all, dwell-time patterns in this experiment clearly
revealed learning-based reorganization in the way that
viewers modulated their attention during the unfolding
activity stream. These findings provided the first evidence to
date documenting patterns of attentional reorganization
specifically attributable to newly-acquired familiarity with
segment-related predictability structure. In particular,
viewers who had the opportunity to learn the predictability
structure of the sequence displayed longer dwell times at
junctures within the unfolding activity sequence where they
came to be able to predict that predictability was low (i.e.,
between the end of one statistically coherent unit of action
and the beginning of another). This experiment also
showcased a striking degree of alignment across
discrimination and dwell-time methodologies; that is,
viewers who displayed newly-acquired knowledge of
segmental structure in the explicit discrimination judgment
task also displayed sensitivity to that same structure in their
implicit dwell-time patterns. These findings provide a strong
basis for confidence in the dwell-time paradigm as a valid and
sensitive index of familiarity-driven reorganization in action
processing.
The statistical learning paradigm utilized in the research
just described has the advantage of offering complete control
of the predictability structure of the activity stream. At the
same time, of course, the activity streams utilized in such
research by necessity are somewhat unnatural, undercutting
generalization of findings to event processing in the world at
large. Thus, it is important to extend this research by
investigating how familiarity alters action processing in more
naturalistic activity sequences. We have identified one such
sequence -- tying shoe laces -- that offers considerable
potential for exploring these issues while maintaining
necessary methodological controls. Skill at tying shoelaces is
challenging to acquire; children between 5 and 8 years of age
typically require many months to grasp its fundamentals and
achieve an outcome that is at least moderately effective. This
may be in part because the necessary motion elements for
causal success are difficult for novices to extract from the
motion stream through observation alone. Although shoelace
tying comes to seem trivial to the expert (i.e., the average
adult), producing successful shoelace tying in fact requires
not only manual dexterity, but also knowledge of causal
mechanics and fluent sequencing of coordinated motions
necessary to effect successful tying. Shoelace tying can be
accomplished via alternative methods (in regard to which
viewers differ in their familiarity). This fact presents a unique
opportunity to investigate the effects of viewer familiarity on
the processing of the complex motion stream that shoe-tying
generates.

In the current study, we investigated differences in adults’
processing of shoelace tying sequences that may arise in
conjunction with increasing familiarity (as when those who
understand the causal mechanics are introduced to a new
method). There are at least three methods for tying shoe laces
that achieve the same intentional outcome: loop, in which a
loop is created, another lace is wrapped around the loop and
a second loop is pulled through; ears, in which two loops are
created and tied together; and twist, in which both laces are
simultaneously manipulated to capture loops from opposing
fingers. In North America, adults tend to be familiar with
both the loop and ears methods, but prefer one of these
methods in their own tying (thus they have highest familiarity
with one particular method). In contrast, most North
American adults have little to no familiarity with the twist
method.
We predicted that, overall, methods that were less familiar
would elicit overall longer dwell times, and that this would
hold regardless of the specific details of the tying method
involved. We also expected to replicate the “boundary
advantage effect” found in previous dwell-time research;
specifically, that dwell times to boundary slides would be
significantly longer than to those for slides depicting withinunit content. However, we predicted that familiarity might
influence observers’ ability to detect and increase attention to
event boundaries. Thus, a boundary advantage might differ
systematically for more familiar versus more novel event
sequences.
An additional advantage of shoelace tying sequences is that
they allow for naturalistic repetition within the unfolding
event stream. That is, we were able to explore dwell time
patterns to the unfolding event once on a first shoe and again
for a second shoe. We predicted that dwell-time patterns
would differ from the first viewing (first shoe) to the second
viewing (second shoe) as participants gained experience with
a given shoelace-tying method. Thus, the above-mentioned
patterns were predicted to vary across first and second
viewings.

Method
Stimuli
Videos of the three methods of shoe tying were filmed on a
camera at a rate of 30fps. Videos of the loop, ears, and twist
methods were equal in length (each 139 seconds). Only the
actor’s shoes, socks, pant legs, and hands were visible in the
videos. To increase consistency across the slide shows
derived from the videos of the three methods of shoe tying,
the lead-in and completion portions of all three slide shows
were in fact identical. The slide shows differed only in their
middle portion, which contained the actions that were
distinctive to each method. Consistent with prior research,
slideshows were created by extracting one frame every
second from each of the three videos (e.g., Hard, Recchia,
and Tversky, 2011; Meyer, Baldwin, & Sage, 2011). The

1339

three resulting slideshows thus contained an identical number
of frames (N = 139). Sections of slides were classified as
causally distinctive (e.g., differing across the three
slideshows and unique to the method being demonstrated)
versus non-distinctive (e.g., depicting actions that did not
differ across the three methods, such as tying a double knot).
Two expert coders further classified slides as depicting
boundaries or within-unit action. Examples of images
depicting boundary and within-unit slides from each of the
three slideshows are depicted in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Example boundary and within-unit slides from
slideshows depicting the ears, loop, and twist methods.
Outline indicates boundary slides in all three slideshows. All
other slides depicted were categorized as within-unit.

Participants and Procedure
142 undergraduates (61% female, Mage = 20 years)
participated for course credit; data from three participants
were excluded from analyses due to experimenter error (2)
and illness. After a brief training phase to familiarize
participants with the self-paced slideshow format,
participants advanced at their own pace through three slide
shows (the three different shoelace tying methods, in
counterbalanced order across participants). Participants’
dwell times, or latency between mouse clicks from one slide
to the next, were recorded using Psychtoolbox (Brainard,
1997). Finally, participants were asked to rate their
familiarity with the three methods of shoe tying and to
demonstrate the method that they used every day.

Results
Dwell times greater than three standard deviations from the
overall group mean were considered outliers. Participants’
data were excluded from analyses when more than 10% of
their dwell times were outliers, resulting in the exclusion of
eight participants. Data from the remaining 131 participants
were positively skewed, as is typical for looking time data; a
log10 transformation was utilized to normalize the
distribution prior to analyses.
The shoelace tying method that participants used every day
(assessed by the shoe-tying demonstration task) was
classified as their most familiar method. For 75.9% of
participants this was the loop method and for 21.2%
participants this was the ears method. Only 2.9% of

participants identified the twist method as most familiar; their
data were excluded from further analysis due to the small
sample size. For purposes of analysis, participant’s other
highly-rated method (loop or ears depending on participants’
most familiar method) was classified as moderate familiarity
for each participant. For all participants included in analyses,
the twist method was classified as low familiarity. Thus, even
though participants’ high familiarity method was the method
most familiar to them, the details of the specific method
differed across subjects (i.e., for some the method of highest
familiarity was loop, and for others, it was ears).
Our first analysis examined whether viewers dwelt longer
to the degree that events were less familiar, and whether this
pattern held up regardless of their own preferred method of
tying (and thus the details of the specific method that was
high- versus mid-range in familiarity). Log10-transformed
dwell times (henceforth, simply “dwell times”) were
examined via a 3 (familiarity: high, mid, low) X 2 (preferred
method: loop vs. ears) mixed between-within ANOVA with
familiarity as the within-subjects variable and preferred
method as a between-subjects variable. We found a
significant main effect of familiarity, F(2, 258) = 5.17, p =
.006, 𝜂"# = .04, which, as predicted, displayed a significant
linear trend, F(1, 129) = 9.65, p = .002, 𝜂"# = .04 (MHighFam =
2.50, SEM = .02; MMidFam = 2.52, SEM = .02; MLowFam = 2.54,
SEM = .02). The main effect of preferred method did not
emerge as significant, F(1, 129) = 0.64, p = .426, 𝜂"# = .005,
nor did it interact with familiarity, F(2, 258) = 1.12, p = .327,
𝜂"# = .009. That is, the linear trend (lowest dwell times to
participants’ most familiar method and highest to their least
familiar method) held regardless of participants’ preferred
method for tying shoes and was robust to differences in the
details of which method was classified as low versus mid
familiarity. This linear trend of familiarity, combined with a
lack of interaction involving familiarity and preferred
method, confirms that dwell-times are responsive to
familiarity, regardless of the specifics of the particular
shoelace tying method at issue, which helps to further
validate dwell times as a meaningful index of viewers’
processing that is at least to some degree independent of
specific motion patterns.
In question with the second analysis was the extent to
which viewers displayed increased dwelling to slides
depicting event boundaries, relative to slides displaying
within-segment content, a basic question regarding
replication of prior findings. Also of interest in this analysis
was whether a “boundary advantage” was affected by a) the
familiarity of shoe-tying methods, and/or b) first versus
second viewing of a given method. A 2 (slide type: boundary
vs. within) X 3 (familiarity: high, mid, low) X 2 (viewing:
first vs. second) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted
to examine these effects. The main effect of slide type was
significant, F(1, 130) = 94.56, p < .001, 𝜂"# = .42, with
dwelling significantly longer to boundary slides (M = 2.52,
SEM = .016) than within-unit slides (M = 2.51, SEM = .016),

1340

replicating prior findings using the dwell time methodology.
The main effect of familiarity was also significant, F(2,
260) = 5.85, p = .003, 𝜂"# = .04, with a significant linear trend,
F(1, 130) = 11.20, p = .001, 𝜂"# = .04, reflecting increased
dwelling for methods that were less familiar, further
confirming what was reported in the first analysis.
Participants additionally displayed longer dwell times on first
(M = 2.53, SEM = .016) versus second viewing (M = 2.50,
SEM = .016), F(1, 130) = 40.82, p < .001, 𝜂"# = .24, also
indicative of dwelling reducing with increasing familiarity.
We found significant two-way interactions between
familiarity and slide type and between viewing and slide type,
ps < .05. However, we will leave these aside as they seemed
best interpreted in the context of a nearly significant threeway interaction between slide type, familiarity, and viewing,
F(2, 260) = 2.90, p = .06, 𝜂"# = .02. Simple effects tests
revealed that, on first viewing, dwell times to boundary slides
were significantly greater than dwell times to within-unit
slides across all levels of familiarity, all ps < .001. On the
second viewing, however, dwell times to boundary slides
were greater than dwell times to within-unit slides only for
the least familiar method, p < .001. For slideshows depicting
shoe tying methods at low and moderate levels of familiarity,
there was no significant difference in dwell times to boundary
versus within-unit slides on the second viewing, ps > 0.18.
These findings point to the boundary advantage being
responsive to the familiarity of the event sequence depicted.
A final exploratory analysis focused specifically on
reorganization in dwell times for the least familiar twist
method across viewings. As Figures 2 and 3 depict, a notable
surge in dwell times seemed to occur specifically for the
second viewing of the twist method at the most causally
distinctive portion of the shoe-tying sequence. Viewers
seemed to target the causally distinctive portion of the twist
slide show with sustained enhanced attention during their
second viewing. This analysis examined the degree to which
this was a systematic attentional increase from first to second
viewing, and whether viewing in relation to slide type
(boundary versus within slides) was affected equivalently by
this attentional enhancement. A 2 (slide type: boundary vs.
within) X 2 (distinctiveness: causally distinctive vs. not
causally distinctive) X 2 (viewing: first vs. second) repeatedmeasures ANOVA examined these effects for only the lowest
familiarity twist method of shoe tying. As expected, dwell
times were significantly longer to boundary slides (M = 2.54,
SEM = .02) than within-unit slides (M = 2.52, SEM = .02),
F(1, 130) = 52.63, p < .001, 𝜂"# = .29, and to distinctive
portions of the slideshow (M = 2.54, SEM = .02) than nondistinctive portions (M = 2.52, SEM = .02), F(1, 130) = 5.45,
p = .02, 𝜂"# = .04. Dwell times were also marginally
significantly longer on first (M = 2.54, SEM = .02) than
second viewing (M = 2.52, SEM = .02), F(1, 130) = 3.25, p =
.07, 𝜂"# = .02. Additionally, all two-way interactions were
significant or marginally significant: the slide type X
distinctiveness and distinctiveness X viewing interactions

were both significant (ps < .001) and the slide type X viewing
interaction was marginally significant (p = .08). However,
these effects must be interpreted in the context of a significant
three-way interaction between slide type, distinctiveness, and
viewing, F(1, 130) = 39.76, p < .001, 𝜂"# = .23. This
significant three-way interaction suggested that slide types
were affected differentially by attentional enhancement to the
causally distinctive portion of the twist slideshow. A
boundary advantage was observed only for non-distinctive
portions of the slideshow on first viewing (p < .001).
However, by the second viewing of the least familiar twist
sequence, participants’ dwell times were higher to boundary
slides than within-unit slides for the distinctive as well as the
non-distinctive portions of the slideshow (ps < .001).

Figures 2 and 3: Dwell-time patterns across low, mid, and
high familiarity slideshows on first (Figure 2) and second
(Figure 3) viewings.

Discussion
To recap briefly, we investigated the extent to which adults’
processing of shoelace tying sequences reorganized with
respect to familiarity with a given method of tying shoe laces,
and over repeated viewings of that method. We also
examined the extent to which enhanced attention to event
boundaries might be preserved over the course of such
attentional reorganization. Overall, less familiar methods of
shoe tying elicited longer average dwell times per slide, and
this was so regardless of the specific details of the tying
method involved. Replicating prior research, viewers
displayed enhanced attention to boundary slides relative to
slides depicting within-segment content. However, while this
boundary advantage was present on first viewing across all
three methods it disappeared on the second viewing for all
but the least familiar, twist, method. Moreover, analyses
focusing specifically on the least familiar twist method
revealed further striking evidence for attentional
reorganization. For the twist method, a boundary advantage
was observed for non-distinctive portions of the activity
stream (depicting activity familiar to viewers and similar
across all methods of shoe tying) on both viewings. In
contrast, for the causally distinctive portion of the shoe tying
sequence (depicting activity unique to the twist method), a
boundary advantage emerged only on the second viewing.
Thus viewers’ identification of boundaries within the twist

1341

activity stream underwent reorganization after just a single
exposure to this unfamiliar shoe tying method.
Of particular interest was the impact of repeated viewing
on observers’ enhanced attention to events. For shoe tying
sequences at high and moderate levels of familiarity, a
boundary advantage was present on first viewing and
markedly absent on second viewing. By the second viewing,
these two relatively familiar action streams no longer
contained predictability troughs -- regions of “predictable
unpredictability” -- and the boundary advantage effect was
reduced. For the least familiar method, in contrast,
participants continued to display selective attention to event
boundaries on second viewing, suggesting that just one
viewing hadn’t yet rendered the activity stream familiar and
predictable. Further examination revealed that, though the
overall boundary advantage remained, attention to event
boundaries underwent reorganization across repeated
viewings within this unfamiliar method.
Our final analysis, in particular, implicated enhanced
targeting of predictable unpredictability on second viewing
within the causally distinctive portion of the highly
unfamiliar twist method The “predictable unpredictability”
hypothesis suggests that observers must be able to identify
(predict) when unpredictability will occur in order to
selectively attend to these junctures. While viewers did not
selectively target unpredictability (event boundaries) with
increased attention in the causally distinctive portion of twist
tying on first viewing, just the that single first viewing
provided enough exposure to allow them to identify these
maximally informative regions as early as the second viewing
of this highly unfamiliar event. These findings showcase how
rapidly viewers reorganize attention as new action
information is first encountered and then incorporated to
guide event processing on subsequent viewings.
Our findings also offer incentive to extend related
questions to research with children, as shoelace tying is a skill
that is typically acquired at approximately five to eight years
of age. Additionally, the dwell-time paradigm has been
validated for use with preschoolers (Meyer, Baldwin, & Sage,
2011), suggesting that the current study might be amenable
to use with children who are at varying levels of shoe-tying
ability. Questions of interest include: How might
reorganization of streaming sensory information differ for
those who are at the cusp of acquiring this new skill? Would
variation in children’s executive function affect their ability
to effectively modulate attention to the unfolding event? How
might direct motor experience reshape children’s processing
of shoe-tying sequences as they are in the midst of acquiring
this basic motor skill? These and similar questions can inform
research on the acquisition of event processing fluency in
childhood.
The findings we report here further validate the usefulness
of the dwell-time paradigm for examining how viewers
deploy attention as they process dynamically unfolding
sensory streams. More specifically, these findings showcase

how attention readily reorganizes to cope with novelty as
dynamic activity sequences unfold across time. It will be
important to extend this methodology to other naturalistic
event sequences varying in familiarity; this effort is
underway. All in all, the current findings provide altogether
new information about the timing and nature of changes to
processing as novel event information is encountered.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Alan L. Baldwin, Rose
Maier, Jenny Mendoza, Robbie Ross, and Jason Wallin for
valuable conceptual input regarding this research.

References
Baldwin, D., Andersson, A., Saffran, J., & Meyer, M. (2008).
Segmenting dynamic human action via statistical structure.
Cognition, 106, 1382-1407.
Brainard, D.H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Hard, B., Recchia, G, & Tversky, B. (2011). The shape of
action. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 140,
586-604.
Huff, M., Papenmeier, F., & Zacks, J. M. (2012). Visual
target detection is impaired at event boundaries. Visual
Cognition, 1-17.
Kurby, C. A., & Zacks, J. M.(2008). Segmentation in the
perception and memory of events. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12, 72–79.
Meyer, M., Hard, B., & Baldwin, D. (in prep). Attention
reorganizes as structure is detected in dynamic human
action. Unpublished manuscript, University of Oregon.
Meyer, M., Baldwin, D. A., & Sage, K. (2011). Assessing
young children's hierarchical action segmentation.
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Newtson, D. (1973). Attribution and the unit of perception of
ongoing behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 28, 28–38.
Zacks, J. M. (2004). Using movement and intentions to
understand simple events. Cognitive Science, 28, 9791008.
Zacks, J. M., Kumar, S., Abrams, R. A., & Mehta, R. (2009).
Using movements and intentions to understand human
activity. Cognition, 112, 201–216.
Zacks, J. M., Kurby, C. A., Eisenberg, M. I., & Haroutunian,
N. (2011). Prediction error associated with the perceptual
segmentation of naturalistic events. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 23 (12), 4057-4066.
Zacks, J. M., & Swallow, K. M. (2007). Event segmentation,
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16(2), 80-84.
Zacks, J. M., Tversky, B., & Iyer, G. (2001). Perceiving,
remembering, and communicating structure in events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 29–58.

1342

