Alien species and alienable traits: An artificial language game investigating the
spread of cultural variants between antagonistic groups
Betsy Sneller (esnell@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania
255 South 36th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Gareth Roberts (gareth.roberts@ling.upenn.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania
255 South 36th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Abstract
The spread of cultural variants, such as dress or speech patterns, may be promoted or inhibited by different types of bias.
In model-based bias, variants are differentially adopted according to characteristics of individuals exhibiting them. A surprising case of cross-group adoption comes from sociolinguistic
fieldwork in which White speakers were observed exhibiting a
feature of African-American Vernacular English, in spite of expressing aggressively negative attitudes towards their AfricanAmerican neighbors. A likely explanation for this is that the
feature in question had become dissociated for these speakers
from the inalienable trait Blackness, but had retained associations with the more alienable trait of being “street” or tough.
We tested this by conducting an artificial-language experiment
in which groups of four participants played a computer game
that involved typing instant messages to each other, trading
resources, and fighting. Participants were assigned to one of
two mutually antagonistic “alien species” (weaker Wiwos and
tougher Burls) and learned an alien language with two speciesspecific dialects. In one condition, the Wiwos were told that
that Burl dialect was mainly used by Burls; in the other condition they were told it was mainly used by “tougher aliens”.
Burl variants were significantly more likely to be used by Wiwos in the latter condition than in the former, even though they
were associated with tougher aliens in both conditions. This
suggests that cultural variants linked to more alienable traits
are more likely to be adopted than those linked to inalienable
ones, even if the practical implications of the two traits are very
similar.
Keywords: language variation and change; dialect contact;
cultural evolution; artificial language

Introduction
A core process of cultural evolution is the propagation of cultural variants – such as styles of art, technology, or dress –
between individuals. Once a cultural variant has been innovated, it must spread to other individuals before cultural evolution can be said to have taken place. Crucially, this propagation occurs not only between the innovator and their immediate contacts, but also between the first contacts and their
own circles of influence. In this way, the borrowing or spread
of cultural variants is a crucial aspect of cultural evolution.
Linguistic examples of cultural evolution abound; indeed, a
conventional communication system like language relies for
its success on such propagation, and dialects or dialect features may spread to huge populations of speakers covering
vast geographic areas, as is the case for the Inland North dialect of North America, found in speakers across the Great
Lakes from Chicago, IL to Rochester, NY (Labov, Ash, &
Boberg, 2006). Like other cultural variables, speech patterns

also serve as social markers, however, and this can lead to
small-scale patterns of variation serving to distinguish social
groups, which may be defined on the basis of personality
traits such as “jocks” and “burnouts” (Eckert, 2000) or inherent attributes such as gender (Eisikovits, 1981).
For cultural variables to serve as social group markers in
this way, there has to be a mechanism that limits their spread
outside group boundaries. One mechanism, compatible with
a neutral evolutionary model, is variation in the frequency
with which individuals interact. Alternatively, individuals
may be biased in their adoption of variants. Richerson and
Boyd (2006, p. 69) distinguished between three kinds of bias,
which may operate in isolation or in combination with one
another: content-based bias, based on the nature of a variant,
frequency-based bias, based on its commonness or rarity,1
and model-based bias, based on characteristics of individuals bearing the variant.
In this paper we will focus on model-based bias in the
transmission of linguistic variants, and will draw a distinction between two kinds of characteristics that the model might
have. The first, which we term inalienable traits, are characteristics of the model that are inherent to the individual,
and effectively do not change, such as height, race, or sex.
The second kind, which we term alienable traits, are characteristics that are acquired, and may be learned or abandoned
over time, such as “honest” or “mean.” This distinction matters, assuming that model-based adoption of a cultural variant
is driven by a desire to be associated with characteristics of
a cultural variant’s bearers. We may expect variants linked
to inalienable traits to be mainly adopted by other bearers
of those traits, and variants linked to alienable traits to be
adopted by a wider range of individuals. High school girls,
for example, may be more likely to adopt their male classmates’ speech patterns if those speech patterns are associated predominately with some desirable alienable quality, like
coolness, than if they’re strongly associated with being a boy.
Similarly, White speakers and African American speakers have been observed to diverge from each other in both
phonology and morphology within local dialects (Wolfram,
2004; Fisher & Labov, 2015; Van Herk, 2008). Where con1 This

should be distinguished from the role of frequency in neutral evolution, where variants may come to dominate as a result of
sampling error; frequency-based bias, by contrast, can involve the
selection of a variant on the basis of perceived rarity.

2591

vergence occurs across racial lines, it is typically toward a
prestigious mainstream dialect, associated more with such
alienable traits as education, wealth and power than with race.
Cross-racial shifts towards local White or African American
dialect occur rarely, and usually in cases where the speaker in
question holds strong social ties with speakers of the relevant
dialect (Fix, 2010; Sweetland, 2002). Other cases involve
more temporary shifts in which features are appropriated, allowing the claiming of social capital that comes through association with urban Blackness, such as “coolness” (Ibrahim,
1999; Cutler, 1997), by speakers relatively well disposed toward (their perception of) urban Black culture.
A striking and unusual counterexample to this was reported by Sneller (2014), who conducted fieldwork in which
White speakers in a South Philadelphia neighborhood were
found to be exhibiting (TH)-fronting, a feature of AfricanAmerican Vernacular English (AAVE) that is well attested
among African-American speakers in South Philadelphia
(and elsewhere), but otherwise entirely unattested among
White speakers in Philadelphia. The White speakers in question not only lacked strong social ties with African Americans, but they also espoused violently negative attitudes toward their African American neighbors. Sneller hypothesized
that this paradoxical situation would be explicable if (TH)fronting had become dissociated from being African American, an inalienable trait, and had instead become an index of
street culture (Anderson, 1999) or toughness. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that all the speakers who exhibited
the feature were males who were involved in street activities,
such as drug deals and the stolen bike trade. Furthermore,
one of the White speakers with the highest rates of fronting
and one of the strongest negative attitudes toward his African
American neighbors explicitly identified the fronted variants
as “street,” rather than as a feature associated with AAVE.

Figure 1: Players randomly assigned to species. There were
two Burls and two Wiwos in each trial.

thus providing a middle-ground between ethnographic studies and computational simulations (see Galantucci & Roberts,
2012, for further discussion of the advantages of this approach). Third, the method allows language change to be
observed much more rapidly than would be the case outside
the laboratory. Finally, the approach has some advantages
over more traditional artificial-language learning experiments
(Folia, Uddén, De Vries, Forkstam, & Petersson, 2010), particularly for investigating questions with a sociolinguistic dimension. Rather than being explicitly quizzed on their knowledge of the artificial language and the social correlates of variants within the language, participants in this paradigm use the
language to accomplish a nonlinguistic primary task. This
helps to reduce the effect of the Observer’s Paradox (Labov,
1972), wherein participants may alter their behavior as a result of being observed.

Method

Experimental paradigm
While ethnographic studies like that of Sneller (2014) play
an important role in informing models of linguistic (and other
cultural) change, they do not allow hypotheses to be tested directly. Further ethnographic investigation in cases like this is
also hampered by ethical concerns surrounding the involvement of serious racial tensions (including violently aggressive attitudes) and criminal activity. To test Sneller’s hypothesis – and, more broadly, to investigate the role of alienable
and inalienable traits in cultural transmission – we therefore
conducted an experimental simulation, following an artificiallanguage paradigm developed by Roberts (2008, 2010), in
which participants play a game with each other as aliens, and
communicate by typing messages in a small artificial “alien
language”. Especially when employed in conjunction with
studies of real-world data, this approach has a number of advantages.
First, it avoids the methodological and ethical hurdles
noted above. Second, by employing a miniature artificial language, researchers are able to apply laboratory control without compromising on the cognitive plausibility of the agents,

Participants
Eighty students from the University of Pennsylvania participated, in groups of four, for course credit.

Procedure
Overview The experiment involved groups of four participants playing a computer game with each other. At the start
of the trial, each participant was led to a separate cubicle containing a computer and was asked to log in by entering their
name. Having does this, each participant was automatically
assigned to one of two “alien species”: the tough Burls and
the weak Wiwos (Figure 1). They were then presented with
the game instructions (Figure 2). As well as explaining how
the game worked, these identified the species assigned to the
player in question and provided information about both Wiwos and Burls, emphasizing that Burls were tougher than Wiwos and that the two species did not always get along. The
difference in toughness was reinforced by images and by the
names “Wiwo” and “Burl”. Both the Wiwos and the Burls
were explicitly told that the Burls were tougher than the Wi-

2592

Table 1: Sample Wiwo Wordlist in “Tough Talk” Condition

Figure 2: Instruction Screen, as presented to a Burl player.

wos, that the two species didn’t always get along, and that the
two species were nevertheless sometimes prepared to do business with each other in the Marketplace. In this way, we replicate the cultural setting found in Sneller (2014), where two
groups may feel antagonistic toward each other but still interact. Once all participants had confirmed that they had read the
instructions and had no questions, they were given an alien
language to learn, presented in the form of a wordlist (see
Table 1 for an example and the section on Alien Language
for more details). Then they played four practice rounds before beginning the game proper, which consisted of twelve
rounds. The object of the game was to win points by gaining
resources from other aliens, by fighting or trading with them.
The winner was announced at the end of the game. See below
for more details of how the game worked.

hello/goodbye
yes
no/not

buzuki (or fuzuki*)
boti (or foti*)
kibo (or kifo*)

I/me
you

repa
neba (or nefa*)

have
want/need
fight
give

teme
lovite
bolu (or folu*)
viluha

water
meat
grain

tiluge
ginuda
jubu (or jufu*)

(*Tougher aliens tend to use f instead
of b in words)

Alien language The alien language consisted of twelve
words, each consisting of two or three CV syllables and a
minimal phonemic inventory of five vowels and sixteen consonants. There were two “dialects” of the language, which
differed from each other with respect to both consonants (f
vs. b) and vowels (e vs. i and o vs. u). Each dialect was assigned to one of the two species at random before the experiment began, so that Burls would sometimes learn words with
f as their native variants, and sometimes with b. (See Table 1 for an example wordlist given to Wiwos.) We chose to
vary letter representations to approximate phonological variation between the two dialects. In one dialect, b corresponds
to f in the other, and central vowels e and o are raised to i
and u. There were several advantages of focusing on quasiphonological variation rather than syntactic or morphological variation. First, Sneller (2014) focused on phonological variants. Second, this simplified the task for participants, who had only to acquire words, and not syntax. Finally, borrowing across dialects is in general more likely to
occur in lexical items or phonological features than in structural elements such as phonemic inventory or syntactic structure (Thomason & Kaufman, 1988). Thus by focusing on
quasi-phonological features, we more closely approximate

real-world cross-dialectal borrowing.
Participants were exposed to the wordlists immediately after reading the game instructions, and were given approximately 14 minutes to learn the language, broken up as follows. First they had two minutes to study their wordlists.
Then they played four practice rounds (each lasting approximately two and a half minutes), where they were able to
practice the mechanics of the game (including chatting with
each other by typing messages) with their wordlists on screen.
After this they had two more minutes to study the language
before the game proper began, in which participants had no
access to wordlists. We note that in real languages, linguistic innovations are more frequent in informal speech registers
than in formal registers (Labov, 2001). In this experiment,
participants were not explicitly told anything about the register they were speaking in. However, as online chatting is an
informal register (Tagliamonte & Denis, 2008), and as participants were able to engage in fighting and insulting one another, it is expected that the experiment most closely aligned
with informal speech.
Game structure Each player began the game with 22
points, distributed unevenly between three resources (water, meat, and grain2 ) and shown on the left of the screen
(Figure 2), and a toughness score (hidden from the player).
Toughness scores varied such that, while a Burl could in principle be beaten in a fight by a Wiwo, Burls were the tougher
species (a fact of which players were made aware).
The goal of the game was to obtain more points by trading resources, winning fights, or scaring off opponents. A
2 The distribution of points over three resources had no practical
significance in the game, but was designed to provide more to talk
about in the Chat Stage.

2593

and Wiwos would meet Wiwos; in the other half, Burls would
meet Wiwos. The order in which these meetings occurred,
however, was randomized.

Figure 3: Beginning of the Action Stage. Chat displayed in
the main box, resources displayed to the left, action choices
displayed in the upper left corner, and a picture of the interlocutor displayed on the right.

game consisted of 12 rounds, each of which consisted of four
stages. The first was the Setup stage, during which participants did not yet know who they would meet that round and
could choose which resources they wanted to take with them
to “the marketplace.” After 20 seconds this stage ended and
the Chat stage began, in which each participant was paired
with another participant in the marketplace. The species of
that alien was shown via a picture that appeared on the top
right of the screen. During this stage, which lasted approximately two minutes, participants could chat with each other
by typing messages using instant messaging software. At the
end of the Chat Stage, the Action Stage began, in which players could decide whether they wanted to challenge their interlocutor to a fight or offer them resources in the hope of getting
resources in return (see 3). They could also choose to do nothing. A participant who was challenged to a fight could choose
to stand their ground or run away. If they stood their ground,
the result of the fight was determined probabilistically based
on a normal distribution with the player’s toughness as the
mean. As stated above, Burls were more likely to win fights
against Wiwos, but were not guaranteed to do so.
Any resources given away were worth double to the receiver. A player who lost a fight would lose half of the resources they were carrying; a player who ran away would
lose only a third. The winner of a fight would get the resources lost by the loser, multiplied by three. A player whose
opponent ran away would get the resources that individual left
behind multiplied by five. These values were chosen to take
into account the value of leaving a potential battle unscathed.
In other words, a player was better off scaring an opponent
away than beating them in a fight and better off running away
than losing a fight.
Following the Action Stage, participants were given feedback about the results of the round. Then a new round began.
In half the rounds, Burls would meet Burls in the Chat Stage

Experimental Conditions There were two conditions. In
the “Burl Talk” condition, Wiwos were told that Burls sometimes used different variants. In the “Tough Talk” condition,
Wiwos were told that “tougher aliens” sometimes used different variants (Table 1). In both conditions, Wiwos were exposed to the same instruction screen, which associated Burls
with toughness. Thus, in both conditions the variation was
implicitly associated with both Burlness and toughness; the
experimental variation was in the explicit association of the
variation.
In both conditions, consonantal variation was explicitly
marked for the Wiwos but the vocalic variation was not. This
is shown in Table 1, which displays a wordlist provided to the
Wiwos. This difference in feature marking allowed us, as a
secondary question, to investigate the effect of the manipulation on less salient features.

Results
Practice rounds were excluded from analysis. All words
used by participants in the game proper were extracted automatically from transcripts. Because participants might use
forms not included in the wordlists, as a result of typing errors, memory errors, or deliberate innovation, every word was
matched automatically to the most likely intended word based
on Levenshtein distance.3 Rates of native and non-native consonant use were calculated by speaker species and interlocutor species. Given our research question, we focus here only
on patterns for Wiwos. All p-values were calculated using a
Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
Consonantal Variation Wiwo participants demonstrated
high rates of consonantal borrowing in both conditions (Figure 4). Our hypothesis was that alienable-trait-linked features
would be more frequently borrowed than features linked to an
inalienable trait. In other words, we expected Wiwos to borrow Burl consonants at a higher rate under the “Tough Talk”
condition than the “Burl Talk” condition. Our data supported
this hypothesis: Wiwos borrowed Burl consonants significantly more in the Tough Talk condition (µ = 0.74, sd = 0.33)
than in the Burl Talk condition (µ = 0.47, sd = 0.31) , regardless of interlocutor (T = 2.54, p = 0.015).
Furthermore, in the Tough Talk condition, Wiwos did not
exhibit a difference (T = 0.81, p = 0.42) in the rates of borrowed features between chatting with a Burl interlocutor (µ
= 0.74, sd = 0.33) and a Wiwo interlocutor (µ = 0.65, sd =
0.33). This suggests that in the Tough Talk condition, Wiwo
participants treated the “tough” variant as a feature of their
own dialect.
However, Wiwos did exhibit a difference in the rates of
3 The analysis was also rerun excluding any forms not found in
the wordlists; the pattern of results did not change. The same is true
if practice rounds are included.

2594

between the experimental conditions. To Burls in the Tough
Talk condition (µ = 0.08, sd = .07) and Burl Talk condition (µ
= 0.15, sd = 0.18), the difference was not significant (T = 1.6,
p = 0.1). Likewise, to Wiwos in the Tough Talk condition (µ =
0.02, sd = 0.04) and Burl Talk Condition (µ = 0.01, sd = 0.02),
the difference was also not significant (T = 0.6, p = 0.5). This
lack of a difference between experimental conditions are consistent with our hypothesis: Since vocalic variation was associated with neither alienable nor inalienable traits, we should
expect to find participants borrowing Burl vowels at the same
rate in both experimental conditions. Second, Wiwos used
Burl vowels more when talking to Burls (µ = 0.08, sd = 0.07)
than when talking to Wiwos (µ = 0.02, sd = 0.04), regardless
of experimental condition (T = 2.89, p = 0.007). This is consistent with rates of consonantal borrowing in the Burl Talk
condition, as discussed above. In other words, the difference
between rates of Burl vowels when chatting with Burls compared to Wiwos suggests that participants accommodated to
their interlocutors even when variation was not made salient.

Wiwo use of Burl Consonants
n.s.	  

1.00

*	  

*	  

***	  

Proportion use

0.75
Condition
Tough
Talk

0.50

Burl
Talk

0.25

0.00
To Burls

To Wiwos

Interlocutor

Figure 4: Wiwo use of Burl Consonants. Error bars show
standard error.

Discussion

Wiwo use of Burl Vowels
1.00

Proportion use

0.75
Condition
Tough
Talk

**	  

0.50

Burl
Talk

n.s.	  
0.25

n.s.	  

0.00
To Burls

To Wiwos

Interlocutor

Figure 5: Wiwo use of Burl Vowels. Error bars show standard
error.

borrowed features between interlocutor type in the Burl Talk
condition (T = 2.55, p = 0.015). In this condition, Wiwos
used significantly more Burl consonants when chatting with
Burls (µ = 0.47, sd = 0.31) than when chatting with Wiwos (µ
= 0.22, sd = 0.22). This behavior can be explained in terms
of accommodation, whereby Wiwos in this condition were
not treating the variants in question as a feature of their own
dialect but rather converging with their interlocutors.
Vocalic Variation In addition to analyzing the rates of consonantal borrowing in both experimental conditions, we also
analyzed the rates of vocalic borrowing. As shown in Figure
5, Wiwo participants did not engage in high rates of vocalic
borrowing from their Burl interlocutors.
There are several results to be discussed in the vowel data.
First, there is no statistical difference in the use of Burl vowels

We conducted an experiment in which participants learned artificial languages with quasi-phonological dialectal variation.
We tested whether variants were more likely to be adopted
when they were associated with an alienable traits than with
an inalienable trait (species). As expected, we found higher
rates of consonant adopton in the former case. These results
are consistent with the patterns of real-world dialect borrowing found by Sneller (2014), who argued that White speakers who borrowed (TH)-fronting from their AAVE speaking
neighbors did so because the feature had become associated
with “street” identity and dissociated from urban Blackness.
An important point to be made about our study is that Wiwos can be said to be outsiders with respect to both the alienable trait (toughness) and the inalienable trait (Burls). That
is, it was made clear not only that Wiwos and Burls were
different species, but that the Burls were the tougher aliens.
The rates of adoption of the “tough” variants by the Wiwos in
the Tough Talk Condition is thus quite striking. At the same
time, a limitation of the study is that participants were exposed to the variation during the learning phase of the game.
In other words, the experiment can be seen as modeling a situation in which (in)alienable-trait-linked variation is already
well established in the borrowing community. An important
next step, currently underway, is to run the experiment without exposure to the variation during the learning phase, thus
modeling an earlier stage in the spread of cultural variants.
Finally, we also note that there is an important practical
difference in the benefits of Wiwos adopting the new variant
between the Burl Talk and the Tough Talk condition. That is,
in the Burl Talk condition, Wiwos gain no practical advantage
by using the Burl features. In the Tough Talk condition, on
the other hand, there is the possibility that a Wiwo using the
tough features may signal actual toughness. In terms of the
game, perceived toughness has a practical benefit: it may con-

2595

vince the other player not to start a fight or even to run away
if the tough-talking Wiwo starts the fight. In other words, it
may be the combination of alienable trait and practical desirability that promotes the adoption of the tough features by
Wiwos in the Tough Talk condition, and not the sole fact of
alienability. We are currently undertaking a follow-up experiment to test whether adoption still occurs in the Tough Talk
condition when there is an absence of practical benefit.

Conclusions
The aim of the study reported here was to investigate the role
of two kinds of model-based bias in the adoption of cultural
variants, namely quasi-phonological variants in an artificiallanguage game. The results of the experiment support a distinction between two types of model-based bias: alienable
traits such as “tough” and inalienable traits such as race.
We found support for the hypothesis that, given two hostile
groups that differ with respect to both an alienable and an
inalienable trait, individuals from one group are more likely
to adopt cultural variants linked to the alienable than to the
inalienable trait.

References
Anderson, E. (1999). Code of the street: Decency, violence
and the moral life of the inner city. New York: W. W.
Norton and Company.
Cutler, C. (1997). Yorkville crossing: A case study of the influence of hip hop culture on the speech of a white middle
class adolescent in New York City. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics, 4(1), 371–397.
Eckert, P. (2000). Linguistic variation as social practice:
The linguistic construction of identity in Belten High. Oxford/Cambridge MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Eisikovits, E. (1981). Inner-Sydney English: An investigation of grammatical variation in adolescent speech. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Sydney.
Fisher, S., & Labov, W. (2015). African American phonology
in a Philadelphia community. In S. Lanehart (Ed.), The
Oxford handbook of African American language (pp. 256–
279).
Fix, S. (2010). Representations of Blackness by White
women: Linguistic practice in the community versus the
media. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics, 16(2), 55–65.
Folia, V., Uddén, J., De Vries, M., Forkstam, C., & Petersson,
K. M. (2010). Artificial language learning in adults and
children. Language Learning, 60, 188–220.
Galantucci, B., & Roberts, G. (2012). Experimental Semiotics: An engine of discovery for understanding human
communication. Advances in Complex Systems, 15(3–4),
115–26.
Ibrahim, A. (1999). Becoming Black: Rap and hip-hop, race,
gender, identity, and the politics of ESL learning. TESOL
Quarterly, 33, 349–369.
Labov, W.
(1972).
Sociolinguistic Patterns.
Oxford/Cambridge MA: Wiley-Blackwell.

Labov, W. (2001). Principles of linguistic change: Social
factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W., Ash, S., & Boberg, C. (2006). The Atlas of
North American English: Phonetics, phonology and sound
change. The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter.
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2006). Not by genes alone:
How culture transformed human evolution. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Roberts, G. (2008). Language and the freerider problem: An
experimental paradigm. Biological Theory, 3(2), 174–183.
Roberts, G. (2010). An Experimental Study of the Role of
Social Selection and Frequency of Interaction in Linguistic
Diversity. Interaction Studies, 11(10), 138–159.
Sneller, B. (2014). Antagonistic contact and inverse affiliation: Appropriation of /TH/-fronting by White speakers
in South Philadelphia. University of Pennsylvania Working
Papers in Linguistics, 20(2).
Sweetland, J. (2002). Unexpected but authentic use of an
ethnically-marked dialect. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 6:4,
514–538.
Tagliamonte, S., & Denis, D. (2008). Linguistic ruin?
LOL! instant messaging and teen language. American
Speech(83.1), 3–34.
Thomason, S., & Kaufman, T. (1988). Language contact,
creolization, and genetic linguistics. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Van Herk, G. (2008). Fear of a Black phonology: The Northern Cities Shift as linguistic White flight. University of
Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics, 14(2).
Wolfram, W. (2004). The grammar of urban African American Vernacular English. In B. Kortmann & E. Schneider
(Eds.), Handbook of varieties of English (pp. 111–132).

2596

