An Analysis of Frame Semantics of Continuous Processes
McFate, Clifton (c-mcfate@northwestern.edu)
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
2133 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA

Forbus, Kenneth (forbus@northwestern.edu)
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
2133 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA

Abstract

Qualitative Process Theory

Qualitative Process theory provides a formal representation
for human-like models of continuous processes. Prior
research mapped qualitative process elements onto English
language constructions, but did not connect the
representations to existing frame semantic resources. Here we
identify and classify QP language constituents through their
instantiation in FrameNet frames to provide a unified
semantics for linguistic and non-linguistic representations of
processes. We demonstrate that all core QP relations can map
to FN, though larger QP evoking phrasal constructions do
exist outside of this mapping. We conclude with a corpus
analysis showing that these frames occur in natural text
involving a variety of continuous processes.

In QP theory, changes within a continuous system are
always the result of processes. Causality starts with direct
influences, which express the relationship between the rate
of a process and the constrained quantity. A direct influence
provides partial knowledge of a differential equation, where
the set of direct influences must be combined to determine
derivatives. Indirect influences propagate the direct effects
of processes through the rest of a system, by providing
partial information about instantaneous (e.g. algebraic)
causal relationships. Consider water flow into a tub. A direct
influence holds between the flow rate and the amount of
water in the tub. An indirect influence holds between the
amount of water and the water level. Processes are
represented by model fragments which describe the
participating entities, the conditions under which instances
of it are active, and what consequences hold when active.
The conditions typically include ordinal relationships
involving a quantity and one of its limit points.
A system that acquires model fragments from text could
reason about real-world scenarios, predicting, for example,
that our tub of water may overflow. However, the
incremental nature of language makes extracting complete
models from text difficult. We turn to frame semantics to
provide flexibility, and view this research as a step towards
systems that learn by reading about the continuous world.

Keywords: Frame Semantics; Qualitative Reasoning

Introduction & Background
Daily life requires interacting with, and reasoning about,
continuous processes. They can be as common as coffee
flowing into your mug or as abstract as economic growth.
Despite their mathematical complexity, people rapidly
generate predictions based on mental models of these
situations. Forbus’ (1984) qualitative process (QP) theory
provides a formal language for representing mental models
of continuous systems. QP theory is domain general and
there is evidence supporting qualitative models as a mental
representation. For example, Friedman et al (2011) use
qualitative representations to simulate conceptual change,
and demonstrate intermediate states of knowledge found in
middle-school students (Sherin et al, 2012).
An important issue is bridging the gap between these
cognitive models of change and purely linguistic models.
Doing so illuminates the semantics of continuous processes
and lays groundwork for systems that learn from and reason
with natural language (McFate, Forbus, & Hinrichs, 2014).
Kuehne (2004) developed QP frames, a frame semantic
representation inspired by Fillmore et al’s (2001) FrameNet.
This approach was expanded by McFate et al ( 2014). While
useful, both approaches had limited coverage and did not
connect QP frames to existing frame semantic resources.
We bridge that gap by providing a QP mapping of specific
process types in FrameNet as well as their constraints, e.g.
limit points, which mark the boundaries of qualitative states.
We evaluate our mapping on science texts, but expect our
approach to be domain general.

Frame Semantics
Semantic frames are conceptual schemas that relate lexical
items in a sentence to their role in a semantic description
(Fillmore, Wooters, & Baker, 2001). Fillmore et al’s (2001)
FrameNet is a frame semantics for English. FrameNet
frames are evoked by a frame-bearing lexical unit (LU). The
dependent structures in the sentence form arguments to that
frame’s frame elements (FEs). For example, the Motion
frame includes frame elements for the Source, Goal, and
Theme. It is instantiated in a specific construction by a
frame evoking LU such as the word fly in “The bird flew to
Florida”. Here, the NP subject fills the FE of Theme and the
prepositional phrase fills the FE of Goal. The specific
grammatical instantiation of these roles is called a valence
pattern for that lexical unit.
Baker, Fillmore & Cronin (2003) present inter-frame

836

relationships including inheritance and subframe. A frame
that inherits from a parent has a corresponding frame
element for each element of the parent and can introduce
others. The subframe relation allows frames to act as
ordered arguments to another frame, forming a kind of
script. These relations create a frame-lattice with top-level
frames like Event and specialized inheritors like Motion.

QP Language
Kuehne (2004) recast QP theory in a frame-semantic
representation to better handle compositionality in language.
Quantity frames fill the argument slots of direct and indirect
influence frames. The influences participate in quantity
transfer descriptions and process frames which capture the
results and activation conditions of a process. We adopt a
representation closer to FrameNet’s, with influences and
quantities related through shared lexical units (see Figure 1)
This change from previous work (McFate et al, 2014)
facilitates extracting partial information when grammatical
constructions leave out required roles (e.g. an agent).
Kuehne (2004) identified several patterns that instantiated
QP frames, and used them to extract QP frames from text,
using neo-Davidsonian lexical representations from the Cyc
KB1. McFate et al (2014) extended this approach and
introduced narrative functions (Tomai, 2009) to guide
disambiguation. This system was limited by the coverage of
Cyc’s semantic templates, and it also became evident that a
finer-grained set of distinctions would be useful. Integrating
QP frames with FrameNet helps solve both problems by
providing valence patterns by frame type. It benefits frame
semantics by providing representations for mental models.
Next we provide FrameNet mappings for each QP frame:
direct influence, process, indirect influence, quantity, and
ordinal. We also discuss how limit points are represented.

Figure 1: QP frames for a sentence

spill can be causative whereas flow is only inchoative e.g.
“The boy spilled the juice.”
*”The boy flowed the juice.”
“The juice flowed from the box.”
While our analysis covers many physical processes, it is
not intended to be exhaustive. Instead, it is exemplary of the
productivity of mapping these resources.

Inchoative
There is no root frame for all events that don’t require an
agent. We examine an inheritor of Event, Motion. We
also examine non-agent-requiring state-change frames.
Motion
Basic motion in is captured with the Motion frame, which
has many inheritors. We use Fluidic_Motion as an
example. Tables in the following sections illustrate valence
patterns for target frames. For example, Table 1 summarizes
Fluidic_Motion patterns and their alignment to DI frames.
Table 1

Unifying FrameNet with QP Frames
Continuous processes are process verbs and nominalized
verbs in English. Since direct influences are only allowed
within processes, we start with them. The direct influence
(DI) frame has constrained and constrainer entities,
constrained and constrainer quantities and quantity types, as
well as a sign. The constrainer entity is the process itself,
and the sign indicates the direction of contribution for the
rate. We introduce an agentive causer FE motivated
differences between causative and inchoative constructions,
as discussed below.
FrameNet has many frames that instantiate continuous
processes and DIs. A straightforward mapping for these
frames aligns QP elements to potential FN elements. Figure
1 provides an example of Fluidic_motion.
We now walk down part of the FN hierarchy for Event
verbs, and examine the additional valence patterns at each
layer. We begin with a broad distinction between causative
(with an agent) and inchoative constructions. For example,
1

Valence Pattern
Example
FrameNet Frames
Water flows to the
Fluidic Motion:
DI+ NP-V-PP
basin.
Core: Goal, Source,
Cnd-Qtype
Cnd-Ent
Path,
Fluid, Area
NP<ext>
PP[to]<dep>
Non-core: Speed
PP[into]<dep>
PP[in]<dep>
Water flows from the
DI- : NP-V-PP
basin
Cnd-QType
Cnd-Ent
NP<ext>
PP[from]<dep>
PP[out]<dep>

The left-hand column illustrates valence patterns that
instantiate the QP elements (here the constrained quantity
type and entity). The patterns are presented with FrameNet
grammatical functions. The most common are ext, dep,
and obj which indicate an external argument (subject), verb
dependent, or object. The top left cell of Table 1 says that a
positive DI can appear with an NP subject and PP dependent
instantiating the quantity type and entity.
For motion, positive direct influences correspond to frame
instantiations that include the Goal while negative direct

http://www.cyc.com/platform/researchcyc, v4.0

837

Figure 2: Agentive and Non-Agent Mapping
influences correspond to the Source FE. The constrained
quantity corresponds to the Theme in the Motion frame and
its corresponding element in the inheritors (ie. Fluid).
These can also appear in a single ditransitive prepositional
form e.g. “X flows from Y to Z”. Each of the sub-frames
that evoke this pattern evokes a DI, but not all possible
valence patterns for motion do. For example, Motion can
have Path or Area FEs that can occur in isolation e.g.
“Joe ran through the long tunnel”
“Joe ran around the room”
These valence patterns instantiate a motion process, but
would require additional sentences to specify a DI.
State_Change & Conversion
State change processes can be represented as a pair of
direct influences representing the increase in substance at
one phase and decrease in substance at another (e.g. steam
and water). This is an important representational decision in
because it separates state-changes from their preconditions.
Thus the same NP-V-PP structure in state-change can
introduce two influences based on the semantics of the verb
(Table 2). FrameNet captures inchoative state-change with
the Change_of_phase. The core element, Undergoer, is
the changing entity. This differs from prior analyses of flow
and motion, because they are referring to an event without
referring to the details of what happened during it (e.g. “The
water boils away”).
Table 2
Valence Pattern
Example
DI+ : Resultative-State The water froze to
Cnd-QType Cnd-Ent ice.
PP[to]<ext> NP<ext>
DI- : Resultative-State
Cnd-QType Cnd-Ent
NP<ext>
NP<ext>
The water froze.
DI- : NP-V
Cnd-QType Cnd-Ent
DEN
NP<ext>

FrameNet Frames
Change_of_phase:
Core: Undergoer
Non-core: Result, Speed,
Place

conversion interpretation is supported by multiple PP
attachments as in “The water froze from liquid to ice”.
Thus, our mapping extends the Change_of_phase frame
to include required initial and final states. This puts our
interpretation closer to the Undergo_Change and
Cause_Change frames which include verbs such as
change, convert, and turn.

Causative
Causative verbs appear in additional constructions. Many
verbs appear in both the causative and inchoative.
We begin with Transitive_Action which includes
causative frames such as Cause_Motion and
cause_Change_Of_Phase. Each of the verbs under
Transitive_Action inherits its required Agent FE.
Cause_motion verbs, with their mandatory Agent or
Cause, appear in additional patterns. For example, the
subject of the sentence can be the entity: “The plant creates
energy”. Here, the plant does not necessarily gain the
energy. It is not the constrained entity of the DI, but its role
as agent is vital to the model. This motivates adding an
agentiveCauser FE which allows for these entity-less
causal constructions. These DIs can also appear with
prepositional attachments that specify the entity as well as in
a passive. (Table 3).
Table 3
Valence Pattern

Example
FrameNet Frames
New York pumps Cause_fluidic_motion:
water from the
Core: Goal, Source,
Cnd-QType
Cnd-Ent
subway.
Path, Fluid, Area,
NP<obj>
PP[from]<dep>
Agent/Cause
DI +/- NP V NP PP

PP[to]<dep>
…
DI+: Passive
Cnd-QType
NP<obj>

Cnd-Ent

Water is spilled
from the bucket.

PP<from>

Again, differences in semantic meanings across verbs
results in different interpretations of the same construction.
Create for example, with the preposition for creates a
benefactive where the entity becomes the PP dependent

This is clearest in the intransitive where the resulting
state, ice, is indicated only by the verb, freeze. In contrast,
intransitive motion may indicate a process but does not
specify the predicates (from/to) needed for a full DI. Our

838

rather than the NP subject. This same construction leaves
the entity underspecified when used with cause_Motion or
even the Destroying Frame. The mappings discussed so
far are represented graphically in Figure 2.

sentence. An example would be heat or pressure. The
entity is the object that the quantity attribute pertains to.
An optional quantityValue and quantityUnit FE relate
the quantity to numerical data. The optional
signOfDerivative can indicate a direction of change.
Quantity evoking units include words such as “heat” or
“volume”. These fit best in the Measurable_attribute
frame, though it has thus far only been applied to gradable
adjectives (e.g. the hot brick). Furthermore, in FrameNet the
frame explicitly evokes deviation from a norm.
Quantity frames often rely on possession to indicate the
entity. These instantiations map to the Possession frame
and include possessive verbs (e.g. have) and genitive
constructions, though only a subset of Possession verbs is
suitable. A counterexample is “The brick owns mass.”
Containment also links quantities to entities. One can
describe the “energy contained in the boiler” or separate out
quantities with “the air and water pressure in the container”.
These constructions fit into the Containers and
Containing frame.
The QType can be compositional with the unit. This
occurs in constructions with measurement phrases (Table 5).
Table 5

Constrainers
So far we have ignored rates. Kuehne (2004) found that
English frequently left rates implicit. Non-causative frames
above contain the non-core Speed FE which includes rate
constructions (e.g. at a rate of X per Y). For process frames
lacking the Speed element, we implicitly encode the rate as
the constrainer quantityType.

Indirect Influences
The indirect influence frame has a consequent and
antecedent quantity, quantityType, and entity,
as well as a sign. It maps to the Contingency and
Objective_Influence frames, both of which have a
frame element corresponding to a causal (antecedent) and
dependent (consequent) entity. These LUs can be modified
with an adverb such as negatively to reverse directionality.
Contingency includes verbs like depend which use a
prepositional attachment to indicate the independent
variable. Objective_Influence appears in a transitive
and passive construction. A similar mapping holds to the
Actor and Affected of the Causation frame, as in:
“Deforestation causes less carbon to be taken out of the
atmosphere.” This sentence indicates a constraint on carbon
absorption tied to amount of deforestation. Similar patterns
tie the rates of two processes together: “Heating water
causes it to boil.” Disambiguating whether the rate or
governed quantity is the antecedent frequently requires
domain knowledge.
Several phrasal constructions can indicate covariance and
thus evoke an indirect influence (Table 4). Construction 1 is
the comparative correlative (Culicover & Jackendoff, 1999).
Here the first and second phrases map to the antecedent and
consequent roles. The sign is given by the directionality of
the adjectives. A similar mapping exists for correlative
conjunction constructions where, the conjunct phrases both
involve change verbs (e.g. increase/decrease).
Table 4
1. Comparative Correlative

2. Correlative Conjunction
3. As X, Y

4. Changes with Y

QValue

Qunit

Num.Quant

DEN

QValue

Qunit

Num.Quant N<dep>
QValue
Qunit
Num.Quant N<dep>
Qunit
DEN

Qtype
PP[of]<dep>

5 liters of water Measures
Core: Count,
Entity, Unit

Qtype

Entity The wall is 6 feet Dimension
Core: Dimension,
tall
Measurement,
Object
Qtype Entity The 6 foot tall
wall
DEN NP<obj>
DEN NP<ext>

Qtype
PP[of]<dep>

Amount of water Quantity
Core: Entity,
Quantity

The first example consists of a measurement expression
modifying an “of” PP. The next two take a measurement
expression and adjective phrase and return either a nounmodifier or a predicate (Fillmore et al, 2012). Additionally,
‘amount of’ can be used to explicitly define a quantity.
Fillmore et al (2012) also identify a measurement phrase
construction specific to rates which consists of a numerator,
the definite NP, and a denominator, the indefinite np (e.g.
“miles per hour”). Rates can also link to a nominalized
process verb (e.g. ‘The rate of flow’). These often anaphoric
phrases map to the Rate_quantification frame.

The higher the water level in the
bucket, the greater the water
pressure in the bucket.
Both temperature and pressure
increase.
As the temperature in the boiler
increases, the pressure in the boiler
increases.
The pressure of the boiler changes
with the temperature.

Ordinals
Inequalities frequently drive processes. An ordinal frame
has the elements, entity1 and entity2 as well as a
relation FE that defines the relation (>, <, =, negligible)
between them. Entities in an ordinal share a qtype.
The most direct way these appear in language is through
gradable adjectives in a comparative construction (e.g.
‘cooler than’ or ‘more cool than’). In FrameNet, these fit
best into the Evaluative_comparison frame, though it

Quantity Frames
frames have the required FEs entity,
quantity, and quantityType. QuantityType relates
Quantity

the frame to the Cyc collection denoting the quantity of the

839

Table 7

does not include comparative adjectives.
Ordinal frames are also evoked by non-comparative
Measurable_attribute expressions such as hot or cold.
There are also several ways to indicate a difference
without specifying directionality. These are often referential
and fall under the Similarity frame (Table 6).
Table 6
Ent1

Ent2

Qtype The temperature
difference
PP[between] PP[between] N<dep> between the
objects
<dep>
<dep>
PP[between] PP[between] PP[in]
<dep>
<dep>
<dep>
The temperatures
Compound-NP-V
Ent1
Ent2
Qtype of A and B differ.

Condition
PP[after]<dep>
PP[when]<dep>
PP[if]<dep>
PP[once]<dep>
Condition

Process
NP<ext>

Once the submarine Process_Start
reaches crush depth, Core Unxp: Event
compression begins. Non-Core: Time
Arriving
Core: Goal, Theme

Process After reaching 2,070
PP[after]<dep> Vping<dep> degrees, the steel
begins melting.
PP[when]<dep>
VP[to]<dep
PP[if]<dep>

Similarity
Core:
Differentiating_fact
, Dimension,
Entities, Ent1, Ent

PP[once]<dep>

Explicit Causation verbs and modifiers can also indicate a
process constraint (e.g. ‘because the temperatures differ…’).
Finally, quantities within a process can be constrained at
certain values using correspondence statements such as:
“The force of the spring is zero when the block is at zero.”
This temporal correspondence is captured by the frame
Temporal_collocation. This frame is vast and includes
indexical terms such as “today”. We constrain our mapping
to patterns that relate two events (e.g. the adverb ‘when’).

PP[of]<dep PP[of]<dep> NP<ext>
>
The temperatures
NP-V-PP
Ent1
Ent2
Qtype differ between the
PP[across] PP[across] NP<ext> bricks.
<dep>
<dep>
PP[between] PP[between]
<dep>
<dep>
PP[from] PP[from]
<dep>
<dep>

Corpus Analysis

One significant difference between our representation and
FrameNet’s is that FrameNet provides the Entities FE
which groups multiple individuals to fill one role. We
separate them since they indicate different quantity frames.

We have demonstrated that the core elements of QP theory
each correspond to FrameNet frames. Next we use a corpus
analysis to evaluate the frequency of these patterns in
natural language descriptions. We predict that descriptions
of continuous processes are prevalent in natural language,
especially in explanatory texts. Furthermore, if framesemantics captures core QP representations, then we would
expect that a large number of these descriptions conform to
our frame-semantic analysis.
Our corpus consisted of grade school science topics from
the Simple English Wikipedia: full articles on the water
cycle, condensation, and Bernoulli’s principle as well as the
first 6 sections about the sun and introduction of the global
warming article. There were a total of 90 sentences. Each
sentence was annotated for any QP frames. For each process
evoking LU (e.g. flow) we further evaluated its FrameNet
entry. An LU did not have to result in a DI to be counted; it
could be an elaboration of a process (e.g. “condensation
occurs when…”). We counted FN as having the valence
pattern if the specific LU in the correct frame had the
complete pattern annotated either alone or as a part of a
larger pattern with the same core elements. We also
evaluated if the frame-type was analyzed in this paper or
one of its children. The results are summarized by article in
Table 8. Out of all 90 sentences, 56 (62.2%) had QP
material. We identified 53 total process evoking lexical
units (e.g. flow).
These results suggest a substantial number of sentences in
science texts convey QP information, consistent with our
prediction. Furthermore, we found that 43.4% of process
evoking units already had their specific valence pattern
annotated in FrameNet. Thus, mapping QP theory, and
possibly other non-linguistic representations, to FrameNet

Limit Points, Transitions, and Constraints
Limit points are quantities that define a value where a model
fragment changes status (e.g. boiling point). Frequently they
occur as a compound noun consisting of a constrained
process and a barrier. They can also include numerical
values, and participate in possession and containment. Limit
points are also evoked with Extreme_value adjectives
such as maximum or minimum as well as verbs that signify
arrival at a point as in the Arriving frame.
Many limit points are left implicit or referred to only as a
deviation from the norm as in: “The water gets cold which
causes condensation” These limit points can be made
explicit with a modifier such as enough (Sufficiency)
FrameNet’s Process frame has sub-frames indicating
different states. Starting conditions are captured with
patterns from the Process_start frame which includes
verbs such as ‘begin’. Similar frames exist for stopping,
continuing, pausing, and resuming. When used in
conditionals, lexical units evoking sub-frames and limit
points define the constraints of a model fragment (Table 7).
Many frames in FrameNet can indicate their own
activation conditions. Consider the Cause_Motion valence
patterns in Table 2. The required Agent can be replaced
with a non-animate Cause and viewed as preconditions:
“A temperature difference drives heat to the brick.”
These constructions can also be used to elaborate on
previous instantiations of frames that they are causative of.
“A temperature difference drives heat flow.”

840

Qualitative Process Theory provides a formalism for
representing mental models of continuous processes. While
preliminary, by linking this formalism to frame semantic
resources we enrich the linguistic representations with a
higher-order inferential model and provide a resource that
facilitates interactive learning of these models in the future.

Table 8
Corpus Analysis Results
QP
Process Valence
Type
Evoking Evoking in FN Analyzed
LUs
9 (.6)
8
6
4
15 (.54)
20
10
11
11 (.79)
5
2
3
13 (.62)
9
4
3

Water (15)
Sun (28)
Bernoulli(14)
Globalwarming (21)
Condensation 8 (.67)
(12)

11

1

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Intelligent and
Autonomous Systems Program of the Office of Naval
Research.

8

References

can reveal how these models are expressed linguistically.
Finally, 29 of the 53 process evoking units either directly
evoked or evoked inheritors of the set of process frames
analyzed above (see Figure 2). The remaining verbs evoked:

Allen, J. (1995). Natural language understanding (Vol. 2).
Redwood City, CA: Benjamin/Cummings.
Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., & Cronin, B. (2003). The
structure of the FrameNet database. International Journal
of Lexicography, 16(3), 281-296.
Culicover, P. W., & Jackendoff, R. (1999). The view from
the periphery: The English comparative correlative.
Linguistic Inquiry, 30(4), 543-571.
Das, D., Chen, D., Martins, A. F., Schneider, N., & Smith,
N. A. (2014). Frame-semantic parsing. Computational
Linguistics, 40(1), 9-56.
Fillmore, C. J., Wooters, C., & Baker, C. F. (2001).
Building a Large Lexical Databank Which Provides Deep
Semantics. Proceedings of PACLIC-2001.
Fillmore, C. J., Lee-Goldman, R., & Rhodes, R. (2012). The
FrameNet
Constructicon. Sign-based
Construction
Grammar. CSLI, Stanford, CA.
Forbus, K. D. (1984). Qualitative process theory. Artificial
Intelligence, 24, 85–168.
Friedman, S., Forbus, K., & Sherin, B. (2011). How do the
seasons change? Creating & revising explanations via
model formulation & metareasoning. Proceedings of the
25th International Workshop on Qualitative Reasoning.
Hinrichs, T. and Forbus, K. 2012. Learning Qualitative
Models by Demonstration. Proceedings of QR2012.
Kuehne, S. E. (2004). Understanding natural language
descriptions
of
physical
phenomena.
Doctoral
Dissertation, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.
McFate, C.J., Forbus, K. and Hinrichs, T. (2014). Using
Narrative Function to Extract Qualitative Information
from Natural Language Texts. Proceedings of AAAI-2014
Ovchinnikova, E., Vieu, L., Oltramari, A., Borgo, S., &
Alexandrov, T. (2010). Data-Driven and Ontological
Analysis of FrameNet for Natural Language Reasoning.
In LREC-2010.
Sherin, B. L., Krakowski, M., & Lee, V. R. (2012). Some
assembly required: How scientific explanations are
constructed during clinical interviews. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 49(2), 166-198.
Tomai, E. (2009). A Pragmatic Approach to Computational
Narrative
Understanding.
Doctoral
Dissertation,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.

Giving, Receiving, Gathering_up, Arriving,
Expansion, Emanating, Emitting, Departing,
Soaking_up, Using_resource, Removing, and
Fire_burning. Extending to these additional frames is

future work.
Like in Kuehne’s (2004) analysis, we found that reference
to an explicit rate was rare, only occurring in four sentences
of the Bernoulli article. Furthermore, we found no
compound-noun limit points (e.g. boiling point) but did find
constraints based on deviation from the norm (e.g. when it
gets cold…). In part this was due to choice of articles, e.g.
articles on boiling or phase changes per se do mention them.

Related Work
Our work dovetails nicely with work in semantic role
labeling. General frame semantic parsers such as Das et al’s
(2014) SEMAFOR could provide FrameNet parses to be
generalized using our mapping. Furthermore, knowledge of
constraints on qualitative models could resolve ambiguities
in language processing as in McFate et al (2014).
Ovchinnikova et al (2010) used a data-driven analysis to
cluster and enrich FN frames about medical treatment. A
similar approach could be used to extend our mapping.
Finally, while we’ve focused on lexicographic descriptions, we identified multi-word and phrasal patterns for
indirect influences and quantities, and expect more. These
are beyond the initial goal of FrameNet. Fillmore, LeeGoldman and Rhodes (2012) propose a method for
extending FN to include such structures.

Conclusions and Future Work
Much remains to be done. Our corpus analysis suggested
additional frames that could be mapped to QP theory, and a
larger corpus would both illuminate new frames and
establish their frequency. We also hope to use this analysis
to enrich the coverage of McFate et al’s (2014) system by
automatically extracting valence patterns from FrameNet.
Future work must also examine how pragmatic and
narrative constraints influence QP frame instantiation.

841

