An experimental study on the observation of facts in explanation reconstruction
Hitoshi Terai (terai@fuk.kindai.ac.jp)
Faculty of Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kindai University,
Kaya no Mori 11-6, Iizuka, Fukuoka, 820-8555, Japan

Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa, Aichi, 464-8601, Japan

Naohiro Toyama (toyama@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa, Aichi, 464-8601, Japan

Explanatory Shift

Abstract

In the current study, we call the phenomena that is an explanation fundamentally reconstructed from a preceding explanation “an explanatory shift.” We define the explanatory shift
as a reconstruction of an original explanation that includes
changes to both the structure of an explanation and the meaning of facts related to the explanation. Such changes neither
partially expand a preceding explanation nor refine it. A preceding explanation is defined as “an initial explanation.” We
also call a reconstructed explanation “a shifted explanation.”
The explanatory shift is characterized by the perception of “a
key fact” that must be fundamentally revised from the initial explanation. Namely, in the before and after stages of an
explanatory shift, the meaning(s) of the key fact are fundamentally different.
As an example, consider the change of the caloric theory to
the oxygen theory. Initially, in the caloric theory, burning was
explained as the release of calories. After an inconsistency
was observed in this explanation, i.e., the increase in weight
after burning, a new explanation was required. The change of
the explanation from the caloric theory, i.e., burning releases
calories, to the oxygen theory, i.e., burning is associated with
oxygen, was established by reinterpreting the key fact, i.e.,
the increase in weight by burning(S. F. Mason, 1953).

Explanation reconstruction performs a crucial role not only in
the progress of science but also in educational practices and
daily activities, including the comprehension of phenomena.
In this study, we conducted experiments to examine the factors
that facilitate shifts in explanations. We focused on the transition of attention on a key fact that contradicts an initial explanation and has a central role in its reconstruction. We used
a short story as an experimental material in which participants
first constructed an initial explanation and then reconstructed
it. In the experiment, we controlled the time of presentation
of the key fact (bottom-up condition), reflective thinking (topdown condition), and the two together (bidirectional condition)
to facilitate understanding of the explanatory shift. The experimental results are summarized as follows. First, when the prior
explanation was rejected, attention to the key fact was inhibited
although a new explanation was required. Second, the successful group increased their attention on the key fact just before
the explanatory shift. Third, protection of the preceding explanation with unobserved facts was inhibited by guiding the participants attention toward the key fact. Finally, although the
initial explanation was not completely shifted, a explanatory
pre-shift was achieved by activating reflective thinking with
attention to the key fact.
Keywords: eye-movement analysis; explanation reconstruction; explanatory shift; reinterpretation

Introduction
Scientific activities aim to understand the world in two ways:
descriptive and explanative (Simon, 2000). Descriptive understanding describes the nature and characteristics of phenomena by observations and experiments, whereas explanative understanding reveals the mechanisms behind the phenomena and the reasons why such phenomena occur.
Through the history of science, first descriptive understanding is usually established and then explanative understanding is investigated.
On the basis of historical facts, we can confirm many cases
where the explanation for a certain phenomenon was completely changed because the structures of the explanation and
the concepts of objects were essentially shifted. Such cases
are generally observed in the history of science, e.g., the shift
from the caloric theory to the oxygen theory and the transition from Newton’s traditional theory to Einstein’s relative
theory(S. F. Mason, 1953).

The Difficulty of an Explanatory Shift
It is difficult to shift the mind to a new explanation from an
initial explanation by reinterpreting a key fact when it requires overcoming an accepted fact that in the past seemed
to be common sense. For example, it has been repeatedly
demonstrated that a confirmation bias leads to gathering positive instances that confirm an established hypotheses (e.g.,
Wason, 1960) and initial hypotheses are typically maintained
against anomalous data(e.g., L. Mason, 2001). Therefore,
even when an initial explanation is rejected and a new explanation is required, the initial explanation is protected by local modification and slight expansion with non-existent facts
rather than the acceptance a new understanding by an essential change of the initial explanation.
In the oxygen theory, the connection of burning with oxygen explains a key fact; however, in the caloric theory, there

686

was only an assumption to support the release of phlogiston
that had negative weight, which was part of the accepted theory even though the negative-weight phlogiston had not yet
been observed or proved. Moreover, in the oxygen theory, as
the explanation shifted from the caloric theory, the relationship of oxygen to burning could be accurately reinterpreted
by overcoming an accepted common sense fact that had been
accepted since the times of ancient Greece: “fire is an element.”
Difficulties exist in such essential reconstructions of explanations. However, few studies have examined the process of
the explanatory shift.

to reconsider the meaning of the key fact in order to facilitate
an explanatory shift.
Grant and Spivey (2003) discussed the relations between
achieving insight and attention by inducing gaze in participants. In the experiments, the X-ray problem (Duncker,
1945), consisting of a tumor, healthy tissue wrapping around
the tumor, and outer skin, was presented to the participants.
They were required to solve how to destroy the tumor without
harming the healthy tissue1 . The results of the experiments
revealed that problem-solving performance was increased by
inducing the participants’ attention (gaze) to the area in which
the successful participants increased attention. Therefore, it
is suggested that an explanatory shift is facilitated by having
the opportunity to obtain the key fact from the bottom-up.

Transition of Attention toward an Explanatory Shift
In our previous research(Terai, Miwa, & Matsubayashi,
2012), we used eye-movement analysis to examine the transition of attention to a key fact that was contradictory to an
initial explanation.
In the experiment, a short story is set in a town with only
two barbershops (Figure 1). A character is looking for a barber and must pick one of the two shops. Barber A’s staff has
unkempt hair, while barber B’s staff has hair that is beautifully cut. Initially, participants typically select barber B
on the basis of the following naı̈ve explanation provided as
the initial explanation: “A barber with beautiful hair is very
skilled.” However, a new explanation is now required by the
character for selecting barber A. The fact “barber A’s hair is
messy and barber B’s hair is neat” contradicts the initial explanation. Therefore, in the story, the key fact that must be
reinterpreted is “barber A’s staff has unkempt hair and barber
B’s staff has neat hair.” The reconstructed explanation from
Gardner (1978) is “each does the other’s hair because there
are only two shops in town; therefore, barber A’s staff, who
did barber B’s staff’s hair, is more skilled.” In the shifted explanation, the key fact becomes evidence for selecting barber
A, but in the initial explanation, it is evidence for selecting
barber B. The meaning of the key fact has completely shifted
with the transition from the initial to the shifted explanation.
The experimental results are summarized as follows. First,
the attention to the key fact, which is inconsistent with the
initial explanation, declines. Second, the successful group
increases their attention on the key fact just before the explanatory shift. Finally, we could facilitate the explanatory
shift by both highlighting the key fact to lead the participants’
attention to the key fact and instructing participants that the
highlighted fact was crucial for finding the right explanation.

On the other hand, taking time to only see the key fact
might be insufficient to shift an initial explanation. It is
known that seeing is affected by knowledge held by the investigator, even in scientific activities where objectivity is
required, i.e., the theory-ladenness of observation(Duhem,
1914; Hanson, 1958; Kuhn, 1962) . For example, in astronomy, Tycho and Simplicius saw a mobile sun, whereas Kepler
and Galileo saw a static sun(cf., Hanson, 1958). This means
that facilitation of an explanatory shift might require reflective thinking as a top-down process, which tries to reconsider
a phenomenon from a different perspective.

Purpose
Our experimental purpose is to reveal the factors that facilitate an explanatory shift. We focused on the observation of
a key fact, which is required for reinterpretation to achieve
explanatory shift.
In our previous study, the attention on a key fact was inhibited, and then attention on the key fact was increased
just before the explanatory shift as discovered through eyemovement analyses. However, the previous study did not
sufficiently discuss differences of attention on the key fact
between successful and unsuccessful groups. The degree of
accuracy of eye-movement measurement is one of the reasons. Therefore, in experiment 1, we capture differences in
the amount of attention on the key fact between successful
and unsuccessful groups through more precise eye-movement
measurement. Moreover, we reconfirm that moving the attention to the key fact is a robust process.
Then, in experiment 2, we discuss the factors that facilitate an explanatory shift by controlling both the bottom-up
and the top-down processes: the opportunity to obtain the
key fact and reflective thinking, which involves the reconsideration of a phenomenon again from a different perspective,
respectively.

Relation between the Observation and the
Explanatory Shift
The results of our previous research (Terai et al., 2012) show
that the explanatory shift is facilitated by leading the participants’ attention to a key fact by highlighting it and then instructing that the highlighted fact is crucial for finding the
right explanation. However, it is unclear whether it is enough
to only increase the chance of gathering information about
the key fact or, in addition to this, there must be an intention

1 The

correct solution is the simultaneous convergence of low intensity X-rays on the focal tumor.

687

Introduction Taro was driving. His car broke down in a small town.
(First half) He decided to get a haircut while the car was being repaired.
Introduction There are only two barbershops in the town: Alf's shop and Bally's shop.
(Second half) They like each other.
Alf's shop is on the ground floor of a building located in the east area of town.
Filler In the building, there is a stationary shop.
(Place) Bally's shop is along a street running in the west area of town.
There is a supermarket near it.
Alf's hair is unkept, and the nape of his neck is messy.
Key Fact Bally's hair is beautifully cut, and the nape of his neck is neat.
Alf's shop is open until late.
Filler He often eats dinner at his favorite restaurant near the shop.
(Time) Bally's shop is open early.
He usually walks with his friend around the shop in the morning.
Ending Then, Taro selected Alf's shop.

Figure 1: The barber task (modified from the original barber task in Gardner (1978))
Note. The story in the above box was presented to the participants in experiment 1. The story consists of an introduction, facts of regarding
the place, barbers, and time, and an ending.

Experiment 1

tion in the initial explanation phase and then constructed a
shifted explanation in the reconstruction phase (the successful group). On the other hand, twelve participants could not
construct the shifted explanation in the reconstruction phase,
although they constructed the initial explanation in the initial
explanation phase (the unsuccessful group).
In the following analysis, we focus on fixation ratios of
each of the facts (introduction, place, key fact, time, and ending) in both the successful and the unsuccessful groups. Average fixation ratios of each fact were normalized by the number of characters in each paragraph corresponding to each
fact.

Methods
Participants Forty-two undergraduates participated in this
experiment.
Task Figure 1 shows the barber story task used in this experiment as introduced in our previous research(Terai et al.,
2012).
Procedure Experiment 1 consists of two phases: the initial
explanation phase and the reconstruction phase. In the initial
explanation phase, the participants read the story (Figure 1)
without the ending on a computer screen while thinking about
which barbershop to select. Their task was to construct an explanation for their decision. They reported their constructed
explanation by using a computer keyboard. The initial explanation phase was followed by the reconstruction phase in
which the initial explanation was rejected, and they were required to reconstruct their explanation of the story. They reported their initial explanation and reconstructed explanation
at their own pace. After reporting their explanations, they received the following message: “Since there is another reasonable explanation for this quiz acceptable to all, please reconsider another creative explanation.” They were told that there
was an evaluator in another room connected by the Internet,
even though no such evaluator existed, and the same message
was always returned. The reconstruction phase continued for
15 min, and then the data were analyzed until they reached
the shifted explanation.
The experiment was conducted individually, and participant eye movements were recorded using a Tobii T60 eye
tracker. In the experiment, we used a chin rest and required
the participants to inhibit their head movement to increase the
precision of gathering eye movement.

Unsuccessful Group Figure 2 (a) shows the average fixation ratios in the first 5 min of the reconstruction phase in
the unsuccessful group. To examine differences in the fixation ratios among each fact, a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed a significant main effect of the facts.
The results of the multiple comparisons using Holm’s method
showed that the fixation ratio of the key fact was significantly
lower than those of the place and time facts (MSe = 0.00, p <
.05).
Next, we examined whether there were any differences between the fixation ratios of each fact and the baseline calculated with assumption that each fact was seen in unbiased
way. A t-test indicated that the fixation ratio of the key fact
was lower than the baseline (t(11) = −5.36, p < .01). Moreover, a t-test indicated that the fixation ratio of the place fact
was greater than the baseline (t(11) = 2.24, p < .05).
Successful Group An average time of constructing the
shifted explanation in the successful group was 219.3 s (SD =
179.0). Figure 2 (b) shows the average fixation ratios up to 30
s before constructing the shifted explanation in the successful group. A one-way ANOVA showed no significant main
effect of the six facts (F(5, 40) = 1.36, ns) whereas a t-test
indicated that the fixation ratio of the key fact was lower than
the baseline (t(8) = −4.39, p < .01).

Results
Ten of 39 participants (three participants were excluded because of equipment trouble) constructed the initial explana-

688

Method

Figure 2 (c) shows the average fixation ratios during 30
s until constructing the shifted explanation. A one-way
ANOVA showed a significant main effect of the six facts
(F(5, 45) = 7.48, p < .01). The results of the multiple comparisons using Holm’s method showed that the fixation ratio of the key fact was significantly higher than those of
other facts (MSe = 0.02, p < .05). A t-test also indicated
that the fixation ratio of the key fact was higher than the
baseline (t(9) = 4.70, p < .01), whereas the fixation ratio of
the first half of the introduction was lower than the baseline
(t(9) = −5.19, p < .01).
The results of the experiments are summarized as follows:
(1) The attention of the key fact, which is inconsistent with
the initial explanation, declined and (2) the successful group
increased their attention on the key fact just before the explanatory shift. These results are consistent with the experimental results in Terai et al. (2012).
50%

(a) Unsuccessful group (ﬁrst 5 min)!

Participants Eighty-eight undergraduates participated in
this experiment.
Task We used a barber task that was slightly modified from
the one used in the previous experiment. In addition, in the
reconstruction phase, we changed the procedure of the presentation of the story to control the rates of seeing each fact.
In particular, each primal fact (place, key, and time facts) was
repeatedly presented rather than having the whole story displayed at one time.
Conditions In addition to the control condition, we introduced three experimental conditions (bottom-up, top-down,
and bidirectional). In the bottom-up condition, we controlled
the observation time of each fact. In particular, the observation time of the key fact was twice (20 s) as long as that in the
control condition, where the observation time of each fact in
each period was 10 s.
In the top-down condition, we instructed the participants
to reconsider a new explanation with reflective thinking. In
particular, the participants were instructed to listen to instructions for reflective thinking through a set of headphones. Sentences in the instructions are as follows: (1) “Try to consider
a new explanation without being bound to the initial explanation.” (2) “Try to consider a radically new explanation.” (3)
“Try to consider a new explanation only on the basis of the
presented facts.” (4) “Try to consider a new explanation without adding any unobserved fact(s).”
The order of these instructions was randomized. During
the vocal playback of each instruction, each fact was temporarily hidden. In the control and bottom-up conditions,
these instructions were not given, while each fact was hidden
at the same time in the bottom-up condition.
In the bidirectional condition, experimental manipulation
was the combination of the bottom-up and top-down conditions. In particular, the participants observed the key fact for
twice as long as the others and they were instructed to listen to the directions for reflective thinking through a set of
headphones.
We conducted the experiment as a between-participants design (bottom-up: n = 20, top-down: n = 21, bidirectional: n =
23).

Baseline!

**!: p < .01!
* : p < .05!

40%

30%

*
20%

*

*
**!

10%

0%
50%

!Intro. 1

!Intro. 2

Place

!Key fact

Time

Ending

(b) Successful group (up to 30 s before explanatory shift)!

40%

30%

20%

**!
10%

0%

50%

!Intro. 1

!Intro. 2

Place

!Key fact

Time

Ending

(c) Successful group (for 30 s just before explanatory shift)
*

40%

30%

*

**!

20%

10%

0%

**!

!Intro. 1

!Intro. 2

Place

!Key fact

Time

Procedure The procedure in the experiment followed that
of the previous experiment. In the reconstruction phase, the
observation time of each fact (place, key, and time) and the
instructions for reflective thinking were controlled.

Ending

Figure 2: Average fixation ration of each fact.
Note. Each bar chart shows the average fixation ratios in the reconstruction phase. Error bars indicate standard errors.

Results
Table 1 shows the results of success and failure of the explanatory shift. In the analyses, we excluded the participants who did not construct the initial explanation during
the initial explanation phase. There was no significant difference among conditions where the successful participants
who could shift their explanation in the bidirectional condition were greater than the ones who did in the other condi-

Experiment 2
In experiment 2, we discuss factors to facilitate an explanatory shift by controlling both the bottom-up and the top-down
processes: the opportunity to obtain the key fact and reflective thinking, which tries to consider a phenomenon from a
different perspective.

689

Differences in reconstructed
explanations from the control group!

Table 1: Performance
Conditions

n

Shift

No shift

Control

17(24)

4

13

Top-down

17(20)

4

13

Bottom-up

15(21)

3

12

Bidirectional
20(23)
6
14
Note. Numbers in () refer to all the participants, including
those who did not construct the naïve explanation.

Differences in reconstructed
explanations from the control group!

Differences in reconstructed
explanations from the control group!

tions.
Although there was no significant difference in the performance among the conditions,the experimental conditions
might have influenced the process toward the explanation
shift. Thus, we focused on the unsuccessful group (who could
not form an explanatory shift). In the following analyses, we
classified reconstructed explanations on the basis of their description to realize whether the participants tried to reinterpret the key fact. In particular, we defined the explanations
that were based on the fact of the hair as “a pre-shifted explanation” in which participants were trying to reinterpret the
key fact: e.g., “Because he had a full schedule and no time
to fix himself up” and “Because Alf has hair and Bally is
bald.” On the other hand, we also defined explanations that
avoided to reinterpreting the key fact were based on place and
time facts and other facts not described in the story as “nonshifted explanations.” In the following analyses, we compare
each experimental condition with the control condition as the
baseline.
Bottom-up vs. Control Figure 3 (a) shows the differences in the number of reconstructed explanations between
the bottom-up condition and the baseline. In each explanation type, t-tests indicated no significant difference (t(24) =
−0.65, n.s.;t(24) = 0.96, n.s.;t(24) = −0.90, n.s.;t(24) =
1.24, n.s.).

25%
20%

(a) Bottom-up vs. Control!

15%

* : p < .05
**!:!p < .01

10%
5%
0%
-5%
-10%
-15%
-20%
-25%
25%
20%

Key fact

Place

Pre-shifted
Quasishift
(b) Top-down

Time

Others

Non-shifted
Quasiinitial
vs. Control!

15%
10%
5%
0%
-5%

*!

-10%
-15%
-20%
-25%
25%
20%

Key fact

Place

Pre-shifted
(c) Bidirectional

Time

Others

vs. Non-shifted
Control!

15%
10%
5%

**!

0%
-5%
-10%

**!

-15%
-20%
-25%
Bases! Key fact

Place

Types! Pre-shifted

Time

Others

Non-shifted

Figure 3: Types of reconstructed explanations

Discussion
Summary

Top-down vs. Control Figure 3 (b) shows differences in
the number of reconstructed explanations between the topdown condition and the baseline. In the non-shifted explanations based on the place and time facts, t-tests indicated no significant difference (t(23) = 1.42, n.s.;t(23) =
1.43, n.s.;t(23) = 0.88, n.s.). On the other hand, In the nonshifted explanations based on other facts, the number of
reconstructed explanations in the top-down condition were
lower than those in the baseline (t(23) = −2.17, p < .05).

The experimental results in experiment 1 are summarized as
follows. First, when the initial explanation was rejected, a
new explanation was required after attention on the key fact
was inhibited. Second, the successful group increased their
attention on the key fact just before the explanatory shift.
These results are consistent with the results of Terai et al.
(2012).
The experimental results in the experiment 2 are also summarized as follows. First, protection of the initial explanation
with unobserved facts, i.e., constructing a non-shifted explanation, was not inhibited by only guiding the participants
attention toward the key fact. Second, although the initial explanation was not completely shifted, a explanatory pre-shift
was achieved by activating reflective thinking with attention
on the key fact.

Bidirectional vs. Control Figure 3 (c) shows differences
in the number of reconstructed explanations between the bidirectional condition and the baseline. In non-shifted explanations based on the place and time facts, t-tests indicated no
significant difference (t(25) = 2.02, n.s.;t(25) = 0.28, n.s.).
On the other hand, In non-shifted explanations based on other
facts, the number of reconstructed explanations in the bidirectional condition were lower than those in the baseline
(t(25) = −3.35, p < .005). Moreover, in the pre-shifted explanations based on the key fact, the number of reconstructed
explanations in the bidirectional condition were higher than
those in the baseline (t(25) = 3.20, p < .005).

Explanatory Shift and Seeing
The experimental result that increasing the opportunity to obtain the key fact from bottom-up was insufficient to the explanatory shift is consistent with the theory-ladenness of observation. Namely, even if the chance to see the key fact in-

690

creases, the explanatory shift might not be facilitated because
the perspective remain unchanged.
In problem-solving research, the Einstellung (set) effect is
known to occur when the first idea that comes to mind, triggered by familiar features of a problem, prevents a better solution from being found(Bilalić, McLeod, & Gobet, 2008;
Luchins & Luchins, 1950). Moreover, functional fixedness
is well known as one of the cognitive biases that limits people to using a daily object only in the way it is traditionally
used(Duncker, 1945; Scheerer, 1963).
Therefore, an underlying initial explanation leads a person
to see a key fact with a bias. Then, the initial explanation will
not be shifted even if the opportunity of seeing the key fact is
increased.

information about where to direct reflective thinking. Such
cues might be crucial to facilitate an explanatory shift.

References
Bilalić, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. (2008). Why good
thoughts block better ones: The mechanism of the pernicious einstellung (set) effect. Cognition, 108(3), 652–661.
Duhem, P. (1914). La théorie physique son objet et sa structure (2nd ed.). Paris: Chevalier et Rivière. (English Translation Phillip Wiener, The Aim and Structure of Physical
Theory, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1954)
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem-solving. Psychological
Monographs, 58(270), 1-113.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2003). In two minds: dual-process accounts of reasoning. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 7(10),
454–459.
Gardner, M. (1978). Aha! insight. New York: W. H. Freeman
& Co.
Grant, E. R., & Spivey, M. J. (2003). Eye movements and
problem solving: Guiding attention guides thought. Psychological Science, 14(5), 462–464.
Hanson, N. R. (1958). Patterns of discovery. Cambridge
University Press.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions.
The university of Chicago Press.
Luchins, A. S., & Luchins, E. H. (1950). New experimental
attempts at preventing mechanization in problem solving.
Journal of General Psychology, 42, 279–294.
Mason, L. (2001). Responses to anomalous data on controversial topics and theory change. Learning and Instruction,
11(6), 453–483.
Mason, S. F. (1953). A history of the science – main currents
of scientific thought. London: Lawrence & Wishart Ltd.
Scheerer, M. (1963). Problem solving. Scientific American,
208, 118–128.
Simon, H. A. (2000). Discovering explanations. In R. A. Keil
F. C. & Wilson (Ed.), Explanation and cognition (pp. 21–
59). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stanovich, K. E. (2004). The robot s rebellion: finding
meaning in the age of darwin. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Terai, H., Miwa, K., & Matsubayashi, S. (2012). Explanation
reconstruction through reinterpretation of key facts. In Proceedings of 34rd annual conference of the cognitive science
society (pp. 2411–2416).
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses
in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12(3), 129–140.

Explanatory Shift and Reflective Thinking
The results of experiment 2 revealed that the focus of participants on the presented facts rather than non-existent facts
facilitated by the reflective thinking (the top-down condition).
Moreover, reflective thinking coupled with increasing the opportunity of gathering information about the key fact led the
participants to construct a pre-shifted explanation (the bidirectional condition).
The dual process theory considers that high-order cognition consists of different types of systems, i.e., System 1 and
System 2(Evans, 2003; Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich, 2004).
System 1 is fast, parallel, automatic/unconscious, and intuitive, whereas System 2 is slow, serial, temporal, and requires
conscious attention. Facilitation of reflective thinking might
affect System 2. Stanovich’s tripartite model of the mind
based on the dual process theory suggests that System 1 corresponds to the autonomous mind and that System 2 is divided into two subsystems, the algorithmic mind and the reflective mind. The reflective mind inhibits an automatic response by the autonomous mind and activates the algorithmic
mind to start calculating an alternative solution. The instruction that requires reflective thinking in experiment 2 might
correspond to making an effort by the reflective mind to inhibit an automatic response to the key fact and to reinterpret
the key fact in the algorithmic mind.

Explanatory Shift and Cues
In an insight problem-solving study, Grant and Spivey (2003)
induced the participants’ attention to the skin by subtly pulsing the skin area of a diagram in the X-ray problem. The
thickness of its outer edge increased and decreased by one
pixel three times per second. Such experimental manipulation might not only increase the opportunity of information
gathering from the bottom-up but also provide a cue, which
is essential for problem solving.
Similarly, in our previous research(Terai et al., 2012), we
could facilitate the explanatory shift by both highlighting the
key fact to lead the participants’ attention toward it and instructing the participants that the highlighted fact was crucial
for finding the right explanation. The bidirectional condition
in experiment 2 of the present study lacked a cue that gave an

691

