Analytic Eye Movement Patterns in Face Recognition are Associated with Better
Performance and more Top-down Control of Visual Attention: an fMRI Study
Cynthia Y.H. Chan (cynchan@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
J.J. Wong (jjwong@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
Antoni B. Chan (abchan@cityu.edu.hk)
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Hong Kong
Tatia M.C. Lee (tmclee@hku.hk)
Laboratory of Neuropsychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Abstract

al. (2014) reported that individual eye movements were not
predictive of performance in face recognition. In contrast,
Henderson, William, and Falk (2005) showed that eye
movements facilitate face learning since restricting eye
movements during face learning was found to impair recognition performance. Goldinger, He, and Papesh (2009)
showed that during face learning, eye movements in trials
that eventually led to a miss during recognition were more
suppressed, with fewer regions visited, shorter scanning
distance, and fewer fixations, as compared with those that
eventually led to a hit.
This inconsistency may be due to limitations in eye
movement data analysis methods for discovering common
patterns from individuals. In view of this, Chuk, Chan and
Hsiao (2014a) proposed a Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
based approach to analyze eye movement data; the model
takes individual differences in both spatial and temporal
dimensions of eye movements into account. Through clustering participants’ eye movement patterns according to
their similarities, both holistic and analytic patterns in face
recognition were discovered in Asians (Chan, Chan, Lee, &
Hsiao, 2015; Cheng, Chuk, Hayward, Chan, & Hsiao, 2015;
Chuk et al., 2014a) as well as in Caucasians (Chuk et al.,
2014b). In addition, it was found that people who adopted
analytic patterns had better recognition performance than
those with holistic patterns (Chuk et al., 2014b; Chan et al.,
2015). These results demonstrate that the HMM based approach is a powerful analysis tool for discovering common
eye movement patterns and their relationship with recognition performance.
Nevertheless, it remains unclear why analytic eye movement patterns lead to better face recognition performance
than holistic patterns. Since analytic patterns involve more
spread out regions of interest (ROIs) targeting at facial features, and more transitions among them, people with analytic patterns may engage more top-down control of visual
attention, which in turn enhances recognition performance.

Recent research has revealed two different eye movement patterns during face recognition: holistic and analytic. The present study investigated the neural correlates of these two patterns through functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
A more holistic pattern was associated with more activation in
the face-selective perceptual areas, including the occipital
face area and fusiform face area. In contrast, participants using a more analytic pattern demonstrated more activation in
areas important for top-down control of visual attention, including the frontal eye field and intraparietal sulcus. In addition, participants using the analytic patterns had better recognition performance than those showing holistic patterns. These results suggest that analytic eye movement patterns are associated with more engagement of top-down control of visual
attention, which may consequently enhance recognition performance.
Keywords: eye movement; functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI); face recognition; analytic patterns; Hidden
Markov Model (HMM); top-down visual attention.

Introduction
Studies have revealed distinct eye movement patterns in
face processing. For example, compared with young adults,
older adults fixate more on the lower half of a face (Wong,
Cronin-Golomb, & Neargarder, 2005). Some differences
seem to be culturally influenced: Caucasians demonstrate
more of an analytic pattern, focusing on characteristics of
face parts, whereas Asians process faces with a more holistic pattern, with most fixations landed around the face center
(i.e., the nose; Kelly et al., 2011). However, it remains unclear whether people adopting different eye movement patterns process faces differently. Findings on the relationship
between eye movements and face recognition performance
are still mixed. For example, Kelly et al., (2011) found no
performance differences between Asians and Caucasians
who adopted different eye movement patterns. Mehoudar et

854

Thus, here we aim to investigate the neural correlates of the
observed association between eye movement patterns and
face recognition performance via functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
In face recognition, neuroimaging research identified two
face-selective perceptual areas, including the occipital face
area (OFA) in the inferior occipital gyri and the fusiform
face area (FFA) in the lateral fusiform gyrus. OFA is the
entry point of the face network and is sensitive to facial features. FFA is related to invariant aspects of face perception
such as face identity and is sensitive to the configuration
and spacing between facial features (Hoffman & Haxby,
2000; Pitcher, Walsh, Yovel, & Duchaine, 2007). When a
task was switched from face to object recognition, functional connectivity decreased significantly between the OFA
and FFA (Zhen, Fang, and Liu, 2013), suggesting an important role of these two areas in face recognition.
Brain regions beyond the face-selective network have also
been identified, namely the primary visual cortex (V1),
frontal eye field (FEF), intraparietal sulcus (IPS), posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC), and prefrontal cortex (PFC; Zhen et
al, 2013; Leube et al., 2003; Phillips et al., 1998). Some of
these regions are greatly engaged in top-down control of
visual attention in cognitive tasks in general (Gilbert & Li,
2013; Noudoost, Chang, Steinmetz & Moore, 2010; Leech
& Sharp, 2014). For example, the FEF, IPS and PCC are
related to saccadic eye movement (Schall, 2004), attention
shift (Corbetta et al., 1998) and internally directed attention
(Leech & Sharp, 2014) respectively. The PCC was also
found to play an essential role in facilitating or monitoring
working memory loaded tasks (Hampson, Driessen, Skudlarski, Gore, & Constable, 2006), and early top-down control of visual attention has been shown to be advantageous
to performance on working memory and perceptual tasks
(Rutman, Clapp, Chadick, & Gazzaley, 2010). The prefrontal cortex (PFC), especially the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), plays an important role in memory (Braver et
al., 1997; Kane & Engle, 2002), goal maintenance (Colvin,
Dunbar, & Grafman, 2001), planning and execution (Fincham, Carter, van Veen, Stenger, & Anderson, 2002), and
modulates other brain regions by conveying top-down signals in controlling visual attention.
Accordingly, we hypothesized that analytic eye movement patterns in face recognition may be associated with
more top-down control of visual attention, as reflected in
higher activations in the IPS, FEF, PCC, and DLPFC. To
test this hypothesis, here we examined participants’ eye
movement patterns and brain activations in face recognition
and examine the association between them.

col was approved by the Ethics Review Board at The University of Hong Kong.

Materials
A total of 120 young Chinese face images (60 females) with
neutral facial expressions were used and split into two sets
of images. Sixty of them (30 in each set) were used as target
faces to be remembered and the other 60 (30 in each set)
were used as distractors in the test phase. All face images
were 270 × 360 pixels (8 visual degrees) in grayscale, and
were adjusted to match for luminosity, contrast, and quality.
The distances between the eyes and the mouth were standardized. Each face was a frontal view and was cropped according to the original shape of the face such that hair, ears
and the neck were removed, leaving only the face visible.

Experimental Design
Apart from the face recognition task, a verbal and spatial
working memory test and an executive functioning test were
administered in order to examine possible correlations between eye movement patterns and cognitive abilities.
Face Recognition task. The task included three runs, each
of which consisted of a study and a test phase. In each study
phase, participants were shown 10 face images one at a time
at a rate of 3s each. The face was displayed either at the
upper center or at the lower center (see Figure 1) of the
screen randomly. Participants were instructed to fixate at a
cross “+” located at the center of the screen between the
presentation of each image. The stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) between images varied from 6 to 16s. Participants
were instructed to remember all the faces in the study phase.
In each test phase, participants were shown 20 face images
individually, which consisted of 10 old images and 10 new
images. They were asked to judge whether they recognized
the displayed images from the study phase previously, within 3s per face. Individual A-prime was computed.

Figure 1. Display of images in the study and test phases.
Working memory test. Both verbal and spatial working
memory abilities were measured via a computerized twoback test (Lau, Ip, Lee, Yeung, & Eskes, 2013). For verbal
two-back, a sequence of 100 single digit numbers was displayed at the screen center. Starting from the third number,
participants had to judge whether each displayed number
was identical to the one displayed two items ago. For the
spatial two-back task, a sequence of 100 symbols was displayed at several different locations around the screen center. Starting from the third symbol, participants had to judge

Method
Participants
A total of 20 Chinese participants (aged 18 – 24; M = 21.7;
SD = 2.36; 11 females) were recruited from the University
of Hong Kong. All participants were right-handed. They
either had normal or corrected visual ability. Informed consent was collected from each participant; the research proto-

855

whether each displayed symbol was in the same position as
the one displayed two items ago. Accuracy (%) was calculated for verbal and spatial tasks separately.
Executive functioning test. Executive functioning, specifically planning and execution ability, was measured via a
computerized Tower of London (TOL) test (e.g., Phillips,
Wynn, McPherson, & Gilhooly, 2001). Three beads and
three pegs of different heights were shown on screen. Participants had to move the beads from peg to peg one at time to
match the bead positions on a target board while adhering to
certain rules. Participants were told to complete it as quickly
as possible using the fewest number of moves. The planning
and execution ability was measured by performance scores
(a total of 10 trials; 1 mark for every trial finished with minimal moves) and number of extra moves (actual minus minimal moves). .

to their similarities. According to our previous studies (e.g.,
Chuk et al., 2014), a holistic pattern and an analytic pattern
would be shown. Finally, for each individual HMM, we
calculated the difference between the log-likelihood of being classified as the holistic pattern and the log-likelihood of
being classified as the analytic pattern, to represent the degree of similarity of one’s eye movements to the two patterns (named “H-A Scale” in later sections).

Image Data Acquisition, Processing and Analysis
Imaging was performed on a 3-Tesla Phillips scanner head
scanner with a standard eight-channel head coil. A total of
580 volumes (190 × 3 runs) of functional data were collected as echo-planar images (128 × 128 matrix; 40 slices with
in-plane resolution of 3 × 3 mm2 and slice thickness 3.5mm;
TE 30 ms; TR 2000 ms; FOV 230 × 230 mm2; flip angle
90°). A T1-weighted spin-echo pulse sequence with a spatial resolution of 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 data set was collected for
anatomical reference.
The FSL software package was used for image preprocessing. Functional images were corrected for head motion
with FSL’s intra-modal motion correction tool (MCFLIRT),
high-pass filtered at 100s and spatially smoothed with a
Guassian filter (full-width-half-maximum = 5mm). T1 anatomical images were co-registered at participant level and to
a standard brain Montreal Neurological Institute template
(MNI152; 2 mm). A general linear model was used to analyze functional imaging data incorporating predictors, which
corresponded to the particular experimental conditions. The
onset times were set as the stimulus onset and the durations
were set as 1s for all predictors.
To examine the neural correlates of different eye movement patterns, we examined the correlations between participants’ H-A Scales and the event contrasts of non-missed
test trials (i.e. trials with either correct or incorrect responses) against the fixation baseline. Significant signal changes
were reported if they exceeded a p-value of 0.05 corrected at
a whole-brain level.

Procedure
The study consisted of three parts: an eye tracking experiment, a set of cognitive tests, and an fMRI experiment. In
the eye tracking experiment, participants sat in front of a
computer screen with their head on a chinrest and their eye
level adjusted via a chinrest to approximately the mid-level
of the screen. Prior to the experiment, 9-point calibration
was conducted repeatedly until the errors were lower than
0.3° and 0.5° visual degree for the dominant eye and the
non-dominant eye respectively. Then, they performed the
face recognition task while their eye movement was recorded. After the eye tracking experiment, participants performed cognitive tests including the verbal and spatial twoback, and TOL tasks, followed by the fMRI experiment.
Throughout the whole fMRI experiment, participants had to
perform the same face recognition task during the eye tracking experiment but with a different set of images.

Eye Data Acquisition, Processing and Analysis
Eye movements were recorded with an SMI REDn eyetracking system (60 Hz), which was connected to a 17”
monitor with screen resolution 1280 × 768 pixels (with a 60
cm eye-monitor distance). Both eyes were tracked with the
‘Smart Binocular’ tracking mode; only data from the dominant eye was used in analysis. We analyzed participants’
eye movement data in the test (recognition) phase.
A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) based approach was
used to analyze eye movement data. First, each participant’s
eye movement data was modeled by an HMM with a variational Bayesian approach. Each HMM included three
Gaussian components (i.e. ROIs), as indicated by different
colors in Figure 2. The overlapping area of two or more
ROIs indicates that the fixations around that area have similar probabilities of belonging to those ROIs. The prior values in the matrices represent the probability that an initial
eye fixation is located at each of the ROIs. The rest of the
matrix represents the transition probabilities among the
three ROIs. Next, we applied a variational hierarchical EM
algorithm (VHEM; Coviello, Chan, & Lanckriet, 2014) to
cluster the individual HMMs into two subgroups according

Result
Cognitive Test and Behavioral Performances
The average face recognition performance in A’ was .85
(SD = .07). The average number of fixations per trial was
2.56 (SD = .85) and the average reaction time was 1.64s
(SD = .85s). The mean accuracy of the verbal 2-back task
was 76.6% (SD = 18.0%) and that of the spatial 2-back task
was 77.5% (SD = 11.5%). The average correct score and
number of extra moves in the TOL test were 5.3 (SD = 2.6)
and 24.3 (SD = 16) respectively.

Eye Movement Pattern Analysis
Participants’ eye movement patterns were clustered into
two groups via the HMM-based approach, as shown in Figure 2. Each group consisted of 10 participants. H-A Scale
was computed, with a positive value representing a holistic
pattern (M = .04; SD = .56; ranging from -.65 to 1.31).

856

Holistic>

H-A Scale

sults were not significant for verbal working memory (r = .08, n.s), and executive functioning (scores: r = -.26, n.s.;
extra moves: r = .15, n.s.).
10

r(20)= -.47, p = .035

8
6
4
2

<Analytic

In Figure 2, the top figure shows a typical holistic eye
movement pattern. The ROIs were around the face center.
The first fixation was located most commonly at the vertical
and center of a face (red; prob. = .54). The subsequent eye
fixations usually stayed at the same position (red to red =
.56), although sometimes they also transited to the surrounding region (red to green = .24; blue to green = .23). In contrast, the bottom figure shows a typical analytic eye movement pattern. The ROIs were relatively more clearly located
at different facial features, the left eye (green), the right eye
(red), and the center/mouth (blue) of a face. The first fixation was most commonly located near the left eye (green;
prob. = .56). Most eye gaze transitions appeared between
the two eyes (red to green = .36; green to red = .65, see e.g.
Chuk et al., 2014a).

0
-2 0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

-4
-6

Face Recognition Performance (A-prime)

Figure 3. Correlation of H-A Scale and face recognition
performance.

Relationship between Strategy and Neural Activity
Correlation analysis between participants’ H-A Scales and
the event contrast of non-missed test trials against fixation
baseline was conducted for all 20 participants. It was found
that the more holistic the eye movement patterns, the higher
the brain activation in some face-selective perceptual areas
(Figure 4), including the left OFA ([-34, -76, -10]; z > 2.3,
p < .05) and the right FFA (BA 37; [42, -55, -18]; z > 2.3, p
< .05). Higher activation was also found in the left pars triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45; [-55, 26, 6]; z
> 2.3, p < .05).

Figure 2. The representative HMMs of the two subgroups,
holistic (top) and analytic (bottom) patterns, and the corresponding transition probability matrices.

Relationship between Eye Movement Pattern and
Recognition Performance/Cognitive Ability
With regards to the relationship between eye movement
pattern and face recognition performance, a negative correlation was found between the H-A Scale and face recognition A-prime scores, r = -.47, p = .036 (Figure 3). People
who used a more analytic (holistic) strategy yielded a better
(worse) face recognition performance. This finding is consistent with previous studies (e.g., Chuk et al., 2014b; Chan
et al., 2015; Cheng et al., 2015). H-A Scale was neither correlated with average number of fixations per trial (r = .05,
n.s.) nor reaction time (r = .30, n.s.). Thus, participants with
holistic patterns did not necessarily make fewer fixations or
had shorter viewing times on the faces. When examining the
relationship between eye movement patterns and cognitive
abilities, we found that spatial working memory performance was marginally correlated with the H-A Scale, r = .41, p = .073, indicating that people who possessed higher
(lower) spatial working memory tended to employ a more
analytic (holistic) eye movement pattern. However, the re-

Figure 4. Holistic patterns: more activation in the left
OFA (top left) and the right FFA (top right). Analytic patterns: more activation in bilateral IPS (bottom left) and the
prefrontal cortex (bottom right)
When people had more analytic eye movement patterns,
there was significantly higher activation in the V1 ([±14, 92, 4]; z > 2.3, p < .05), eye movement planning and attention control related areas including the IPS ([±30, -64, 46]; z
> 2.3, p < .05), PCC ([±2, -30, 40]; z > 2.3, p < .05), and
FEF (encompassed in DLPFC; BA 8; [±30, 18, 58]; z > 2.3,
p < .05), and executive functioning related areas including
the DLPFC (BA 9; [±46, 44, 30]; z > 2.3, p < .05) and the

857

frontalpolar prefrontal cortex (FPPFC; BA 10; [±24, 52, 18],
z > 2.3, p < .05).

people who adopted holistic eye movement patterns may
have relied more on perceptual areas for face recognition
with less engagement of eye movement planning and visual
attention control. This is consistent with their eye movement
behavior, which focused on the face center and lacked transitions among facial features.
In a previous study, Chan et al. (2015) showed that in face
recognition, more old adults adopted holistic eye movement
patterns, and more young adults exhibited analytic patterns.
In addition, they found that the likelihood of old adults’ eye
movements being classified as holistic was negatively correlated their cognitive status: the higher the likelihood, the
lower the cognitive ability. Our current results suggest that
this effect may be due to ageing-related cognitive decline in
old adults, affecting their ability to actively engaging topdown control of visual attention. Our results also suggest
that the adoption of different eye movement patterns may be
related to limitations of cognitive capacity, rather than merely a matter of preference or motivation.
Note that the term “holistic” here refers to the specific eye
movement pattern described here, and is different from the
term “holistic processing” frequently described in the face
perception literature (e.g., Taubert et al, 2011). Thus, having
a holistic eye movement pattern does not necessarily leads
to more engagement of holistic face processing. Indeed,
although here we found holistic eye movement patterns are
associated with high activations in the OFA and FFA, recent
research has suggested both holistic and featural representations may be found in these areas (e.g., Goffaux, Schiltz,
Mur, & Goebel, 2013). Using the Expanding Spotlight technique, Miellet et al. (2013) showed that Westerners, who
exhibited analytic eye movement patterns, used local highspatial-frequency information of facial features for recognition, whereas Easterners, who had holistic eye movement
patterns, used global low-spatial frequency information.
Future work will examine whether similar results can be
obtained between the analytic and holistic patterns identified
here through the HMM approach.
In summary, here we showed that holistic eye movement
patterns in face recognition are associated with increased
activation in the face-selective perceptual areas, whereas
analytic patterns are associated with increased activation in
areas involved in top-down control of visual attention. As
previous studies have shown that analytic patterns lead to
better performance in face recognition, the current results
suggest that this advantage in performance may be a consequence of more engagement of active eye movement planning and visual attention control during the task. This finding thus provides strong evidence for a close relationship
between eye movement patterns and cognitive performance.

Discussion
The current study investigated the neural correlates of different eye movement patterns in face recognition. Through
the HMM-based approach for eye movement data analysis,
we identified holistic and analytic eye movement patterns in
the participants (e.g. Chuk et al., 2014a). By calculating
participants’ H-A Scale according to the likelihood of each
individual’s eye movement being classified as a holistic or
an analytic pattern, our neuroimaging results demonstrated
that a more holistic pattern is associated with increased activation in face-selective perceptual areas OFA and FFA. In
contrast, a more analytic pattern is associated with increased
activation in areas related to top-down control of visual attention, including FEF, IFS, and PCC. In addition, consistent with previous studies, we found that people using
analytic patterns recognized faces better than those with
holistic patterns (Chan et al., 2015; Chuk et al., 2014a).
The regions whose activations are associated with analytic eye movement patterns included the V1, IFS, FEF, PCC,
DLPFC (BA 9), and FPPFC (BA 10). The V1 is one core
region of visual attention. The DLPFC (BA 9) is involved in
planning (Fincham et al., 2002) and delivering top-down
signals to other brain regions. The FEF was previously reported to be active during voluntary saccades of eye movement (Schall, 2004). The PCC was reported to monitor visual attention shift during post-saccadic eye movement (Olson, Musil & Goldberg, 1993) and resetting the visual attention plan in anticipating the next attentional shift (Small et
al., 2003). The Right IPS is shown to be involved in serial
attention processes and the left IPS acts as an attentional
modulator to maintain the activities of initial perception and
processing of selective information in the working memory
as well as long-term memory network (Majerus et al., 2007;
Noudoost et al., 2010). Taken together, the elevated activation of these regions suggests that people adopting analytic
patterns may be engaging active eye movement planning
and top-down control of visual attention during face recognition. This is consistent with the behavioral finding that
analytic patterns involved more spread out ROIs and transitions among ROIs than holistic patterns. Since top-down
visual attention allows us to filter out irrelevant information
and improve the efficiency of information processing by
selecting useful visual information, it has been found to be
associated with better cognitive task performance (Rutman,
Clapp, Chadick, & Gazzaley, 2010). Thus, it is possible that
participants adopting analytic eye movement patterns were
engaging more top-down control of visual attention, and
consequently had increased accuracy in face recognition.
On the other hand, some face-selective perceptual areas,
including the left OFA and right FFA, were found to be
more active when people adopted holistic patterns. The
OFA plays a major role in face part processing while the
FFA is concerned with the processing of face configurations
(e.g. Pitcher et al., 2007). Thus, our finding suggested that

Acknowledgments
We thank Mr. Tim Chuk for his technical support in using
the HMM-based model, Dr. Bolton Chau for his advise on
fMRI data analysis, and Ms. Kit Yan Pang for data collection. We are also grateful to the Research Grant Council of
Hong Kong (project code 17402814 to J.H. Hsiao and

858

CityU 110513 to A.B. Chan), and the University of Hong
Kong May Endowed Professorship in Neuropsychology to
Professor Tatia M.C. Lee.

Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of prefrontal
cortex in working-memory capacity, executive attention,
and general fluid intelligence: An individual-differences
perspective. Psychon. Bull. Rev., 9, 637-671.
Kelly, D. J., Jack, R. E., Miellet, S., De Luca, E., Foreman,
K., & Caldara, R. (2011). Social experience does not
abolish cultural diversity in eye movements. Front. Psycho, 2, 1-11.
Lau, E. Y. Y., Ip, M. S. M., Lee, T. M. C., Yeung, A. W.
M., Eskes, G. A. (2013) Neurocognitive and psychosocial
outcomes of obstructive sleep apnea in Hong Kong Chinese: Similar to or different from western populations? J.
Sleep. Disord. Treat Care, 2:3.
Leech, R., & Sharp, D. J. (2014). The role of the posterior
cingulate cortex in cognition and disease. Brain, 137, 1232.
Majerus, S., Bastin, C., Poncelet, M., Van der Linden, M.,
Salmon, E., Collette, F., & Maquet, P. (2007). Shortterm memory and the left intraparietal sulcus: focus of
attention? Further evidence from a face short-term
memory paradigm. Neuroimage, 35, 353-367.
Miellet, S., Vizioli, L., He, L., Zhou, X., & Caldara, R.
(2013). Mapping face recognition information use across
cultures. Frontiers in Perception Science, 4, 34.
Noudoost, B., Chang, M. H., Steinmetz, N. A., & Moore, T.
(2010). Top-down control of visual attention. Curr. Opin
Neurobiol, 20, 183-190.
Phillips, L. H., Wynn, V. E., McPherson, S., & Gilhooly, K.
J. (2001). Mental planning and the Tower of London
task. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. - A, 54, 579–597.
Phillips, M. L., Bullmore, E. T., Howard, R., Woodruff, P.
W., Wright, I. C., Williams, S. C., ... & David, A. S.
(1998). Investigation of facial recognition memory and
happy and sad facial expression perception: an fMRI
study. Psychiatry Res-Neuroim, 83, 127-138.
Pitcher, D., Walsh, V., Yovel, G., Duchaine, B. (2007).
TMS evidence for the involvement of the right occipital face area in early face processing. Curr. Biol., 17,
1568–1573
Rutman, A. M., Clapp, W. C., Chadick, J. Z., & Gazzaley,
A. (2010). Early top–down control of visual processing
predicts working memory performance. J. Cogn. Neurosci., 22, 1224-1234.
Schall, J. D. (2004). On the role of frontal eye field in guiding attention and saccades. Vision Res., 44, 1453-1467.
Taubert, J., Apthorp, D., Aagten-Murphy, D., & Alais, D.
(2011). The role of holistic processing in face perception:
Evidence from the face inversion effect. Vis. Res., 51,
1273-1278.
Wong, B., Cronin-Golomb, A., & Neargarder, S. (2005).
Patterns of visual scanning as predictors of emotion identification in normal aging. Neuropsychol., 19, 739–749.
Zhen, Z., Fang, H., & Liu, J. (2013). The hierarchical brain
network for face recognition. PloS one, 8, e59886.

References
Braver, T. S., Cohen, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Jonides, J.,
Smith, E. E., & Noll, D. C. (1997). A parametric study of
prefrontal cortex involvement in human working
memory. Neuroimage, 5, 49-62.
Chan, C. Y. H., Chan, A. B., Lee, T. M. C., & Hsiao, J. H.
(2015). Eye movement pattern in face recognition is associated with cognitive decline in the elderly. In Noelle, D.
C., et al. (Eds.), the Proceeding of the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 321-326).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Cheng, Z., Chuk, T., Hayward, W. G., Chan, A. B., &
Hsiao, J. H. (2015). Global and local priming evoke different face processing strategies: evidence from an eye
movement study. J. Vis., 15, 154.
Chuk, T., Chan, A. B., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014a) Understanding eye movements in face recognition using hidden Markov models. J. Vis., 14, 8.
Chuk, T., Luo, X., Crookes, K., Hayward, W., Chan, A. B.,
& Hsiao, J. H. (2014b). Caucasian and Asian eye movement patterns in face recognition: A computational exploration using hidden Markov models. J. Vision, 14, 1212.
Colvin, M. K., Dunbar, K., & Grafman, J. (2001). The effects of frontal lobe lesions on goal achievement in the
water jug task. J. Cogn. Neurosci., 13, 1129-1147.
Corbetta, M., Akbudak, E., Conturo, T. E., Snyder, A. Z.,
Ollinger, J. M., Drury, H. A., ... & Shulman, G. L. (1998).
A common network of functional areas for attention and
eye movements. Neuron, 21, 761-773.
Coviello, E., Chan, A. B., & Lanckriet, G. R. G. (2014).
Clustering hidden Markov models with variational HEM.
J. Mach. Learn. Res., 15, 697-7
Fincham, J. M., Carter, C. S., van Veen, V., Stenger, V. A.,
& Anderson, J. R. (2002). Neural mechanisms of planning: a computational analysis using event-related fMRI.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 99, 3346-3351.
Gilbert, C. D., & Li, W. (2013). Top-down influences on
visual processing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 14, 350-363.
Goffaux, V., Schiltz, C., Mur, M., & Goebel, R. (2013).
Local discriminability determines the strength of holistic
processing for faces in the fusiform face area. Front. Psychol., 3, 604.
Hampson, M., Driesen, N. R., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. C., &
Constable, R. T. (2006). Brain connectivity related to
working memory performance. J. Neurosci, 26, 1333813343.
Henderson, J. M., Williams, C. C., & Falk, R. J. (2005). Eye
movements are functional during face learning. Mem.
Cognition, 33, 98-106.
Hoffman, E. A., & Haxby, J. V. (2000). Distinct representations of eye gaze and identity in the distributed human
neural system for face perception. Nat. Neurosci., 3, 8084.

859

