Are we ON the same page?
Monolingual and bilingual acquisition of familiar and novel relational language
Nathan R. George (nrg10@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

Junko Kanero (jkanero@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, Temple University
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Dorothee Chwilla (d.chwilla@donders.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Daniel J. Weiss (djw21@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

relations, sometimes in conjunction with the in/on
distinction, as in oku (i.e., loose-fitting on) and ireru (i.e.,
loose-fitting in), but sometimes collapsing across it, as in
hameru (i.e., tight-fitting on or in; see Figure 1). How do
learners come to discern these categories in language?

Abstract
Verbs and prepositions pose significant challenges in second
language learning, as languages differ in how they map these
relational terms onto events. Second language learners must
put aside their language-specific lens to uncover how a new
language operates, perhaps having to rediscover semantic
distinctions typically ignored in the first language. The
current study examines how the acquisition of these novel
mappings are affected by characteristics of the learner and of
the language to be learned. English monolinguals and DutchEnglish bilinguals learned novel terms that corresponded to
containment and support relations of either English, Dutch, or
Japanese. Results show that English distinctions are learned
best across groups, potentially reflecting predispositions in
human cognition. No differences were found between
monolinguals and bilinguals in any language condition. The
characteristics of the language to be learned appear to play a
prominent role in the acquisition of novel semantic categories.
Keywords: Cognitive Semantics; Second
Learning; Bilingualism; Event Perception

Figure 1: Containment and support in Dutch, English, and
Japanese, inspired by Gentner and Bowerman (2009).

Language

Over the first year and a half of life, infants learn to attend
to a set of foundational components of events that support
the structure of semantic categories across a wide array of
languages (e.g., George, Göksun, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff,
2014; Göksun, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2010;
McDonough, Choi, & Mandler, 2003). With exposure to
language, however, infants appear to focus on a subset of
categories relevant to their native tongue. Language, in
other words, has the function of orienting attention to some
relations in events over others (George, et al., 2014;
Göksun, et al., 2010). Heightening and dampening attention
to early perceptual categories creates entrenched
lexicalization biases, or strategies for word-to-world
mapping. These biases are largely believed to influence
event perception in children and adults, though there
remains debate regarding the scope of these effects (e.g.,
Choi & Hattrup, 2012; George et al., 2014; Gleitman &
Papafragou, 2013; McDonough et al., 2003; Papafragou,
Hulbert, & Trueswell, 2008).

Introduction
Verbs and prepositions are fundamental components of
language, conveying dynamic and static relations between
objects in events (e.g., “He kicked the ball over the fence”).
Despite their centrality, these relational terms prove
challenging for both first and second language learners
(Gentner, 2006). Part of the challenge arises from the fact
that languages differ in the aspects of events they
emphasize. For example, while English utilizes in and on to
denote containment and support relations, respectively,
other languages vary in terms of the granularity or foci of
these distinctions (Gentner & Bowerman, 2009). Dutch
makes finer-grained divisions, breaking support into three
distinct categories: op (i.e., resting on), aan (i.e., point-topoint attachment), and om (i.e., encirclement with contact).
In contrast, Japanese verbs require attending to degree-of-fit

111

English support category of on is more prevalent across
languages than the Dutch category of aan, and
correspondingly emerges earlier in English-speaking
children’s vocabulary than does aan in Dutch-speaking
children’s vocabulary (see also Beekhuizen, Fazly, &
Stevenson, 2014). Extending this hypothesis to the study of
second language learning, those categories that are more
universal may also be those that are easier to rediscover
regardless of the learner’s native language.
The ease in acquiring a new language may also be
proportional to the degree of similarity between that
language and the language(s) known by the learner (e.g.,
Antoniou, et al., 2015). In the domain of containment and
support, for example, we might expect that a monolingual
English speaker would more easily acquire a novel language
that shares the in/on distinction, when compared to a
language such as Japanese, which sometimes requires
collapsing across it. In this regard, we see a potential
language-dependent advantage for bilingual speakers: using
two languages with potentially disparate lexicalization
patterns increases the likelihood that at least one of these
will be reflected in any newly encountered language.
Finally, research on second language learning suggests
that bilinguals acquire novel languages more efficiently than
monolinguals overall (e.g., Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009;
Van Hell & Mahn, 1997). A common explanation regards
bilingual advantages in several areas of cognition, including
those associated with executive control (e.g., inhibition,
working memory, etc.) among others (Bialystok, Craik, &
Luk, 2012). These cognitive skills may lead to a more
efficient restructuring of lexicalization biases. For example,
inhibitory control may assist in the dampening of native
biases when interpreting novel patterns.

Bilingualism and Second Language Learning
The study of first language acquisition suggests that
lexicalization biases affect the way in which adults process
events for language. While beneficial for mapping language
onto relations in events, lexicalization biases also potentially
bear on challenges in second language learning. Learning a
new language requires second language learners (SLLs) to
not only acquire a new lexicon, but to identify how
relational terms in the second language map onto events.
Given that the overlap in the lexicalization patterns between
languages is unknown, SLLs must be able to put aside their
language-specific lens to uncover the way the new language
operates, perhaps having to resurrect semantic distinctions
typically ignored in the first language.
Research examining the endpoint of second language
learning highlights plasticity in these biases. Hohenstein,
Eisenberg, and Naigles (2006) found that even college
students who did not begin second language instruction until
after puberty can achieve native-like lexicalization biases in
their second language. This process takes time, however.
Song, Pulverman, Pepe, Golinkoff, and Hirsh-Pasek (2016)
found that approximately seven semester-long courses are
required to elicit lexicalization biases in a second language
that do not differ from native speakers. Artificial language
experiments suggest a higher degree of malleability. Havasi
and Snedeker (2004) taught English-speaking adults
nonsense verbs in English consistent with the Spanish bias
to encode path in the main verb (e.g., crossing). At the
beginning of the experiment, subjects preferred applying the
novel verb to manner of motion, according with the English
bias. As the experiment progressed, participants shifted
towards a path interpretation for novel verbs, suggesting
these biases can be changed with relatively short exposures.
While these biases are malleable, there remains a
relatively impoverished understanding of the factors that
contribute to the successful learning of novel semantic
spaces. Most research in this area focuses on the added
benefit of immersion over traditional classroom instruction
(e.g., Song, et al., 2016). In the parallel field of phonetic
learning, however, research suggests that learning features
of a new language can be attributed to an amalgam of
characteristics both of the learner and of the material to be
learned (Antoniou, Liang, Ettlinger, & Wong, 2015). Here
we investigate the impact of three features on the
malleability of lexicalization biases: 1) the difficulty of the
contrasts to be learned; 2) the degree of similarity between
languages; and 3) bilingualism.
Ease of acquisition may be attributable in part to the
characteristics of the language to be learned. Some
lexicalization patterns may be easier to acquire, regardless
of their relation to the learner’s native tongue. Returning to
work on development, Gentner and Bowerman (2009) note
that the semantic categories underlying relational language
emerge at different points across development. In their
Typological Prevalence Hypothesis, they suggest that more
cross-linguistically prevalent categories are more “natural”
in perception and thus easier to learn. For instance, the

The Current Study
The current study seeks to deepen our understanding of
the factors underlying the successful learning of novel
lexicalization patterns. We examine the ability of English
monolinguals and Dutch-English bilinguals to learn novel
terms that map onto either the English, Dutch, or Japanese
semantic categories of containment and support. We make
several hypotheses. First, if cognitive predispositions favor
some lexicalization patterns over others irrespective of
language experience, we would expect that both
monolinguals and bilinguals would show the same patterns
of learning, with the categories more central to cognition
being learned more efficiently than those less prevalent.
This pattern may be observed on the level of language (e.g.,
English more central than Japanese) or individual category
(e.g., Dutch in more central than aan). Alternatively, if ease
of acquisition is dependent upon the relation between the
lexicalization patterns of language to be learned and those
known by the learner, we would expect that monolinguals
and bilinguals would perform equally well in acquiring the
semantic categories of English (known by both) and equally
poorly in acquiring the semantic categories of Japanese
(known by neither), but that bilinguals would outperform

112

monolinguals in acquiring the semantic categories of Dutch
(known only to bilinguals). We also expect variations of this
pattern on the category level, reflecting differences in the
degree of overlap between English and Dutch categories.
For example, bilinguals should not outperform
monolinguals in acquiring the Dutch category in, which is
shared across English and Dutch. Finally, if there is a more
general bilingual advantage in learning new lexicalization
patterns, bilinguals should outperform monolinguals overall,
even when learning Japanese, a language with which they
have no experience.

were recorded by a female native English speaker, each
utilizing a different nonce word (blick, frep, glorp, hirsh).
A language history questionnaire (LHQ) assessed
language proficiency (Li, Sepanski, & Zhao, 2006). The
LHQ asks participants to self-rate their proficiency in each
known language, among other aspects of language use.

Procedure
Participants were tested in a quiet room equipped with a
computer and headphones. In all conditions, the experiment
consisted of eight blocks. Each block consisted of eight
training trials followed by eight test trials.
Training Each training trial presented an auditory sentence
(e.g., “The ring is blick her finger”) paired with a picture
depicting the relation referenced. Within each block, eight
trials were presented in succession, two for each of the
condition’s four categories. Each trial lasted five seconds
and trials proceeded in a random order.
Test Each test trial presented a novel picture paired with a
four-alternative multiple choice question. Questions
required subjects to choose a word to fill in a sentence,
mirroring the structure of the recorded sentences used
during training with the blank corresponding to the position
of the nonce word (see Figure 2). Answers consisted of the
target word, plus the three remaining nonce words presented
during the training phase. Within each block, eight trials
were presented in succession, with two trials per category in
the condition. Trials were untimed and randomized.

Methods
Participants
One-hundred and six monolingual English-speaking
adults were randomly assigned to one of three conditions of
a word learning task: English mappings (N= 33, M = 18.76
yrs; 4 Male), Dutch mappings (N= 37, M = 19.69 yrs; 5
Male), or Japanese mappings (N= 36, M = 18.97 yrs; 3
Male). All participants’ self-rated proficiency in a second
language was five or less on a ten-point scale. An additional
41 participants were excluded from the current analyses due
to bilingual status. Further, an additional six were excluded
altogether for inattention (4) and technical error (2).
Fifty-four Dutch-English bilinguals living in the
Netherlands were also randomly assigned to the English (M
= 23.89 yrs; 6 Male), Dutch (M = 24.83 yrs; 7 Male), and
Japanese (M = 22.89 yrs; 2 Male) conditions (18 in each).
All bilingual participants’ self-rated proficiency in English
was six or higher on a ten-point scale. Two additional
bilinguals were excluded for failure to understand the task.

Materials
For each condition, images were selected to represent four
distinct semantic categories. In the English condition, these
consisted of the two English containment/support categories
(on, in) as well as two filler spatial relations (beside, behind)
that are similar across the languages used in the experiment.
In the Dutch condition, the semantic categories were made
up of the four Dutch containment/support categories of op
(resting on), aan (attachment), om (encirclement with
contact), and in. In the Japanese condition, these categories
corresponded to three Japanese containment/support
categories of oku (loose-fitting on), ireru (loose-fitting in),
and hameru (tight-fitting on/in) as well as one filler category
that is similar across languages (behind). For each relation
in each condition, 32 distinct images were chosen from the
public domain (128 in total per condition). The assignment
of images to their semantic categories was done in
consultation with a native speaker for all conditions.
For each image, a recording was made that presented a
novel word embedded within a syntactic frame. The use of
syntactic frames allowed for the disambiguation of the
meaning of the terms. For example, when viewing an apple
resting on a pile of books, the recording might state, “The
apple is blick the books.” For each image, four sentences

Figure 2: Example of a test trial.
Design No images were repeated during the experiment,
ensuring responses to test trials were based on knowledge of
the semantic category and not memory for word-image
pairings. The assignment of images to training or test trials,
as well as the mapping of nonce words to semantic
categories were counterbalanced within each condition.
Following the experiment, participants completed the LHQ.
Instructions were presented in the participant’s native
language; however, recordings and test sentences were
presented in English for all participants.

Results
A series of ANOVAs were conducted. For all ANOVAs,
the Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied whenever
sphericity was violated (Greenhouse & Geisser, 1959).
First, we conducted an ANOVA examining accuracy
scores, with block as a within-subjects factor, and condition
(English, Dutch, Japanese) and language background

113

(monolingual, bilingual) as between-subjects factors.
Results showed a main effect of block (see Figure 3),
reflecting improved mapping of words to referents across
the experiment, F(4.687, 745.710) = 150.839, p < .001.

Figure 5: Proportion of correct responses broken down by
condition and category. *p < .008
For the English condition, there was a significant main
effect of block, F(3.254, 162.750) = 45.535, p <.001, and
category, F(3, 350) = 11.756, p < .001. Bonferroni-corrected
(p < .008) post-hoc contrasts were conducted to examine
how learning differed among the categories. Participants
performed worse on the category of on in comparison to in,
t(50) = 3.418, p < .01, beside, t(50) = 5.071, p < .001, and
behind, t(50) = 5.360, p < .001. Performance on all other
categories was equivalent, ps > .008.
For the Dutch condition, there was a significant main
effect of block, F(4.839, 261.198) = 65.142, p <.001, and
category, F(3, 378) = 10.475, p < .001. Bonferroni-corrected
(p < .008) post-hoc contrasts were conducted to examine
how learning differed among the categories. Participants
performed worse on the category of aan in comparison to
op, t(54) = 5.054, p < .001, om, t(54) = 5.180, p < .001, and
in, t(54) = 4.365, p < .001. Performance on all other
categories was equivalent, ps > .008.
For the Japanese condition, there was a significant main
effect of block, F(4.804, 254.506) = 43.745, p < .001, and
category, F(3, 371) = 49.386, p < .001. Bonferroni-corrected
(p < .008) post-hoc contrasts were conducted to examine
how learning differed among the categories. Participants
performed worse on hameru compared to oku, t(53) = 8.370,
p < .001, ireru, t(53) = 6.399, p < .001, and behind, t(53) =
12.983, p < .001. Participants also performed worse on oku
and ireru when compared to behind, t(53) = 4.619, p < .001
and t(53) = 5.569, p < .001, respectively. There was no
difference between oku and ireru, p > .008.
Neither language background, nor any interactions
between block, category, and language background were
significant in any condition, ps > .05.

Figure 3: Learning by language background (monolingual
vs. bilingual; ML and BL, respectively) and condition
(English vs. Dutch vs. Japanese).
Further, there was a significant effect of condition, F(2,
154) = 3.863, p < .05. Bonferroni-corrected (p < .017) posthoc contrasts suggested that English categories were learned
significantly better than Japanese categories, t(103) = 3.057,
p < .017. English categories were also learned better than
Dutch categories, though this result was only marginally
significant, t(104) = 2.246, p = .027. There was no
difference between participants in mapping Dutch and
Japanese categories, t(107) = .899, p = .371 (see Figure 4).

Figure 4: Proportion of correct responses by condition and
language background. *p < .017 +p < .034
There was no effect of language background, nor any
interactions between block, condition, and language
background, ps > .05. Thus, bilinguals did not show any
advantage overall, nor within any language condition.
Because some categories are similar across languages
(e.g., in), we next looked for differences on the level of
categories, to determine whether certain semantic
distinctions were driving the observed condition differences.
For each condition, an ANOVA was conducted, with both
category and block as within-subjects factors, and language
background as a between-subjects factor (Figure 5).

Discussion
Lexicalization biases present a challenge for learning a
new language. To achieve native-like competency, learners
must potentially put aside these longstanding biases to
discover how a new language maps relational terms onto
relations in events. Our results provide evidence that some
lexicalization patterns may be easier to learn than others, a
factor that has been found to impact other facets of second
language acquisition (e.g., Antoniou, et al., 2015). Japanese

114

and to a lesser extent Dutch biases proved more difficult to
learn than English biases. This finding is particularly
striking given that both Dutch and Japanese conditions
included categories native to English (e.g., in for Dutch,
behind for Japanese) that may have inflated performance.
Further, the bias for English lexicalization patterns is
apparent on the level of individual categories. Categories
most difficult to learn were those most typologically
dissimilar from English. For instance, post-experiment
debriefings suggest that monolinguals could rely on rough
English equivalents to support learning op (prototypical on),
and om (around) in Dutch, but that this strategy was less
productive for aan (attached, hanging, on, etc.). Similarly,
participants could simplify the categories of oku and ireru in
Japanese to prototypical containment and support relations,
whereas hameru had no clear English equivalent.
Interestingly, both monolinguals and bilinguals showed
the same enhancement of learning English patterns over
Dutch and Japanese, even though the native language of the
bilingual group was Dutch. This pattern of results may
support the notion that cognition is predisposed to attend to
the categories of some languages more than others, an
experience-independent effect that is immune to the
language background of the learners tested in our study
(though see below for an alternative explanation). As
discussed by Gentner and Bowerman (2009), English
containment and support categories are more universally
represented across languages and appear early in children’s
vocabularies, reflecting their potential centrality to
cognition. We mirror this pattern in the learning of
additional languages. Thus, the superior learning of the
English biases may be further reflection of the centrality of
the in/on distinction, relative to the semantic categories of
Dutch or Japanese. Our results are also in accord with recent
work on action words, in which cognitive predispositions
for encoding path information, but not adults’ language
backgrounds, predicted the ease with which they learned
novel words (Emerson, Özçalişkan, & Frishkoff, 2016).

the current results, however, there was also a languagedependent effect: Korean-English bilinguals outperformed
the other groups on words that relied on Korean contrasts.
Why might the results here be different? The lack of
advantage may be due in part to the higher malleability of
lexicalization biases. The phonetic space is drastically
restructured over the course of development (Werker &
Tees, 1984) and even advanced SLLs struggle to discern
non-native phonetic contrasts (Pallier, Colomé, &
Sebastián-Gallés, 2001). The heightening and dampening of
lexicalization biases, however, is thought to be less
dramatic, with non-native categories easily re-awakened in
certain contexts (Choi & Hattrup, 2012).
We also found no evidence of a general bilingual
advantage, again in contrast to research in other areas of
second language learning (Antoniou, et al., 2015;
Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009; Van Hell & Mahn, 1997).
Specifically, bilinguals were no better at mapping relational
terms than monolinguals across both familiar and novel
lexicalization patterns. Future research will examine
performance relative to traditional measures of executive
function to isolate whether these variables thought to
underlie bilingual advantages in language learning are
relevant to the learning of lexicalization patterns.

Limitations and Future Directions
When considering how language experience affects the
learning of lexicalization patterns, there is another factor
that must be considered: context. Despite written
instructions in Dutch, the presentation of the experiment by
an English-speaking experimenter and the use of English to
frame nonce words may have biased bilinguals away from
the lexicalization patterns of their native Dutch and towards
those of their second language, English. Indeed, in research
on motion conceptualization, Spanish-English bilinguals
attend more to manner of motion when tested in English,
which prominently marks this aspect of events, as opposed
to Spanish, which does not (Kersten, et al., 2010). Future
conditions will manipulate the language of presentation to
determine whether the pattern of results in the current study
is caused in part by a predominantly English context.
Further, while the patterns observed are consistent with a
cognitive predisposition account, other variables warrant
consideration. For instance, the pattern of performance may
be attributable to a preference for English’s semantically
broader categories, which may not always be a feature of
categories proposed to be cognitively central. In addition,
the use of fillers, such as behind and beside, may have
differentially helped participants in the English and
Japanese conditions, as distinctions between these relations
and those of containment and support may be more obvious
than distinctions within containment and support relations.
Finally, a particularly promising avenue for future
research is the use of this paradigm with native speakers of
Japanese. The results suggest that Japanese is the most
difficult of the three lexicalization patterns tested. If this is
an experience-independent effect due to cognitive

Bilingual Advantage?
While the results support experience-independent effects
of the language to be learned, we find no evidence of
additional experience-dependent effects. Dutch-English
bilinguals did not outperform English monolingual speakers
when learning the semantic categories of Dutch, a language
with which monolingual participants had no prior
experience. This result also holds on the level of individual
categories, with Dutch-English bilinguals not outperforming
English-speaking monolinguals on any Dutch category.
The lack of facilitative effect for Dutch-English bilinguals
in learning Dutch lexicalization patterns is a departure from
related research in phonology. Antoniou and colleagues
(2015) found that English monolinguals, Mandarin-English
bilinguals, and Korean-English bilinguals all learned novel
words better when the words relied on Mandarin, as
opposed to Korean phonetic contrasts, analogous to the
cognitive predisposition for English categories here. Unlike

115

predispositions, we would expect even Japanese speakers to
show poorer learning of these categories relative to those of
English and Dutch in an artificial language learning task.

neuroscientific research can enrich the study of first and
second
language
learning.
Developmental
Neuropsychology, 39(4), 262-284.
Gleitman, L. R., & Papafragou, A. (2013). Relations
between language and thought. In D. Reisberg
(Ed.), Handbook of Cognitive Psychology (pp. 504-523).
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Göksun, T., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2010).
Trading spaces: Carving up events for learning language.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 33-42.
Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, S. (1959). On methods in the
analysis of profile data. Psychometrika, 24, 95–112.
Havasi, C., & Snedeker, J. (2004). The adaptability of
language-specific verb lexicalization biases. Proceedings
of the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hohenstein, J., Eisenberg, A., & Naigles, L. (2006). Is he
floating across or crossing afloat? Cross-influence of L1
and L2 in Spanish-English bilingual adults. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 9, 249-261.
Kaushanskaya, M., & Marian, V. (2009). Bilingualism
reduces native-language interference during novel-word
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 35(3), 829-835.
Kersten, A. W., Meissner, C. A., Lechuga, J., Schwartz, B.
L., Albrechtsen, J. S., & Iglesias, A. (2010). English
speakers attend more strongly than Spanish speakers to
manner of motion when classifying novel objects and
events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
139(4), 638.
Li, P., Sepanski, S., & Zhao, X. (2006). Language history
questionnaire: A Web-based interface for bilingual
research. Behavior Research Methods, 38(2), 202-210.
McDonough, L., Choi, S., & Mandler, J. M. (2003).
Understanding spatial relations: Flexible infants, lexical
adults. Cognitive Psychology, 46, 229–259.
Pallier, C., Colomé, A., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2001). The
inﬂuence of native-language phonology on lexical access:
Exemplar-based versus abstract lexical entries.
Psychological Science, 12, 445–449.
Papafragou, A., Hulbert, J., & Trueswell, J. (2008). Does
language guide event perception? Evidence from eye
movements. Cognition, 108, 155-84.
Song, L., Pulverman, R., Pepe, C., Golinkoff, R. M., &
Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2016). Does the owl fly out of the tree or
does the owl exit the tree flying? How L2 learners
overcome their L1 lexicalization biases. Language
Learning and Development, 12(1), 42-59.
Van Hell, J. G., & Mahn, A. C. (1997). Keyword
mnemonics versus rote rehearsal: Learning concrete and
abstract foreign words by experienced and inexperienced
learners. Language Learning, 47, 507–546.
Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1984). Cross-language speech
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization during
the first year of life. Infant Behavior & Development, 7,
49–63.

Conclusion
Lexicalization biases provide a lens with which to process
events for language. When learning a novel language,
however, these biases must be put aside in favor of new
ways of representing relations in events. The current study
suggests that a primary influence on this process may be the
extent to which cognitive predispositions align with the
lexicalization patterns of a new language.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an NIH R01 grant to
Daniel J. Weiss (HD067250) and an NSF PIRE grant
(OISE-0968369) to Judith Kroll, Janet van Hell, and Giuli
Dussias. We thank Carol Miller, Janet van Hell, Gerrit Jan
Kootstra, Federica Bulgarelli, Sarah Miller, Johanna de Vos,
Miriam Kos, Vanessa Engel, and Ronny Janssen for their
invaluable contributions to this work. We also thank the
Child Language and Cognition Lab and the Center for
Language Science at Penn State University, as well as the
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour at
Radboud University for supporting this work.

References
Antoniou, M., Liang, E., Ettlinger, M., & Wong, P. C.
(2015). The bilingual advantage in phonetic learning.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18(4), 683-695.
Beekhuizen, B., Fazly, A., & Stevenson, S. (2014).
Learning Meaning without Primitives. Typology Predicts
Developmental Patterns. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., & Luk, G. (2012).
Bilingualism: consequences for mind and brain. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 16(4), 240-250.
Choi, S., & Hattrup, K. (2012). Relative contribution of
perception/cognition
and
language
on
spatial
categorization. Cognitive Science, 36, 102-129.
Emerson, S. N., Özçalişkan, S., & Frishkoff, G. A. (2016).
Effects of motion type and modality on word learning in
English. Applied Psycholinguistics, 37(3), 643-671.
Gentner, D. (2006). Why verbs are hard to learn. In K.
Hirsh-Pasek & R. M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action meets
word: How children learn verbs (pp. 544-564). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gentner, D., & Bowerman, M. (2009). Why some spatial
semantic categories are harder to learn than others: The
typological prevalence hypothesis. In J. Guo, E. Lieven,
S. Ervin-Tripp, N. Budwig, S. Özcaliskan, & K.
Nakamura (Eds.), Crosslinguistic approaches to the
psychology of language: Research in the tradition of Dan
Isaac Slobin (pp. 465–480). New York, NY: Erlbaum.
George, N. R., Göksun, T., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff,
R. M. (2014). Carving the world for language: How

116

