Are children flexible speakers?
Effects of typicality and listener needs in children’s event descriptions
Myrto Grigoroglou (Mgrigor@Udel.Edu)
Department of Linguistics and Cognitive Science, University of Delaware
125 East Main Street, Newark, DE 19716 USA

Anna Papafragou (APapafragou@Psych.Udel.Edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware
105 The Green, Newark, DE 19716 USA

likely to offer a greater amount of information to an
ignorant addressee, but less information to a knowledgeable
addressee (to avoid redundancy).
In the present study, we are interested in whether children
adjust their utterances to the needs of their addressees and–
to the extent that they do–whether these adjustments are
oriented towards a generic or specific interlocutor.

Abstract
Do children take into account their addressees’ needs in
spontaneous production? Developmental evidence for speaker
adjustments is mixed. Some studies show that children are
often under-informative when communicating with ignorant
addressees but other studies demonstrate successes in
children’s ability to integrate another person’s perspective.
We asked whether children adapt their event descriptions
depending on (a) the typicality of event components, and (b)
the listener’s visual access to the events. We found that
children’s ability to use information about the listener’s visual
perspective to make specific adjustments to event descriptions
emerged only in highly interactive contexts, in which
participants collaborated towards mutual goals.

Children’s referential communication
Previous research on children’s ability to adjust to the
informational needs of their addressees has focused on
nominal reference. The usual paradigm used to elicit
referential expressions from children involves the child
asking a partner to move objects on a visual display. The
crucial manipulation concerns the partner’s knowledge
state: The partner is either knowledgeable (has full visual
access to the same objects as the child) or partially ignorant
(she has limited visual access to the objects on display).
This line of work has led to contrasting views concerning
children’s referential communication abilities.
On an egocentric view, young children’s early
egocentrism prevents them from adjusting their production
to their addressees’ informational needs. This view is
supported by experimental evidence showing that children
are often under-informative when communicating with
ignorant addressees. For instance, 3-year-olds fail to adjust
their utterances appropriately when addressing ignorant vs.
knowledgeable interlocutors (Perner & Leekam, 1986) and
5-year-olds are often underinformative when describing one
of two objects in a contrast set to an ignorant addressee
(Davies & Katsos, 2010). Furthermore, 2-, 3- and 4-year old
children produced ambiguous utterances before receiving
any referential training (Matthews, Lieven, & Tomasello,
2007). Even older children (6- to 8-year-olds) have been
shown to produce many ambiguous utterances in their
referential communication (Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982;
Girbau, 2001; Sonnenschein, 1982).
On an audience-design view, children are able to adjust
their production to the needs of their addressees, as long as
these needs are sufficiently transparent. Experimental
evidence from certain types of tasks supports this view.
Children seem to be sensitive to a partner’s perspective
when they are engaged in a task that has a clear
communicative purpose (e.g., when children give their

Keywords: referential communication; event cognition;
language production; instruments; perspective-taking;
pragmatics

Introduction
According to a widely shared perspective, communication is
a collaborative effort governed by rational expectations
(Grice, 1957). On Grice’s theory (1975), a collaborative
speaker is reasonably expected to be as informative as
required by the purpose of the communicative exchange
(maxim of quantity), truthful (maxim of quality), relevant
(maxim of relation), and perspicuous (maxim of manner).
Within this framework, production is often considered as an
addressee-oriented process in which speakers flexibly adjust
their utterances to their listeners’ informational needs in a
given context (e.g., Clark & Marshall, 1981).
However, in a seminal study, Brown and Dell (1987)
suggested that not all adjustments in production are oriented
towards a specific addressee. They proposed that speakers
make two types of adjustments in production. Generic
adjustments are geared towards an unspecified
comprehender. For instance, speakers are more likely to
mention atypical (unusual) event components (as opposed to
typical ones) because any comprehender would find atypical
components harder to infer (e.g., ‘Adolph stabbed the man
with an icepick’ is more felicitous compared to ‘Adolph
stabbed the man with a knife’). Additionally, speakers also
make adjustments to specific addressees in a particular
communicative context. For instance, speakers are more

782

partner instructions about how to manipulate objects on a
visual display; see Bahtiyar & Küntay, 2009; Nadig &
Sedivy, 2002). Children also become more informative
when they are given specific feedback in the form of
clarification questions (e.g., “[Do you need] the girl eating
an ice-cream or the girl swimming?”; see Matthews, Lieven
& Tomasello, 2007; Matthews et al., 2012). Additionally,
children seem to be taking into account the knowledge state
of their interlocutors when they are familiar with them: for
instance, 2-year-old children are more likely to name a
hidden toy when their mother has not witnessed the hiding
(O’Neill, 1996).
The egocentric and audience-design views make specific
predictions concerning the types of adjustments that
children might make in production. Both accounts predict
that children should make ‘generic’ adjustments, since these
are guided by broad comprehension constraints and do not
involve true perspective-taking. However, they make
different predictions concerning children’s ability to
perform addressee-specific adjustments. According to the
egocentric account, children might not make adjustments to
specific addressees, because of limitations in the ability to
take into account another person’s perspective. According to
the audience-design account, children might make listenerspecific adjustments in contexts where listeners’
informational needs are sufficiently transparent.

& Tanenhaus, 2006; Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982). In
Experiment 3, we explore how instrument mention is
affected by introducing a clear communicative goal to the
task.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants watched short video clips
depicting different events and described them to listeners
who either saw or could not see the events. Half of the
events contained typical and half atypical instruments (e.g.,
watering plants with a watering can/a hat used as a
container). Both the egocentric and audience design
accounts predict that participants should make generic
adjustments in production by mentioning atypical
instruments more frequently than typical instruments. In
terms of addressee-specific adjustments, on the audiencedesign view, participants are expected to offer more
information about instruments when their addressee has no
visual access to events; on the egocentric view, instrument
mention should not differ depending on the knowledge state
of the addressee.

Methods
Participants Twenty-four 4- to 5-year-old children (range:
4;4-5;2, mean: 4;11) and twenty-four adults participated in
the experiment. The children were recruited from daycares
in the Newark (DE) area. Adults were undergraduate
students at the University of Delaware and received course
credit for their participation.

Current study
In this study, we compare the predictions of the egocentric
and audience-design views by asking whether adults and
preschoolers adapt their event descriptions depending on (a)
the typicality of event components (generic adjustment),
and (b) the listener’s visual access (specific adjustment).
Both factors have been argued to play a role in adults’ early
syntactic choices in production (Brown & Dell 1987;
Lockridge & Brennan 2002). Unlike prior work that has
focused on children’s nominal reference, we elicit
descriptions of events to explore children’s adjustments.
Describing events is much more complex than referring to
single objects and requires more advanced syntactic
structure. Specifically, we focus on instrument phrases in
event descriptions, which are typically encoded in a nonobligatory adjunct (i.e., Ving with a Y).
Additionally,
we
explore
the
communicative
circumstances under which children can make successful
adaptations. Previous experimental evidence suggests that in
certain types of tasks children are able to take into account
the informational needs of their addressees, but more
research is required to clarify exactly which factors
contribute to children’s success. In Experiment 1, we test
whether the presence of an addressee with specific
informational needs affects typical and atypical instrument
mention. In Experiment 2, we test whether instrument
mention is affected by presenting stimuli in contrastive pairs
of typical/atypical events. In previous research, contrastive
contexts have been shown to facilitate unique identification
of referents (e.g., Brennan & Clark, 1996; Brown-Schmidt

Materials Test items included 12 events depicting an agent
performing an action. For each of the test events, we created
two short video clips, one showing the agent performing an
action using a typical instrument (e.g., watering plants with
a can) and the other showing the agent performing the same
action using an atypical instrument (e.g., watering plants
with a hat). Typicality of instruments was pre-rated by a
group of 14 adults and 16 children. Overall, adults
mentioned the selected typical instruments in 73% of their
responses and children in 63% of their responses. For
atypical versions of the same events, we chose instruments
that were either not mentioned at all or mentioned very
infrequently (less than 6% of the time) by both children and
adults. We chose these novel (i.e., highly atypical but still
possible) instruments because we wanted to ensure that
there would be a large difference between typical and
atypical instruments in the test events, noticeable even by
our younger participants. We also created a set of 6 filler
clips showing various everyday actions that did not involve
instruments (e.g., watching television, running). The same
(male) agent performed all actions in the test and filler clips.
Procedure Participants were informed that they would be
watching a set of short video clips and that, at the end of
each video, they would have to describe what they saw.

783

They were also introduced to a ‘friend’ of the
experimenter’s (the confederate listener) who had not seen
the videos and wanted to know what participants would see.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions. In the Visual Access condition, the listener sat
next to the participant and also watched the clips. In the No
Visual Access condition, the listener sat behind an opaque
barrier so that she was unable to see the videos (or the
participants as they were describing them). No restrictions
were placed on participants’ productions.
Coding Participants’ descriptions were tape-recorded and
transcribed. Descriptions were coded for the explicit
mention of instruments (either within the same clause or in a
separate clause) before or after the main verb (e.g., “The
guy is eating soup with a big spoon”, “A man getting the
knife and cutting something”) or incorporated into the verb
(e.g., “The man is hammering a fence”). We also coded for
implicit mention of instruments, in cases where the
instrument was not mentioned but simply inferred by the
systematic choice of locution (e.g., “He is trying to open the
door”, for an event in which the agent was using a hanger to
try and break into the room).

Figure 1: Proportion of mention of Typical and Atypical
instruments by age group and type of Visual Access in
Experiment 1
These results show that adults made both typicality-based
adjustments and more specific adjustments to the
informational needs of their addressee.1 Children, however,
performed only typicality-based adjustments by mentioning
only the most unusual event component, a result in
accordance with the egocentric view.
There are several explanations for the fact that children
may have ignored the needs of their addressee. One
possibility is that children had difficulty estimating the goals
of the exchange: asking children to simply describe events
for a passive listener may not have provided the necessary
communicative goal that would highlight the listener’s
specific needs. To explore this possibility, we conducted a
second experiment that clarified the goals of the exchange.

Results and Discussion
We conducted an ANOVA with Age (Children, Adults) and
Visual Access (Visual Access, No Visual Access) as
between-subjects factors and Typicality (Typical, Atypical)
as a within-subjects factor. The analysis revealed a main
effect of Age (F(1, 43) = 89.56, p < .001), a main effect of
Visual Access (F(1, 43) = 461.84, p < .001), and a main
effect of Typicality (F(1, 43) = 224.31, p < .001). These
effects were qualified by an interaction between Age and
Visual Access (F(1, 43) = 9.60, p = .003): adults were much
more likely to add instrument information when the events
were not visible to their interlocutor (M=.64) compared to
situations where the interlocutor also had visual access to
the events (M=.47; p < .05); in children, however, this
difference was not significant (M=.20 vs. .23 respectively).
The analysis also revealed an Age by Typicality interaction
(F(1, 43) = 29.04, p < .001): adults were much more likely
to mention instruments for Atypical compared to Typical
versions of events (M=.87 vs. .22), while in children this
difference was smaller (M=.36 vs. .06 respectively). No
other interactions were found.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we explored a new paradigm with the goal
of making the addressee’s needs more prominent for
children: we asked whether instrument information can be
identified and used by children to unambiguously single out
and describe an event within a pair of closely matched
alternatives. In such contrastive contexts, adults might be
expected to produce instruments regardless of typicality or
visual access (since the goal of the task is to disambiguate
the right referent) but children might show both effects of
typicality and visual access. We reasoned that such a
contrastive context might highlight the need to clearly
distinguish between two almost identical events for the sake
of an uninformed addressee. In order to seek developmental
changes in the ability to make use of perspective
information, we compared two age groups of children.
Recall that the egocentric account predicts that–despite the
different manipulations–children should not show effects of
visual access. The audience-design account, however,
predicts that children should use instruments more

1 It should be noted that adults’ specific adaptations emerged
despite our listener being a confederate and not a naïve participant
(see Lockridge & Brennan, 2002 for discussion).

784

frequently when the addressee lacks visual access to the
events.

across from participants so that she could not see the
computer screen. Throughout the experiment, the
confederate avoided eye contact with the participants but
kept looking into her binder and followed the descriptions
of the events turning the pages as appropriate. In the Visual
Access condition, participants and confederate were seated
next to each other so that they both had visual contact with
the pictures described. The confederate looked at the screen
as participants were describing the events and followed
along by turning the pages in her binder.

Methods
Participants Sixty children and thirty adults participated.
The children ranged between 4;0 and 6;0 and fell into two
age groups: a younger group (n = 30) with a mean age of
4;7 and an older group (n = 30) with a mean age of 5;6. All
children attended daycares in the Newark (DE) area. Adults
were undergraduate students at the University of Delaware
and received course credit for their participation.

Coding Participants’ descriptions were tape-recorded and
transcribed. For test items, responses were coded following
the coding scheme of Experiment 1.

Materials Materials consisted of pairs of events constructed
out of clipart pictures. Each pair was displayed on a
computer screen in Powerpoint format. There were 8 pairs
of test events. Within each pair, the same event was
depicted with a typical vs. an atypical instrument (e.g., a
woman sweeping the floor with a broom vs. a tree branch).
The position (left-right) of the typical and atypical versions
were counterbalanced within the stimulus set. The test
events were arranged in two presentation lists. In each list,
one version of each event was placed within a red circle
(half of the time, the circle was placed around a typical and
the other half around an atypical event). For each event, the
version that was circled was different between the two lists.
Each presentation list also contained 8 pairs of control
events.

Results and Discussion
We conducted an ANOVA with the proportion of explicitly
mentioned instruments as the dependent variable, Age
(Younger, Older, Adult) and Visual Access (Visual Access,
No Visual Access) as between-subjects factors and
Typicality (Typical, Atypical) as a within-subjects factor.
The analysis revealed a main effect of Age (F(2, 84) =
103.60, p < .001), with adults being more likely than either
group of children to include instrument information overall
(Mad=.91 vs. My=.17 and Mo=.32; ps < .001), and older
children being more likely to include more instrument
information than younger children (p =.026). There was also
a main effect of Typicality (F(1, 84) = 55.07, p < .001),
qualified by an interaction between Age and Typicality
(F(2, 84) = 6.76, p = .002): matched-pairs comparisons
revealed that both older and younger children were much
more likely to mention instruments for Atypical compared
to Typical versions of events (younger: t(29) = -6.71, p <
.001, MA=.27 vs. MT=.08; older: t(29) = -5.64, p < .001,
MA=.43 vs. MT=.19), while in adults this difference was not
significant (p >.05, MA = .93 vs. MT = .88). There were no
other main or interaction effects.

Figure 2: Example stimulus from Experiment 2 depicting
a pair of typical and atypical events. The circle indicates the
target event
Procedure Participants were assigned to either a No Visual
Access or a Visual Access condition. In the No Visual
Access condition, the experimenter introduced participants
to her ‘friend’ (a confederate). Then the experimenter
showed participants the display of events on a computer
screen and told participants: “These are two twins. They are
each doing something different. Look at both twins and tell
[the confederate] what the twin inside the circle is doing.
She has a picture of the twins too, but she doesn’t know
which one we are talking about.” Participants saw that the
confederate had a binder which contained color printouts of
the pictures on their computer screen but lacked circles
around the target pictures. The confederate was then seated

Figure 3: Proportion of mention of Typical and Atypical
instruments by age group in Experiment 2
Thus, in these contrastive contexts, adults did not perform
any type of adjustment (generic or specific). The reason is
that instrument mention in adults was very high, regardless

785

of typicality or visual access, since the goal was to uniquely
identify the correct referent. However, children made only
generic (typicality-based) adjustments and did not adapt to
specific addressees. This result provides support to the
egocentric view of children’s adjustments.

there was a main effect of Visual Access (F(1,56) = 5.029, p
= .020), indicating that participants of all age groups used
more instrument information when the addressee did not
have visual access to the events.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 was a version of Experiment 2 with two main
modifications: first, the addressee was no longer a
confederate who acted as a passive listener but was
introduced as a ‘naïve’ listener who was actively involved
in the task; second, the task had a specific communicative
purpose (guessing game). We reasoned that in a highly
interactive paradigm, in which participants interacted with a
‘real’ addressee, children’s ability to take into account the
needs of their interlocutor might be more likely to arise.

Methods

Figure 4: Proportion of mention of Typical and Atypical
instruments by age group in Experiment 3

Participants Thirty-two children and thirty adults
participated2. The children ranged between 4;0 and 6;0 and
fell into two age groups: a younger group (n = 19) with a
mean age of 4;4 and an older group (n = 13) with a mean
age of 5;2. All children attended daycares in the Newark
(DE) area. Adults were undergraduate students at the
University of Delaware and received course credit for their
participation.

Therefore, in this more interactive paradigm, children
showed sensitivity to their addressee’s informational needs
by mentioning instruments more frequently when the
addressee could not see the events, in accordance with the
audience-design view. In the context of contrastive
presentation of the stimuli, children–just like adults–did not
perform generic adjustments, since both types of
instruments (typical, atypical) were important for
disambiguating the correct referent.

Materials and Procedure Materials were identical to
Experiment 2. The procedure included the following
modifications. The adult listener (the experimenter’s
confederate) was presented to the participants as a ‘naïve’
addressee. The experimenter told the participant and the
confederate that they would play a guessing game together,
in which the participant had to help the addressee guess the
right event. At the beginning of each trial, the addressee
said: “I can see two pictures. Which one is it? Tell me about
it!” At the end of each trial, the addressee said: “I hope I got
it right!” and placed a sticker next to the picture that best
matched the participant’s description. Feedback was
provided in one practice trial at the beginning of the task.
During the main test phase, the participants could not see
where the addressee put the sticker so that their production
was not affected. As in Experiment 2, participants were
assigned in either a Visual Access or a No Visual Access
condition.

General Discussion
The present study investigated referential communication
patterns in children and adults, focusing on event reference.
We showed that adult speakers, similarly to Brown and Dell
(1987) and Lockridge and Brennan (2002), performed both
‘generic’ adjustments (adding information about atypical,
i.e., generally unpredictable, instruments) and more specific
adjustments to addressees’ needs (mentioning instruments
more often when addressees could not see the events).
Children, however, often made only generic (typicalitybased) adjustments. Their ability to use information about
the listener’s visual perspective to make specific
adjustments to their event descriptions emerged only in
contexts where the addressees’ needs were made
particularly transparent.
What were the precise factors that made addressees’
needs accessible to children in Experiment 3? An important
difference between Experiments 1-2 and Experiment 3 was
the role of the addressee. In Experiment 3, the addressee
was a “real” interlocutor, who had more genuine
informational needs that children could easily identify. In
fact, in studies that show early successes in children’s
tendency to make addressee-specific adjustments, the
addressees are either the children’s parents (O’ Neill &
Topolovec, 2001; O’Neill, 1996) or confederates of the
experimenter with an active role in the task (Bahtiyar &

Results and Discussion
We conducted an ANOVA with Age (Younger, Older,
Adult) and Visual Access (Visual Access, No Visual
Access) as between-subjects factors and Typicality (Typical,
Atypical) as a within-subjects factor. The analysis yielded a
significant effect of Age (F(2, 56) = 37.319, p < .001), with
older children mentioning instruments more frequently than
younger children, but less frequently than adults. Crucially
2

The results presented here are preliminary.

786

Girbau, D. (2001). Children’s Referential Communication
Failure: The Ambiguity and Abbreviation of Message.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 20(1-2), 81–
89.
Grice, H., P. (1957). Meaning. The Philosophical Review,
66(3), 377–388.
Grice, H., P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Speech acts,
Volume 3 (pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Lockridge, C. B., & Brennan, S. E. (2002). Addressees’
needs influence speakers' early syntactic choices.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 550–557.
Matthews, D., Butcher, J., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M.
(2012). Two- and Four-Year-Olds Learn to Adapt
Referring Expressions to Context: Effects of Distracters
and Feedback on Referential Communication. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 4(2), 184–210.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2007). How
toddlers and preschoolers learn to uniquely identify
referents for others: A training study. Child Development,
78(6), 1744–1759.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2010). What’s
in a manner of speaking? Children's sensitivity to partnerspecific
referential
precedents.
Developmental
Psychology, 46(4), 749–760.
Nadig, A. S., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Evidence of
perspective-taking constraints in children’s on-line
reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13(4), 329–
336.
O’ Neill, D. K., & Topolovec, J. C. (2001). Two-year-old
children’s sensitivity to the referential (in)efficacy of their
own pointing gestures. Journal of Child Language, 28, 1–
28.
O’Neill, D. K. (1996). Two-Year-Old children’s sensitivity
to a parent's knowledge state when making requests.
Child Development, 67(2), 659.
Perner, J., & Leekam, S. R. (1986). Belief and quantity:
three-year olds’ adaptation to listener's knowledge.
Journal of Child Language, 13(2), 305–315.
Sonnenschein, S. (1982). The Effects of Redundant
Communications on Listeners: When More Is Less. Child
Development, 53(3), 717.

Küntay, 2009; Nadig & Sedivy, 2002). By contrast, in
studies where the addressee is either a static picture on a
computer screen or imaginary (Davies & Katsos 2010;
Girbau 2001), children fail to make adaptations. Even adults
seem to be more likely to make addressee-specific
adjustments when the addressee is naïve as opposed to a
confederate (see Brown & Dell, 1987; Lockridge &
Brennan, 2002).
A second important difference between Experiment 3 and
the previous experiments is the communicative purpose of
the task. In Experiment 3, the speaker and the addressee had
to engage in a collaborative process (guessing game) to
achieve a mutually pursued goal (finding the ‘right’
picture). This conclusion is supported by previous findings
that demonstrate children’s sensitivity to other people's
perspective in tasks that require collaboration between
interlocutors (e.g., Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982; Matthews,
Lieven, & Tomasello, 2010; O’ Neill & Topolovec, 2001;
O’Neill, 1996).
Overall, our findings suggest that children do not seem to
be egocentric communicators. However, they need extra
communicative cues to facilitate their assumptions about
what type of information is relevant for the purpose of the
exchange and how much information their addressee needs.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the children and the parents in the
preschools of Newark, DE area. Special thanks to Dan
Curtin, Sarah Fairchild and Hanna Schwartz for their
assistance in data collection. This research has been partially
supported by NSF grant BCS-0749870 to A.P.

References
Bahtiyar, S., & Küntay, A. C. (2009). Integration of
communicative partner’s visual perspective in patterns of
referential requests. Journal of Child Language, 36(3),
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6),
1482–1493.
Brown, P. M., & Dell, G. S. (1987). Adapting production to
comprehension: The explicit mention of instruments.
Cognitive Psychology, 19(4), 441–472.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006). Watching
the eyes when talking about size: An investigation of
message formulation and utterance planning. Journal of
Memory and Language, 54(4), 592–609.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite reference
and mutual knowledge. In A. H. Joshi, B. I. Webber, & I.
A. Sag (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding (pp.
10–63). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davies, C., & Katsos, N. (2010). Over-informative children:
Production/comprehension asymmetry or tolerance to
pragmatic violations? Lingua, 120(8), 1956–1972.
Deutsch, W., & Pechmann, T. (1982). Social interaction and
the development of definite descriptions. Cognition,
11(2), 159–184.

787

