Are Financial Advisors Money Doctors or Charlatans? Evidence on Trust, Advice,
and Risk Taking in Delegated Asset Management
Qizhang Sun (Qizhang.Sun@usi.ch)
Institute of Marketing and Communication Management, USI
Lugano-6900, Switzerland

Michael Gibbert (Michael.Gibbert@usi.ch)
Institute of Marketing and Communication Management, USI
Lugano-6900, Switzerland

Thomas T. Hills (T.T.Hills@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom

Eric Nowak (Eric.Nowak@usi.ch)
Institute of Finance, USI
Lugano-6900, Switzerland

to mere advice, trustworthy advice is more effective;
moreover (3) trustworthy advice has a larger effect on
encouraging individuals to take more risk than justified
advice for more conservative investments. (4) Individuals
still select the high trust advisor even though it is more
expensive.

Abstract
We test the effects of advice and trust on risk-taking in three
online experiments designed to elucidate under what
conditions financial advice may increase risk-taking,
irrespective of advisor performance. In our study, investors
made 100 decisions, selecting between one of two alternatives:
risky or conservative. We manipulate the suggestion of an
advisor (risky vs. non-risky investments), the fee of the advice,
as well as the trustworthiness of the advisor (by increasing the
transparency of the advice presented) to test the effect of the
advice on risk-taking. The results show that individuals
asymmetrically follow the advice they received, with a bias
towards following more risky than conservative advice.
Moreover, trusted advice was more persuasive irrespective of
what the advisor suggested and even the fee is higher.

Money Doctor and Our Study
In a recent analytical paper in financial economics, entitled
“Money Doctors”, Gennaioli et al. (2015) present a new
model of money management, in which investors delegate
portfolio management to professional advisors based not on
performance but on trust. In the model, the advisor decreases
the investor's perception of the riskiness of a given
investment, which allows advisors to charge fees to investors
who trust them, even though the actual performance of
advisors might be poor relative to market benchmarks.
However, this still benefits investors, because the advisor
encourages them to take higher risks, which they would not
dare to bear just by themselves, and so earn superior returns.
The central assumption of their work is that advisors charge
investors to reduce their anxiety, which then enables
investors to take these higher risks. By themselves, investors
tend to be reluctant, or even anxious, to choose a risky
alternative. However, the risky alternative often comes with
a higher pay-off in the long-run. Financial advisors provide
an important function in this situation. Specifically, the
advisor seems to decrease the investor's perception of the
riskiness of a given investment, reducing investor anxiety,
enabling the investor to take more risk (and get more reward).
To our knowledge, we provide the first study investigating
these claims using an experimental method with randomly
chosen survey participants. We conduct two different sets of
survey experiments. In Experiment 1, we show that trusted
advisors enable investors to choose riskier investment
options. In Experiment 2, we extend the basic design by

Keywords: Advice taking; Financial advice; Money doctors;
Risk taking; Trust

A central finding of the literature on advice-taking in
financial economics is that many investors seek advice even
though it often performs poorly relative to market
benchmarks (Bergstresser et al., 2009; Chalmers and Reuter,
2012; Del Guercion and Reuter, 2014). In psychology,
research also found that individuals keep looking for advice
even though they understand that investors perform poorly
(Sun et al., 2014). Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2015) in
an analytical paper suggest this is because the trusted advice
enables them to be more audacious than they would be
otherwise, thus enabling them to take more risk, irrespective
of the advisor’s actual performance. Our study uses an
experimental method as a first empirical test of this
hypothesis, thereby bridging the financial and psychological
dimension of advice-taking.
In our study, we hypothesize that (1) advisors will enable
individuals to take more risks, in line with the core
assumption of the model built by Gennaioli et al. (2015), but
only when advice favors the risky alternative; (2) Compared

895

manipulating the trustworthiness of the advisor (via
increasing the transparency of the advice presented), and find
that non-trustworthy advice attenuates the effect.
In both experiments, financial advisors provide risky as
well as conservative advice, and we do model this for two
reasons. The first reason is that financial advisors vary – both
over time and in the cross-section - in how much risk they
advise their clients in real life. Changing economic
environments will influence performance criteria. This
suggests that even mildly cognizant money managers should
change their risk evaluations over time. In some cases, money
managers do give conservative advice. Indeed, this is likely
to be very common right after a market crash, especially as
managers sometimes turn into “noise traders pandering to
investors” (Gennaioli et al., 2015). Second, conservative
advice is a necessary control to test for asymmetric influences
of advice. Conservative advice is necessary in order to test
the asymmetry of "anxiety reduction in risk-taking"
(Gennaioli et al., 2015). Without conservative advice, we can
only establish that people follow advice, which in the
laboratory environment may be due simply to participant
expectations that this is what the experimenter wants the
participant to do.

socio-demographic questionnaire, including age, gender,
nationality, personal investment experience, financial
consultant experience, organizational investment experience
and professional financial knowledge.
In the experiment task, participants were asked to invest $1
on one of two alternatives, and they were required to choose
one of the two alternatives for each of 100 consecutive virtual
days. At the end of each day, they were informed about the
outcome of the investment, and whether they earned or lost
money. The outcome was presented on the selected
alternative for one second. The investment alternatives were
presented as boxes. Participants were allowed to choose an
alternative (one of the presented boxes) by clicking on it.
Unbeknownst to the participants, the two alternatives were a
risky alternative (e.g., stock) and a safe alternative (e.g.,
savings account or bond). Every time the participants selected
an alternative, they received a random draw from the
alternative’s underlying payoff distribution.
In the experimental groups, the participants were given an
advisor at the very beginning of the experiment. No other
information was provided about the advisor. Participants
were free to ask (or not to ask) and to take (or not to take) the
advice. The participants clicked on a female silhouette to
solicit the (free) advice. The advisor only provided advice
once, when asked, but the advice stayed on the screen until
the very end of the experiment task. In the control group,
there was no advisor available to be solicited.

Repeated Choice Paradigm
Investors rarely do have the true full information set about
their investment alternatives. Instead, they need to refer to
either their own experience by sampling or other’s
experiences (e.g., market history). This is classic risk under
uncertainty, where the true probabilities of payoffs are
unknown and may even be changing. Unlike decisions from
description (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), the decisions from
experience paradigm is especially appropriate to decisions
under uncertainty, as it requires decision makers to infer the
properties of alternatives based on personal experience
(Hertwig & Erev, 2009; Hills, Noguchi, & Gibbert, 2013). In
particular, we use the decision from experience paradigm
based on repeated choice from behavioral economics. In the
repeated choice paradigm, participants choose alternatives
and receive payoffs after each choice. Prior to decision
making, decision makers do not get any information about
alternatives.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants were 756 individuals randomly recruited from
the online experimental platform mTurk. Excluding the
missing data, the total number of participants is 721.A 3
(environment type: risky, neutral, or safe choice has the best
expected value) X 2 (advice type: risky vs. conservative) X 2
(advice present or absent) between-subject design was used
for the experiment. As the control group did not have an
advisor to be manipulated, there were nine conditions in total.
One percent of the accumulated investment outcome was
paid into the participants’ MTurk account. The actual bonus
range is from $0.23 to $1.36. The distribution of the
alternatives are showed in Table 1. The participants were
asked to rate the advisor every five trials on trial 6, 11, 16 and
so forth, if they have asked for advice on that trial or the trial
before. They were asked "how helpful did you find the
advice? Please select from 1 (not at all helpful) to 7 (very
helpful)".

General Method
We conduct an online survey experiment with Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk (mTurk). mTurk has recently been
advocated to being utilized in large randomized online
studies in experimental economics, for example by
Kuziemko et al. (2015) to analyses preferences for
redistributive policies. Participants were recruited from
mTurk. Each participant received a participation fee $0.10
plus a performance-based bonus, which depended on their
accumulated investment outcome. The participants were
given the opportunity to provide informed consent and then
received instructions about the experiment. Subsequently,
they were required to complete the experiment task and the

Table 1: Distribution of the alternatives in Experiment 1.

Risky environment
Neutral environment
Bearish environment

896

Risky
alternative
N ~ (0.75, 1)
N ~ (0.5, 1)
N ~ (0.5, 1)

Conservative
alternatives
always 0.5
always 0.5
always 0.75

The advice in the risky advice group was “I would
recommend 'Alternative 1'. The returns for 'Alternative 1' are,
in the long-run, greater than 'Alternative 2.' Although you
may occasionally lose money in the short run, 'Alternative 1'
offers the best long-run prospect for future returns”, while in
the conservative advice group the advice is “I would
recommend 'Alternative 2'. You may not make huge jumps in
earnings as in 'Alternative 1', but you don’t lose large
amounts of money and it gives you a secure payoff if you
keep choosing it”. Here ‘Alternative 1’ and ‘Alternative 2’
refer to the risky or safe option, respectively, which were
randomized in location across participants.

Results and Discussion

Figure 1. Asymmetric effect (the interaction)

Money Doctors. To test the intuition of the Money Doctors
model by Gennaioli et al. (2015), we focus on whether (or
not) advisors enable the investors to take more risk. To
answer this question, we use a generalized linear mixed
effects model to test Model 1, where “followed” means
followed advice or not (binomial); “consult” stands for before
or after advice seeking (binomial); that is, whether or not
participants had advice on that trial (day), which aims to add
the probability of selecting the suggested alternative before
the advice as a baseline; “1 | participants” represent the
individuals are used as an intercept random factor.
Followed ~ consult + (1 | participants)

Investment Environment. By comparing the Model 2 and
Model 2.1, we are able to test how the macro-economic
environment influences advice following. The results show
that the three-way interaction, χ2 (2) = 0.42, p > .05, is not
significant. Breaking down the three-way interaction, we find
that the coefficient of the asymmetric effect in the bullish,
neutral and bearish economic environment respectively are
0.63 (SE = 0.23, z = 2.73, p < .01), 0.77 (SE = 0.23, z = 3.36,
p < .001), and 0.53 (SE = 0.20, z = 2.62, p < .01).
Followed ~ consult + consult + envir. + (1 | participants)
+ consult * condition + consult * envir.+ envir. * condition
+ consult * condition * envir.
(Model 2.1)

(Model 1)

The results show that participants are 5 times more likely
to select the risky alternative after risky advice as before
advice seeking (B = 1.61, SE = 0.09, z = 17.50, p < .001). This
result supports the assumption in money doctor model, that a
financial advisor enables the investor to take more risk.
However, not only risky advice is followed, the conservative
alternatives are also 2.77 times more likely to be selected
after receiving conservative advice as before the advice
seeking (B = 1.02, SE = 0.09, z = 11.79, p < .001).
A second Model 2 tests if the participants follow risky
advice more than conservative advice, where “condition”
means if the advisor provide a risky or conservative advice
(binomial). The interaction represents the difference in
advice following (the difference in the probability of
following advice after advice taking) between the two advice
conditions (risky advice and conservative advice).

The results show that they are more likely to follow the
risky advice regardless the macro-economic environments. Is
it because people are not able to understand the investment
environment? To answer this question, we asked if
participants could detect the better alternatives in the absence
of advice (i.e., the control group). The results show that in the
control group, those who were in the bullish investment
environment select the risky alternative more than by chance,
V = 2575, p < .05, 95% confident interval (CI) is from 0.52
to 0.64, and those who were in the bearish environment
selected the conservative alternative more than chance, V =
740, p < .001, 95% CI is from 0.29 to 0.40.
At the end of the experiment, we asked 3 questions- “which
alternative do you think is better”,” which alternative do you
think has a larger value in the long run (larger average value)”
and “which alternative do you think has a larger chance to get
a larger value outcome”- to the participants to confirm their
understanding to the environment. The results show that
more than half of the participants in the bullish environment
think that the risky alternative is better, χ2 (1) = 15.68, p <
.001, has a larger value in the long run, χ2 (1) = 11.52, p <
.001 and has a larger chance to get a larger value outcome, χ2
(1) = 18.00, p < .001; more than half of the participants in the
bearish environment think that the conservative alternative is
better, χ2 (1) = 21.36, p < .001, has a larger value in the long
run, χ2 (1) = 24.2, p < .001 yet do not have a larger chance to
get a larger value outcome, χ2 (1) = 2.69, p > .05 (only
37.78% of the people select alternative 2; that is conservative
alternative, for this question).

Followed ~ consult + condition + consult * condition
+ (1 | participants)
(Model 2)
The results show that the participants are 1.79 times more
likely to follow the risky advice than the conservative advice
(B = 0.58, SE = 0.13, z = 4.60, p < .001, Figure 1), which
represents the “asymmetric effect” of being more likely to
follow risky advice than conservative advice.

897

These results show that the asymmetric effect is robust in
different macro-economic environment. Even though they
sense the macro-economic environment, they are still more
likely to follow the risk favouring advice. These results
suggest that the financial advisor does enable individuals to
take more risk (and hope for a larger pay-off), irrespective of
the advisor’s actual performance— an assumption that is
strikingly central to the Money Doctor model of Gennaioli et
al. (2015).

or absent) between-subject design was used. As the control
group did not have an advisor to be manipulated, there were
five conditions in total. Fifteen percent of the accumulated
investment outcome was paid into the participants’ MTurk
account. The actual bonus range is from $0 to $4.57.
Regarding the distribution of the alternatives, the
conservative alternative always has an outcome of $0.05,
while the risky alternative has a mean of 0.1, and a standard
deviation of 1.0. Participants were not asked to rate the
advisor.
Advisor trust was manipulated by altering the phrasing of
the advice: in the conservative justified group, the advice was
“I would recommend 'Alternative 2'. You may not make huge
jumps in earnings, but you don’t lose anything and it gives
you a secure payoff”. In the risky justified group, the
participants read the advice as “I would recommend
'Alternative 1'. The returns for 'Alternative 1' are, in the long
run, greater than 'Alternative 2.' Although you may
occasionally lose a large amount of money, you will earn it
back if you keep choosing it”. In contrast, the participants in
the non-justifying groups only saw the advice as
“Choose:'Alternative 1'” and “Choose:'Alternative 2'” in the
risky and conservative group respectively.

Financial Advisors. Are participants able to detect the
quality of the advisors? Do they follow the advice simply
because they do not sense the quality of the advisor? We test
if participants who are in consistent conditions (conservative
advice in bearish environments or risky advice in bullish
environments) rate the advisor better than those who are in
inconsistent conditions. The Wilcoxon rank sum test with
continuity correction result is negative, W = 21143.5, p > .05.
In other words, participants are not able to perceive the
quality of the advisor. If investors do not sense the quality of
the advisor and clear the macro-economic environment in
mind, why are they more likely to follow the risky advice?
Gennaioli et al. (2015) suggest it is because they trust the
advisor, which is to be tested in the Experiment 2.

Results and discussion
Financial Experience. We also test the link between
financial experience and the asymmetric effect by adding
personal information into the model (Model 2). The results
show that those who have personal investment experience
(three-way interaction: B = -0.19, SE = 0.26, z = -0.75, p >
.05, the interaction represents the asymmetric effect) and
consultant experience (three-way interaction: B = 0.17, SE =
0.32, z = 0.53, p > .05) do not show a larger asymmetric
effect.
However, those who have the organizational investment
experience (three-way interaction: B = 0.79, SE = 0.38, z =
2.09, p < .05) and professional knowledge do (three-way
interaction: B = 1.63, SE = 0.54, z = 3.02, p < .01). These
results suggest that those with financial investment training
rather than personal experience are less likely to follow the
conservative advice. These results are complementary to
those of Von Gaudecker (2015) on the effect of financial
literacy and financial advice on the diversification of Dutch
household portfolios.

Trusted Advisor. We test the phrasing of the advice on the
probability of selecting a risky alternative using Model 3,
where “followed” means followed advice or not (binomial);
“consult” stands for before or after advice seeking
(binomial); “phrasing” means whether the advice is justified
or non-justified; “1 | participants” shows that individuals are
used as fixed effects. The interaction represents the difference
in advice following between justified advice and nonjustified advice.
Followed ~ consult * Phrasing + (1 | participants)(Model 3)
The results show that people receiving the justified advice
are more likely to follow the advice (interaction: B = 0.48, SE
= 0.15, z = 3.19, p = .001, Figure 2). This result suggests that
the phrasing of the advice plays a role in advice following,
which is in line with our hypothesis. As the trust on the
advisor can be manipulated by the phrasing of the advice, this
result also supports another key finding in the money doctors
model: investors follow financial advisors based on trust.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, we showed that advisors enable people to
take more risks irrespective of the quality of the advice. In
Experiment 2, we manipulate advisor trust by manipulating
the phrasing of the advice.

Method
Participants were 400 individuals randomly recruited from
the online experimental platform mTurk. Excluding the
missing data, the total number of participants is 387. A 2
(justification: justified vs. non-justified) X 2 (advice type:
risky vs. conservative advice) X 2 (advisor presence: present

898

Figure 2. The effect of advice phrasing.

(B = 0.75, SD = 0.13, z = 5.72, p < .001). That means people
tend to follow trusted advice, but are still more likely to
follow risky than conservative advice.

After adding the advice condition (risky advice or
conservative advice) into the model (Model 3), the results
show that the effect of the advice phrasing is stronger in risky
advice (three-way interaction: B = 1.93, SE = 0.37, z = 5.27,
p < .001). To further break down the interaction, we compare
the justified advice condition to the non-justified condition.
People were more likely to follow justified than non-justified
advice in the risky condition (interaction: B = 2.33, SD = 0.32,
z = 7.36, p < .001, Figure 3). Further analyses show that
people increase the probability of selecting risky alternatives
after the advice comparing to before the advice was given in
justified condition (B = 2.35, SD = 0.28, z = 8.29, p < .001),
but not in the non-justified condition. This result means the
advisor enables the investors to take more risk only if the
investors trust in the advisor. Otherwise, the effect does not
kick in. This underlines the importance of trust in terms of
boosting risk taking and demonstrates the third assumption of
the money doctors model.

Figure 4. The asymmetric effect in Experiment 2.
We also test the effect in non-justified condition, and the
asymmetric effect is reversed (Figure 4), which means people
are more likely to follow the conservative advice in this case
(interaction: B = -1.11, SD = 0.18, z = -6.13, p < .001, Figure
4). Separating the risky and conservative advice condition,
we find that under the unjustified condition, people do not
follow the risky advice (B = 0.04, SD = 0.13, z = 0.30, p >
.05), while people follow the conservative advice (B = 1.15,
SD = 0.13, z = 8.94, p < .001). These results imply that people
need to trust the advisor to take more risk, whereas to follow
a conservative advice, the advisors do not necessarily need to
be trusted. Although people can follow the conservative
advice anyway - but only follow a trusted advisor to take risk,
people are much more likely to follow the risky advice than
the conservative advice once they consider the financial
advisor to be trustworthy.

Figure 3. Simple effect of trust in Experiment 2.
In the conservative condition, people were less likely to
follow the justified advice (interaction: B = -0.40, SD = 0.18,
z = -2.18, p < .01, Figure 3). Further analyses show that
people increase the probability of selecting conservative
alternatives after the advice comparing to before the advice
in the justified condition (B = 0.75, SD = 0.13, z = 5.72, p <
.001), but the effect is also found in the non-justified
condition (B = 1.15, SD = 0.13, z = 8.94, p < .001). Here, trust
in the advisor does not make them more likely to follow the
advice compare to those without trust.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we manipulate the trust on advisors to test
the robustness of the trust effect. We also assign different
prices to the advisors, in order to prove that an investor
prefers a trusted advisor and enables managers to charge a
higher fee and still keep them (Gennaioli et al., 2015).

Method
Participants were 118 individuals randomly recruited from
the online experimental platform mTurk. Excluding the
missing data, the total number of participants is 104. One
percent of the accumulated investment outcome was paid into
the participants’ MTurk account. The actual bonus range is
from $0.29 to $1.4.
A 2 (high vs. low trust, within subject) X 2 (same price vs.
different price, between subject) mixed design was used.
There were two phases in the experiment. In both phases, the

Asymmetric effect. Using the justified advice condition and
Model 2, we find a strong asymmetric effect; people are more
likely to follow risky than conservative advice (interaction: B
= 1.62, SD = 0.32, z = 5.09, p < .001, Figure 4). To look
closer, we separate the risky advice and conservative advice.
The results show that people follow both risky advice (B =
2.35, SD = 0.28, z = 8.29, p < .001) and conservative advice

899

participants were forced to make a decision between two
alternatives. The first 30 decisions manipulated the
participants’ trust on the advisors. Then, in the second phase,
there were 70 decisions. They were instructed that all the
alternatives were different from the previous 30 rounds and
the participants still could get a piece of advice from one of
our advisors (who were exactly the same advisors as in the
first 30 rounds.) However, during the second phase, the
advisors charged them a certain fee. They are free to ask (or
not to ask), take (or not to take) the advice and choose one of
the advisors.
In the first phase, we set one alternative as better than the
other in a very obvious manner. The better alternative
(alternative 1) followed a normal distribution with a mean 1.5
and standard deviation 0.5, while the worse alternative
(alternative 2) followed a normal distribution with a mean 0.2
and standard deviation 1. All participants saw two advisors
with their own advice. The advice was directly showed to the
participants next to its advisor’s profile. To manipulate the
trust on the advisor, we made the quality of the advisor easily
judgeable by the participants. The high trust advisor
suggested the better alternative in a justifying way- “I would
recommend 'Alternative 1'. The returns for 'Alternative 1' are
greater than 'Alternative 2.' In addition, it is less risk and more
secure. Plus, you almost do not lose money if you select
'Alternative 1', whereas you have almost half a chance of
losing money if you select 'Alternative 2'”; The low trust
advisor simply suggested to the participants who went for the
worse one in a non-justifying way- “choose: alternative 2”.
In the second phase, the risky alternative (alternative 1)
followed a normal distribution with a mean 0.88 and standard
deviation 1.5, while the conservative alternative (alternative
2) followed a normal distribution with a mean 0.3 and
standard deviation 0.1. Irrespective of the advisor chosen, the
participants receive the justifying advice suggesting the risky
alternative. In the same price group, both advisors charged 50
cents. In the different price group, high trust advisor charged
100 cents, while the low trust one charged 50 cents.

participants bought the high trust advisor and only 3 bought
the low trust advisor, χ² (1) = 12.57, p < .001. In the different
price condition, 27 participants bought the high trust advisor
and 9 bought the low trust advisor, χ² (1) = 9, p < .01. These
results show that the investors selected the advisor because of
trust, which is in line with our hypotheses and the money
doctors model.
Price. After we prove that the investors select advisors
because of trust, we move to the next step; that is to prove
trust enables managers to charge the investor a higher fee and
still keep him. To test this hypotheses, we use a generalized
linear model to examine whether the increased price reduces
the probability of selecting the high trust advisor. The tested
model is with “advisor” as dependent variable and “condition”
as independent variable, where “advisor” is which advisor the
investors choose (binomial) and “condition” is the price
variable (binomial). The result shows a negative effect, B = 0.80, z = -1.10, p > .05. This means that the probability of
selecting the high trust advisor does not drop down because
of the increased price. Together with the findings about trust
in this experiment, all these results prove the arguments put
forth by money doctors model.

References
Bergstresser, Daniel, John M. R. Chalmers, and Peter Tufano,
2009, Assessing the Costs and Benefits of Brokers in the
Mutual Fund Industry, The Review of Financial Studies 22,
4129-4156.
Chalmers, J., and J. Reuter, (2012) What is the Impact of
Financial Advisors on Retirement Portfolio Choices and
Outcomes?, NBER Working Paper, 18158.
Guercio, D. D. and Reuter, J. (2014), Mutual Fund
Performance and the Incentive to Generate Alpha. The
Journal of Finance, 69: 1673–1704.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (2015). Money
doctors. The Journal of Finance, 70(1), 91-114.
Hertwig, R., and Erev, I. (2009). The description–experience
gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(12),
517-523.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 263-291.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and
Stefanie Stantcheva. 2015. "How Elastic Are Preferences
for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey
Experiments." American Economic Review, 105(4): 14781508.
Sniezek, J. A., and Van Swol, L. M. (2001). Trust,
confidence, and expertise in a judge-advisor system.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
84(2), 288-307.
Sun, Q., Noguchi, T., Hills, T. and Gibbert, M., Paying for
Useless Advice to Resolve Information Overload, Working
Paper.
Gaudecker, H.-M. V. (2015), How Does Household Portfolio
Diversification Vary with Financial Literacy and Financial
Advice?. The Journal of Finance, 70: 489–507.

Results and discussion
Manipulation Check. We asked the participants which
advisor they trust more at the end of the first phrase. Ninetytwo participants selected the high trust advisor and twelve
participants select the other. Chi-squared test result shows
that the number of participants selecting the high trust advisor
is significantly higher than the number of participants
selecting the low trust advisor, χ² (1) = 61.54, p < .001. This
suggests that the first phrase has successfully manipulated
participants’ trust on the advisors.
Trust. We test whether participants tend to select the high
trust advisor in the task phrase. Across the price condition, 47
and 12 participants selected the high trust advisor. Chi-square
test results shows that investors are more likely to select the
advisor they trust, χ² (1) = 20.76, p < .001. Breaking down
the price conditions, both conditions had more investors
buying the high trust advisor. In the same price condition, 20

900

