Are Symptom Clusters Explanatory?
A Study in Mental Disorders and Non-Causal Explanation
Daniel A. Wilkenfeld (daniel.wilkenfeld@berkeley.edu)*
Jennifer Asselin (asselin.7@osu.edu)**
Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)*
*Department of Psychology, UC Berkeley
**Department of Philosophy, The Ohio State University
Abstract
Three experiments investigate whether and why people accept
explanations for symptoms that appeal to mental disorders,
such as: “She experiences delusions because she has
schizophrenia.” Such explanations are potentially puzzling, as
mental disorder diagnoses are made on the basis of symptoms,
and the DSM implicitly rejects a commitment to some
common, underlying cause. Do laypeople nonetheless
conceptualize mental disorder classifications in causal terms?
Or is this an instance of non-causal explanation? Experiment 1
shows that such explanations are indeed found explanatory.
Experiment 2 presents participants with novel disorders that
are stipulated to involve or not involve an underlying cause
across symptoms and people. Disorder classifications are
found more explanatory when a causal basis is stipulated, or
when participants infer that one is present (even after it’s
denied in the text). Finally, Experiment 3 finds that merely
having a principled, but non-causal, basis for defining
symptom clusters is insufficient to reach the explanatory
potential of categories with a stipulated common cause. We
discuss the implications for accounts of explanation and for
psychiatry.
Keywords: explanation, understanding, mental disorders

Anecdotal evidence suggests that people consider
diagnostic categories to be explanatory. For instance, one
might explain a patient’s high blood sugar levels by appeal to
diabetes. This is also the case for mental disorders. A blurb
about the film A Beautiful Mind claims that “the film displays
the idea that Nash is a genius because he has schizophrenia”
(Covell, 2013, emphasis added). In the wake of a mass
shooting, it is common for people to cite the shooter’s mental
illness in explaining the atrocity (Craghill & Clement, 2015).
Consider the most basic form of such explanatory claims:
those that appeal to a diagnostic category to explain the
presence of a symptom. “He suffers from hallucinations
because he has schizophrenia.” “She is persistently sad
because she has depression.” Such claims may be common,
but they’re also potentially puzzling. The Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, known
as the DSM-5, catalogues recognized mental disorders along
with criteria for diagnosis. Importantly, these criteria involve
the presence, duration, and severity of various symptoms, and
are explicit that it is these symptoms which define the
disorder: “A mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by
clinically significant disturbance of an individual’s cognition,
emotion regulation, or behavior…” (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013, p. 20, emphasis added). Explaining a
symptom by appeal to a diagnostic category thus borders on

a tautology – it’s (almost) like explaining that someone has
little money because he is poor (that's just what it means to
be poor).
What, then, is the value of these explanations? One
possibility is that laypeople’s beliefs about mental disorders
depart from the stipulations of the DSM – as even experts’ do
when it comes to causal relationships between symptoms
(Kim & Ahn, 2002a, 2002b). Rather than thinking of mental
disorders in terms of symptom clusters, laypeople may treat
diagnostic labels more like medical disease labels, which
often pick out some underlying condition that’s causally
responsible for observable symptoms. Past work finds that
while clinicians generally reject the idea that mental disorders
share causal “essences” (Ahn, Flanagan, Marsh, & Sanislow,
2006), laypeople do not (Cooper & Marsh, 2015). On this
view, then, mental disorder classifications could be
explanatory because they (perhaps indirectly) offer causal
explanations. But another possibility is that laypeople accept
at least some non-causal explanations (e.g., Prasada &
Dillingham, 2006), and that DSM diagnostic categories
support them.
Despite these connections to prior work, no research – to
our knowledge – has investigated whether and why mental
disorder classifications are found explanatory. Given their
explicitly non-causal basis, DSM categories provide fruitful
terrain in which to explore questions about the relationship
between explanation and causation. Is a disease classification
only explanatory when it picks out some common,
underlying causal structure? Or can mere symptom clusters –
clusters that are not tied by causal etiology – explain the
presence of the symptoms associated with the corresponding
diagnosis? We explore these questions in three experiments.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we verify a presupposition of our project:
that laypeople do, in fact, find mental disorder categories
explanatory. To do so, we assess people’s willingness to
accept claims of the form: “Alex experiences hallucinations
because she has schizophrenia.” In addition to looking at
absolute levels of agreement with such statements, we
include medical diseases and non-explanations for
comparison.

Methods
Participants Fifty-three adults (23 male, 30 female, mean
age = 34) were recruited through the Amazon Mechanical
Turk marketplace (MTurk) and participated in exchange for

1979

monetary compensation. In all experiments, participation was
restricted to users with an IP address within the United States
and an approval rating of at least 95% based on at least 50
previous tasks. An additional seven participants were
excluded prior to analysis for failing to consent, failing to
complete the experiment, or giving an incorrect response to
one of the reading comprehension or attention check
questions (detailed below). For all experiments, those who
had completed another experiment in this line of research
were ineligible.

Results & Discussion

Materials and Procedures Participants were presented with
12 vignettes in random order. In each vignette, participants
were told that a character displayed a symptom, went to a
doctor, and was correctly diagnosed with a disease that had
five listed symptoms. They were also told the character was
suffering from a second, unrelated problem. For example,
participants read:
Rachel…has been experiencing a decreased range of
motion (in her fingers)....She was correctly diagnosed with
arthritis. Symptoms of arthritis include decreased range of
motion, pain, swelling, stiffness, and inflammation.
As it happens, Rachel also has headaches, which are not
a symptom of arthritis.
After each vignette, participants were asked two reading
comprehension questions, which asked both whether the
main symptom (e.g., “decreased range of motion”) and the
unrelated symptom (e.g., “headaches”) were symptoms of the
disorder mentioned—anyone who answered either question
incorrectly for any vignette was excluded from further
analysis. (Participants were also excluded if they failed an
attention check based on Oppenheimer, Meyvis, and
Davidenko, (2009), at the end of the task.)
Participants were then asked to evaluate an explanation
claim on a 7-point Likert scale from “Strongly Disagree” (1)
to “Strongly Agree” (7):
[Name] has [symptom] because s/he has [disease].
(e.g., Rachel has a decreased range of motion because she
has arthritis.)
In eight of the cases – four based on medical conditions
(“Medical”) and four based on mental disorders (“Mental”) –
the symptom asked about was in fact the first one listed for
the disorder (e.g., whether someone had a skin rash because
of measles or hallucinations because of schizophrenia). In the
remaining four cases (“Control”) – two medical and two
mental – the symptom was from the unrelated condition (e.g.,
“Rachel has headaches because she has arthritis”). The
control items were included to ensure that participants did not
provide indiscriminately high ratings.
1

An equal number of participants was included in each condition
prior to exclusions; however, participants in the cause condition did
significantly worse (p < .001) on a true/false question about whether
the disorder was diagnosed on the basis of common symptoms (this

Responses to the “because” statements were averaged for
each participant into three sets: those for the medical, mental,
and control vignettes. These average ratings were then
analyzed with a repeated-measures ANOVA with vignette
type as a within-subjects factor, revealing a significant effect,
F(2, 104) = 571.644, p < .001, ηp2 = .917. Bonferroni pairwise
comparisons revealed no significant difference (p = .071)
between the Medical (M = 6.35, SD = .611) and Mental (M =
6.14, SD = .779) disorders, but that both differed significantly
(ps < .001) from control cases (M = 1.87, SD = .759).
Moreover, the ratings for Mental disorders were significantly
above the scale midpoint (p < .001), suggesting that
participants indeed found references to mental disorder
categories explanatory.

Experiment 2
Having established that mental disorder classifications are
found explanatory, we consider (in Experiment 2) whether
this depends upon the causal structure of the category.
Specifically, we varied whether diagnosis was based on the
presence of a common cause or on a cluster of symptoms. For
comparison, we also included a condition in which the
disease was diagnosed in an arbitrary fashion. To limit effects
of prior knowledge about mental disorders, we introduced
fictional disorders on an alien planet.

Methods
Participants Participants were 141 adults (63 male, 77
female, 1 other, mean age 32) who were recruited through
Amazon Mechanical Turk and participated in exchange for
monetary compensation. Sixty-seven participants were
excluded prior to analysis based on the same criteria as
Experiment 1.
Materials Participants were presented with a vignette in
which an alien was diagnosed with a mental disorder.
Participants were divided into three groups (“Condition”).
One group was told the diagnosis was made based on the
presence of a particular cause (“stipulated cause,” N = 34), a
second group was presented with diagnoses based on
symptom clusters (“symptom,” N = 53), and a third group
was presented with diagnoses based on which disorder name
was pulled out of a hat (“random draw,” N = 54).1
Participants received symptoms corresponding to one of
three disorders, which were modeled on depression,
schizophrenia, or borderline personality disorder. For
example, participants in the symptom/depression group read:
John is an alien on the planet Zorg. Lately he has been
experiencing a number of troubling symptoms, including
persistent sadness.
was supposed to be false for them). There were no other significant
differences on reading comprehension or attention checks (ps >
.240).

1980

Recently, John went to the doctor to find out what was
wrong. The doctor consulted her medical textbook, which
is used by all doctors on Zorg as the standard for defining
and diagnosing illness. It says that a doctor should
diagnose a given mental illness when and only when the
patient exhibits some number (but not necessarily all) of
the symptoms on a list of symptoms corresponding to that
illness.
For example, it says that Gordon’s Disease should be
diagnosed when a patient has some number (but not
necessarily all) of the symptoms of persistent sadness,
trouble falling asleep, difficulty maintaining a stable
weight, light-headedness, and difficulty concentrating. The
book is very clear that the disease always has some of
these symptoms. However, it doesn’t always have the same
cause in different people, or even the same cause for all
symptoms within a given person. For example, it could be
caused by a virus in some people, but by a genetic
predisposition in others. Or even for the same person, some
symptoms could be caused by a virus, and others by a
genetic predisposition. All that matters for having the
disease is having the right set of symptoms.
John does in fact have a number of these symptoms, so
the doctor diagnoses him as having Gordon’s Disease. 2

correct answers varied by condition.) At the end of the task,
participants were asked what real disorder they thought was
closest to the one in the vignette. Only 38 of 141 participants
correctly identified the disorder with which they were
presented, and whether people identified the disorder had no
impact on other responses. Finally, participants supplied
standard demographic information, reported any problems
with the survey, and had the same attention check used in
Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
Responses were analyzed in a mixed ANOVA with
condition (3: random draw, symptom, stipulated cause) and
disorder (3: depression, schizophrenia, borderline
personality) as between-subjects factors, and statement (3:
because, understand, token cause) as a within-subjects factor.
This analysis revealed a significant main effect of condition,
F(2, 132) = 25.80, p < .001, ηp2 = .281. Tukey post-hoc tests
indicated significantly higher ratings for stipulated cause
than symptom (p < .001), which were in turn significantly
higher than random draw (p < .005) (See Figure 1). There
were no other significant effects. Because statement did not
interact with condition, we averaged the three responses to
create a single “explanation score”.

All participants then rated their agreement with three
statements about the disorder’s explanatory status (in random
order, not labeled for participants) from 1 (“Strongly
Disagree”) to 7 (“Strongly Agree”):

Random Draw

Because: [Name] is [symptom] because he has [disorder].
Understand: I understand why [name] is [symptom].
Token Cause: [Disorder] is the cause of [name’s]
[symptom].

Because

Participants were also asked to generalize properties across
individuals with the same diagnosis, but in the interest of
space, we do not report these results here.
After these agreement and generalization ratings,
participants were asked to answer the following question
about the basis for the disorder, rated on a 7-point scale:
Inferred Common Cause: How likely do you think it is that
there is a common cause behind all cases of [disorder]?
Participants were excluded from analyses if they could not
correctly answer any of three true/false questions regarding
the basis on which the disorder was diagnosed. For example,
they had to answer whether “Gordon’s Disease is diagnosed
on the basis of symptoms sharing a particular cause.” (The
We used the locution that a person “has” a disorder. Reynaert and
Gelman (2007) found systematic differences in beliefs about
disorder permanence depending on whether a noun-phrase,
adjective-phrase, or possessive-phrase (“has”) was used, which
could also affect explanation judgments. This could not, however,
2

Symptom

Common Cause (Stipulated)

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Understand

Token Cause

Figure 1: Experiment 2 Mean DVs by Condition. Error Bars ± 1
SEM

These results suggest that whether a diagnostic category is
considered explanatory depends, at least in part, on the basis
for category membership. The results also suggest that
sharing a common cause is not necessary for conferring some
explanatory potential: participants in the symptom condition
gave significantly higher ratings than those in the random
draw condition, although their ratings did not differ from the
scale mid-point (p = .890.) However, it could be that these
participants assumed the presence of a common cause, even
though the vignette stipulated in those cases that none was
present.
account for differences we find across our conditions. Reynaert and
Gelman (2007) cite the Publication Manual of the American
Psychological Association as suggesting it’s best to frame disorders
in terms of possessive phrases (e.g., “has Gordon’s Disease”).

1981

To investigate whether this occurred, we first examined
responses to inferred common cause as a function of
condition using a one-way ANOVA with condition as a
between-subjects factor and inferred common cause as a
dependent variable (see Figure 2). This analysis revealed a
significant main effect, F(2, 138) = 34.26, p < .001, ηp2 =
.332; Tukey post-hoc tests revealed that all differences were
highly significant (ps < .001).

Mean Explanation Score

7
6
5
4

3
2

How Likely Do You Think it is that there is a
common cause behind all cases of [disease]?

1
1

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1 = "Very Unlikely" 4 = "Undecided" 7 = "Very Likely"

Figure 3: Experiment 2 Mean Explanation Score as a Function of
Response to Inferred Common Cause.

Experiment 3
Random Draw

Symptom

Common Cause
(Stipulated)

Figure 2: Experiment 2 Mean Inferred Common Cause ratings by
Condition, from low (1) to high (7) likelihood. Error Bars ± 1 SEM

Although inferences to a common cause varied
significantly across conditions, mean ratings reveal that many
participants in the symptom condition (and even some in the
random draw condition) believed there was a reasonable
probability that one existed. Could it be, then, that diagnostic
categories were only found explanatory to the extent that
people believed the category picked out a common cause,
regardless of the condition to which they were experimentally
assigned?
To test this possibility, we ran a hierarchical regression. An
initial model used the variable inferred common cause to
predict explanation scores (see Figure 3). This model was
highly significant (p < .001), with R2 = .35. A second model
that also included condition, coded as two dichotomous
variables, accounted for more variance, with R2 = .40 (this
increase in R2 was significant as assessed by a significant
change in F-scores, p < .001). In this second model, inferred
common cause had an unstandardized coefficient of .38 (p <
.001), being in the stipulated cause condition (yes=1, no=0)
had an unstandardized coefficient of .41 (p = .184), and being
in the random condition (yes=1, no=0) had an unstandardized
coefficient of -.72 (p = .008).
In sum, people’s assessments of explanations were affected
by both their inferences regarding the existence of a common
cause and by the experimental manipulation of diagnostic
procedure. This suggests that some factor (or factors) other
than the presence of a common cause – and that varied across
conditions – played a role in modulating judgments. In
Experiment 3, we examined whether a relevant difference
between the common cause (stipulated) condition and the
symptom condition was the fact that in the former case, the
symptom cluster had a non-arbitrary basis (the common
cause) and presumably practical implications for treatment.

In this experiment, participants considered mental disorder
classifications based on symptom clusters (without an
underlying common cause), but in one case, the symptom
cluster was motivated by non-arbitrary practical
considerations, and in the second case, it was described as the
result of historical accident. If having some principled basis
for defining a symptom cluster – even when it’s not causal –
is sufficient to support good explanations, we would expect
higher explanation ratings in the former case than in the latter.

Method
Participants Ninety-two adults (43 male, 49 female, 1 other,
mean age 38) were recruited through MTurk and participated
in exchange for monetary compensation. Fifty-nine
participants were excluded prior to analysis based on the
same criteria used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Materials Participants were presented with a single vignette
in which an alien was diagnosed with a mental disorder,
where the disorder was characterized by always sharing some
cluster of the same symptoms. Participants were divided into
two experimental groups (“Condition”). In the reason
condition (N = 47), participants were told that the symptoms
were grouped together into one disorder on the bases of
treatment and prognosis. In the no reason condition (N = 45),
participants were told that the symptoms were grouped
together by historical accident. Both conditions stressed that
there was no shared causal mechanism behind all instances of
the disorder. As in Experiment 2, the vignettes were based on
one of three mental disorders from the DSM: depression,
schizophrenia, or borderline personality disorder.
In the reason condition involving depression, for example,
participants read:

1982

Even though the symptoms of Gordon’s Disease do not
share a common cause, they were grouped together for
principled reasons. When these symptoms occur in
conjunction, they interfere with multiple facets of life in a
way that interferes with close personal relationships and

with daily routines, making it difficult for people to obtain
the social support and physical well being that could
facilitate treatment. As a result, people who exhibit clusters
of these symptoms are at heightened risk for suicide, and
also need to pursue alternative treatment plans. It’s because
patients with these symptoms experience similar risks and
are best suited to particular treatments that they’re grouped
under a common disorder.

Reason

No Reason

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

For participants in the no reason condition, the relevant
paragraph was replaced by the following:
The symptoms of Gordon’s Disease were grouped
together under one disorder by historical accident, rather
than for any principled reason. Had 18th century doctors
documented the associated symptoms in a different order,
the disease might have been defined by a very different
cluster of symptoms.
All participants were then asked to rate their agreement
with the measures used in Experiment 2, and also completed
comprehension and attention checks. As in Experiment 2,
only a minority of participants (33 out of 92) were able to
identify the real disorder, and whether or not the disorder was
correctly identified had no impact on responses.

Results & Discussion
Responses were analyzed in a mixed ANOVA with
condition (2: reason, no reason) and disorder (3: depression,
schizophrenia, borderline personality) as between-subjects
factors, and statement (3: because, understand, token cause)
as a within-subjects factor (See Figure 4). This analysis did
not find a significant effect of condition (p = .830): overall,
mean responses to the three statements were the same across
the reason (M = 3.809, SD = 1.391) and no reason (M =
3.882, SD = 1.409) conditions. However, there was a
significant interaction between condition and statement, (p =
.004): only “understand” ratings decreased numerically from
the reason to the no reason condition, though this decrease
was not itself significant (p = .195), nor were the numerical
increases found for “because” (p = .530) and “token cause”
(p = .170). So while the significant interaction is suggestive
and merits further scrutiny, we collapsed the three ratings into
a single explanation score (as in Experiment 2) for
subsequent analyses.
As in Experiment 2, there was a reliable association
between explanation scores and the probability assigned to
inferred common cause, r = .281, p = .007. Interestingly,
responses to inferred common cause did not themselves vary
across conditions (p = .888).
In sum, when evaluating whether a diagnostic category
offers an explanation for its symptoms, participants were
insensitive to the question of whether the symptoms were
grouped on the basis of a (non-causal) principled reason or a
historical accident. However, once again, there was a reliable
association between explanation ratings and inferences
concerning the existence of a common cause.

Because

Understand

Token Cause

Figure 4: Experiment 3 Mean DVs by Condition. Error Bars ± 1
SEM

General Discussion
Across three experiments, we find that people are willing
to explain symptoms by appeal to mental disorder
classifications, but that their willingness to do so depends in
large part on causal assumptions that are not endorsed by the
DSM, and indeed denied in some of our vignettes.
Specifically, Experiment 1 used real mental disorder
classifications, and found that these classifications were not
only found explanatory, but as explanatory as medical
diagnoses. Experiment 2 used fictional disorder names in an
alien context, which allowed us to stipulate the causal basis
for each disorder classification. We found that classifications
were most explanatory when they corresponded to a common
cause. However, participants also found classifications based
on symptom clusters significantly more explanatory than
those based on a random draw. This pattern of results was
largely, but not exclusively, driven by participants’
assumptions about the presence of a common cause: even
when the characterization of the disorder denied a common
cause, participants in the symptom condition often inferred
that one existed. Finally, Experiment 3 found that a nonarbitrary but non-causal basis for grouping symptoms was
insufficient to improve the explanatory potential of a
symptom cluster.
One robust finding from Experiments 2 and 3 is that people
consider diagnostic categories more explanatory when they
correspond to a common cause across cases. This is broadly
consistent with causal accounts of explanation in philosophy
(e.g., Woodward, 2003), according to which explanations
identify one or more causes of what’s being explained.
However, causal accounts of explanation are both more and
less demanding. On the one hand, a causal explanation need
not identify a single common cause. It’s typically sufficient
to pick out a cause (or causes) that operated in the case being
explained. It’s not entirely clear, though, what this means
when the explanation invokes a diagnostic category with
some causal basis rather than the causes themselves. It could
be that people take the diagnostic category to pick out a
circumscribed set of causes, and thus find it explanatory by
virtue of its implicit causal content, even when this content
falls short of identifying a single common cause.

1983

In another sense, causal accounts of explanation may be
insufficiently demanding: inferring a common cause in our
symptom conditions was typically enough to boost
explanation ratings just above the scale mid-point, but it did
not subsume the effects of experimental condition. It could
be that a diagnostic category is more explanatory when it is
itself characterized in causal terms, which is a condition that
goes beyond the mere existence of a common cause.
Another possibility is that (some of) our participants were
engaged in a genuinely non-causal form of explanation.
Indeed, while the dominant approach to explanation within
philosophy is causal, there are a variety of alternatives
(Woodward, 2014), including those that focus on unification
(e.g., Friedman, 1974), pragmatic import (e.g., Wilkenfeld,
2014), or argumentative structure (e.g., Hempel, 1965).
Similarly, some psychological approaches to explanation
suggest more formal accounts (e.g., Prasada & Dillingham,
2006).
While it's certainly possible that participants endorsed
mental disorder classifications as explanatory for some noncausal reason, the findings from Experiment 3 speak against
the most obvious possibilities. In particular, introducing a
non-arbitrary basis for the symptom cluster, as we did in the
reason condition, should have made the diagnostic categories
better candidates for explanation on most accounts: the
manipulation made the symptoms more inferentially useful,
introduced pragmatic import, and arguably suggested some
basis for unification. There’s clearly more work to be done,
but our initial findings present a puzzle for non-causal
approaches.
How would clinicians respond in our task? Given prior
work suggesting that expertise is associated with weaker
beliefs in causal essences underlying mental disorders (Ahn
et al., 2006; Cooper & Marsh, 2015), we speculate that
clinicians would be less likely to endorse the explanations
offered here. Similarly, we speculate that if laypeople knew
what mental disorders were really thought to be by clinicians
(Cooper & Marsh, 2015), they would not consider them (as)
explanatory. However, our findings also suggest that
dislodging laypeople’s causal-essentialist beliefs about
mental disorder classifications is no easy task. In the symptom
condition of Experiment 2, and in both conditions of
Experiment 3, many participants believed a common cause
was likely, even though it had been explicitly denied.
While psychiatrists are largely interested in a classification
scheme that best serves diagnosis and treatment, rather than
one that reflects lay intuitions, the present results might have
important implications. There’s evidence that treatments are
less effective if the patient does not believe the treatment will
work (e.g., Seligman 1991), and people’s intuitive beliefs
about mental disorders have implications for their views
about the efficacy of different kinds of treatment. It follows
that lay beliefs could inform psychiatric practice.
The impact of our results on philosophy is more
pronounced. People’s persistence in seeing causes where
there are (by stipulation) none to be had—and the fact that
that tendency seems to account for much of their explanatory

judgments—underscores the central role of causation in
explanation.

References
Ahn, W. K., Flanagan, E. H., Marsh, J. K., & Sanislow, C.
A. (2006). Beliefs about essences and the reality of
mental disorders. Psychological Science, 17(9), 759-766.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5.
Washington, D.C: American Psychiatric Association.
Cooper, J. A., & Marsh, J. K. (2015). The influence of
expertise on essence beliefs for mental and medical
disorder categories. Cognition, 144, 67-75.
Covell, K. (2013, May 23). A beautiful mind [Presentation].
Retrived from https://prezi.com/vfuqvvu3pzxq/abeautiful-mind/
Craighill, P., & Clement, S. (2015, October 26). What
Americans blame most for mass shootings. Washington
Post. Retrieved from http://tinyurl.com/oj79jrw
Friedman, M. (1974). Explanation and scientific
understanding. The Journal of Philosophy, 71(1), 5-19.
Harvey, A.G., Soehner, A., Lombrozo, T., Bélanger, L.,
Rifkin, J. & Morin, C.M. (2013). ‘Folk theories’ about the
causes and treatment of insomnia. Cognitive Research and
Therapy, 37, 1048-1057. doi:10.1007/s10608-013-9543-2
Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation and
other essays in the philosophy of science by Carl G.
Hempel. New York: Free Press.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W. (2002a). The influence of naive causal
theories on lay concepts of mental illness. American
Journal of Psychology, 115(1), 33-66.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W. (2002b). Clinical psychologists'
theory-based representations of mental disorders predict
their diagnostic reasoning and memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131(4), 451.
Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, N. (2009).
Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting satisficing to
increase statistical power. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 45(4), 867-872.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. M. (2006). Principled and
statistical connections in common sense conception.
Cognition, 99(1), 73-112.
Reynaert, C. C., & Gelman, S. A. (2007). The influence of
language form and conventional wording on judgments of
illness. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 36(4), 273295.
Seligman, M. E. (1991). Learned optimism. New York:
Knopf.
Strevens, M. (2004). The causal and unification approaches
to explanation unified—causally. Noûs, 38(1), 154-176.
Wilkenfeld, D. A. (2014) Functional explaining: A new
approach to the philosophy of explanation. Synthese,
191(14), 3367-3391.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen: A theory of
causal explanation Oxford University Press.
Woodward, J. (2014). Scientific explanation. In E. N. Zalta
(Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.

1984

