Benefiting from Being Alike:
Interindividual Skill Differences Predict Collective Benefit in Joint Object Control
Basil Wahn (bwahn@uos.de)
Institute of Cognitive Science – Neurobiopsychology, University of Osnabrück, Albrechtstr. 28
49069 Osnabrück, Germany

Laura Schmitz (Schmitz_Laura@phd.ceu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Central European University, Október 6 utca 7
1051 Budapest, Hungary

Peter König* (pkoenig@uos.de)
Institute of Cognitive Science – Neurobiopsychology, University of Osnabrück, Albrechtstr. 28
49069 Osnabrück, Germany
Institut für Neurophysiologie und Pathophysiologie, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf
Hamburg, Germany

Günther Knoblich* (KnoblichG@ceu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Central European University, Október 6 utca 7
1051 Budapest, Hungary
* shared senior authorship
Abstract
When two individuals perform a task together, they combine
their individual skills to achieve a joint goal. Previous
research has shown that interindividual skill differences
predict a group’s collective benefit in joint perceptual
decision-making. In the present study, we tested whether this
relationship also holds for other task domains, using a
dynamic object control task in which two participants each
controlled either the vertical or horizontal movement direction
of an object. Our findings demonstrate that the difference in
individuals’ skill levels was highly predictive of the dyad’s
collective benefit. Differences in individuals’ subjective
ratings of task difficulty reflected skill differences and thus
also turned out to be a predictor of collective benefit.
Generally, collective benefit was modulated by spatial task
demands. Overall, the present study shows that previous
findings in joint decision-making can be extended to dynamic
motor tasks such as joint object control.
Keywords: collective benefit; joint action; coordination;
collaboration; task distribution; social cognition.

Introduction
In our modern world, controlling man-made objects has
become an essential part of human everyday life. Humanobject interactions range from simple tasks such as carrying
a table (Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich, 2006) to complex
ones such as flying an airplane (Hutchins, 1995). Humans
often do not perform these tasks alone but collaboratively in
teams by distributing the task among team members to
facilitate performance. For instance, when carrying a table
up the stairs, the stronger person may hold the lower,
heavier end of the table, or when flying an airplane, pilot
and co-pilot efficiently distribute responsibilities.

While collaboration has obvious benefits, coordinating
individual actions (in relation to external objects) also gives
rise to costs such as the need to predict and integrate another
person’s action into one’s own action plan. Whether benefits
or costs prevail depends on a variety of aspects such as the
type of control task, the information exchange between
individuals, as well as individual skill levels. A study by
Knoblich and Jordan (2003) tested whether groups could
learn an anticipatory control strategy to jointly track a
moving object. Results showed that groups managed to
reach the level of individual performance only if given
extensive training and external feedback about each group
member’s actions. In another task, individuals outperformed
groups in a virtual object lifting task (Bosga &
Meulenbroek, 2007). Yet, Masumoto and Inui (2012)
provide evidence that in a joint force production task, a
dyad’s joint action is more successful than individual
performance, provided the dyad receives external action
feedback. Joint forces were also produced in a different
study (van der Wel, Knoblich, & Sebanz, 2011) where
participants had to control a pendulum-like object. But here,
group and individual performance levels closely resembled
each other. When two participants jointly controlled a ball
in a virtual labyrinth game, they did not exceed the
individual performance level either (Rigoli et al., 2015).
These differing findings across studies may be partly
attributed to the use of different types of control tasks.
Despite these task differences, it is notable that a collective
benefit was only reached when coordinating individuals
received some form of feedback about each other’s actions.
Another factor that has been shown to affect whether a
group will outperform an individual or vice versa is the

2747

magnitude of the difference in individual skill levels.
Previous research has demonstrated that such differences
can reliably predict whether a dyad outperforms its more
skilled member in a collaborative perceptual decisionmaking task (Bahrami et al., 2010). In particular, a dyad’s
collective benefit was higher the more similar the perceptual
sensitivities of the two dyad members were. Importantly, the
members’ opportunity to verbally negotiate the joint
decision was crucial for joint success.
Considering that the specific type of task as well as the
flow of information between co-actors seem to substantially
affect whether joint performance is beneficial, we aimed to
test whether Bahrami et al.’s finding that interindividual
skill differences predict collective benefit generalizes to a
non-communicative motor task. Specifically, in contrast to
discrete decision-making where two participants first make
individual decisions and subsequently communicate to reach
a joint decision, we used a dynamic object control task in
which participants’ interaction was continuous and verbal
communication was prohibited.
A further objective was to test two predictions about joint
performance: We predicted that joint success should depend
on the specific type of spatial control required because
action distribution may be more suitable for certain types of
control than for others. For instance, flying an airplane in
undisturbed midair demands a more coarse control than
carefully landing the plane on a small airfield. We further
predicted that assigning task contributions in accordance
with co-actors’ individual skills should facilitate joint
performance.
To summarize, it is yet unclear whether and how
interindividual skill differences, spatial task demands, and
unequal task contributions influence collective benefit in a
dynamic task in which communicative exchange is
prohibited. Hence in the present study, we used a joint
object control task to examine 1) whether the correlation
between interindividual skill differences and collective
benefit holds not only for perceptual decision-making
(Bahrami et al., 2010) but also for dynamic object
manipulation, 2) whether spatial task demands modulate the
group’s collective benefit, and 3) whether assigning task
contributions in accordance with individuals’ skills
facilitates joint performance. We hypothesized that:
H1 Interindividual skill differences between dyad members
will be negatively correlated with the dyad’s collective
benefit.
H2 A dyad’s collective benefit will be additionally
modulated by the type of spatial task demand (i.e.,
coarse vs. precise control).
H3 Assigning the higher task contribution to the more
skillful dyad member will facilitate joint performance
while assigning the lower task contribution to the more
skillful member has a detrimental effect (relative to an
equal assignment of task contributions).

Method
Participants
Twelve pairs of individuals (16 female, M = 24.83 years,
SD = 3.05 years) participated in the study. Data collection
was partly conducted at the Central European University in
Budapest, Hungary (eight pairs) and partly at the University
of Osnabrück in Germany (four pairs). All participants were
right-handed and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
They signed prior informed consent and received monetary
compensation. The study was performed in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki.

Apparatus and stimuli
The experimental setup consisted of two 24” Asus computer
screens (resolution 1920 x 1080 pixels, 40.25° x 22.64°
visual field, refresh rate 60 Hz) which were placed next to
each other. A black cardboard partition (70 x 100 cm) was
set up between them (Figure 1). On each screen, the
following stimuli were presented (Figure 1): A circle
(outlined in black, 0.9 cm = 0.71° diameter) was centrally
displayed on a white background. A second, smaller circle
(filled in black, 0.5 cm = 0.38° diameter), surrounded by
another larger circle (outlined in grey, 4.2 cm = 3.21°
diameter) was displayed in one of 16 possible positions. The
central circle represented the cursor that participants
controlled. The second circle was the target to which the
cursor should be moved. The target’s periphery was defined
as homing-in zone. The target was 12.8 cm away from the
start location of the cursor.
The experiment was programmed using the Python library
Pygame and the experimental procedure and data collection
were controlled by Python 2.7.3. The experiment was run on
two Dell Precision computers.

Figure 1: Via key presses, participants controlled the
cursor’s horizontal movement with the left and its vertical
movement with the right hand. In the Individual Condition,
participant controlled both dimensions (A); in the Joint
Condition (B), control was distributed between participants.

Procedure
Participants were seated next to each other in front of two
computer screens (at a distance of 85 cm), separated by a
partition (see Figure 1B) such that they could neither see
each other nor each other’s screens. They were not allowed
to talk and wore ear muffs throughout the experiment to
shield external noise (e.g. the sound of key presses).

2748

Participants performed the task both individually
(Individual Condition) and together as members of a pair
(Joint Condition). In the Individual Condition, each
participant controlled the cursor displayed on their own
computer screen whereas in the Joint Condition, participants
jointly controlled one cursor and both screens showed
identical displays. Participants first performed five practice
trials in both conditions. After the practice, six experimental
blocks each consisting of 40 trials followed. Individual and
joint blocks alternated, i.e. participants first completed one
block in the Individual or Joint Condition and then switched
to the other condition in the next block. This way, three
blocks in each condition were completed in a
counterbalanced order across pairs.
At the start of each trial, the cursor appeared in the center
of the screen. After one second, the target appeared in one
of 16 possible locations (order of locations was
randomized). Relative to the cursor’s start location, the
target was located in one of five angles (0°, 22.5°, 45°,
67.5°, 90°; see Figure 2). Each angle appeared eight times
per block. Participants were instructed to move the cursor to
the target as fast as possible and on the most direct path, and
to stop the cursor exactly on the target. The target turned
green when the cursor came to a halt on it. After the cursor
had remained motionless on the target for one second, the
trial was completed successfully and the next trial started.
Two types of behavior were classified as errors: If the
cursor moved into the homing-in zone but then exited it
again, and if the cursor moved outside of the screen borders.
Participants controlled the cursor by pressing different
keys on the keyboard which incremented the cursor’s
velocity either to the left, to the right, upwards, or
downwards (compare Knoblich & Jordan, 2003). The ‘leftkey’ (LK) and ‘right-key’ (RK) were controlled by the left
hand and the ‘up-key’ and ‘down-key’ were controlled by
the right hand (see Figure 1). If LK was pressed, the cursor
started moving to the left. Another LK press accelerated the
movement to the left, whereas a RK press decelerated it (by
increasing its velocity into the opposite direction). Each key
press caused a speed increment/decrement of 0.24°/s. Thus,
if a participant had produced leftward movement by
pressing LK e.g. four times, she needed to press RK also
four times to decrease the cursor’s velocity back to zero. If
she pressed RK a fifth time, the cursor started moving to the
right. In the Individual Condition, participants used both
their left and right hand to control all four movement
directions whereas in the Joint Condition, task control was
distributed between the two members of a dyad such that the
participant sitting on the left side controlled only the
horizontal dimension (with her left hand) and the participant
on the right side controlled only the vertical dimension
(with her right hand). Participants were assigned randomly
to either the left or the right side. The five different angles
determined participants’ relative contributions towards task
completion in the Joint Condition: For 0° and 90°, only one
dyad member controlled the cursor individually, as only
horizontal or vertical movement was required. These angles

served as baseline measure for individual performance
within a joint setting (‘baseline angles’). For the other three
angles, both members had to contribute to achieve the task
goal (‘joint contribution angles’). For 45°, both members
contributed equally (‘50 % contribution’). For 22.5° and
67.5°, one of the members contributed more than the other
(‘30 % vs. 70 % contribution’); see Figure 2.
Task demands not only differed in terms of the relative
contributions across trials but also regarding the two distinct
movement phases within a trial, i.e., the Approach and the
Homing-in phase (see Figure 1). The Approach was the
interval from trial start to the moment the cursor entered the
target periphery, where the Homing-in began. The Approach
primarily required high movement speed whereas controlled
braking and high spatial accuracy was required during the
final Homing-in. As we hypothesized that the two
movement phases (‘Phase’) as well as the three contribution
angles (‘Contribution’) could differentially influence joint
performance (cf. H2 & H3, respectively), they were
included as factors in the analysis.
After task completion, participants were asked to rate (in
written form) subjective task difficulty of joint and
individual performance on a 7 point scale (1 = very easy, 7
= very difficult). The experiment lasted about 80 minutes.

Figure 2: Contribution angles: For 0° only vertical and for
90° only horizontal control by one participant was required.
For 45°, both participants contributed equally, and for 22.5°
and 67.5°, one participant contributed 40 % more than the
other (i.e., contributions were split 30 % / 70 %).

Data preparation and analysis
Prior to analysis, all error trials were removed from the data
set (6.7 %). Statistical analyses were done in R (2014).
As performance measures, we derived reaction time (RT)
and distance travelled (DIST). RT was the time between
cursor appearance and arrival at target. DIST was the
absolute path length the cursor traveled from start to target
location. Both RT and DIST were also calculated separately
for each movement phase. The values for Approach were
the time/distance from cursor appearance/start location to
crossing the target periphery. The remaining time/distance
until arrival at target were the Homing-in values. RT and

2749

DIST served as central measures since participants’ goal
was to move to the target as fast and as directly as possible.
To evaluate whether performing as a dyad was more
efficient than performing alone, we compared each dyad’s
performance to the performance of the better member of that
dyad. Following Bahrami’s terminology, a collective benefit
is achieved if the dyad outperforms the better individual. As
lower values of the dependent variables indicate better
performance, we calculated the collective benefit by
dividing the better member’s measurement by the dyad’s
value. For instance for RT, the faster member’s RT (RT
min) was divided by the dyad’s RT (RT dyad). Values
above 1 indicate a collective benefit because dyad RT is
lower than the faster member’s RT. This measure was
calculated separately for the Approach and the Homing-in
phase – averaged across all contribution angles as well as
separately for each of the three contribution angles (30 %,
50 %, 70 %; defined for the better member’s contribution,
see Figure 3). We predicted (cf. H3) that the 70 %
contribution should result in a higher collective benefit
because the better member’s contribution dominates joint
performance. Conversely, a lower collective benefit should
be achieved for the 30% contribution because the weaker
member’s contribution dominates joint performance.
Besides testing whether joint performance would result
into an overall collective benefit, we investigated in what
way two individuals’ performances determine the dyad’s
joint performance. Based on previous findings (Bahrami et
al., 2010), we predicted that the quality of a dyad’s
performance is determined by the magnitude of the
difference between the two individual performances, such
that the smaller the individuals’ performance difference, the
larger their collective benefit during joint performance (cf.
H1). To test whether the difference between two
individuals’ performances is indeed a predictor of their
collective benefit, we divided the better individual’s
performance value by the worse individual’s performance
value. For instance, the RT ratio was composed of the faster
member’s RT (RT min) divided by the slower member’s RT
(RT max). For the resulting skill ratio, a value of 1 indicates
that both members perform equally well individually
whereas an increasingly lower ratio indicates a larger
interindividual performance difference. In our subsequent
analysis, we correlated these interindividual skill ratios with
the collective benefit for each of the contribution conditions,
separately for Approach and Homing-in. We predicted that
the collective benefit systematically increases with larger
skill ratios, suggesting that dyad members who have
increasingly similar individual performance levels benefit
more from performing jointly – particularly when both
members contribute equally to the joint performance. If
however the better individual’s dominance compensates for
a large interindividual difference (as in the 70% contribution
condition), we predicted a reduced correlation relative to the
other contribution conditions (cf. H3).

Results
Social facilitation
To exclude the theoretical possibility that differences
between individual and joint performance are due to social
facilitation (individual performance being affected purely by
someone else’s nearby presence), we compared RT in the
Individual and Joint Condition for the baseline angles in
which only one participant controlled the cursor. This
comparison was done separately for the Approach and
Homing-in phase. We found no significant RT difference
for these comparisons (Approach: t(11) = -0.03, p = .979,
Cohen’s d = -0.04; Homing-in: t(11) = -0.14, p = .894,
Cohen’s d = -0.06), indicating that participants’
performance was not affected by the joint setting. This
finding was confirmed by the results for DIST (Approach:
t(11)= -0.92, p = .376, Cohen’s d = -0.27; Homing-in:
t(11)= -0.28, p = .782, Cohen’s d = -0.08). For all further
analyses, we focused on the joint contribution angles.

Collective benefit
To determine whether joint control was beneficial, we tested
whether the collective RT benefit was larger than 1, using
one sample t-tests. Results showed that for Approach, dyads
did not outperform the better member (t(11) = -0.88, p =
.396, Cohen’s d = -0.26) whereas a collective benefit was
achieved for Homing-in (t(11) = 2.96, p = .013, Cohen’s d =
0.86) (Figure 3A). In line with our hypothesis H2, this result
suggests that distributing task dimensions is advantageous
for precise spatial control over short distances (as during
Homing-in) but not for longer distances when speed is
prioritized over spatial accuracy (as during Approach).

Figure 3: Mean collective benefit for A: RT and B: DIST.
Dyads obtained a collective benefit > 1 (see dashed line) for
Homing-in only. Error bars reflect Standard Errors.
To test our hypothesis H3 that collective benefit might
differ between the three contribution angles, we performed a
2 x 3 repeated measures ANOVA (Phase x Contribution).
We found a significant main effect of Phase (F(1,11) =
20.57, p < .001), indicating that the collective benefit was
higher for Homing-in than Approach, as shown by the
previous analysis. Neither a significant main effect of
Contribution (F(2,22) = 1.00, p = .384) nor a significant
interaction effect between the two factors (F(2,22) = 1.31, p

2750

= .288) was found, demonstrating that collective benefit did
not differ between contribution angles.
These findings were corroborated by the analysis of our
second performance measure DIST (Figure 3B). As for RT,
a collective benefit was present for Homing-in (t(11) = 3.20,
p = .008, Cohen’s d = 0.92) but not for Approach (t(11) = 0.24, p = .822, Cohen’s d = -0.07) and the ANOVA results
showed a significant main effect of Phase (F(1,11) = 12.18,
p = .005), but neither a significant main effect of
Contribution (F(2,22) = 2.09, p = .147) nor a significant
interaction effect (F(2,22) = 0.99, p = .389).

Interindividual differences as predictor
Regarding the predicted correlation between interindividual
skill ratios and collective benefit measures, results for RT
showed that the skill ratio significantly predicts collective
benefit for the 30 % and the 50 % contribution angles for
Approach (30 % contribution: r = .90, t(10) = 6.46, p <
.001; 50 % contribution: r = .91, t(10) = 7.02, p < .001)
(Figure 4A). As hypothesized, there was no significant
correlation for the 70 % contribution (r = .48, t(10)= 1.75, p
= .111). Pairwise comparisons between the correlation value
of the 70 % contribution and the values of the two other
contribution angles demonstrated a significant difference for
both comparisons (70 % vs. 30 %: z = 2.87, p = .004; 70 %
vs. 50 %: z = 3.01, p = .003) (cf. Steiger, 1980).

Figure 4: The dyad member’s RT ratio predicts the dyad’s
collective benefit for A: Approach but not B: Homing-in.
In sum, these results indicate that the interindividual RT
ratio highly predicts a dyad’s collective benefit (cf. H1).
Moreover, the predictive power of the RT ratios is
significantly reduced when large interindividual differences
are compensated for by the better individual’s dominant
contribution in comparison to the other two contribution
angles, suggesting that the collective benefit depends on the
individuals’ relative action contribution (cf. H3).
For Homing-in (Figure 4B), analyses yielded a significant
correlation for the 70 % contribution angle (r = .58, t(10) =
2.27, p = .047) but not for the other two angles (30 %
contribution: r = .38, t(10) = 1.32, p = .217; 50 %
contribution: r = .41, t(10) = 1.43, p = .183). However,
pairwise comparisons showed no significant differences
between contribution angles (70 % vs. 30 %: z = 0.74, p =
.459; 70 % vs. 50 %: z = 0.51, p = .614). Overall, these

findings indicate that the interindividual RT ratios predict
the collective benefit for Approach but not for Homing-in.
In contrast to the RT results, we did not find significant
correlations between interindividual DIST ratios and
collective benefit for Approach (30 % contribution: r = -.23,
t(10) = -0.73, p = .48; 50 % contribution: r = -.28, t(10) = 0.91, p = .39; 70 % contribution: r = .09, t(10) = 0.29, p =
.778). For Homing-in however, interindividual DIST ratios
predicted the collective benefit significantly for the 70 % (r
= .62, t(10) = 2.51, p = .030) and close-to-significantly for
the 30 % contribution angle (r = .57, t(10) = 2.18, p = .054),
but not for the 50 % contribution angle (r = .31, t(10) =
1.04, p = .183). The lack of significant correlations for
Approach can be explained by participants’ overall low
variability for DIST in Approach (Approach SD = 0.04 vs.
Homing-in SD = 0.15, see Figure 3B).

Subjective difficulty as predictor
Finally, we explored whether differences in individuals’
subjective experience might be related to the quality of their
joint performance. We hypothesized that participants’
introspective access may allow for accurate ratings of
perceived task difficulty, thereby effectively providing an
indirect measure of one’s own performance.
We used participants’ ratings of individual task difficulty
and subtracted the rating of the faster dyad member from the
rating of the slower member. These difference values were
then correlated with the collective RT benefit measures (for
each of the contribution conditions, separately for Approach
and Homing-in). Results showed that for Approach, the
difference in difficulty ratings indeed significantly predicted
the collective benefit for all contribution angles (30 %: r = .73, t(10) = -3.33, p = .008; 50 %: r = -.76, t(10) = -3.67, p
= .004; 70 %: r = -.58, t(10) = -2.23, p = .050). For Homingin, we found significant correlations for the 30 % (r = -.76,
t(10) = -3.74, p = .003) and 70 % (r = -.59, t(10) = -2.33, p =
.042) contribution angles, as well as a trend towards
significance for the 50 % contribution angle (r = -.55, t(10)
= -2.09, p = .063). These results indicate that the differences
in participants’ subjective difficulty ratings can be used to
predict the collective temporal performance benefit.
The same tests were conducted with the collective DIST
benefit measure. Based on the finding that only Homing-in
performance is predicted by interindividual DIST ratios, we
computed the correlations with the rating differences only
for Homing-in. Yet no significant correlations were found
(30 %: r = -0.46, t(10) = -1.66, p = .128; 50 %: r = -0.33,
t(10) = -1.10, p = .296; 70 %: r = -0.43, t(10) = -1.49, p =
.167), suggesting that subjective difficulty ratings cannot be
used to predict the collective spatial performance benefit.

Discussion
The aim of the present study was to target a gap in the
existing literature by examining group performance in a
dynamic object control task. We investigated whether the
relationship between interindividual skill differences and
collective benefit previously found for perceptual decision-

2751

making (Bahrami et al., 2010) also holds in a dynamic
motor task (cf. H1). Whereas Bahrami et al. used a discrete
perceptual decision-making task in which two participants
first took individual decisions and subsequently
communicated to reach a joint decision, we used a dynamic
task in which participants’ interaction was continuous. Two
members of a dyad jointly controlled a cursor movement
with the shared goal of moving it to a target location, while
one member controlled the vertical and the other member
the horizontal movement dimension. In contrast to Bahrami
et al. (2010), group members were not allowed to verbally
communicate. Additionally, the present task tested whether
spatial control demands (coarse vs. precise control) affect
collective benefit (cf. H2). Finally, we manipulated the dyad
members’ relative action contributions to test whether
assigning the higher task contribution to the more skillful
dyad member facilitates joint performance (cf. H3).
Despite using a dynamic instead of a discrete task and not
allowing verbal exchange between participants, the present
data are in line with Bahrami and colleagues’ (2010) finding
that a dyad’s collective benefit varies according to the
interindividual skill differences of its members (cf. H1).
Thus our results generalize our current knowledge regarding
individuals’ skills as predictors of collective benefit to the
domain of dynamic object control, demonstrating a
systematic relationship between interindividual skill ratios
and the quality of joint performance. Adding to Knoblich
and Jordan (2003) who highlighted the influence of external
action feedback on collective benefit in object tracking, we
identify interindividual skill differences as a further
predictor for collective benefit in a similar motor task.
When comparing the dyad’s performance to the
performance of the more skillful dyad member, we found
that dyads outperformed the individual in the Homing-in
phase of the task while there was no such collective benefit
in the Approach phase. This suggests that collective benefit
is modulated by spatial task demands such that joint control
is advantageous only for precise but not for coarse spatial
control (cf. H2). The two phases may have also differed in
overall task difficulty – future studies are needed to tease
apart the effects of spatial control type and of overall control
difficulty. With regard to spatially coarse control, we
showed that the influence of individual skill differences on
collective benefit can be effectively reduced by assigning
contribution percentages in accordance with the individual
skill level (cf. H3).
Finally, the present study shows that not only individuals’
performance differences but also differences in individuals’
subjective experience predict the quality of their joint
performance. Relatedly, Bahrami and colleagues’ (2010)
found that collective benefit was highly dependent on
whether participants were allowed to share their confidence
ratings when agreeing on a joint decision. Both confidence
ratings as well as subjective difficulty ratings require
assessing one’s own performance level. In Bahrami et al.’s
(2010) task though, participants shared their confidence
before taking a joint decision. In the present study,

subjective task difficulty was privately assessed after task
completion. When assessing task difficulty, participants
could rely on introspective access and/or regard their own
skill in relation to their task partner’s. In any case,
participants’ ratings provided an indirect performance
measure such that interindividual rating differences predict
the dyad’s collective benefit. Possibly, sharing these ratings
online might have further improved a dyad’s performance.
Taken together, the present study shows that the
collective benefit in a joint object control task depends on
interindividual skill differences, as well as on the type of
spatial task demand. Future research could investigate
whether interindividual skill differences are viable
predictors for other types of joint action.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by H2020—H2020FETPROACT-2014641321—socSMCs (for BW & PK) and
by the European Research Council under the European
Union's Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) /
ERC grant agreement n° [609819], SOMICS, and by ERC
grant agreement n°616072, JAXPERTISE (for LS & GK).

References
Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Latham. P. E., Roepstorff, A., Rees,
G., Frith, C. D. (2010). Optimally interacting minds.
Science, 329, 1081-1085.
Bosga, J., & Meulenbroek, R. G. J. (2007). Joint-action
coordination of redundant force contributions in a virtual
lifting task. Motor Control, 11(3), 234-257.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Knoblich, G. & Jordan, J. S. (2003). Action coordination in
groups and individuals: learning anticipatory control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29(5), 1006-1016.
Masumoto, J., & Inui, N. (2013). Two heads are better than
one: both complementary and synchronous strategies
facilitate joint action. Journal of Neurophysiology, 109,
1307-1314.
Rigoli, L., Romero, V., Shockley, K., Funke, G. J., Strang,
A. J., & Richardson, M. J. (2015). Effects of
complementary control on the coordination dynamics of
joint-action. In D. C. Noelle, R. Dale, A. S. Warlaumont,
J. Yoshimi, T. Matlock, C. D. Jennings, & P. P. Maglio
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 1997-2002. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: Bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10, 70-76.
Steiger, J. H. (1980). Tests for comparing elements of a
correlation matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 87, 245-251.
van der Wel, R. P., Knoblich, G., & Sebanz, N. (2011). Let
the force be with us: Dyads exploit haptic coupling for
coordination. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 37(5), 1420-1431.

2752

