Can the High-Level Semantics of a Scene be Preserved in the Low-Level Visual
Features of that Scene? A Study of Disorder and Naturalness
Hiroki P. Kotabe (hkotabe@uchicago.edu)
Omid Kardan (okardan@uchicago.edu)
Marc G. Berman (bermanm@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 South University Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Abstract
Real-world scenes contain low-level visual features (e.g.,
edges, colors) and high-level semantic features (e.g., objects
and places). Traditional visual perception models assume that
integration of low-level visual features and segmentation of the
scene must occur before high-level semantics are perceived.
This view implies that low-level visual features of a scene
alone do not carry semantic information related to that scene.
Here we present evidence that suggests otherwise. We show
that high-level semantics can be preserved in low-level visual
features, and that different high-level semantics can be
preserved in different types of low-level visual features.
Specifically, the ‘disorder’ of a scene is preserved in edge
features better than color features, whereas the converse is true
for ‘naturalness.’ These findings suggest that semantic
processing may start earlier than thought before, and
integration of low-level visual features and segmentation of the
scene may occur after semantic processing has begun, or in
parallel.
Keywords: low-level visual features, scene semantics,
semantics, scene recognition, visual perception, scene gist,
visual processing

Introduction
A scene of an environment contains a lot of information
that we perceive as “features,” broadly construed. There are
lower-level visual features such as edges and colors and
higher-level semantic features such as recognizable objects,
places, and descriptors (Oliva & Torralba, 2001; Rosch &
Mervis, 1975). Here we focus on two specific semantic
features of a scene—its level of ‘disorder’ and its level of
‘naturalness’—due to their psychological importance
(Berman, Jonides, & Kaplan, 2008; Kotabe, Kardan, &
Berman, 2016; E. O. Wilson, 1984; J. Q. Wilson & Kelling,
1982). Traditional non-Gestalt visual perception models
suggest that integration of low-level visual features and
segmentation of the scene must occur before high-level
semantic features are perceived (e.g., Biederman, 1987;
Treisman & Gelade, 1980; Marr, 1976). This would imply
that low-level visual features do not intrinsically carry
information about high-level semantic features. Here we
question this assumption by asking, can the low-level visual
features of a scene preserve any of the high-level semantics
of that scene? Furthermore, is it possible that different highlevel semantics are preserved in different types of low-level
visual features?

The preservation of high-level semantics in low-level
visual features would be of import to theories of visual
perception, posing a challenge especially to those that assume
that semantic processing starts later in visual perception.
First, it would suggest that semantic processing may start
earlier than thought previously. Second, it would suggest that
integration of low-level visual features and segmentation of
the scene may occur after semantic processing has begun, or
in parallel.
We know of some of work that is relevant to this idea. First,
although it may seem improbable that humans can start to
process semantics from information carried by low-level
visual features, before objects are perceived, we note that the
brain is a meaning making machine that can even find
meaningful objects in white noise (Gosselin & Schyns,
2003). Furthermore, there is ample evidence that people can
rapidly identify the semantic category of a scene—a
remarkable feat considering the subtle comparisons one must
make among the large number of scenes within a scene
category (e.g., imagine the number of scenes one could
consider ‘natural’), not to mention the large number of scene
categories. After only 20 ms of exposure to a scene, people
can categorize whether the scene contains an animal or not
with about 94% accuracy (Thorpe, Fize, & Marlot, 1996).
This is a shorter duration than used in some subliminal
priming experiments! After only 27 ms of exposure to a
scene, people can recall seeing semantic features, as
evidenced by a free-recall experiment (Fei-Fei, Iyer, Koch, &
Perona, 2007). After only 33 ms of exposure to a scene,
people can not only categorize objects in a scene (e.g., dog)
but can even identify within-category kinds (e.g., a German
Shepherd) above chance (Grill-Spector & Kanwisher, 2005).
Even if scenes are jumbled into six parts and presented for
only 50 ms, people can categorize the gist of the scenes better
than chance. After 100 ms of exposure to a scene, people can
perceive if an object is incompatible within the scene
(Biederman, Teitelbaum, & Mezzanotte, 1983). Although we
do not examine the time course of visual information
processing in this study, we see this research as consistent
with the idea that semantic processing starts very early in
visual processing.
There is other support for our hypothesis. An
electroencephalogram (EEG) experiment showed that lowlevel category-dependent processing can occur in less than a
tenth of a second after presentation of a stimulus (Vanrullen

1721

& Thorpe, 2001). Not only was the presentation rapid, but
category-dependent brain processing started soon after
exposure, consistent with low-level visual information
carrying semantic information. There are studies that suggest
that people can identify the semantic category of a scene in
the near absence of attention (Fei-Fei, VanRullen, Koch, &
Perona, 2005; Li, VanRullen, Koch, & Perona, 2002). Other
research suggests that object semantics are processed prior to
figure-ground segmentation (Peterson & Gibson, 1994). A
patient study suggests that objects can be recognized when
early visual processing is intact but recognition of object parts
is impaired, consistent with low-level visual features carrying
global semantic information (Davidoff & Warrington, 1999).
At least one study suggests that it takes the same amount of
time to detect an object as it does to categorize it (GrillSpector & Kanwisher, 2005), which is contrary to semantic
processing starting at a higher and more time-delayed level.
An fMRI study also supports this idea by showing that scene
categories could be decoded from activity in V1 (Walther,
Caddigan, Fei-Fei, & Beck, 2009). In fact, the decoding
accuracy of V1 (26%) was not that far off from the decoding
accuracy of the parahippocampal place area (31%), which is
known to be a key region involved in processing scene
semantics. All of these studies cast doubt on traditional
hierarchical models of visual perception.
Specifically concerning the preservation of semantics in
low-level spatial features, Oliva and Torralba (2001)
presented the spatial envelope model which proposes that the
global spatial layout of a scene, defined by specific low-level
visual feature configurations, carries information about the
semantic category (e.g., natural vs. built) of that scene (see
also Oliva & Torralba, 2006). This computational model
suggests that segmentation and the processing of individual
objects or regions is not necessary for classifying scenes into
semantic categories.
As for the preservation of semantics in low-level color
features, although some research suggests that color
information is not critical for the rapid categorization of
scenes (Delorme, Richard, & Fabre-Thorpe, 2000; Fei-Fei et
al., 2005), other research suggests otherwise. Oliva and
Schyns (2000) showed that color information helps people
categorize scenes into semantic categories when the color
information is diagnostic of a semantic category. Follow-up
research by Goffaux et al. (2005) provided both behavioral
and EEG evidence that diagnostic color information is part of
the scene “gist” (Oliva, 2005) that facilitates rapid scene
recognition. This is consistent with other research that
suggests that prior experience benefits rapid scene
understanding (Greene, Botros, Beck, & Fei-Fei, 2015). In
fact, Goffaux et al. (2005) showed that atypical scene colors
hinder rapid scene recognition.
Specifically concerning the preservation of semantics
related with disorder and naturalness in low-level visual
features, we showed that the disorder of a scene could be
predicted by objective low-level visual features (Kotabe et
al., 2016), and we have shown that this is also true for
naturalness (Berman et al., 2014). Relatedly, Oliva and

Torralba (2001) showed that naturalness could be predicted
based on the principal components of power spectra which
capture orientation and spatial frequency information. It is
unclear, however, whether these results are possible because
the disorder and naturalness of a scene systematically varies
non-causally with certain low-level visual features (e.g., the
low-level visual features relate with objects that convey
semantics related with disorder or naturalness, rather than
conveying semantics themselves) or because high-level
semantics are actually preserved in low-level visual features.
Here we test the latter possibility.

Notes on General Method
We sampled broadly from real-world environments by
utilizing 260 colored images of environments that ranged
from more urban to more natural (according to previouslycollected ratings, Berman et al.; Kardan et al., 2015) and from
more orderly to more disorderly (according to previouslycollected ratings, Kotabe, Kardan, & Berman, 2016) (see
Figure 1 for examples; all images can be downloaded here in
original resolution: https://goo.gl/IKHXeC). We manipulated
these scene images by extracting and scrambling their lowlevel edge features and their low-level color features. We had
people rate these derived stimuli in terms of disorder or
naturalness. Together, that gave us both disorder and
naturalness ratings for the scrambled-edge stimuli, the
scrambled-color stimuli, and the unaltered scene images.
Data analysis was conducted on the image-level mean
ratings.
Note that we did not use the rapid scene recognition
paradigm for this study. Although this paradigm is useful for
the study of the time course of visual information processing,
it does not directly test whether low-level visual information
carries high-level semantic information. It also relies on
recognition instead of directly testing perception. The method
we used, which involved freely rating semantic dimensions
of presented scenes, directly measured the perception of these
semantic dimensions. Furthermore, by taking these
measurements between-subjects, we eliminated memory
issues including the possibility that high-level semantics are
preserved in low-level visual features only when one has
previously viewed the unaltered scene (thus has memory of
the scene and low-level visual features), or when one has
previously viewed its low-level visual features in a scrambled
stimulus (thus has memory of the low-level visual features).

1722

many edges (but same straight and non-straight edge ratios)
as the original image. This stimulus was then multiplied (dot
product) by the mask so that half of its edges got removed at
random. The resulting stimulus had, on average, the same
amount of edges with similar edge types, but no identifiable
segments or objects from the original image (see Figure 2b
for an example).

More Urban

a

b

c

More Natural

More Order

More Disorder

Figure 2: (a) Example of a highly natural scene, (b) its
derived scrambled-edge stimulus, and (c) its derived
scrambled-color stimulus.

Figure 1: Sample images from our set of 260 scene
images varying in naturalness and disorder.

Experiment 1: Is Disorder Preserved in Edges?
We extracted and scrambled the edges and colors of the 260
scene images. We had people rate these derived stimuli in
terms of disorder. We then tested the association of these
disorder ratings with the disorder ratings of the original
scenes to see if disorder was preserved in the low-level visual
edge or color features. Based on our previous work, which
suggests that edges matter more than colors for the perception
of disorder (Kotabe et al., 2016), we predicted that the
disorder ratings of the scrambled-edge stimuli would
correlate stronger with the disorder ratings of the original
scenes than would the disorder ratings of the scrambled-color
stimuli.

Method
Participants and design 191 US-based adults (108 men, 82
women, 1 other) were recruited from the online labor market
Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) and participated in this
two-condition (stimuli: scrambled edges vs. scrambled
colors) between-subjects experiment.
Extracting and scrambling edges We developed a method
to extract and scramble the edges of the scenes such that the
average low-level edge properties (e.g., edge continuities,
straight and non-straight edge ratios) would be preserved but
colors and identifiable segments and objects would be
removed. In this method, a matrix, called the mask matrix,
was constructed to be the same size as the original images
(600*800) with its elements randomly assigned between zero
and one. This matrix was then convolved with a median filter
sized 30*40 pixels. In this way, patches of 1s and 0s were
made randomly and placed at random locations across the
mask with random sizes equal to or greater than the 30*40
pixels, with half of every mask having, on average, half a
surface of 1s and half a surface of 0s. Next, the edge map of
the target image created as in (Berman et al., 2014; Kardan et
al., 2015) was randomly rotated either 90 or 270 degrees and
overlaid on the 180 degrees rotated edge map, creating a
stimulus consisting of less identifiable stimuli with twice as

Extracting and scrambling colors For the scrambled-color
stimuli (see Figure 2c), we randomly repositioned windows
of 5*5 pixels from the image. The window size was selected
so that: 1) segments and objects became non-discernible, and
2) to keep the color texture of the scene visible. For example,
using a 1*1 pixel window size resulted in stimuli in which
less frequent colors were so scattered that they became
invisible to the eye. Using a 10*10 pixel window kept some
of the segments or objects identifiable.
Procedure Participants were first given a brief introduction
to the image-rating task. They were instructed, “You will be
presented with a series of 50 images containing various lines
(colors). We simply want you to rate each image in terms of
how disorderly or orderly it looks.” We intentionally did not
define “disorder” or “order” because we were interested in
people’s natural and spontaneous definitions of disorder,
which turned out to be surprisingly uniform. Participants
were then randomly presented 50 of the 260 scrambled-edge
stimuli (Experiment 1a) or scrambled-color stimuli
(Experiment 1b) on a plain white background. The
randomization scheme had two layers. First, we randomly
selected
10
images
from
each
quintile
of
urbanness/naturalness. Second, we presented these 50 images
in random order. This ensured that each participant would
view a wide sample of images from more urban to more
natural. For each image, they were instructed to rate the scene
in terms of disorder on a seven-point Likert-type scale
ranging from “very disorderly” to “very orderly.” The task
would continue to the next image immediately after a rating
was made. By not fixing presentation time, we would not
artificially make people view the scenes for shorter or longer
than they wanted to, which could have influenced their
perceptions.

Results
We correlated the disorder ratings of the scrambled-edge and
scrambled-color stimuli with the previously collected

1723

disorder ratings of the original scenes. Disorder ratings of the
scrambled-edge stimuli significantly correlated with disorder
ratings of the original scenes, r = .38, p < .001, providing first
evidence that disorder was partially preserved in the lowlevel edge features (see Figure 3a). In contrast, disorder
ratings of the scrambled-color stimuli did not significantly
correlate with disorder ratings of the original scenes, r = .02,
p = .731 (see Figure 3b), suggesting that disorder was not
preserved as much in the color features. In support, the
difference between these two dependent correlations was
statistically significant, t = 4.43, p < .001, according to
Williams’ test (1959). One may note that the disorder ratings
for the scrambled-color stimuli varied less (SD = 0.52) than
the disorder ratings for the scrambled-edge stimuli (SD =
0.90), which may explain the small correlation of r = .02
insofar as reduced variance in X is related to reduced
covariance between X and Y, so we conducted Thorndike
Case 2 correction for range restriction setting the unrestricted
SD of disorder ratings for the scrambled-color stimuli equal
to the SD of disorder ratings for the scrambled-edge stimuli
which increased the correlation to r = .03, p = .63, still
consistent with edges preserving disorder semantics better
than colors.
a

b

These results suggest that high-level semantics related to
disorder at the scene-level were preserved in the low-level
edge features of the scenes but not as much in the low-level
color features of the scenes. This provides evidence that highlevel semantics can be preserved in low-level visual features,
and more specifically, that some types of low-level visual
features carry certain semantic information better than others.
But is it possible that different semantic information is
preserved better in different low-level visual features?
Specifically, is ‘naturalness’ better preserved in colors than
in edges because colors are more diagnostic of naturalness
(Oliva & Schyns, 2000)? We tested this possibility in the
following experiment. We note that this would be contrary to
the spatial envelope model (Oliva & Torralba, 2001) which
suggests that naturalness is a perceptual dimension that is
well-represented by the spatial structure of a scene.

Experiment 2: Is Naturalness Preserved in
Colors?
We extracted and scrambled the edges and colors of the
260 scene images. We had people rate these derived stimuli
in terms of naturalness. We then tested the association of
these naturalness ratings with the naturalness ratings of the
original scenes to see if naturalness was preserved in the lowlevel visual edge or color features. We predicted that the
naturalness ratings of the scrambled-color stimuli would
correlate stronger with the naturalness ratings of the original
scenes than would the naturalness ratings of the scramblededge stimuli, under the assumption that colors are more
diagnostic of naturalness.

Method
***

ns

Participants and design 186 US-based adults (118 men, 67
women, 1 other) were recruited from AMT and participated
in this two-condition (stimuli: scrambled edges vs. scrambled
colors) between-subjects experiment.

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 1. (a) Disorder ratings of
scrambled-edge stimuli significantly correlated with the
disorder ratings of scene images. (b) Disorder ratings of
scrambled-color stimuli did not significantly correlate with
the disorder ratings of scene images. Least-squares lines
with 95% confidence bands shown. *** p < .001

Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1
except that participants rated naturalness on a seven-point
Likert type scale ranging from “very urban” to “very natural.”

Because of imperfect linearity, we also tested these
associations with two nonparametric tests of association
based on rank-order, Spearman’s rho (ρ) and Kendall’s tau-b
(τ). Disorder ratings of the scrambled-edge stimuli were
again significantly associated with disorder ratings of the
original scenes according to both tests, ρ = .40, p < .001 and
τ = .27, p < .001, providing further evidence that disorder was
partially preserved in the low-level edge features. In contrast,
disorder ratings of the scrambled-color stimuli were again not
significantly associated with disorder ratings of the original
scenes according to both tests, ρ = .02, p = .414 and τ = .01,
p = .758, again suggesting that disorder was not preserved as
much in the color features. In support, the difference between
the two dependent ρs was statistically significant, t = 4.58, p
< .001, according to Williams’ test.

Results
The analysis followed the same procedure as in Experiment
1. Naturalness ratings of the scrambled-color stimuli
significantly correlated with naturalness ratings of the
original scenes, r = .24, p < .001, providing first evidence that
naturalness was partially preserved in the low-level color
features (see Figure 4c). In contrast, naturalness ratings of the
scrambled-edge stimuli did not significantly correlate with
naturalness ratings of the original scenes, r = -.06, p = .358
(see Figure 4a), suggesting that naturalness was not preserved
as much in the edge features. In support, the difference
between these two dependent correlations was statistically
significant, t = 3.52, p < .001, according to Williams’ test.
One may note that the naturalness ratings for the scramblededge stimuli varied less (SD = 0.40) than the disorder ratings

1724

for the scrambled-color stimuli (SD = 0.68), which may
explain the small correlation of r = -.06, so we conducted
Thorndike Case 2 correction for range restriction setting the
unrestricted SD of naturalness ratings for the scrambled-edge
stimuli equal to the SD of naturalness ratings for the
scrambled-color stimuli which increased the correlation to r
= -.10, p = .11, still consistent with colors preserving
naturalness semantics better than edges.
There was an outlying clustering of scenes rated as highly
natural (see Figure 4). After removing these with a cutoff of
6.5/7.0 on the naturalness scale (N = 212 remaining), the
results provide even stronger support for our hypothesis.
Naturalness ratings of the scrambled-color stimuli
significantly correlated with naturalness ratings of the
original scenes, r = .44, p < .001 (see Figure 4d). In contrast,
naturalness ratings of the scrambled-edge stimuli did not
significantly correlate with naturalness ratings of the original
scenes, r = .02, p = .358 (see Figure 4b), suggesting that
naturalness was not preserved as much in the edge features.
In support, the difference between these two dependent
correlations was statistically significant, t = 4.87, p < .001,
according to Williams’ test.
a

original scenes according to both tests, before, ρ = .29, p <
.001 and τ = .21, p < .001, and after, ρ = .48, p < .001 and τ =
.34, p < .001, removing the cluster of highly natural scenes,
providing further evidence that naturalness was partially
preserved in the low-level color features. In contrast,
naturalness ratings of the scrambled-edge stimuli were again
not significantly associated with naturalness ratings of the
original scenes according to both tests, before, ρ = -.07, p =
.288 and τ = -.05, p = .287, and after, ρ = -.01, p = .851 and τ
= -.01, p = .879, removing the cluster of highly natural scenes,
again suggesting that naturalness was not preserved as much
in the edge features. In support, the difference between the
two dependent ρs was statistically significant before, t = 4.27,
p < .001, and after, t = 5.74, p < .001, removing the highly
natural scenes, according to Williams’ test.
These results suggest that high-level semantics related to
naturalness at the scene-level were preserved in the low-level
color features of the scenes but not as much in the low-level
edge features of a scene. This further supports our general
hypothesis that high-level semantics can be preserved in lowlevel visual features. It also further supports our more specific
hypothesis that some low-level visual features carry certain
semantic information better than others.

b

ns

c

Conclusion
Together, these experiments provide direct evidence that
high-level semantics can be preserved in low-level visual
features, and that different high-level semantics can be
preserved in different types of low-level visual features. This
is evidenced by our two experiments, the first showing that
high-level semantics related with disorder were preserved
better in low-level edge features than in low-level color
features, and the second showing that high-level semantics
related with naturalness were preserved better in low-level
color features than in low-level edge features. This research
adds to the body of literature that is starting to entertain the
possibility that object perception and segmentation do not
need to occur before identifying the semantic category of a
scene.

ns

d

Acknowledgments
***

***

This work was supported by a grant from the TKF
Foundation and an internal grant from the University of
Chicago.

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 2 before and after
removing cluster of highly natural scenes. (a-b) Naturalness
ratings of scrambled-edge stimuli did not significantly
correlate with the naturalness ratings of scene images; (c-d)
Naturalness ratings of scrambled-color stimuli significantly
correlated with the naturalness ratings of scene images.
Least-squares lines with 95% CI shown. *** p < .001

References

Because of imperfect linearity, we also tested these
associations with Spearman’s rho and Kendall’s tau-b.
Naturalness ratings of the scrambled-color stimuli were again
significantly associated with naturalness ratings of the

Berman, M. G., Hout, M. C., Kardan, O., Hunter, M. R.,
Yourganov, G., Henderson, J. M., … Jonides, J. (2014). The
perception of naturalness correlates with low-level visual
features of environmental scenes. PLOS ONE, 9, e114572.
Berman, M. G., Jonides, J., & Kaplan, S. (2008). The
cognitive benefits of interacting with nature. Psychological
Science, 19, 1207–1212.
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: A
theory of human image understanding. Psychological
Review, 94(2), 115–147.

1725

Biederman, I., Teitelbaum, R. C., & Mezzanotte, R. J.
(1983). Scene perception: A failure to find a benefit from
prior expectancy or familiarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9(3), 411.
Davidoff, J., & Warrington, E. K. (1999). The bare bones
of object recognition: Implications from a case of object
recognition impairment. Neuropsychologia, 37(3), 279–292.
Delorme, A., Richard, G., & Fabre-Thorpe, M. (2000).
Ultra-rapid categorisation of natural scenes does not rely on
colour cues: A study in monkeys and humans. Vision
Research, 40(16), 2187–2200.
Fei-Fei, L., Iyer, A., Koch, C., & Perona, P. (2007). What
do we perceive in a glance of a real-world scene? Journal of
Vision, 7(1), 10.
Fei-Fei, L., VanRullen, R., Koch, C., & Perona, P. (2005).
Why does natural scene categorization require little
attention? Exploring attentional requirements for natural and
synthetic stimuli. Visual Cognition, 12(6), 893–924.
Goffaux, V., Jacques, C., Mouraux, A., Oliva, A., Schyns,
P., & Rossion, B. (2005). Diagnostic colours contribute to the
early stages of scene categorization: Behavioural and
neurophysiological evidence. Visual Cognition, 12(6), 878–
892.
Gosselin, F., & Schyns, P. G. (2003). Superstitious
perceptions reveal properties of internal representations.
Psychological Science, 14(5), 505–509.
Greene, M. R., Botros, A. P., Beck, D. M., & Fei-Fei, L.
(2015). What you see is what you expect: Rapid scene
understanding benefits from prior experience. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 77(4), 1239–1251.
Grill-Spector, K., & Kanwisher, N. (2005). Visual
recognition: As soon as you know it is there, you know what
it is. Psychological Science, 16(2), 152–160.
Kardan, O., Demiralp, E., Hout, M. C., Hunter, M. R.,
Karimi, H., Hanayik, T., … Berman, M. G. (2015). Is the
preference of natural versus man-made scenes driven by
bottom-up processing of the visual features of nature?
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 471.
Kotabe, H. P., Kardan, O., & Berman, M. G. (2016). The
order of disorder: Deconstructing visual disorder and its
effect on rule-breaking. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Li, F. F., VanRullen, R., Koch, C., & Perona, P. (2002).
Rapid natural scene categorization in the near absence of
attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
99(14), 9596–9601.
Marr, D. (1976). Early processing of visual information.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
B: Biological Sciences, 275(942), 483–519.
Oliva, A. (2005). Gist of the scene. Neurobiology of
Attention, 696(64), 251–258.
Oliva, A., & Schyns, P. G. (2000). Diagnostic colors
mediate scene recognition. Cognitive Psychology, 41(2),
176–210.
Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2001). Modeling the shape of
the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 42(3), 145–175.

Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2006). Building the gist of a
scene: The role of global image features in recognition.
Progress in Brain Research, 155, 23–36.
Peterson, M. A., & Gibson, B. S. (1994). Must figureground organization precede object recognition? An
assumption in peril. Psychological Science, 5(5), 253–259.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7(4), 573–605.
Thorpe, S., Fize, D., & Marlot, C. (1996). Speed of
processing in the human visual system. Nature, 381(6582),
520–522.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12(1),
97–136.
Vanrullen, R., & Thorpe, S. J. (2001). The time course of
visual processing: From early perception to decision-making.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13(4), 454–461.
Walther, D. B., Caddigan, E., Fei-Fei, L., & Beck, D. M.
(2009). Natural scene categories revealed in distributed
patterns of activity in the human brain. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 29(34), 10573–10581.
Williams, E. J. (1959). The comparison of regression
variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B,
21, 396–399.
Wilson, E. O. (1984). Biophilia. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Wilson, J. Q., & Kelling, G. L. (1982). Broken windows.
Atlantic Monthly, 249, 29–38.

1726

