Causal Action: A Fundamental Constraint
on Perception of Bodily Movements
Yujia Peng1

Steven Thurman1

yjpeng@ucla.edu

sthurmanucla@gmail.com

Hongjing Lu1,2
hongjing@ucla.edu

1

Department of Psychology
Departments of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
2

situations this relation can be violated. A striking example is
the renowned “moonwalk” dance move, popularized by
Michael Jackson decades ago, in which the dancer appear to
be making the physical movement of walking forwards, but
actually his body moves backwards. We hypothesize that the
dance movement’s impact on an observer reflects the surprise
triggered by its violation of a fundamental expectation about
causal actions—the assignment of the role of cause to relative
limb movements, and the role of effect to body motion (i.e.,
the position changes of the body center of mass). Although
this proposal appears intuitive, no direct evidence has
established that this causal constraint on bodily movements
influences perception of human actions (Thurman & Lu,
2013). It is by no means obvious that human observers are
sensitive to the physical causal mechanisms that govern the
actions of others. Demonstrating such sensitivity to human
actions is challenging because in human actions, intention,
causality and perceived body movements are entangled. To
resolve this difficulty, the present study experimentally
separated two types of motion cues involved in actions:
relative limb movements (with reference to body-centered
coordinates) and the position changes of the body center of
mass (with reference to distal world coordinates). This
separation makes it possible to determine whether people
consider the systematic relations between the two types of
motion cues to be causal, or merely an associative correlation.
The present study was inspired by a ubiquitous feature of
causation highlighted by Hume (1739/1888): the temporal
priority of a cause to its effect. The constraint that the causal
relation is asymmetric, such that effects never (or almost
never) occur before their causes, is considered a necessary
condition to be explained by any adequate theory of causation
(Price, 1992; White, 2006). In the context of action
observation, if humans assign the cause role to limb
movements, and the effect role to the position change of the
body (i.e., body motion), we would expect that the relative
temporal relationship between limb movements and body
motion will be an important determinant of action perception.
In the present paper, we report three experiments to
investigate the role of causation in action perception.

Abstract
Human actions are more than mere body movements. In
contrast to other dynamic events in the natural world, human
actions involve mental processes that enable willful bodily
movements. We reported two experiments to demonstrate that
human observers spontaneously assign the role of cause to
relative limb movements, and the role of effect to body motion
(i.e., the position changes of the body center of mass) when
observing actions of others. Experiment 1 showed that this
causal action constraint impacts people’s impression on the
naturalness of observed actions. Experiment 2a/b revealed that
the causal constraint guides the integration of different motion
cues within a relational schema. We developed an ideal
observer model to rule out the possibility that these effects
resulted from the learning of statistical regularity in action
stimuli. These findings demonstrate that causal relations
concerning bodily movements play an important role in
perceiving and understanding actions.
Keywords: causation; causal asymmetry; biological motion;
limb movement; body motion

Introduction
Human actions are more than mere body movements. In his
Philosophical Investigations, Ludwig Wittgenstein (1953, p.
161) posed a famous question: “What is left over if I subtract
the fact that my arm goes up from the fact that I raise my
arm?” This question highlights the special status of the
actions of a human being relative to other dynamic events in
the natural world—human actions involve mental processes
that cause willful bodily movements. For example, we see
rhythmic stepping forward on the ground as causing the
forward motion of the agent’s body; we see lifting and
quickly swinging arms as causing a basketball to launch by
throwing it. These types of interaction between active body
movements and the distal world gives us direct experience of
cause-effect relations. Thus “to step up by lifting one’s leg”
is properly considered to include the objective content of an
action: it involves a causal structure in which moving one’s
limbs in a certain way provides a means to cause position
changes of the body such that the intentional goal of the
action is fulfilled.
We often have a strong sense of causality as actions unfold.
Observing certain limb movements triggers the expectation
of changes in body position. The causal link between the two
types of motion is manifested in most observed human
actions in our daily life (Thurman & Lu, 2014), yet in some

Experiment 1
In accord with the general causal asymmetry based on
temporal priority, we hypothesized that introducing a

229

temporal lag of limb movements relative to changes in body
position (i.e., a situation in which the expected causal cue
occurs after its expected effect) would signal a strong
violation of the anticipated causal relation between the two
motion cues. Observers are therefore likely to detect the
inconsistency between the two motion cues and to judge the
observed action as unnatural or artificial. In contrast, when
limb movements (causes) are displaced forward in time so as
to occur moderately early relative to body motion (effect),
observers may show more tolerance to such misalignment
(since the temporal relation between relative limb
movements and body movements will still be qualitatively
consistent with normal causal directionality). To examine the
role of causal relation between relative limb movements and
common body motion in perceiving the validity of observed
actions, Experiment 1 was designed to measure how temporal
offsets between limb movements and body motion impact the
perceived naturalness of actions.

the uneven surface with invisible steps through a slowly
rotating camera. The rotation of the camera will help you
perceive the 3D space. Look at the relative limb movements
of the actor. Look at how the body position changes over
time. Ask yourself if that could be a real person’s motion in
the environment. ” Participants were asked to rate the
naturalness of videos on a 1 (unnatural) to 5 (natural) scale.
On each trial, an action sequence was presented with a
point-light walker on a checkerboard surface with invisible
steps was presented. The viewpoint rotated clockwise with a
speed of 3 degrees/second, aiming to facilitate a 3D
perception of the biological motion stimulus in the
environment. Each video lasted about 8 seconds and was
played automatically with the start of each trial.
Six temporal offsets between limb movements and body
motion were used: 0, ±0.5, ± 1 and 8.33 s. The 0 and very
large offset (8.33 s) conditions served as extreme cases to
help participants anchor the two ends of the rating scale.
The experiment consisted of 24 experimental trials, plus
two attention check trials randomly placed in the experiment.
An attention check trial involved a simple task, in which
participants were presented with either a walking or jumping
sequence, and were asked to identify the presented action.
The purpose of including these two trials was to identify
outlier participants who gave random responses in the online
experiment. The total running time of the experiment was less
than 10 minutes.

Methods
Participants
One hundred online participants were recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.

Stimuli
Action stimuli were generated from the CMU motion-capture
database (http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu) and processed using the
Biological Motion Toolbox developed by van Boxtel and Lu
(2013). We selected actions in which a person walked on an
uneven surface with steps, with both horizontal and vertical
body motion included in the sequence.

Results
Given that the participants were recruited online, we included
three criteria to remove obvious outliers, including the failure
of passing the two attention-check trials, or the average
naturalness rating in the zero-offset condition (i.e., action
sequence generated from the raw motion capture data) was
lower than 2 standard deviations below the mean, or they
gave the same naturalness rating value for all trials in the
experiment. Nine out of 100 participants were removed
according to the exclusion criteria.
The average naturalness rating for the zero-offset condition
(i.e., perfect synchrony between limb movements and body
motion) was the highest (M = 3.88, SD = 0.74); and the
naturalness rating for the extreme offset condition of 8.3
seconds was the lowest (M = 2.28, SD = 1.02), suggesting
that human observers utilized information about the
magnitude of temporal offsets between limb movements and
body position changes in their naturalness judgments.
To examine how temporal offsets between the two
movement cues influenced the naturalness ratings, we
conducted a repeated-measures ANOVA with two withinsubject factors, temporal offset magnitude (.5 vs. 1 s) and
offset direction (ahead vs. lag). As shown in Figure 3, the
results revealed a significant main effect of temporal offset
direction, F(1,90) = 8.66, p = 0.004, ηp2 = 0.83. Observers
judged actions to be more natural if the effect of body motion
lagged behind the causal limb movements, relative to the
corresponding ahead condition. In other words, when the
temporal displacement was qualitatively consistent with the

Figure 1: An
illustration of
different temporal
relationships
between body
motion and limb
movements.

The relationship between limb movements and body
motion was manipulated by shifting the temporal sequence of
common body motions forward or backward in time relative
to the sequence of limb movements, as illustrated in Figure
1. Common body motions were made to either precede or lag
behind the posture change resulting from the relative limb
movements. The temporal sequence of body positions was
shifted forward relative to limb movements in the “ahead”
condition (i.e., effect precedes), and were shifted backward
in time in the “lag” condition (i.e., cause precedes).

Procedure
Participants were first presented with a cover story as
following: “Imagine you are viewing a walking sequence on

230

causal direction (i.e., the causal limb movements preceded
the effect of body motion), people showed more tolerance of
temporal displacement than in the corresponding ahead
condition (i.e., when the temporal offset was opposite to the
causal direction).
We also found a significant main effect of offset
magnitude, F(1,90) = 29.13, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 1.0, indicating
that people were sensitive to the temporal alignment between
the two motion cues when assessing the validity of observed
actions. In general, larger offsets resulted in lower ratings of
naturalness. The two-way interaction between offset
magnitude and temporal direction was not significant,
F(1,90) = 0.15, p = 0.70.

Figure 3: Illustration of stimulus
for Experiments 2a and 2b. The
stick-figure actor shows the
posture change over time at a
stationary location; the dot depicts
the motion of the body. The
figure and the dot change from a
light color to a dark color in
proportion to the elapsed time.

Procedure
Participants were first given a cover story along with
illustration figures. “Imagine that you work for a specialized
video analysis company and are given two sources of
information: a processed video from a motion tracking
system, which records a person’s posture change over time
and keeps the figure always at the center, and the location of
the person reported from a GPS system.” After the cover
story, participants were presented with two video clips which
illustrated how the posture change in a stationary location
was separated from the position change of the body over time
based on the original motion capture video. Note that our
display explicitly isolated the effect cue, body motion
(represented by the gray GPS dot) and the causal cue, limb
movements (represented by the red figure). Participants were
asked to decide whether the movements of the GPS dot
matched the posture changes of the actor by pressing one of
the two response buttons.
After receiving the cover story, participants were given
two practice blocks with feedback to familiarize them with
the task. Practice trials included stimuli with either perfectly
aligned movements or with excessive temporal
displacements (temporal offset of 8.33 s).
In the subsequent test session, 96 trials were presented to
participants. The experiment included eight levels of
temporal offsets between the position change of the body
resulting from body motion and the posture change resulting
from limb movements (±0.02s, ±0.5s, ±1s and ±1.5s,
respectively). On each trial, the action stimuli lasted for 6.67
s. The first 100 frames (i.e., 1.67 s) presented only the walker,
with the goal of encouraging participants to maintain fixation
on the walking action. Then the GPS dot appeared at the
center of screen in the 101th frame, and subsequently started
to move according to the assigned trajectory of body motion.
The test block included four viewpoints (45ᵒ, 135ᵒ, 225ᵒ and
315ᵒ), and each viewpoint was tested three times under each
of the eight offsets. The order of conditions was randomized.

Figure 2: Naturalness ratings in the ahead condition (effect
of body motion preceded) and in the lag condition (causal
limb movements preceded). Error bars represent standard
errors of the mean.

Experiment 2a
In Experiment 2, we aimed to create a reasoning task in which
the two movement cues were represented by distinct visual
entities in the display. This new reasoning task serves to
assess whether people use the default causal relation to form
an explicit binding between the two types of movements.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-two UCLA undergraduate students (mean age =
20.8; 16 female) participated in the experiment for course
credit. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision.

Stimuli
Four action sequences of an actor walking on an uneven
surface were displayed from two viewing directions with
orthogonal projection. The actor was made to appear to walk
on a treadmill by maintaining a stationary position for the
average location of two hip joints at the center of the screen.
To depict the position change of the body over time, a gray
dot moved according to the trajectory of body motion. Figure
3 provides an illustration of the stimuli.

Results
The results of Experiment 2a are shown in Figure 4. A
repeated-measures ANOVA with two within-subject factors
(ahead vs. lag condition, and four temporal offset levels)
revealed a significant main effect of offset magnitude,
F(3,19) = 37.83 , p < 0.001, ηp2 = 1.0, indicating that
participants were sensitive to the temporal offsets between
the two motion cues in this explicit binding task. Importantly,
the interaction of offset magnitude and temporal direction of

231

offset was significant, F(3,19) = 4.51, p = 0.015, ηp2 = 0.80,
indicating that the influence of causal direction of the two
movement cues on the binding judgment depended on the
magnitude of temporal displacement introduced into the
stimuli. Specifically, when the temporal offset was very large
(e.g., 1.5 second), observers presumably considered the
posture change of the walker and the GPS dot movements to
be generated from different sources, and therefore judged
them as mismatched signals, regardless of the temporal
direction of offset. Similarly, when the temporal offset was
very small (e.g., .02 second), observers may not have
detected the difference in temporal directions, and thus also
did not show a temporal asymmetry effect. Hence, the critical
testing offset conditions were the middle range and we did
planned comparisons for ±.5 and ±1 second conditions
respectively. Indeed, we found that with a 1 s offset, the lag
condition (M = 0.44, SD = 0.29) yielded a significantly
higher proportion of matched responses than did the ahead
condition (M = 0.29, SD = 0.25), F(1,21) = 9.69, p = 0.005,
ηp2 = 0.84. Thus a causal asymmetry effect was observed
within a middle range of the temporal window, when the two
motion cues could be interpreted as originating from a single
actor.
In summary, Experiment 2a used an explicit binding task
to provide converging evidence that observers are sensitive
to the temporal relation between limb movements and body
motion. The two motion cues were more likely to be judged
as matched when the causal limb movement preceded the
effect of body motion, in comparison to when the effect cue
preceded the cause. This temporal asymmetry effect supports
the hypothesis that human observers naturally assign the role
of cause to relative limb movements and the role of effect to
body motion (i.e., they expect limb movements to cause
changes of body position in the environment).

Participants
21 UCLA undergraduate students (mean age = 20.2; 19
female) participated in the experiment for course credit.

Stimuli and Procedure
We used stimuli identical to those of Experiment 2a, but
changed the cover story so as to reverse people’s
understanding of the causal relation between posture change
and dot motion, by specifying that the dot represented a
moving laser spot that the person aimed to follow. In this
situation, the two components of the stimuli are interpreted
as representing two distinct entities, such that the laser spot
is the cause that makes a person move in certain ways (i.e.,
the limb movements are the effect). Participants were
instructed to judge whether the person succeeded in
following the laser spot. All other procedural aspects were
identical to those in Experiment 2a.

Results
The results of Experiment 2b are shown in Figure 5. A
repeated-measures ANOVA revealed that the interaction of
offset magnitude and temporal direction of offset was
significant, F(3,18) = 38.54, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 1.0. When the
dot motion preceded body movements in the ahead condition,
participants judged the actor to be successful in following the
dot, regardless of the magnitude of temporal offset, F(3, 18)
= 6.71, p = 0.003, ηp2 = 0.94. However, when dot motion
followed body movements in the lag condition, the temporal
misalignment magnitude significantly impacted human
judgments, F(3, 18) = 62.13, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 1.0. When the
proportion of “success” responses in the ahead condition was
subtracted from the corresponding proportion in the lag
condition, the difference was significantly below zero for
temporal offsets of 0.5 s, 1 s, and 1.5 s (all ps < 0.001),
indicating a higher proportion of success responses when the
dot motion (cause) preceded the body movements (effect),
relative to the corresponding condition in which the effect cue
preceded the cause.
These results imply that when observers received a cover
story in Experiment 2b that reversed their interpretation of
the cause-effect relations between moving objects (i.e.,
moving dot as cause and limb movements as effect), their
judgments changed dramatically. Observers were more likely
to judge the action to be successful in following the laser spot
when the dot motion was shifted forward relative to limb
movements. Furthermore, this temporal asymmetry effect
was maintained for a large range of offset magnitudes (from
.5 s to 1.5 s). The strength and robustness of the effect is likely
due to people’s qualitative interpretation of a “following”
action: this relation is granted as long as the movement of one
object follows the same trajectory as that of another object.
Whereas the causal relation between limb movements and
body motion of a single agent (Experiments 1 and 2a) is
closely coupled in time, the action of an agent that is
following a separate object (Experiment 2b) can be much

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 2a. The proportion of
“matched” responses in the ahead condition (GPS dot
shifted ahead of limb movements) and in the lag condition
(GPS dot lagged behind of limb movements).

Experiment 2b
If the temporal asymmetry effect found in previous
experiments was resulted from the observers’ understanding
of the causal relation between the two motion sources, then
the effect should be radically altered when the causal relation
is changed. Experiment 2b aimed to measure differences in
people’s pattern of judgments attributable to the influence of
the causal interpretations conveyed by the cover story.

232

more temporally variable, as long as the motion of the agent
lags behind that of the object.

stimulus. Figure 6 (right) shows the simulation results.
Higher log-likelihood values indicate greater probability of
considering the two motion cues as “matched”. The ideal
observer model consistently predicted more matched
responses in the ahead conditions compared with the lag
conditions, which is opposite to the temporal asymmetry
effect observed in Experiment 2a. The ideal observer model
(which lacks any causal constraint) thus failed to account for
the pattern of human judgments. The failure of the model
based solely on visual statistics shows converging evidence
that causal understanding of body motion provides a critical
constraint used by human observers in deciding whether
perceived motion is natural.

Figure 5: Results of Experiment 2b. The proportion of
reported successful tracking responses in the ahead
condition (laser dot was shifted ahead of limb movements)
and in the lag condition (laser dot lagged).

An Ideal Observer Model
To further assess whether the temporal asymmetry effect
could possibly be explained by statistical regularity in
walking actions, rather than causal relations between two
movement cues, we developed an ideal observer model solely
based on visual statistics of action stimuli. The observer
model is a hypothetical device that makes optimal decisions
given available information based on natural statistics of the
visual environment (Geisler 2011; Kersten, Mamassian &
Yuille, 2004; Lu & Yuille, 2006). To capture the natural
statistics in relevant action stimuli, we analyzed 20 walking
actions (each consisted of 1500 frames) from the CMU
motion-capture database, in which an actor explored an
indoor environment with uneven surfaces. We generated a
pool of point-light stimuli from 20 actions each viewed from
six different directions with orthogonal projections. This
stimulus set included a total of 180,000 posture frames
(20*1500*6). To quantify body motion, the velocity was
calculated as the position change of averaged hip joints from
a frame to its neighboring frame. To reduce the number of
postures resulting from limb movements in walking action, a
K-mean algorithm (Jain, 2010) was employed to categorize
the posture frames into a smaller number of key postures.
Twenty key postures were selected since the sum of error
reached a plateau after 20 clusters, indicating that adding
more key postures did not improve the clustering
performance. Each frame in the stimulus set was assigned to
the most similar key posture as the corresponding label.
Using all this information, we computed the histogram of
velocity of body motion for each of the 20 key posture, and
fitted the histogram using a 2D Gaussian distribution to
estimate the mean and the covariance of common body
motions given a key posture, as illustrated in Figure 6.
To simulate the judgment in Experiment 2a, each posture
frame in an experimental trial was first assigned to the most
similar key posture, and subsequently to the associated
distribution of body motion. The displaced body motion in
the input was mapped to the corresponding distribution to
derive a likelihood. Finally, log-likelihood was calculated by
summing up each frame’s likelihood in the log scale for each

Figure 6: Results of an ideal observer model based on visual
statistics. Left, body motion distribution associated with a
key posture frame, derived from visual statistics from
walking action observations. Right, the model simulation
results for Experiment 2a, which is opposite from human
results, suggesting that association between limb
movements and body motion learned from visual statistics is
insufficient to account for human performance.

General Discussion
The present study provides evidence for both perceptual
and inferential processes involved in causal action
judgments. Experiment 1 revealed that actions with
preceding limb movements were rated as more natural than
those with preceding body motion. This result suggests that
people adopt the directionality of causal relation between
limb movements and body motion when judging the
naturalness of observed actions, despite this perceptual task
appears not to explicitly require the sensitivity to causal
relation between the two motion cues. The results of
Experiment 2 collectively revealed that when considering
movements attributed to a single actor (Experiment 2a), by
default the brain binds bodily movements of articulated limbs
(causes) to moving body locations in the environment
(effects). However, when considering movements of one
agent with respect to a separate distal object (Experiment 2b),
the brain can flexibly assign the effect role to bodily
movements of the agent, suggesting the involvement of the
inferential process in causal action judgment. Thus people
form a causal understanding of what drives perceived actions,
which in turn influences their judgments of action
naturalness.
The present findings both support and extend the large
body of research on causal perception and inference. Seminal
work on causal perception (Michotte, 1946/1963), coupled
with contemporary developments (Scholl & Tremoulet,
2000; White, 2006), has illuminated the mechanisms by

233

which humans directly perceive the causal structure of the
visual world. It is possible that a primitive psychological
concept of causation may develop by extension from the fast,
automatic and irresistible visual impression of causality
arising from simple kinematic events. However, previous
studies of causal perception have mostly involved simple
displays of moving objects with rigid shapes. The present
findings extend research on the interactions of objects (such
as colliding balls) in the physical world to agent-related body
movements. Thus, the paradigm introduced here (using
action stimuli with whole-body movements) opens the door
for further experimental investigations directed at the
interface between causal perception and inference.
Actions afford privileged access to experience the role of
agency, and hence provide a powerful tool to produce
interventions that in turn help to discover causal relations in
the physical and social environment (White, 1999).
Numerous studies have shown that action perception is an
active process, in which humans automatically predict
actions to project the future course of an activity (Flanagan &
Johansson, 2003; Graf et al., 2007; Prinz, 2006). Our study
highlights the importance of causal interpretation in
perceiving body movements. As relational binding in general
enhances representational power (Lu, Chen & Holyoak,
2012), the perceived causal relation between the two
movement cues enables people to understand why the body
moves the way it does. The present study is limited to the
simplest causal action, in which a single causal link exist
between limb movements and body motion. The future
investigations in causal action need to consider background
cause (i.e., gravity) or other potential causal cues (i.e., body
motion is caused by a moving skateboard). These situations
open the door for.

Geisler, W. S. (2011). Contributions of ideal observer theory
to vision research. Vision research, 51(7), 771-781.
Graf, M., Reitzner, B., Corves, C., Casile, A., Giese, M., &
Prinz, W. (2007). Predicting point-light actions in realtime. Neuroimage, 36, T22-T32.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary
action and conscious awareness. Nature neuroscience,
5(4), 382-385.
Heider, F., & Simmel, M. (1944). An experimental study of
apparent behavior. The American Journal of Psychology,
243-259.
Hume, D. (1888). Hume’s treatise of human nature (L.A.
Selby-Bigge, Ed.). Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
(Original work published 1739).Jain, A. K. (2010). Data
clustering: 50 years beyond K-means. Pattern recognition
letters, 31(8), 651-666.
Kersten, D., Mamassian, P., & Yuille, A. (2004). Object
perception as Bayesian inference. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 55,
271-304.
Lu, H., & Yuille, A. (2006). Ideal observers for detecting
motion: Correspondence noise. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 18, 827-834.
Lu, H., Chen, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Bayesian analogy
with relational transformations. Psychological review,
119(3), 617-648.
Ludwig, W. (1953). Philosophical investigations. London,
Basic Blackw.
Masselink, J., & Lappe, M. (2015). Translation and
articulation in biological motion perception. Journal of
vision, 15(11), 10.
Michotte, A.E. (1963). The perception of causality (T.R.
Miles, Trans.). London: Methuen & Co. (Original work
published 1946).
Price, H. (1992). Agency and causal asymmetry. Mind, 501520.
Prinz, W. (2006). What re-enactment earns us. Cortex, 42(4),
515-517.
Scholl, B. J., & Nakayama, K. (2002). Causal capture:
Contextual effects on the perception of collision events.
Psychological Science, 13(6), 493-498.
Scholl, B. J., & Tremoulet, P. D. (2000). Perceptual causality
and animacy. Trends in cognitive sciences, 4(8), 299-309.
Thurman, S. M., & Lu, H. (2013). Physical and biological
constraints govern perceived animacy of scrambled human
forms. Psychological Science, 24:1133-1141.
Thurman, S. M., & Lu, H. (2014). Perception of Social
Interactions for Spatially Scrambled Biological Motion.
PLoS ONE. 9(11), 1-12.
van Boxtel, J. J., & Lu, H. (2013). A biological motion
toolbox for reading, displaying, and manipulating motion
capture data in research settings. Journal of vision, 13(12),
7, 1-16.
White, P. A. (1999). Toward a causal realist account of causal
understanding. The American Journal of Psychology, 112,
605-642.
White, P. A. (2006). The causal asymmetry. Psychological
review, 113(1), 132-147.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a CSC Scholarship to YP and
National Science Foundation grant BCS-1353391 to HL.

Reference
Abravanel, E., Levan-Goldschmidt, E., & Stevenson, M. B.
(1976). Action imitation: The early phase of infancy. Child
development, 1032-1044.
Buehner, M. J. (2012). Understanding the past, predicting the
future causation, not intentional action, is the root of
temporal binding. Psychological Science, 23(12), 14901497.
Buehner, M. J., & Humphreys, G. R. (2009). Causal binding
of actions to their effects. Psychological Science, 20(10),
1221-1228.
Choi, H., & Scholl, B.J. (2006). Perceiving causality after the
fact: Postdiction in the temporal dynamics of causal
perception. Perception, 35, 385-399.
Faro, D., Leclerc, F., & Hastie, R. (2005). Perceived causality
as a cue to temporal distance. Psychological Science,
16(9), 673-677.
Flanagan, J. R., & Johansson, R. S. (2003). Action plans used
in action observation. Nature, 424(6950), 769-771.

234

