Children’s Use of Orthographic Cues in Language Processing
Takayo Sugimoto (takayosg@vega.aichi-u.ac.jp)
Aichi University
1-1 Machihatakemachi, Toyohashi,
Aichi, 441-8522 Japan

development and cultural influences on our language
faculty.
In adult grammar, rendaku is generally subject to 2
conditions (Ito & Mester, 1986, 1995, Fukuda & Fukuda,
1999, Fukuda, 2002) 1:

Abstract
Rendaku, or sequential voicing, is a morphophonemic
process in Japanese in which the voiceless word-initial
consonant of the second element (=E2) of a compound word
becomes voiced (e.g., ori + kami →origami, ‘folding’ +
‘paper’ → ‘paper folding’, /k/ becomes /g/). In adult
grammar, rendaku is subject to two conditions: It applies if
and only if (a) E2 is a Yamato word (native vocabulary) in
the lexicon and (b) it contains no voiced consonant (e.g., b, d,
& g). Recent psycholinguistic studies have revealed that
Japanese-speaking preschoolers do not follow adult’s
grammar; they develop their original prosodically-based
rendaku processing strategy (preschooler-specific rendaku
strategy). Their strategies qualitatively change in the early
middle childhood to be adult-like rendaku, creating a
discontinuity in children’s word-processing strategies. This
study investigated factors responsible for this developmental
discontinuity. We conducted an experiment using crossmodal linguistic stimuli (prosody & orthography) to see
whether children’s orthographic knowledge affects their
rendaku strategy or not.
Our results showed that
orthographic cues affected literate children’s rendaku
processing. They were aware the correspondence between
types of orthography and word categories in Japanese.

(2) Rendaku conditions
Rendaku applies if
(a) E2 is a Yamato morpheme (native vocabulary)
and
(b) E2 contains no voiced obstruent in it (Lyman’s Law).
The rendaku conditions seems complex and difficult for
children to acquire since in order to be able to apply
rendaku properly, children must know the lexical strata and
Lyman’s Law. Lexical strata are word categories stratified
in the Japanese lexicon: Yamato, Sino-Japanese, foreign
loans, and onomatopoeia (Ito & Mester, 1995, McCawley,
1968). Lyman’s Law (Ito & Mester, 1995, Vance, 2015,
and many others), which prohibits more than one voiced
consonant within a morpheme (an element or unit of a
word), is active only in the native vocabulary. This means
that children must know which word belongs to the native
vocabulary.
Children also have to parse the E2 and decide the
applicability of rendaku immediately. How do children
acquire this seemingly complex knowledge about rendaku?
Do they know these two conditions from the beginning? Or
do they learn them in some order?
Rendaku acquisition studies have assumed that children
learn the adult’s rendaku conditions (Fukuda & Fukuda,
1999, Fukuda, 2002). However, recent psycholinguistic
studies have revealed that children do not acquire rendaku
along with the adult’s grammar.
Instead, Japanesespeaking preschoolers develop a prosodically-based
rendaku strategy (preschooler-specific rendaku strategy,
Sugimoto, 2013a).

Keywords: preschoolers; rendaku; orthography; word
category; pitch accent;

Introduction
Rendaku is a morphophonemic process in Japanese that the
initial voiceless consonant of the second element (E2) of a
compound becomes voiced (Vance, 2015).
(1) Compound Word Formation and Rendaku
E1 +
E2
→
Compound Word
ori
+ kami → origami
/k/ →/g/
‘folding’
‘paper’
‘paper folding’
Rendaku has long been studied based on the data from
adult subjects (Labrune, 2013). Neuropsychological studies
have shown that rendaku is not just a matter of
pronunciation such as English consonantal assimilation
(e.g., transcript [s] vs. transaction /s/→[z]); rendaku has
functions of signaling the syntactic (grammatical), semantic
(=meaning) aspects of E2 within a compound (Ogata, E.,
Hayshi, R., Imaizumi, S., Hirata, N., & Mori, K., 2000).
Thus, studying children’s rendaku acquisition should lead
to our deeper and comprehensive understanding of language

(3) Preschooler-specific rendaku strategy
Apply rendaku if E2 is an unaccented word.
The preschooler-specific rendaku strategy is also
observed in English-Japanese simultaneous bilinguals
(Sugimoto, 2015a).
Sugimoto (2015b) reported that
1 These conditions are not strict restrictions and there are some
exceptional cases. For the purpose of conducting experiments, we
assume and start from these conditions.

883

preliterate blind children also show the prosodically-based
preschooler-specific rendaku strategy.
Japanese is a language with a pitch accent system. Pitch
accent is a prosodic feature of a word and it differentiates
the meaning of each Japanese word. Pitch accent can be
divided into two types:
Accented and unaccented.
Accented words have a tonal rise followed by a sudden fall.
Unaccented words have no such a tonal (rise & fall) contour.
Preschooler-specific rendaku processing reflects the
distribution of pitch accent types of native vocabulary, to
which rendaku applies (Table 1). Children are aware that
rendaku does not apply every word; it applies a particular
category of words. They actively construct their own
Rendaku rule, making best use of their knowledge: Apply
rendaku if E2 is an unaccented native word.
Table 1:

(4) Research questions
Q1. Do literate preschoolers know the correspondence
between types of orthography and word category?
Q2. How do they use their orthographic knowledge in their
rendaku processing?
(5) Working Hypothesis
If literate preschoolers use their orthographic knowledge in
rendaku processing, then their rendaku patterns should
differ, depending upon types of orthography given.

Method
We used a compound noun formation task (Nicoladis, 2003,
Sugimoto, 2013a&b, 2016) to see Japanese-speaking
preschoolers’ language processing strategy described below.

Word categories and pitch accent

Pitch accent
Lexical strata
Yamato words
(=native vocabulary)
Sino-Japanese words
(vocabulary of Chinese origin)
Loan words
(excluding Sino-Japanese)

Accented words2
(examples)
29%
(ka’rasu ‘crow’)
49%
(hu’dan ‘daily’)
93%
(ke’eki ‘cake’)

Participants and ethical considerations
The total number of 73 six-year olds with hiragana &
katakana literacy living in the Tokyo dialect area
participated in our study. 40 children were assigned to the
no orthography condition (control group); 16 children were
in the hiragana condition; 17 children were in the katakana
condition.
Prior to the study, we obtained written form of parental
permission from all the participants.

Unaccented words
71%
(sakana ‘fish’)
51%
(saihu ‘purse’)
7%
(pijano ‘piano’)

（Sugimoto, 2016, data originally from Kubozono, 2006, p180）

The commonly observed children’s prosodically-based
rendaku processing strategy changes in quality around in
the early middle childhood to be adult-like rendaku,
creating a discontinuity in children’s rendaku strategies
(Sugimoto, 2015b). School age children no longer depend
on prosodic information of E2. Their rendaku patterns
become similar to those of adults being independent from
the prosody of E2. These qualitative change in children’s
rendaku processing strategy create a developmental
discontinuity.
It is easy to imagine that some developmental
changes and learning outcomes during these years might
motivate children’s rendaku strategy at around their entry
into elementary school.
What kind of development or learning motivates and
determines such changes or a discontinuity?
One possibility would be the influence of literacy. Since
three types of Japanese characters represent lexical strata, it
could be likely that children become well aware of Japanese
lexical strata and word categories along with usages of
Japanese hiragana, katakana, and kanji characters. If
literacy affects children’s rendaku processing strategy, how
and why?
The purpose of this study was to investigate factors
responsible for this developmental discontinuity. We
conducted an experiment using cross-modal linguistic
stimuli (prosody & orthography) to see whether literacy
affects children’s rendaku processing strategy or not.

Procedure
Children were tested individually in a quiet room. We went
through three trials: 4 warm-up trials, 4 comprehension
trials, and finally the 16 test trials (E1=hima’wari). In each
trial, children were shown 3 types of pictures on a laptop
computer, E1 & E2 in a random order. The experimenter
read aloud E1 and E2 and then asked the children to name
picture C (compound noun).
(6) Compound noun formation task (Sugimoto, 2016)
E1
+ E2
→
C (Compound noun)
hima’wari + ka’rasu → himawariga’rasu
‘sunflower’
‘crow’
‘sunflower crow’

The experimenter read aloud the following statements
followed by a question as in (7).
(7) Instructions in the experiment
E1: Kore-wa himawari-desu. ‘Here’s a hima’wari’
E2: Kore-wa karasu-desu. ‘Here’s a ka’rasu.’
C: Koreni namae-o tuketekudasai.
‘How would you name it?’

2 The apostrophe in Japanese accented words (e.g., ka’rasu
(=crow)) indicates the position of pitch accent.

884

In order to counterbalance possible phonotactic effects,
we divided each condition group into two subgroups and
switched types of pitch accent assignment between the
subgroups of each condition (see Tables 2 &3 in Appendix).
We also used three types of Japanese orthography
conditions (visual stimuli) as in (8).

Compound noun formation task with cross-modal
linguistic stimuli : Visual(orthography) & auditory
(speech) information
We used a modified version of compound noun
formation task, cross-modal stimuli, which used two types
of visual stimuli (picture and orthography) and auditory
stimuli (experimenter read aloud the stimuli).

(8) 3 orthography conditions
A. No orthography (control)
B. Hiragana condition
C. Katakana condition

Design and material
The experiment used a 3 factor inter-subject design:
2(pitch accent)×2(word)×2(orthography). First, the pitch
accent of E2 was controlled to two types: unaccented vs.
accented (Kubozono, 2006). We used known words and
novel words. As for novel words, we counterbalance poss

Figure 1a: No orthography condition
(control group)

Visual stimuli for each of these three conditions are
illustrated in Figures 1a-c, respectively.

Figure 1b: Hiragana condition
(からす= ‘crows’ in hiragana )

Figure 1c: Katakana condition
(カラス＝ ‘crows’ in katakana)

Measures
During the experiment, we used a SONY IC recorder (ICD
SX-1000) and recorded the children’s utterances. After the
experiment, two people, one of whom was the author,
listened separately to the recordings and transcribed them,
judging whether or not the children voiced the target
consonant. The reliability of the judgments (Cohen ’ s
kappa coefficient (Omura, 2000)) was calculated. The
agreement ratio was κ=.96, which is considered highly
reliable.
Our scoring was the following. All of the 16 compound
nouns in the test trial are subject to rendaku (see Table 2 in
Appendix). When a subject voiced the morpheme-initial
obstruent of E2, then we judged that he/she had correctly
applied rendaku; for each compound, one point was added
to the score. We calculated the total scores and subtotals by
condition (pitch accent, orthography, and word type).

Table 4: Descriptive statistics of rendaku score
Condition
Control
Hiragana
Katakana
Total
Control
Accented Words Hiragana
Katakana
（８）
Total
Unaccented
words（８）

Mean
6.2
3.38
1.82
4.56
3.58
2.44
1.76
2.9

SD
1.244
2.391
1.286
2.444
1.893
2.366
1.888
2.122

N
40
16
17
73
40
16
17
73

(8 pts. are the maximum score for each pitch-accent type)

Multiple comparisons of within-condition show
significant differences between unaccented words and
accented words in the control and the hiragana conditions
(Figure 2). In the two conditions, children used the
prosodically-based preschooler-specific rendaku strategy.
On the other hand, the katakana condition show no
significant difference between the two pitch accent types
(p<.001, 95%IC: .891-774). Thus, children in the katakana
condition did not used the preschooler-specific rendaku
strategy. Compared to the other two conditions, their
rendaku processing rates in the katakana conditions were
inhibited, but when we look at the within-group difference,
children in the katakana condition applied rendaku to
accented words more often than unaccented words.

Results
Descriptive statistics is shown in Table 4. A three-way
ANOVA found a significant interaction of pitch accent and
orthography [F(2,70)=15.061, p<.001, η 2 =.301]. The
simple effect of pitch accent was significant in the control
group and in the hiragana condition [F(1,70)=93.092,
p<.001, η 2 =.571], [F(1,70)=4.750, p=.033, η 2 =.064],
respectively. But the simple effect of pitch accent was not
significant in the katakana condition [F(1,70)=.20, p=.888,
η2 <.0001].

885

7

**

Table 5: Orthographic cues and children’s application of
rendaku
unaccented

accented

6

5

Condition
No orthography
(pictures only)
Hiragana

**

4

n.s.

3

Application of
rendaku

Use of preschoolerspecific strategy

Yes

Yes. U > A

Yes

Yes. U >A

Katakana

Yes, but highly
inhibited
(U = unaccented words, A= accented words)

2
1
0

A. Control

B. Hiragana

No. U≒A

Why, then, did preliterate preschoolers in the katakana
condition were not willing to apply rendaku to unaccented
words more often than accented words? We can think of
the following possibilities. Preliterate children may be
aware of some correspondence between types of
orthography and word categories. That is, they may know
hiragana is used for a certain category of words and
katakana for another. They may also be aware that
katakana is used to represent non-native Japanese
vocabulary, to which rendaku does not apply.
Preschoolers first define the rendaku word category
based on prosodic information, that is, pitch-accent
(preschooler-specific rendaku strategy). We only found
that our literate preschoolers can differentiate rendaku
strategies based on a rough katakana vs. non-katakana
distinction, not hiragana vs. katakana distinction. We need
their longitudinal data to consider orthographic effects on
the developmental changes in children’s language
processing.

C. Katakana

Figure 2: Rendaku Score by Condition (8pts.)

Discussion
The significant interaction of pitch accent and
orthography conditions, which indicates that literate
preschoolers were affected by orthographic cues and
showed different rendaku processing. Children in the no
orthography condition (control) and in the hiragana
condition showed similar rendaku patterns: apply rendaku
to unaccented E2s. But children in the katakana condition
showed a different rendaku pattern: they did not apply
rendaku to unaccented words, contrary to the other two
groups. When katakana is given, which represents foreign
loan words in Japanese, children’s rendaku processing was
inhibited. Children in (c) did not to apply rendaku to nonnative vocabulary as much as those in the other conditions
did.
It follows from this that the katakana condition made
children assume the word stimuli were nonnative
vocabulary. Katakana is used for foreign loan words in the
Japanese writing system. Children seem to know katakana
is used for non-native vocabulary, and judged that the
stimuli (both existent native vocabulary and novel words
were given) were non-native vocabulary, to which rendaku
does not apply.
Our results suggest that literate preschoolers used
orthographic cues in rendaku processing. Preschoolers
used different strategies, depending on types of orthography
provided in the stimuli.
Preschoolers in the ‘no orthography’ and the hiragana
conditions showed the similar tendency: they applied
rendaku to unaccented words more often than accented
words while those in the katakana condition seemed
reluctant to apply it. It follows from these that children
attend to orthographic cues but children still use
prosodically-based rendaku strategy.

Conclusion
Japanese speaking preschoolers, when they have no
orthographic knowledge, first define the rendaku category
based on pitch-accent, i.e., preschooler-specific rendaku
strategy. After acquiring orthography, children seem to
gradually change their rendaku processing strategy, using
information such as the relationship between orthography
and word category. Something more is needed for their
redefinition of the rendaku category, which may cause the
developmental change in their rendaku processing strategy.
We need developmental paths of individual children.

Acknowledgments
The author is grateful for all the participants of this study.
This work was financially supported in part by JSPS
KAKENHI Grant #26580080 and “The Japanese Lexicon:
A Rendaku Encyclopedia”（Project leader: Prof. Timothy J.
Vance, National Institute for National Language and
Japanese Linguistics）.

886

Nakamura, C, M. Arai, & R. Mazuka. (2012). Immediate
use of prosody and context in predicting a syntactic
structure. Cognition 125: 317-323.
Nicoladis, E. (2003). What compound nouns mean to
preschool children. Brain & Language, 84, 38-49.
Nicoladis, E. (2007). Preschool children’s acquisition of
compounds. In Libben & Jarema (eds.), The
Representation and Processing of Compound Words.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ogata, E., Hayshi, R., Imaizumi, S., Hirata, N., & Mori, K.
(2000). Neural Processing Mechanism for Rendaku
and Accent Rules in Compound Word Recognition.
Onsei, 99 (678), 17-24, IEICE.
Ota, M. (2003). The Development of Lexical Pitch Accent
System: An Autosegmental Analysis. Canadian Journal of
Linguistics/ Revue canadienne de linguistique, 48(3/4),
357-383.
Sato, Y., Y. Sogabe, R. Mazuka. (2010). Development of
hemispheric specialization for lexical pitch accent in
Japanese infants. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22,
2503-2513.
Stoel-Gammon, C. (2011). Relationships between lexical
and phonological development in young children. Journal
of Child Language 38, 1-34.
Sugimoto, T. (2013a). The role of pitch accent in the
acquisition of Rendaku. Poster presented at the 3rd
International Conference on Phonetics and Phonology,
Tokyo.
Sugimoto, T. (2013b). The acquisition of Rendaku: The
lexical strata and the Lyman’s Law. Proceedings of the
146th Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of Japan,
67-72.
Sugimoto, T. (2015a). Development of preschooler-specific
language processing strategy: A longitudinal study.
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of Japan Society
of Developmental Psychology, 238. University of Tokyo.
Sugimoto, T. (2015b). Children’s language processing
during the transition from early childhood to middle
childhood. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of Japan
Society of Educational Psychology, 332. Niigata
University, Japan.
Sugimoto, T. (2015c). Children’s acquisition of rendaku.
Talk presented at Rendaku Workshop. University of
Bordeaux, France.
Sugimoto, T. (2015d). Developmental aspects of
preschoolers’ language processing and their acquisition
patterns of rendaku. Journal of University of Tokyo
Graduate School of Education Vol. 54. 261-270.
Sugimoto, T. (2016). Acquisition of rendaku by bilingual
children: A Case study. NINJAL Research Papers11, 1-9.
Vance, T. (2015). Rendaku. In H. Kubozono (ed.),
Handbook of Japanese Phonetics and Phonology, 397-441.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

References
Ambridge, B. & E. Lieven. (2011). Child Language
Acquisition: Contrasting Theoretical Approaches.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bauer, L. (2011). Typology of compounds. In Lieber &
Štekauer (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Compounding.
Oxford.
Clark, E. et al. (1985). Compound Nouns and Category
Structure in Young Children. Child Development 56, 8494.
Clark, E. & Berman, R. (1987). Types of linguistic
knowledge: interpreting and producing compound nouns.
Journal of Child Language, 14, 547-567.
Devescovi, A. et al. (2005). A Cross-linguistic study of the
relationship between grammar and lexical development.
Journal of Child Language 32, 759-789.
Di Sciullo, A. (2009). Why are compounds a part of human
language? A view from asymmetry theory. In Lieber &
Štekauer (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Compounding,
145-177. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Endo, T. (2000). Observation methods. In Omura, A. (ed.),
Research
methods
in
educational
psychology
(=kyouikusinrigaku-no gihou). Tokyo: Fukumura Shuppan.
Fukuda, S.E. & Fukuda, S. (1999). The Operation of
Rendaku in the Japanese Specifically Language Impaired:
A Preliminary Investigation. Folia Phoniatr Logop 51, 3654.
Fukuda, S.E. & Fukuda, S. (2001). An Asymmetric
Impairment in Japanese Complex Verbs in Specific
Language Impairment. Cognitive Studies, 8-1, 63-84.
Ito, J. & Mester, A. (1986). The phonology of voicing in
Japanese: Theoretical consequences for morphological
accessibility. Linguistic Inquiry, 17, 49-73. MIT.
Ito, J. & Mester, A. (1995). Japanese Phonology. In
Goldsmith, J. (ed.) The Handbook of Phonological Theory.
Oxford: Blakwell.
Ito, J. & Mester, A. (2001). Alternations and distributional
patterns in Japanese phonology. Japanese Journal of
Phonetics, 5-2, 54-60.
Labrune, L. (2013). A cross-linguistic approach to rendakulike compound-markers, with special reference to Korean
and Basque. Talk presented at 3rd International
Conference on Phonetics & Phonology, Tokyo.
Kubozono, H. (2006). Where loanword prosody come
from? A case study of Japanese loanword accent. Lingua
116, 1140-1170.
Kubozono, H. (2011). Japanese pitch accent. In van
Oostendrop, M., Ewen, C., Hume, E., & Rice, K. (eds.)
The Blackwell companion to phonology. Vol.5, 2879-2907.
Oxford: Blackwell.
McCawley, J. (1968). The phonological component of a
grammar of Japanese. The Hague: Mouton.
Mckean, C. et al. (2012). Functional reorganization in the
developing lexicon: Separable and changing influences of
lexical and phonological variables on children’s fastmapping. Journal of Child Language ,39, 1-29.

887

Appendix
Table 2: List of stimuli for 16 E2s used in the test trial
8 known words

8 novel words (Old Japanese)

Accented

Unaccented

Accented/Unaccented#

Unaccented/Accented #

1

ta’nuki ‘racoon dog’

sakura ‘cherry blossom’

tokama ‘reaping hook ’

tekona ‘virgin’

2

ka’rasu ‘crow’

tsukue ‘desk’

hikime ‘long arrow’

hokai ‘food container’

3

ho’uki ‘bloom’

hatake ‘field’

tatara ‘bellows’

4

ho’taru ‘light bug’

kuruma ‘car’

sasara
‘an old musical instrument’
koromo ‘Kimono’

hokora ‘god’s palace’

(E1: himawari ‘sunflower’; E2: 16 words listed in Table 2)
#

For 8 novel words, we created two types of pitch accent assignment patterns to counterbalance possible phonotacitic effects
(see Table 3 below). In particular, we divided children in each of three conditions into two groups and used different pitch
accent assignment for each group in each condition.

Table 3: Two types of pitch accent assignment
Groups
Novel word stimuli (E2)
tekona, hokai, tatara, hokora
tokama, hikime, sasara, koromo

Group A of each condition

Group B of each condition

Accented
e.g., te’kona (antipenulte)
Unaccented
e.g., tokama (no pitch accent)

Unaccented
e.g., tekona (no pitch accent)
Accented
e.g., to’kama (antipenulte)

888

