Children consider others’ expected costs and rewards when deciding what to teach
Sophie Bridgers1 (sbridge@stanford.edu), Julian Jara-Ettinger2 (jjara@mit.edu) & Hyowon Gweon1 (hyo@stanford.edu)
1 Department

2

of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139

Abstract

is unusual until she attempts to turn it on. As a knowledgeable host, you can anticipate and pre-empt the trouble she
might have by telling her how the faucet works in advance.
As such, communicative prosociality often relies on our ability to proactively anticipate, select, and provide information
others need before they even realize they needed it.
Our example above illustrates an important consideration
in proactively informing others: what others are capable (or
incapable) of achieving on their own. Though humans learn
a great deal through self-guided exploration (e.g., Bonawitz
et al., 2011; Schulz, 2012; Sim & Xu, 2014), truly naı̈ve
agents (e.g. your guest in the bathroom) may tediously struggle through trial-and-error only to arrive at a poor solution.
In these cases, learning from knowledgeable others is particularly valuable. They not only can provide new information,
but also can prioritize information that would be too difficult,
time-consuming, or perhaps even impossible for the learner
to acquire by herself.
Prospectively reasoning about the information others need
requires a sophisticated use of Theory of Mind; one must reason about their social partner’s knowledge, goals, and competencies, to infer what would be useful for them to know
(Strauss, Ziv, & Stein, 2002; Tomasello & Carpenter, 2007).
Research suggests children readily consider others’ mental
states to selectively provide information that is useful for others. For instance, 5- to 7-year-olds adjust the amount of information they teach based on the learner’s prior knowledge
(Gweon, Shafto, & Schulz, 2014) and goals (Gweon, Chu,
& Schulz, 2014), omitting unnecessary or irrelevant information to communicate just enough to support accurate inference. Children’s tendency to communicate what is useful and
relevant might reflect sensitivity to the value of information;
their resistance to provide unnecessary information might reflect their desire to reduce the overall costs of information
transfer.
In these studies, however, providing less information
meant lower costs both for the children themselves as teachers
(in terms of demonstrating the evidence) and for the learner
(in terms of processing the evidence). It is thus unclear
whether children were simply driven by the desire to reduce
their own costs of teaching, or by the desire to reduce the
learner’s costs of learning. If the latter is true, children should
be able to prioritize teaching information that decreases the
learner’s costs of learning even when children’s own costs of
teaching are equated.
Here, we show that children decide how to help others by
considering the expected costs and rewards from the helpee’s
perspective. More specifically, we propose that children’s
choices of potential prosocial actions reflect the use of a naı̈ve

Humans have an intuitive sense of how to help and inform
others even in the absence of a specific request. How do we
achieve this? Here we propose that even young children can
reason about others’ expected costs and rewards to flexibly
decide what is best for others. We asked children to choose
one of two toys to teach to another agent while systematically
varying the relative costs and rewards of discovering each toy’s
functions. Children’s choices were consistent with the predictions of a computational model that maximizes others’ utilities
by minimizing their expected costs and maximizing their expected rewards. These results suggest that even early in life,
children draw rational inferences about others’ costs and benefits, and choose to communicate information that maximizes
their utilities.
Keywords: social cognition, prosocial decision-making, communication, pedagogy, naı̈ve utility calculus

Introduction
Life is a series of small and big decisions. While some of
these decisions involve choosing what is best for ourselves,
frequently they are made with other people in mind. Humans,
even in early childhood, often deviate from egoistic behavior and act to benefit others (e.g., Fehr & Fischbacher, 2003;
Warneken & Tomasello, 2006).
Concerns for others not only motivate commendable sacrifices but also underlie some of the most mundane communicative acts. Imagine, for instance, that a guest at your house
is going to the restroom to wash her hands. To complete this
goal, you know she will need to turn on the lights and operate the faucet, and you can predict whether she will have
any trouble with these tasks. Based on this, you might prioritize communicating the things that are trickier to figure out
(e.g., an unusual faucet, “first turn the lever and pull it towards
you”), while leaving simpler things untold (e.g., a normal
light switch, “flip up the switch to turn on the lights”). Despite the apparent simplicity of this decision, choosing what
to communicate based on what you think others need to know
and what they can figure out by themselves is far from trivial.
There are many ways to help and inform others, but our
time and resources are limited. Therefore, we must prioritize
what to share and how to help. How do we constrain such decisions? Offering help or information can be straightforward
when it is clear what our social partners want or need. Under these circumstances, even preverbal infants help others by
handing objects out of reach (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006),
providing unknown information (Liszkowski, Carpenter, &
Tomasello, 2009), and fulfilling others’ desires (Repacholi &
Gopnik, 1997). However, naı̈ve agents might not know what
kind of help they need, or that they need help at all. For instance, your guest has no way of knowing that your faucet

710

utility calculus (Jara-Ettinger, Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz,
2015); children reason about others’ costs and rewards and
incorporate them into a single concept of utility to prioritize
actions that have the highest net utility for others.
From offering physical aid to providing useful information,
helping others can take various forms (Tomasello, 2009).
Here, we focus on children’s information sharing to test our
hypothesis. Prior research on children’s inferences and evaluations in pedagogical contexts suggests that children hold
strong expectations about the information knowledgeable informants ought to select for naı̈ve learners (e.g., Bonawitz et
al., 2011; Gweon, Pelton, Konopka, & Schulz, 2014; Gweon,
Shafto, & Schulz, 2014), and even act as helpful informants
themselves (Gweon, Chu, & Schulz, 2014; Gweon, Shafto,
& Schulz, 2014). Thus, children’s information selection as
teachers is an ideal case study for examining children’s prosocial communicative decisions. In the following sections, we
first describe our behavioral experiment, then present our
theoretical predictions alongside their formal instantiation in
computational models, and finally compare these predictions
to our empirical data.

cost of discovery (the difficulty of spontaneously figuring out
how to activate the toy; Easy vs. Hard), and the relative reward of their causal effect (its salience; Dull vs. Cool). Easy
(low-cost) toys had a single button that generated an effect;
figuring out these toys was nearly immediate (2s on average)
and usually involved one action. Hard (high-cost) toys had
one large button and 6 identical small buttons, 5 of which
were inert and one that had to be pressed simultaneously with
the large button to generate an effect; figuring out these toys
took a long time (82s on average) and usually involved many
failed actions. However, after discovery, both toys were quite
easy to activate. Dull (low-reward) toys played music, and
Cool (high-reward) toys had a plastic orb that lit up different colors and spun around. The names of the experimental
conditions describe the two toys used. Figure 2d provides a
schematic of the toys.
Procedure All conditions began with the Discovery Phase.
The experimenter introduced the participant to two novel
toys. She said that she did not know how the toys worked,
and needed the child’s help to figure them out. Children explored both toys until they activated them. For Hard toys,
if children stopped exploring before successfully activating
the toy, the experimenter encouraged them to continue with
a series of prompts (e.g., “Hmm, I wonder what would happen if you pressed two buttons.”). The experimenter delivered these prompts as spontaneous suggestions and with uncertainty to prevent children from thinking she knew how the
toys worked. Critically, the experimenter never explicitly told
or showed children how to activate the toys. Once children
figured out both toys, they were asked to demonstrate each
toy twice (order counterbalanced).
Next came the Choice Phase. In the experimental conditions, the experimenter told children that she had a friend who
knew nothing about the toys but was going to play with them
later all by herself. The experimenter said that before her
friend played alone with the toys, she would teach her friend
how just one of the toys worked. Children were then asked:
“How should I help her? Which toy should I teach her?” Children selected a toy and were asked to explain their choice. In
the Play condition, the experimenter asked children to choose
a toy with which they wanted to play (there was no mention
of a friend), and allowed the child to play with it briefly.
Last was the Manipulation-check Phase. Here, children
were asked (1) which toy was harder to figure out, and (2)
which toy had a cooler effect, with the option of answering
“same” for both questions.

Experiment
In the current study, children first learned about two novel,
causal toys. They were then told that a naı̈ve learner wanted to
figure out both toys, and were asked which toy would be best
to teach her if they had to choose just one. We systematically
manipulated the relative difficulty for discovering how to activate the toys (costs) and the attractiveness of the toys’ causal
effects (rewards) across four experimental conditions. Critically, the costs for demonstrating (teaching) each toy were
approximately the same, because once children knew how
they worked, both toys were easy to activate. Additionally,
unlike previous studies, children never actually demonstrated
the toy they selected. We made these decisions in order to
minimize the effect of children’s own costs and rewards on
their decisions.
We selected 5 – 7 years as our target age range for two
reasons. First, children this age can consider others’ mental states to decide what to communicate as teachers (Gweon,
Shafto, & Schulz, 2014). Second, they can infer and integrate
the expected costs and rewards of others’ actions in their reasoning (see Jara-Ettinger, Gweon, et al., 2015). Thus, we expected that children this age might be capable of simulating
another person’s utility to make decisions on their behalf.

Methods

Computational Modeling and Predictions

Participants We recruited 126 5-, 6-, and 7-year-olds
(M(SD) = 6.36(0.96) yrs, 54% female) from a local museum.
An additional 7 children were excluded from analysis due
to difficulty understanding English (5) and unknown date of
birth (2). We randomly assigned children to the Play condition or one of four experimental (teach) conditions: (1) EasyDull v. Hard-Cool; (2) Easy-Cool v. Easy-Dull; (3) EasyDull v. Hard-Dull; (4) Easy-Cool v. Hard-Dull.
Stimuli We constructed four toys that differed in their relative

To help us interpret our results, we implemented a set of formal computational accounts of our main and alternative hypotheses that capture how children should behave under different considerations. Following recent theoretical and empirical work on social reasoning via a naı̈ve utility calculus,
these models are based on the assumption that people reason
about others in terms of their utilities (Jara-Ettinger, Gweon,
et al., 2015; Jara-Ettinger, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2015). In

711

the context of our experiment, we assume that participants estimate each teaching plan’s utility, and then choose the plan
with the highest net utility for the learner. Here, a teaching
plan refers to the participant’s decision of which toy the experimenter should teach to a naı̈ve learner; since the learner
will play with both toys, deciding what is best to teach involves a consideration of both the toy that will be taught and
the toy that the learner will figure out on her own.

That is, given two toys, Toy X and Toy Y, our model compares two teaching plans: TeachX (teach how Toy X works
and leave Toy Y for the learner to figure out) and TeachY
(teach how Toy Y works and leave Toy X for the learner), and
computes the utility of each plan through the equations shown
in Table 1.
The cost functions were determined by assuming that each
button press results in a constant cost set to 1. (Using a different value does not change our results because all other parameters are defined in terms of this basic cost unit). Thus, a toy’s
activation cost equals the number of button presses required
to activate it. A toy’s expected discovery cost (as estimated
by participants) was set to the expected number of buttons
the learner would need to press to discover how to activate
the toy, assuming that the learner would first try simple activation sequences (pressing one button at a time) and only try
more complex and costly sequences (trying combinations of
two buttons) once the simpler hypothesis space was depleted.
Indeed, when participants interacted with the high-cost toys,
most children began by pressing each button once and only
attempted combinations of two buttons once they had pressed
each button individually.
The toys’ rewards were treated as variables, allowing for
the possibility that different participants assign different rewards to each toy. The music reward was set within a range
that captured rewards large enough that could surmount the
expected costs of discovery of either toy, as well as rewards
that were too small for a teacher to deem the effect worthy
of discovery (from 1 to 45; as the expected discovery cost of
the more costly toy is ∼ 22. Our model results are robust to
different reward ranges). For each possible music reward, we
set a uniform distribution over the range of rewards for the
light-up toy. This range was selected so that the probability
that the lights’ reward surpasses the music’s reward matched
the empirical data obtained from children’s choice of which
effect was “cooler” in the Manipulation-check Phase.
Alternative Models While we assume that children consider
both the expected costs and rewards of each teaching plan
(which includes both the toy that will be taught and the toy
that will be left untaught), it is also possible that children instead use simpler strategies and only reason about a subset of
these variables.
Thus in addition to the full model, we implemented simpler (“lesioned”) models that correspond to four plausible alternative hypotheses. First, children might only be concerned
about the relative difficulty of the toys, and so only consider
the costs the learner will incur when discovering the untaught

A learner’s expected utility can be described as the difference between her expected rewards and costs. In our experiment, a helpful agent would maximize the learner’s overall
utility by making a choice that maximizes her expected rewards (showing her a novel toy with high value) and minimizes her expected costs (showing her a novel toy that would
require a lot of time and effort to figure out alone).
If children prioritize providing information that would
maximize the learner’s expected utility, their teaching decisions should reflect the relative costs and rewards of the toys
under consideration. More specifically, we test our predictions across four conditions. First, when one toy is both more
rewarding than the other and expected to be more difficult
(i.e., incur higher costs) for the learner, children should show
a strong preference for teaching this toy and leave the other
toy (low reward, low cost) for the learner to discover on her
own (Easy-Dull v. Hard-Cool condition). When the two toys
are equally costly to figure out but differ in reward, children should prefer the toy with a higher reward (Easy-Cool
v. Easy-Dull). If the two toys are equally rewarding but differ
in cost, children should choose the toy that is higher in cost
(Easy-Dull v. Hard-Dull). Finally, when one toy is higher in
cost and the other higher in reward, it is unclear which teaching decision would have the higher net utility for the learner,
and so children might be split between the two toys (EasyCool v. Hard-Dull).
Model Implementation In computing the utilities, our main
(full) model considered the learner’s expected utilities under
each teaching plan as the linear sum of the following components: the cost the learner would incur and the reward she
would obtain when activating the toy she was taught (activation cost, CA , and activation reward, RA , respectively), the expected cost the learner would incur to discover how the other
toy works and the reward she would obtain upon discovery
(discovery cost, CD and discovery reward, RD , respectively),
and the reward the teacher would obtain from activating the
toy she teaches (here we assume that the cost of teaching each
toy is negligibly different since both toys are easy to activate,
but the results are the same if this assumption is removed).

U(TeachX ) =
U(TeachY ) =

Activation reward
+RA (ToyX )
+RA (ToyY )

Activation cost
−CA (ToyX )
−CA (ToyY )

Discovery reward
+RD (ToyY )
+RD (ToyX )

Discovery cost
−CD (ToyY )
−CD (ToyX )

Teacher reward
+RA (ToyX )
+RA (ToyY )

Table 1: RA and RD determine the toy’s positive reward from activation and discovery, respectively (which are the same), CA
determines the negative activation cost for a knowledgeable agent, and CD determines the negative discovery cost for a naı̈ve
agent.

712

toy, and when activating the taught toy (costs-only model).
Alternatively, once children know how each of the toys work,
they might only focus on teaching what is cool and just consider the rewards the learner obtains after successfully activating each toy (rewards-only model). Yet another possibility
is that children consider both the costs and rewards but are
only concerned with what is being taught and do not think
about the experience the learner will have trying to activate
the untaught toy (taught-only model). Finally, children might
take what is being taught for granted and focus instead on
the costs and rewards of having to figure out the other toy
(untaught-only model). Table 2 summarizes the different considerations of the full and alternative models. We can assess
the relative performance of these different models by comparing how well each model’s predictions correspond to children’s choices.

Harder
Hard−Dull v. Easy−Cool
Hard−Dull v. Easy−Dull
Easy−Dull v. Easy−Cool
Hard−Cool v. Easy−Dull
(Play) Hard−Dull v. Easy−Cool
0.0

0.5

1.0 0.0
Proportion Choice

0.5

1.0

Figure 1: The proportion of children who selected one toy as
harder (left panel) and one toy as cooler (right panel) in each
condition. Order of toy names per condition reflects order of
bars. ‘Same’ judgments are in grey.
discovery cost (Easy-Dull v. Hard-Dull), children selected
the harder toy (21/25; two-tailed binomial test, p = 0.001),
and finally, when cost and reward were pitted against each
other (Easy-Cool v. Hard-Dull), children’s choices were split
(10/25; two-tailed binomial test, p = 0.424).
One might think children were at chance in the Easy-Cool
v. Hard-Dull condition not because one toy was higher in rewards and the other higher in cost, but rather because the two
toys were equally rewarding. Perhaps, adding buttons to the
“Dull” toy made it more interesting, leading more children
to choose the Hard-Dull toy. To address this possibility, we
compared the results from this condition to the Play condition. In this condition, children overwhelmingly preferred to
play with the Easy-Cool toy (20/25; two-tailed binomial test,
p = 0.004), showing a significant difference from their tendency to teach this toy in the Easy-Cool v. Hard-Dull experimental condition (two-tailed Fisher’s Exact test, p = 0.009).
These results confirm that children’s responses in the EasyCool v. Hard-Dull condition were driven by a consideration
of both the expected rewards and costs for the learner.
The pattern of children’s choices across conditions suggests they were indeed reasoning about the relative expected
costs and rewards of figuring out how different toys worked
for a naı̈ve learner and considered these factors when deciding what should be taught. Figure 2a provides a summary of
children’s responses in the Choice-phase.
Model Fit To evaluate model performance we calculated the
likelihood of each model generating the empirical data. Since
our models are idealized formalizations, we added a small
probability α ∈ (0, 1) that any given participant may get distracted and respond at random. Thus, for each model we
assumed that children sample a response from the model’s
distribution with probability 1 − α and that they give a random response with probability α. Here we present results
with the noise parameter α = 0.1 (see Model Implementa-

Table 2: Model space. Each model captures different considerations that participants can use to decide what to teach.

Results and Discussion
In the Manipulation-check Phase, most children thought Hard
toys were harder than Easy toys, Cool toys were cooler than
Dull toys, and that they were equally hard or cool when these
dimensions were held constant; this confirmed that our manipulation of the toys’ relative costs and rewards was successful. However, compared to the difficulty manipulation, there
was less agreement about the toys’ relative “coolness” (i.e.,
some children thought the music was cooler than the lights).
Figure 1 provides a summary of children’s responses.
Children’s choices of which toy was best to teach varied
systematically with respect to the relative costs and rewards
of the toys. When one toy was higher in both discovery cost
and reward (Easy-Dull v. Hard-Cool), children strongly preferred the experimenter teach that toy (21/25; two-tailed binomial test, p = 0.001). When the toys differed only in reward
(Easy-Cool v. Easy-Dull), children showed a mild preference
for the experimenter to teach the cooler toy (18/26; two-tailed
binomial test, p = 0.076). 1 When the toys differed only in
1 Children’s

Cooler

revealed that many considered the music (“Dull” effect) cooler than
the lights (“Cool” effect), indicating that they were also choosing the
toy with the higher expected rewards.

explanations for why they selected the Easy-dull toy

713

(c)
Easy
Dull

Easy
Cool

Easy
Dull

Easy
Cool

(b)

Full model

1.0

0.5

0.5

Hard
Dull

Hard
Cool

Easy
Dull

Hard
Dull

Hard
Dull

Rewards−only

Taught−only

Untaught−only

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.0

Costs−only

1.0

Model Prediction

(Play)
Easy
Cool

Model Prediction

Proportion Choice

(a)
1.0

Easy-Dull Easy-Cool
Hard-Cool Easy-Dull

Easy-Dull
Hard-Dull

Easy-Cool
Hard-Dull

(d)

Hard-Cool

Hard-Dull

Easy-Cool

Easy-Dull

Figure 2: (a) Proportion of children selecting each toy in the choice phase (teaching conditions outlined in black and play
condition indicated in blue). Error bars are bootstrapped 95% CI. (b) The full model predictions. (c) The predictions of (from
left to right): Costs-only, Rewards-only, Taught-only, and Untaught-only models (d) Schematic of the four toys used varying in
cost (Easy/Hard) and reward (Cool/Dull). Condition names reflect the two toys used.
toy (so as to let the learner discover the high-reward alone).
Instead, participants preferred to teach the more rewarding
toy, as the full model predicted. Altogether, the full model
was the only model that accurately predicted responses in all
four teaching conditions. Figure 2b-c provides a summary of
each model’s predictions.

tion section). Our qualitative conclusions, however, hold
for a wide range of noise and persistence parameters (see
https://osf.io/p29zr/ for model code and predictions).
The full model had the highest likelihood of generating
the observed data across conditions. After computing each
model’s likelihood, we computed the ratio between the full
model’s likelihood and each alternative model’s likelihood.
Thus, for each alternative model, a value below 1 indicates
that it explains the data better than the full model, and a value
over 1 suggests that the full model better explains the data.
All model comparisons favored the full model by at least 3
orders of magnitude (all likelihood ratios > 1e4). In short,
our empirical data provided compelling support for the full
model over the four alternative models.

General Discussion
We propose that children consider others’ expected rewards
and costs of learning when deciding what to helpfully communicate to a naı̈ve leaner, in a way consistent with a naı̈ve
utility calculus. Children’s behavior in our teaching conditions was unambiguously most consistent with a model that
took into account the costs and rewards of both the taught
and untaught toys, suggesting children think about what the
learner ought to know and what would be more difficult for
her to discover on her own. When the toys only differed in
value, children selected to teach the cooler toy, maximizing
the utility for the learner by increasing her expected rewards.
Similarly, when the toys only differed in discovery cost, children selected the harder toy, maximizing the utility for the
learner by decreasing her expected costs. When cost and reward were pitted against each other, children were split, suggesting a desire to simultaneously increase the learner’s rewards (teaching the cooler toy) and reduce her costs (teaching
the harder toy).
It is possible that children who taught the Hard toys did
so not because the learner would find them more difficult but
simply because children received help on these toys (i.e., experimenter prompts). However, we think this is unlikely. If
children were using this simpler strategy, they should prefer
the Hard toy in all conditions where it was used, but in the
Easy-Cool v. Hard-Dull condition, children were at chance.
Children’s explanations provide additional support that the
learner’s expected costs and rewards were indeed informing
their choices: Children spontaneously appealed to differences
in cost and reward, and their tendency to do so varied appro-

To better understand why the data are strong evidence for
the full model, we consider the alternatives. The alternative
models failed to predict participant performance in various
conditions. Here we focus on their most salient limitations,
which shed light on why the full model captures participants’
judgments.
First, the costs-only model failed to capture data in the
Easy-Cool v. Hard-Dull condition. According to this model,
participants should always select whichever toy is most difficult for the learner to discover alone. If this were true, then
participants should have preferred to teach the high-cost toy,
but instead, their choices were split, as the full model predicted. The rewards-only model’s critical failure was in the
Easy-Dull v. Hard-Dull condition, where it predicted that participants should have no preference, when participants in fact
preferred to teach the high-cost toy. The taught-only model
also failed to predict the Easy-Dull v. Hard-Dull condition,
as it predicted that the easier toy should be taught (even for a
knowledgeable agent, the low-cost toy is slightly easier to activate than the high-cost toy). Last, the untaught-only model
most notably failed to predict responses in the Easy-Cool v.
Easy-Dull condition. Because the costs were matched, this
model predicted that children should teach the less rewarding

714

priately with the dimensions of contrast across the particular
toys used. For example, they appealed more to reward in the
Easy-Cool v. Easy-Dull condition but more to cost in the
Easy-Dull v. Hard-Dull condition. In sum children in our
experiment did appear to reason about the relative utilities of
teaching one toy or the other and selected the teaching plan
with the higher overall utility for the learner.
Simulating an unknown person’s expected costs and rewards across two goals (toys) and integrating these considerations to determine the best teaching plan requires complicated perspective taking with many unobservable variables.
We did not find any age differences in our experiment, but it
is possible that younger children would perform differently
on this task. Perhaps, a consideration of reward comes online
before a consideration of cost, or perhaps the ability to integrate these variables improves across development. Comparing younger children’s teaching decisions to older children’s
and the predictions of our different models would shed light
on how a naı̈ve utility calculus might develop.
Additionally, it is an open question how much of children’s
ability to reason about the rewards and costs of another person’s exploration depended on their own experience interacting with the toys. Even adults struggle to take the perspective of others who know less or believe something different
than they do (Sommerville, Bernstein, & Meltzoff, 2013), so
one might expect that after successfully activating the toys,
children would fail to recognize that a toy would be hard
for a naı̈ve person to figure out. We are currently examining whether children’s teaching selections differ when they
are explicitly taught how the toys work rather than discover
how to activate them through play.
In our experiment and model, the teacher is assumed to
take on the learner’s utility function and to select what is
best to teach based on the expected costs and rewards for the
learner. However, teaching is a dyadic situation wherein the
teacher’s own costs and rewards are presumably also a consideration. Critically in our experiment, we aimed to see if
children understood that teaching can reduce the costs and
increase the rewards of learning for another person. In order
to examine this, we controlled the potential costs and rewards
of teaching by making the toys, once known, simple to activate and having children make decisions about what someone else should teach, rather than act as teachers themselves.
Exploring children’s behavior as actual teachers, as well as
situations where certain toys are more rewarding or costly to
teach will give us a deeper understanding of how we reason
about the utility of communicating certain things over others
in real-world social interactions.
Deciding how to act prosocially on behalf of others is no
trivial feat. By considering the expected costs and benefits
for others of the aid we could provide, we can constrain our
decisions of how best to help and inform others. While learning from knowledgeable teachers is useful for acquiring accurate beliefs about the world, not all knowledge is equally useful; some information leads to higher rewards (e.g., knowing

where to forage for food), and some leads us to bypass significant costs or even risks (e.g., learning how to hide from
predators). The results of the present study provide compelling evidence that children are able to reason about the
expected rewards and costs of learning from the perspective
of the learner, and that these considerations inform their decisions of what is most useful to communicate.

Acknowledgments
We thank Avani Singh for help with data coding, and Ellen
Markman, Noah Goodman, and Josh Tenenbaum for their
helpful feedback. We also thank the Palo Alto Junior Museum & Zoo and the families who participated. This work
was supported by the Varieties of Understanding grant from
the John Templeton Foundation to H.G. and a NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship to S.B.

References
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D., Spelke, E.,
& Schulz, L. E. (2011). The double-edged sword of pedagogy:
Instruction limits spontanesous exploration and discovery. Cognition, 120.
Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2003). The nature of human altruism.
Nature, 425.
Gweon, H., Chu, V., & Schulz, L. E. (2014). To give a fish or to
teach how to fish? children weigh costs and benefits in considering what information to transmit. In Proceedings of the 36th
annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Gweon, H., Pelton, H., Konopka, J., & Schulz, L. E. (2014). Sins of
omission: Children selectively explore when agents fail to tell the
whole truth. Cognition, 132.
Gweon, H., Shafto, P., & Schulz, L. E. (2014). Children consider
prior knowledge and the cost of information both in learning from
and teaching others. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E.
(2015). Children’s understanding of the costs and rewards underlying rational action. Cognition, 140.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (2015). Not so
innocent: Toddlers inferences about costs and culpability. Psychological science, 26(5).
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Twelvemonth-olds communicate helpfully and appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners. Cognition, 108.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning about
desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-month-olds. Developmental
Psychology, 33.
Schulz, L. (2012). The origins of inquiry: Inductive inference and
exploration in early childhood. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16.
Sim, Z., & Xu, F. (2014). Acquiring inductive constraints from selfgenerated evidence. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Sommerville, J. A., Bernstein, D. M., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2013).
Measuring beliefs in centimeters: Private knowledge biases
preschoolers’ and adults’ representation of others’ beliefs. Child
Development, 84.
Strauss, S., Ziv, M., & Stein, A. (2002). Teaching as a natural
cognition and its relations to preschoolers developing theory of
mind. Cognitive Development, 17.
Tomasello, M. (2009). Why we cooperate. MIT Press.
Tomasello, M., & Carpenter, M. (2007). Shared intentionality. Developmental Science, 10.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in human
infants and young chimpanzees. Science, 311.

715

