Comparing competing views of analogy making using eye-tracking technology
Yannick Glady, Robert M. French, & Jean-Pierre Thibaut
yannick.glady@gmail.com, {jean-pierre.thibaut, robert.french}@u-bourgogne.fr
LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Pôle AAFE
21065 DIJON. FRANCE

Abstract
We used eye-tracking to study the time course of analogical
reasoning in adults. We considered proportions of looking
times and saccades. The main question was whether or not
adults would follow the same search strategies for different
types of analogical problems (Scene Analogies vs. Classical
A:B:C:D vs a Scene version of A:B::C:D). We then compared
these results to the predictions of various models of analogical
reasoning. Results revealed a picture of common search
patterns with local adaptations to the specifics of each
paradigm in both looking-time duration and the number and
types of saccades. These results are discussed in terms of
conceptions of analogical reasoning.
Keywords: Analogical reasoning; eye tracking; analogy
tasks; strategies

Introduction
Analogical reasoning is a central feature of human cognition
(Gentner & Holyoak, 1997; Holyoak, 2012; Hofstadter &
Sander, 2013) and involves the transfer of relations from a
source domain to a target domain. Analogical reasoning has
been extensively studied from adult experimental,
developmental and modeling perspectives and several
general models have been proposed in order to characterize
this form of reasoning in both children and adults (see
French 2002; Gentner & Forbus, 2011, Holyoak, 2012).
The present work uses eye tracking data to study the
temporal organization of the search for a solution in adults.,.
Specifically, we compare different types of analogical
reasoning tasks (Scene analogies, a standard ABCD task, a
Scene version of the ABCD task -- see Figures 1a, 1b, and
1c, respectively), and the search profiles resulting from
participants' analysis of the stimuli for each of them. In eye
tracking studies, it has been shown that there is a correlation
between the amount of attention paid to a particular item
and the gaze-fixation (Deubel & Schneider, 1996; He &
Kowler, 1992), and between the fixation time associated
with a given item and its informativeness (Nodine,
Carmody, & Kundel, 1978). All of this argues in favor of
using eye tracking technology to study analogy-making
strategies. Indeed, any analogical reasoning task involves
analyzing the stimuli, comparing them, and mapping in
order to find the relations shared by the two compared
domains, this according to a temporal sequence.
Existing models of analogy make different predictions
regarding how and when participants focus on and compare

1349

stimuli. Gentner and Forbus (2011) distinguish “align-first”
models from “projection-first” models. Markman and
Gentner (1993) propose an “alignment-first” conception
which emphasizes the alignment of the stimuli that compose
the base and the target domains. At some point during the
interpretation, the comparisons of local elements, of local
and global structures from both sides, one derives which
elements should be put into correspondence (e.g.,
Falkenhaimer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989). In the A:B::C:D
paradigm, one would systematically tend to align A with C
and look for a D (or Ds) to be aligned with B. In a scene
analogy task (see Markman & Gentner, 1993; see below
Figure 1), one would predict numerous saccades between
the two pictures.
According to “projection-first” models (e.g., LISA,
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997) participants first search for a
relation unifying the base pair (i.e., the A:B pair in the
A:B::C:D paradigm) and, then, try to find matches
corresponding to this relation in the target pair (i.e., the
C:Ds). This model would, therefore, predict more initial
attention to the A:B pair, meaning more A-B transitions and
more gaze time in the first image in the Scene analogy task.
Later in the trial, one expects more gazes towards C and
Target and more C-Target transitions in both the A:B:C:D
task or the scene analogy task.
By contrast with the above models, the “relational
priming” model (Leech et al., 2008) gives no role to
mapping. According to this view, children first study the AB pair. Then, the relation found between A and B
(conceived of as the retrieval of a relevant transformation
between A and B, e.g., “cuts” for knife and bread)
automatically primes the retrieval of a relationship between
C and the target item into which it is transformed. With
respect to the time course of comprehension, this model
predicts that participants should study the A-B pair first,
turning, later, to C and the solution set. However,
participants should not actively compare C with the
semantic distractors or the semantic distractor with the
Target because the C-Target pair would be automatically
primed by the A-B pair relation. The solution is found
through priming without systematic comparisons within and
between the pairs, thus no mapping.
A limited number of eye tracking studies involve analogymaking (e.g., Gordon & Moser, 2007; Thibaut et al., 2011;
Thibaut & French, 2016). Bethell-Fox et al. (1984) used an
A:B::C:D task, with easy and difficult geometrical
analogies. They found that participants with less fluid
intelligence relied more on the elimination of implausible

answers, i.e. had more transitions within pictures in the
solution set. Interestingly, difficult items elicited more
saccades back to A and B, i.e., more time spent on the A:B
pair of the problem before looking to alternatives.
Participants also looked at the alternatives more often than
in simple trials. The authors also found that when
participants first looked at the correct answer, they later
tended to look at a lower number of alternatives than when
an incorrect answer was first looked at. If participants
looked less at other options when their first look was for the
correct answer, this suggests that they had already
constructed a solution for the A:B pair which allowed them
to recognize that the correct solution was correct.
In developmental studies Thibaut et al. (2011) and
Thibaut & French (2016) with A:B::C:D semantic analogies
found key differences between adults and children. First,
adults focused on the A:B pair at the beginning of the trial,
paying little or no attention to C and to stimuli in the
solution set. At the end of the trial, the Target was their sole
focus of attention. By contrast, children organized their
search around C which they actively focused on during the
entire trial. At the beginning of the trial they paid more
attention to C and B but also looked at the Target and the
semantic distractor earlier than adults. Results also showed
that children paid less attention to A and B. Overall, adults
behaved in a projection-first way whereas children followed
neither a projection-first (or constructive) strategy nor an
alignment-first strategy but, rather, a strategy organized
around C (Glady, Thibaut, French, 2012; Glady et al., 2014;
Thibaut & French, 2016).
Gordon and Moser (2007) used scene analogies (see
Markman, & Gentner, 1993) in which participants had to
point which item in a scene had the same role as an item
pointed to by the experimenter in the other scene (e.g.
pointing to a boy chasing a girl, if the experimenter pointed
to a dog chasing a cat, see below Figure 1). Adults initially
focused on the “actor-patient” pair in the source image (i.e.,
a dog chasing a cat, which is analogous to our A and B
terms) and then looked for the solution in the target image (a
second actor-patient pair, e.g., a girl chasing a boy,
analogous to our C and D terms). This is consistent with the
projection-first conceptions (study A:B then analyze C:D).
They also showed that there were longer fixations on the
stimuli with an arrow pointing to it in the source scene and
its match in the target scene.

Goals and Rationale
In the present paper, we compared adults' visual strategies
in three different analogical tasks, the scene analogy task
used by Gordon and Moser (2007) (see Figure 1a), the
standard A:B::C:D task (hereafter “ABCD task”, see Figure
1b) and a modified “scene” version of the A:B::C:D task in
which the stimuli were inserted in scenes (hereafter, the
Scene ABCD task, Figure 1c). The resulting stimuli were
similar to the Scene analogy task. In the Scene Analogy
task, participants have to find what plays the same role in
the target scene (e.g. the boy who is chasing a girl, see

1350

Figure 1) as the element that is pointed to in the source
scene (e.g., a cat chasing a mouse). In this task, the stimuli
are semantically connected in meaningful scenes. By
contrast, in the A:B::C:? task, stimuli are presented
separately and the resulting display has no global meaning.
Given the instructions, participants have to compare
separated pictures in order to find the common relation. The
idea behind the Scene ABCD task was to insert the stimuli
in simple but meaningful scene (e.g. a bird flying close to a
nest). In this case the instructions remain the same as in the
standard ABCD task (find the one that goes with a
designated stimulus [e.g., a dog], in the same way as the
bird goes with the nest). Recent evidence suggests that
grouping objects in meaningful scenes might positively
affect attention toward these objects and their relations (see
Humphreys et al., 2010 for a review).
The main difference between the two "scene" tasks is that
in the Scene analogy task, the focus is on the identification
of the role of the designated object in the relation between A
and B. Once this is done, one must identify stimuli
connected by the same relation in the second picture and the
stimulus which plays the analogous role as the one
designated in the first pair. Thus, the emphasis is on the role
of the designated item within an easily identified relation
between the items. In the Scene-ABCD, when one is gazing
at the AB scene, he/she has to find the relation connecting
them and then orient the search in the second image around
the designated C (“what goes with C”) and find the object
that fulfills the same role in the other objects. Here, the
emphasis is on finding a common relation, something which
might not be straightforward. In the standard A:B::C:D case,
finding the direction of the relation might be simpler since
location cues make it more salient.
Are the search patterns equivalent in the three tasks? Is
the Scene-ABCD task more similar to the Scene task or to
the ABCD task? In terms of the above models, the question
was whether a unified profile of answers would appear for
all tasks. For example, would there be a projection-first
pattern (A:B then C:D) in all cases or not? Would we
observe more alignments (AC and BT saccades),for Scene
analogy tasks than in the two other tasks, this being because
participants had to identify equivalent roles in both scenes?
Since scenes are semantically integrated, they might elicit
more intra-domain saccades than in ABCD task. In order to
test Leech et al. (2008), we will focus on the way
participants analyze the second scene or pair, especially the
presence or absence of Target-Semantic distractor
comparisons.
In what follows we will attempt to test these hypotheses
experimentally. Crucially, we divided the time course of
each trial into three equal time slices, which allowed us to
study the evolving dynamics of problem resolution.
Specifically, we used a Task (Scene Analogy, Standard
A:B::C:?, Scene ABCD) x Time slice (1st, 2nd and 3rd slices)
x Stimulus Type (A, B, etc.) design as within-subject
factors. Response accuracy, reaction times and eye
movements were recorded.

Methods
Participants
Subjects were 20 adults (14 females, 6 males; mean
age=20.4 years; SD=2.21; range: from 17 to 27 years),
Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comté students. They received
course credit for their participation.
Materials
Three tasks were used, each composed of three training
trials and four experimental trials. The first task was a Scene
Analogy task (Figure 1a), the second a Standard ABCD task
(Figure 1b) and the third a Scene-ABCD task, i.e., a
standard A:B::C:? task with the items composing the
problems inserted in scenes (Figure 1c). In each task, the
stimuli were composed of 7 black and white line drawings.
The tasks were presented sequentially and appropriately
counterbalanced. The order of the trials within each task was
random.
In the Scene Analogy task (Fig. 1a), the pictures were
based on materials in which the distractor was chosen to be
semantically related to one member of the relation in the
bottom picture (see Richland et al., 2006; Gordon & Moser,
2007), for example, a ball in the “boy chasing a girl” case.
In both the Scene Analogy task (Figure 1a) and the Scene
A:B::C:D task, trials were constituted of two scenes

(501x376 pixels each) containing 7 black and white line
drawings (corresponding to A, B, C, T, semantic distractor
and two unrelated distractors) framed by a black rectangle.
The top scene contained the A and B pictures; the remaining
pictures were in the bottom scene. The only difference in the
general presentation of the two tasks was that an arrow
pointed to the B stimulus in the Scene Analogy task, and to
the C stimulus in the Scene ABCD task.
In the Standard ABCD trials, the A, B, C drawings were
presented above the picture. On the top right, a black empty
square was the solution location. The four remaining
pictures (Target, Semantic Distractor and two Unrelated
distractors) were presented at the bottom of the screen
(Figure 1). In the analyses presented below, the potentialanswer items were designated as follows: T (correct Target
stimulus), SemDis (semantic distractor), and UnDis
(distractor semantically unrelated to either A, B or C). The
size of each picture was 200x195 pixels. Pictures were not
aligned in two rows in order to minimize saccades of
participant’s eyes involving stimuli “on the way” to another
stimulus.
The tasks were displayed on a Tobii T120 eye-tracker
with a 1024x768 screen resolution using an E-Prime©
software (version 2.8.0.22) embedded in a Tobii Studio
(version 2.1.12) procedure to record participants’ scanpaths.

Figure 1: The three tasks used in this experiment: a) scene analogy task, b) standard ABCD task, c) Scene ABCD task.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room at the
University. Following calibration, participants were shown a
training trial and were given the instructions corresponding
to each condition: In the Scene Analogy task, they were
shown a stimulus in the above frame and were asked to
point to the stimulus that played the same role in the below
picture as the one played by the object that was pointed to in
the first picture. In the Scene-ABCD task they were told
“There are two pictures [pointing to A and B]. A:B go
together well. Can you see why [A and B] go together?”
Once the participant had given a relation linking A and B,
the experimenter gave feedback. “OK! Now, do you see this
one [pointing to C]? What you have to do is to find in this

1351

picture [pointing to the below scene] the item that goes with
this one [C] in the same way as this one [B] goes with this
one [A]." In the standard ABCD task, participants were
asked to find in the solution set the stimulus that goes with
C in the same way as A goes with B. No further instruction
and feedback were given during test trials. Eye tracking data
were recorded when the presentation of the problem started
and stopped when an answer was given.

Results
Trials were excluded of the eye-tracking analysis when
more than 50% of the eye movement data missing. No
participant was excluded of the statistical analyses.

Participants’ performance was above 95% correct in the
three tasks. These analogies were simple because they were
used for comparison with children in another experiment.

An ANOVA on reaction times as a function of Task
Type revealed no main effect of task, p >.2)

Percentage of Gazes

Task x Slice x Items Interaction
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
ITEMS
A

B

Target UnDis ITEMS
C
SemDis
A
SLICE: 1

B

Target UnDis ITEMS
C
SemDis
A
SLICE: 2

B

Target UnDis
C
SemDis

SCENE
A:B:C:D
Scene ABCD

SLICE: 3

Figure 2: Interaction between Task(Scene, Standard ABCD, and Scene ABCD), Time Slice, and Stimulus Type for the percentage of gazes.
Patterns of gazes were partially different in Scene condition and the two versions of the ABCD task (see text).
Task x Slice x Saccades Interaction
4,0
3,5
Number of Saccades

3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5

AB
AC
AT
BC
BT
BSemDis
CT
CSemDis
TSemDis

AB
AC
AT
BC
BT
BSemDis
CT
CSemDis
TSemDis

-0,5

AB
AC
AT
BC
BT
BSemDis
CT
CSemDis
TSemDis

0,0

SLICE: 1

SLICE: 2

SLICE: 3

Scene
A:B::C:D
Scene ABCD

AT BC
BT BSemDis
CT CSemDis
TSemDis
Figure 3: Interaction between Task (Scene, Standard ABCD, AB
andAC
Scene
ABCD),
Time Slice,
and Stimulus
Type for the percentage of gazes.
Patterns of switches were partially different in Scene condition and the two versions of the ABCD task (see text).

Eyetracking data
Visual Strategies
We analyzed the proportions of gazes towards each type of
stimuli with a three-way ANOVA with Type of Stimulus
(A, B, C, T, SemDis, UnDis), Task Type (Scene Analogy,
ABCD, Scene ABCD) and Slice (1st, 2nd, 3rd) as withinsubject factors (Figure 1). There was a main effect of Type

1352

of stimulus, F(8,328)=17.1; p<.001; η²p=.294). There was a
significant interaction between Task and Type of Stimulus,
F(10,190)=9.96; p<.0001; η²p=.34) between Slice and Type
of Stimulus F(10,190)=3.57; p<.0001; η²p=.65), and a
significant interaction between the three factors, F(20,380)=
6.34; p<.0001; η²p=.25) which was the main result to be
considered here.
Figure 2 shows that the three tasks started with gazes on
the AB pair, which is in favor of the projection-first
strategy. The Standard ABCD and the Scene ABCD tasks

were quite similar in the first slice of the trial, with A and B
dominant, and far fewer gazes to the potential solutions
(Target, semantic distractor, and unrelated distractor). By
contrast, in the Scene condition, B (i.e., the stimulus pointed
to by the experimenter) was dominant at the beginning of
the trial, whereas A and Target received approximately the
same number of gazes, which meant that the Target received
more gazes than in the two other conditions. In the second
slice, C and the Target dominated in all three tasks, showing
that participants were making their decision while
comparing these two stimuli (see the "Saccades" section
below). During this second slice, they continued to look at B
(recall that in the scene analogy task, B corresponds to the
object that is designated by the arrow). The third slice is
similar. In the two ABCD tasks, the second slices were
progressively organized around the Target. The Semantic
distractor and the unrelated distractor received more gazes
than in the Scene condition. This suggests that, in the ABCD
tasks, participants look at the entire space of stimuli while
making their decision. Note that the pattern of gazes for the
ABCD task was similar to the one obtained by Thibaut and
French (2016).
Saccades We also analyzed the saccades between stimuli.
They tell us which stimuli are compared and when. We
focused on a subset of 9 transitions, the most relevant here
(see Thibaut et al. 2011; Thibaut & French, 2016). The
subset was composed of A-B, C-T(arget), A-C, B-T and also
A-T, B-C, B-SemDis, C-SemDis, and T-SemDis.
The first four of the above transitions are crucial to
determining whether participants follow strict projectionfirst strategies (A-B then C-Target), or have many
alignments (i.e., A-C and B-T and between sets
comparisons) or a combination of both, depending on the
moment of the trial. The other transitions refer to other
comparisons between C and the solution set (or within the
bottom scene). We ran a three-way repeated-measures
ANOVA with Transitions (A-B, C-T, A-C, B-T, A-T, B-C,
C-SemDis, T-SemDis), Slice (1st, 2nd, 3rd), and Task (Scene,
ABCD, and Scene ABCD) as within-subject factors. The
most important result was the significant interaction
between Transition Type, Task and Slice, F(32,608)=3.40;
p<.0001; η²p=.15 (see Figure 3). The main effects and the
two-way interactions were also significant.
In the first slice, the main common result is the presence
of A-B transitions and the absence of A-C and B-T
transitions. The main difference between the three tasks was
on B-C which appeared only in the Standard ABCD task.
One interpretation of this result is that the B and C are
spatially close. Once they have received the instructions (i.e.
“what goes with C”) they looked at it, and moved to A and
B which they compared as witnessed by the number of A-B
saccades. In the Scene analogy task, in the first slice, A-B
and C-T saccades were present, suggesting that participants
analyzed A and B and C-T in parallel in order to find the
equivalent stimuli in the two scenes. By contrast, the search
is more sequential, A-B then C-T, in the ABCD task with an
overwhelming prevalence of A-B saccades at the beginning.

1353

The Scene-ABCD shows the same prevalence of A-B
saccades. However, one clearly sees the construction of a
semantic space in the second scene with the presence of CT, C-SemDis and T-SemDis saccades. In the second slice,
C-T saccades are overwhelmingly dominant in the Scene
condition which suggests that participants have identified
the stimuli that are involved in the target relation and are
comparing them to attribute a semantic role to them. In the
Scene-ABCD task, C-T, C-SemDis and T-SemDis are
equally distributed. There is a slight dominance of TSemDis in the ABCD task suggesting that comparisons
between semantically-related-to-C stimuli are important at
this point (confirming Thibaut & French 2016). These
patterns suggest that in both the ABCD and Scene-ABCD
tasks participants compare C, T and SemDis in order to find
the correct solution. By contrast, evidence for A-C and B-T
saccades remains scarce in the three tasks, suggesting that
aligning the images is not a primary objective in any of
them: the three are organized around the A-B, C-T pattern.
The pattern of results here is consistent with the projectionfirst hypothesis, rather than with the hypothesis of
alignments taking place at some point. There was also
strong evidence of comparison of stimuli in the solution set
(T, SemDis) which is not consistent with the relational
priming view.

Discussion
The present paper extends the results of previous eyetracking studies by comparing three different analogy tasks
by means of eye tracking. Our first purpose was to assess
whether and when participants tended to use projection-first
or alignment-first strategies (see Introduction). Data
confirmed previous studies by Thibaut and colleagues
showing higher rates of A-B and C-T saccades in
participants' patterns of visual search than of A-C and B-T
saccades at any point during the trial, and a prevalence of
gazes towards A and B in early steps of the trial. Thus, the
first main result is that participants tend to construct or
interpret an analogy by comparing the relation constructed
in the AB domain before looking applying it in the target
domain.
A priori, it could have been argued that scene analogy
trials would require more alignments (A-C and B-T
transitions) (Markman & Gentner, 1993) than ABCD tasks.
Indeed, in order to establish role equivalence, participants
should first identify which objects might be compared in
both scenes (A,B and C, T), which means that they should
saccade between these stimuli in the two pairs. However, in
reality, this rarely occurred (few A-C, B-T, B-C and A-T
saccades). One can observe a small number of B-T
transitions in the Scene task, but only in the second and third
time slices. However, their number remains low compared
to A-B or C-T, transitions. When they do appear, they are
not accompanied by the A-C transitions that should appear
simultaneously if one wants to establish the existence of
parallel search of equivalent objects between the two pairs.

Moreover, there was no evidence of relational priming in
any of the three conditions. Participants first constructed a
solution for the first Scene or pair. Then, they
systematically, explored all the related-to-C options
especially in the two A:B::C::D tasks.
Regarding differences between the tasks, participants had
fewer gazes towards distractors and fewer saccades
involving the semantic distractor in the Scene task than in
the other tasks. Overall the two scenes tasks (i.e., Scene and
Scene-ABCD) differed in the way the solution was
constructed. The Scene task was organized around T from
the start (T gazes and C-T saccades) and fewer of the others
whereas the proportion of gazes towards C, T and SemDis
and transitions involving them was initially more balanced
in the Scene-ABCD condition, suggesting that participants
were constructing the solution from comparisons between
these stimuli. Note that other factors might also play a role,
such as item difficulty (not manipulated here). Indeed,
Glady, French & Thibaut (2014) showed that item difficulty
was associated with more gazes towards distractors, which
was interpreted as an evidence for the necessity of a deeper
analysis of the stimuli in order to find the solution.
In conclusion, our results revealed general patterns in the
search of a solution, together with local adaptations to the
specifics of the tasks.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by French ANR Grant 10BLAN-1908-01, ANAFONEX to the third author, a joint
ANR-ESRC grant 10-056 GETPIMA to the second author,
and a FABER grant from the Conseil Regional de
Bourgogne to the first and the third authors.

References
Bethell-Fox, C. E., Lohman, D. F., & Snow, R. E. (1984).
Adaptive reasoning: Componential and eye movement
analysis of geometric analogy performance. Intelligence,
8, 205-238.
Deubel, H., & Schneider, W. (1996). Saccade target
selection and object recognition: Evidence for a common
attentional mechanism. Vision Research, 36, 1827–1837.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41(1), 1-63.
French, R. M. (2002). The computational modeling of
analogy-making. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6(5), 200205.
Gentner, D., & Smith, L. (2012). Analogical reasoning.
Encyclopedia of human behavior, Vol. 1. Elsevier Inc.
Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and
learning
by
analogy:
Introduction.
American
Psychologist, 52(1), 32.
Gentner, D., & Forbus, K. D. (2011). Computational models
of analogy. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive
Science, 2(3), 266-276.

1354

Glady, Y., Thibaut, J.P., and French, R. M. (2014). Adults'
Eye Tracking Search Profiles and Analogy Difficulty.
Proceedings of the Thirty-fourth Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 535-540.
Glady, Y., Thibaut, J.P.and French, R. M. (2012).
Explaining children’s failure in analogy making tasks: A
problem of focus of attention? Proceedings of the Thirtyfourth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 384-389.
Gordon, P. C., & Moser, S. (2007). Insight into analogies:
Evidence from eye movements. Visual Cognition, 15(1),
20–35.
He, P., & Kowler, E. (1992). The role of saccades in the
perception of texture patterns. Vision Research, 32(11),
2151–2163.
Hofstadter, D. R. and Sander, E. (2013). Surfaces and
Essences: Analogy as the fuel and fire of thinking. NYC,
NY: Basic Books.
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. In
K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Oxford
handbook of thinking and reasoning. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3), 427.
Humphreys, G. W., Yoon, E. Y., Kumar, S., Lestou, V.,
Kitadono, K., Roberts, K. L., & Riddoch, M. J. (2010).
The interaction of attention and action: From seeing
action to acting on perception. British Journal of
Psychology, 101(2), 185–206.
Leech, R., Mareschal, D., & Cooper, R. P. (2008). Analogy
as relational priming: A developmental and computational
perspective on the origins of a complex cognitive skill.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31(04), 357-378.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25(4), 431-467.
Nodine, C. E., Carmody, D. P., & Kundel, H. L. (1978).
Searching for Nina. In J. Senders, D. F. Fisher, & R.
Monty (Eds.), Eye movements and the higher
psychological functions. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94(3), 249-273.
Thibaut, J. P., & French, R. M. (2016). Analogical
reasoning, control and executive functions: A
developmental investigation with eye-tracking. Cognitive
Development, 38, 10-26.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., Missault, A., Gérard, Y., &
Glady, Y. (2011). In the eyes of the beholder: What eyetracking reveals about analogy-making strategies in
children and adults. Proceedings of the Thirty-third
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
453–458).

