Concept Membership vs Typicality in Sentence Verification Tasks
Francesca Zarl (francesca.zarl@phd.units.it)
Psychology Unit “Gaetano Kanizsa”, Department of Life Sciences,
University of Trieste, via Weiss 21, I - 34128 Trieste, Italy

Danilo Fum (fum@units.it)
Department of Humanistic Studies, University of Trieste
via Tigor 22, I - 34134 Trieste, Italy
Abstract
In the paper we discuss the relation between fuzzy sets and the
graded membership and typicality effects found in the study
of concepts. After a short overview of the topic, we present
three experiments, carried out using the same method but with
different situational contexts, which examine whether graded
membership and typicality could be considered as independent
factors capable of influencing the performance of human participants involved in sentence verification tasks, or they are
somehow interrelated. The paper concludes with a general
discussion of the experimental findings and the problems they
pose for models of concepts based on the theory fuzzy sets.
Keywords: Concept representation; fuzzy set theory; graded
membership; vagueness; typicality; sentence verification, categorization.

Introduction
The study of concepts has constituted a key point for psychological research since its very beginning. In the last decade or
so, it has acquired new importance in the light of the Semantic Web endeavor to find a computationally effective way to
model the ontologies machines need to perform satisfactorily
at cognitive-related tasks.
The so-called classical view (Smith & Medin, 1981) regards concepts as rules or definitions, i.e., as sets of properties which are individually necessary and jointly sufficient to
determine whether or not a given entity is an instance of the
concept in question. From a formal point of view, concepts
can be modeled using sets whose intensions are defined by the
rules. According to the law of excluded middle, an element
is a member of a set (if it meets all the necessary properties)
or it is not (if there is at least one necessary property which is
not met). Moreover, since all the elements of a set satisfy the
same conditions, there is no difference among them as far as
their membership is concerned.
The classical view sounds reasonable and intuitive but it
is in fact inadequate to explain several empirical phenomena
psychologists have found by running their experiments. A
number of empirical studies (e.g., Barsalou, 1989) showed
that people, required to define a concept, have difficulty in
generating lists of properties that are necessary and sufficient
for it. Morevover, in trying to identify the features characterizing many everyday concepts, people disagree with each
other, and sometimes they disagree also with themselves,
with the same person generating different lists on diverse occasions (Bellezza, 1984).
These results depend on the fact that most of our concepts
are vague, and they do not have clearly defined boundaries.

If vagueness constitutes sometimes a definite asset, it has the
disadvantage that none of our categories will ever fit completely with the world, and there will be always cases in
which it will be difficult to discriminate whether an instance
belongs to a concept or not.
Hampton (1993) found, for example, that people consider
some entities as just barely members of a category and other
entities as just merely non-members. Members and nonmembers form a continuum without a clear distinction between them. While it is easy to classify unambiguous elements, people face serious difficulties in determining whether
an in-between element does belong or not to a particular category. McCloskey and Glucksberg (1978) found that people,
asked to make membership decisions for exemplar-category
pairs in two separate sessions, agreed with each other and
were consistent between sessions for items clearly related or
unrelated with the category (e.g., apple-fruit and cucumberfurniture, respectively), while they disagreed and were frequently inconsistent in the case of borderline elements (e.g,
curtains-furniture).
Another embarrassing result for the classical view is constituted by the fact that people consider certain entities as better exemplars of a concept than others; for instance, sparrows
and robins are somehow considered as better birds than ostrichs or penguins (Rosch, 1973). This finding, known as the
typicality effect, represents one of the most common and most
robust phenomena found in the study of concepts.
It has been found that typicality affects people’s performance in a variety of ways and in wide range of cognitive
tasks. Typical exemplars of a category are classified faster
and more accurately than atypical ones (Rips, Shoben, &
Smith, 1973); they are more likely to be considered as members of the category (Hampton, 1979); they are mentioned
more frequently when asked to name the members of the category (Mervis, Catlin, & Rosch, 1976); they are the first to
be learned in artificial category learning tasks (Rosch, Simpson, & Miller, 1976); they support better analogical inferences (Rips, 1975), etc.
Being incompatible with the classical view of concepts,
graded membership and typicality cannot be modeled according to the set-theoretic account on which such a theory is
based. Soon after the discovery of these phenomena, an alternative framework for concepts that relied on the idea of fuzzy
sets (Zadeh, 1965) was put forward.
In the paper we discuss the relation between fuzzy sets

1134

and the graded membership and typicality effects found in
the study of concepts. After a short overview of the topic,
we present three experiments, carried out using the same
method but with different situational contexts, which examine
whether graded membership and typicality could be considered as independent factors capable of influencing the performance of human participants involved in sentence verification
tasks, or they are somehow interrelated. The paper concludes
with a general discussion of the experimental findings and the
problems they pose for models of concepts based on the theory fuzzy sets.

Graded membership, typicality, and fuzzy sets
Fuzzy sets were introduced by Zadeh (1965) to overcome the
limitations of the traditional set-theoretic approach in dealing
with classes of objects that are not clearly defined. Because
these classes are pervasive in all the processes that somehow involve language, fuzzy sets have been considered since
their beginning as a promising formalism to represent conceptual knowledge. Following the publication of a critical
paper by Osherson and Smith (1981), the interest for fuzzy
sets rapidly declined among cognitive scientists determining
their practically disappearance from the literature. Recently,
however, a recent reevaluation of the topic by Belohlavek and
Klir (2011) showed that many arguments raised against fuzzy
set were fallacious, and contributed to restate their relevance
for the study of concepts.
Fuzzy sets can be conceived as an extension of classical
sets. While the characteristic function of the latter maps its
domain into the set {0, 1}, comprising only two elements,
the range of the former’s function contains an infinite number of elements: all the real numbers in the interval [0,1], including its limits. In this sense, a classical set is a subset of a
fuzzy one. While classical sets consider 0 and 1 symbolically,
as Boolean entities, the degrees of membership of fuzzy sets
have a true numerical value. One important consequence of
this fact is that fuzzy sets can be mathematically manipulated
in ways that are not allowed by their classical counterpart.
It is evident that both the graded membership and the typicality effect found in the study of concepts can be modeled
through fuzzy sets by introducing a function having as range
the interval of real numbers [0,1]. The question to be asked
is whether graded membership and typicality should be considered as separate phenomena which however depend on an
underlying common factor, or whether they denote distinct
dimensions to be captured by different functions.
According to Cai, Yeung, and Leung (2012) graded membership and typicality have different nature and are not necessarily related. An instance of a concept can in fact be assigned a high degree of membership and a low degree of typicality (as it is the case for ostrichs as members of the class
of birds) while, on the other hand, there may be entities that
have a membership degree close to zero and non-null typicality. This latter case occurs when people consider some
entities as exemplars of a given concept (for example, con-

sider whales as fish or tomatoes as vegetable) while, technically, they cannot be considered as such. As stated by the authors, graded membership and typicality play different roles
in determining whether an entity is an instance of a concept,
and are computed in different ways. To determine the degree of membership, the necessary conditions which define
a concept according to the classical view are taken into account. Typicality provides an additional mechanism to rank
those instances that meet all the membership requirements
(and whose values approximate therefore 1). In this case the
non-defining features which are widely shared among the set
members are tallied. Sometimes this leads to the assignment
of typicality values to entities that, without being members of
the set, partake of its characteristic properties.
Kamp and Partee (1995) too deny that a single measure
could serve the purposes of quantifying both the degree to
which an entity is an instance of a given concept and its typicality, interpreted as the degree of proximity to the best example (or prototype) of the concept. The question they ask
is whether and how the two functions could be considered as
connected, and in particular for which concepts, if any, do
they coincide. As an example of lack of interrelation Kamp
and Partee refer to the concept of male nurse. In this case, according to the authors, knowing the degree of membership—
which depends on the intersection of the classes of males and
nurses—does not help in any way to establish typicality. On
the other hand, there are cases (for instance, for the concepts
of red or chair) in which knowing the typicality value of an
instance helps to establish its membership degree.
Another interesting point of view on this issue is raised
by Hampton (2011) who considers typicality and graded
membership as separate functions that are based, however, on
the same underlying similarity measure. More particularly,
“[t]ypicality is a monotonically rising function of similarity,
whereas membership is a nondecreasing function of similarity that starts at 0, starts to rise at a certain point k1 , and then
reaches a ceiling of 1 at a further point k2 , where k1 and k2
are above the minimum and below the maximum values that
similarity can take.” (Hampton, 2011, p.219)
To better define the relationship between graded membership and typicality, and their possibile connections with fuzzy
sets, we realized the following experiments.

Experiments
All the experiments investigated the role that graded membership and typicality play in determining the behavior of people engaged in sentence verification tasks. The experiments
asked participants how much they agreed with a series of sentences claiming that “. . . Xs are/are not Ys”. Beyond asserting or negating the membership of X to Y , the sentences differed in the relationship that connected an instance with its
putative category. X could be in fact a typical member of Y ,
an atypical member, a non-member sharing common features
with the members of Y , and a non-member without any evident relation with Y . In each experiment, therefore, member-

1135

ship and typicality were orthogonally varied, as it was varied
the polarity (affirmative vs negative) of each sentence.
The experiments differed according to the context in which
membership judgments were made. It is reasonable to assume
that the degree of agreement with a statement could depend
not only on the intrinsic relationship between an entity and
a class but also on the particular viewpoint taken by participants, or by the specific circumstances in which the sentences
are evaluated. (For a review of studies on concept classification manipulating the context of the task, see: Murphy, 2002,
pp. 413-422.)
By adopting different kinds of contexts, we tried to determine the generality and robustness of any influence membership and typicality could have on the concept categorization
processes underlying the sentence verification task.

Table 1: A sample of sentences used in the experiment.
Sentence kind
PMT
PMT
PMT
PMT
NMT
NMT
NMT
NMT

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we investigated whether the effect of membership and typicality could be modulated by providing participants with a purposive context for sentence evaluation.
Our approach is similar to that employed by Hampton,
Dubois, and Yeh (2006) who adopted instructions contrasting
a purely pragmatic classification context with a more technical one, and compared them with a no-context condition.
Contrary to the authors’ expectations, however, none of the
dependent measures was influenced by the context. We conjectured that, by emphasizing the context also in the sentence
text, we could differently influence the criteria participants
used to evaluate the sentences.
Participants. Sixty University of Trieste students (48 females), whose age varied from 18 to 53 years (mean = 23.1;
sd = 8.0), participated to the experiment. Participants were
randomly assigned to three experimental conditions named
Technical, CommonSense, and Neutral, respectively.
Design. A 3x2x2x2 mixed design was adopted having Context (Technical, CommonSense, and Neutral) as a betweensubjects factor and Membership (Yes vs No), Typicality (Yes
vs No), and Polarity (Positive vs Negative) as factors within.
Materials and procedure. In the experiment 64 Italian
sentences – the same used in Zarl and Fum (2014) – each
involving a relation between an instance and a category, were
used. The sentences were divided into 32 pairs. A sentence in each pair made an affirmative statement while the
other negated it. The sentences were constructed by balancing the gender and the number of instances and categories
which were both of natural (e.g., tomato-fruit) and artificial
(e.g., volleyball-sport) kind. Eight different types of sentences were constructed by varying the three distinct factors
of Membership, Typicality, and Polarity. Table 1 provides an
example for each kind of sentence.
Positive sentences are labeled with P while negative sentences are labeled with N. M means that the instance is a
member of the category while while M negates it. Analogously, T means that the instance shares some common fea-

Text
. . . canaries are birds
. . . penguins are birds
. . . bats are birds
. . . toads are birds
. . . toads are not birds
. . . bats are not birds
. . . penguins are not birds
. . . canaries are not birds

tures with members of the category while T negates any similarity between the instance and category.
The interpretation of positive sentences is straighforward.
PMT means that the instance is a typical member of the category, PMT that it is an atypical member, etc. The labeling of
negative sentences, obtained by negating the labels of the positive ones, is based on the criteria participants would follow in
agreeing with the sentence content. So, for example, accepting the NMT sentence “. . . penguins are not birds”, which
negates the PMT “. . . penguins are birds”, means denying
membership while acknowledging typicality as evaluation
criterion because penguins, even if they are in fact birds, lack
some features that are typical of this category.
The sentences of each experimental condition were introduced by a different phrase which provided a context for
their reading. In the case of the Technical group, the sentences began with the expression “In a technical sense . . . ”,
while those of the CommonSense group were introduced by
the words “According to common sense . . . ”. For the Neutral condition we borrowed the phrase “In a sense . . . ”
by Machery and Seppälä (2011) who used it to allow different
interpretations for the concepts of their experiments.
The context according to which participants were asked to
evaluate the sentences was varied in the instructions, too. For
the Technical group, the instructions highlighted the fact that
concepts are structured according to a taxonomy based on
strict membership rules. Participants assigned to the CommonSense condition were said that a looser interpretation of
concepts would take into account the similarity that exists between them. Finally, the instructions for the Neutral group
were quite general and did not provide any specific indication
about the setting to be adopted.
All the sentences were gathered in a leaflet whose pages
contained eight sentences drawn randomly from the total
pool. Next to each sentence was printed a 7 cm line whose
extreme points were marked with the labels Completely disagree and Completely agree, respectively. Participants had
to indicate their degree of agreement with the sentence by
putting a vertical mark on the line. The position of the mark
was measured at the next millimeter and converted into a
score in the [0,70] interval of integers.
Results A four-way mixed ANOVA with one variable
between-subjects (Context) and three variables within-

1136

subjects (Membership, Typicality, and Polarity) was performed on the experimental data. All the main effects of
the within-subjects factors were significant: Sentences in
which the instance was a member of the category obtained
higher ratings than sentences in which the instance was a nonmember (F(1,57) = 338.67, p < .001). Analogously, scores
for sentences in which the instance was similar to the category typical members were higher than those of sentences
in which there was no similarity between the instance and
the category (F(1,57) = 443.91, p < .001). Finally, affirmative sentences obtained higher judgments than negative ones
(F(1,57) = 64.10, p < .001). On the other hand, the different
contexts did not have any effect on the participants performance, and did not lead to any significant interaction with the
other factors.
Table 2 reports the mean scores for the different sentence
kinds. To facilitate the understanding of the data, the contextual conditions have been collapsed in the table.
Table 2: Average scores – contextual conditions collapsed.

T
T

Positive
M
M
13.21 44.27
36.00 62.80

Negative
M
M
9.21 33.46
27.79 54.50

An interesting (and puzzling) three way interaction Membership x Typicality x Polarity (F(1,57) = 4.58, p < .05) was
found among the within-subjects variables. The interaction
effect has quite a small magnitude but it constitutes an original and unexpected result that requires an adequate explanation (see: the General discussion and conclusions section).
To determine which criterion, between Membership and
Typicality, was more influential in determining the participants judgments, a second analysis of the data was made
taking into account only the sentences is which the two criteria were directly contrasted. A two way mixed ANOVA
was carried out having Context as a variable between, and
Criterion (i.e., Membership, for the PMT and NMT sentences, vs Typicality, for the PMT and PMT ones) as variable within. The ANOVA revealed only the significant main
effect (F(1,57) = 19.13, p < .001) of Criterion, with Membership sentences obtaining significantly higher ratings than Typicality ones (average scores of 38.86 and 31.90, respectively).

Experiment 2
The experiment aimed to assess whether the influence of
Membership and Typicality, and their possible interaction
with Polarity, could depend on how the material was presented. In a previous work (Zarl & Fum, 2014), we found
that participants were more likely to agree with sentences
that contradicted each other (e.g., “In a sense penguins are
birds” vs “In a sense penguins are not birds”), and to assigning therefore high scores to both, when the sentences were
submitted separately in random order, while contradiction ac-

ceptance was lower when they were presented together for the
evaluation. Experiment 2 was therefore a control experiment
intended to ascertain the generality of the effects of Experiment 1, and to confirm maybe its findings.
Participants. Forty voluntary participants (31 females)
from the Trieste area whose age varied from 20 to 42 years
(mean = 26.1, sd = 4.8) were engaged in the experiment. Participants were randomly assigned to two experimental conditions named Pair vs Single.
Design. A 2x2x2x2 mixed design was adopted with Context (Pair vs Single) as a variable between, and Membership,
Typicality and Polarity as variables within subjects.
Materials and Procedure. The materials and the instructions of the Neutral condition of Experiment 1 were used,
with all the sentences introduced by the phrase “In a sense
. . . ” and no particular hint provided for the their interpretation. For participants in the Single condition, the procedure
too was identical to that of the previous experiment, with the
sentences presented in random order. The positive and negative sentences of each pair were instead presented together,
one below the other, to participants of the Pair condition. For
this condition, the pairs presentation order, and the order of
presentation of the positive and negative sentence within each
pair were determined randomly.
Results. The experiment replicated all the findings of Experiment 1. A four-way ANOVA showed the main effects of
Membership (F(1,38) = 181.04, p < .001), Typicality (F(1,38) =
124.872, p < .001), and Polarity (F(1,38) = 52.889, p < .001)
only. Table 3 shows the mean scores for the different sentences. Similarly to what was done in Experiment 1, because
the presentation Context did not proved significant, the data
are presented without taking it into account.

Table 3: Average scores – contextual conditions collapsed.

T
T

Positive
M
M
14.49 50.15
36.12 59.82

Negative
M
M
7.31 37.38
25.72 55.26

The ANOVA confirmed also the three-way interaction
Membership x Typicality x Polarity (F(1:38) = 14.21, p <
.001) previously found in Experiment 1 that becomes here
more perspicuous: the gain due to Typicality is clearly greater
for the non-members M, in the case of Positive sentences, and
for members M, when the sentences are Negative.
Another interesting interaction Context x Membership
(F(1,38) = 6.25, p < .05) found by the ANOVA and absent in
Experiment 1 is reported in Table 4.
According to the data, when the sentences are presented
simultaneously in pairs, the participants judgments become
more polarized (i.e. with higher scores for M sentences and
lower scores for the M ones) in comparison with the case in

1137

Table 5: Average scores–contextual conditions collapsed.

Table 4: The Context x Membership interaction
Pair
Single

Member M
58.88
51.64

Non-Member M
21.20
30.25

which the sentences are presented singularly and in a randomized order. This polarization effect obtained in the Pair condition confirms what had already been pointed out previously
by Zarl and Fum (2014).
Finally, a second ANOVA taking into account the positive and negative sentences of the MT and MT kind was performed to determine which criterion, between Membership
and Typicality, was more influential in determining the participants judgments. This mixed two-way ANOVA was carried out having Context as between-subjects factor and Criterion as factor within. The ANOVA revealed only the significant main effect (F(1,38) = 31.32, p < .001) of Criterion, with
Membership sentences (mean = 43.76) obtaining significantly
higher ratings than Typicality ones (mean = 30.92).

Experiment 3
A final experiment was carried out to check whether the previous findings could somehow depend on the fact that all the
sentences were always preceded by an introductory phrase.
The idea for this control experiment derived from some occasional remarks made by participants in Experiment 2 and
by those assigned to the Neutral condition of Experiment 1
who, after reading some sentences introduced by “In a sense
. . . ”, asked “In which sense?”. Experiment 3 thus contrasted
the simple assertion or negation of membership with the more
elaborate formulation adopted to induce a neutral context for
sentence interpretation.
Participants. The participants were 64 residents in the
Friuli Venezia Giulia region in Italy (49 females) whose age
varied from 19 to 63 years (mean = 25.74; sd = 8.2).
Design. The same 2x2x2x2 mixed design of Experiment 1
was adopted. In this case the levels of the between-subjects
Context variable were Neutral and NoContext, respectively.
Materials and procedure. For participants in the Neutral
condition, the materials and the procedure were identical to
those of the Single condition of Experiment 2 (and of the Neutral condition of Experiment 1). Participants in the NoContext condition read the same sentences with the introductory
phrase “In a sense . . . ” removed (e.g. “Penguins are birds”,
“Canaries are not birds” etc.).
Results. The same pattern of results found in the previous
experiments was replicated in Experiment 3, too. More particularly, the Context factor did not have any statistically significant effect on the participants performance indicating that
the previous findings were not influenced by the presence of
the introductory phrase “In a sense . . . ”. Table 5 reports the
average scores for the different conditions.
Again, a four-way ANOVA revealed the significative main

T
T

Positive
M
M
11.68 47.62
37.05 64.05

Negative
M
M
5.94 32.99
22.38 54.64

effects of Membership (F(1,62) = 433.67, p < .001), Typicality (F(1,62) = 585.33, p < .001), and Polarity (F(1,6262) =
188.44, p < .001), and their three-way interaction (F(1,62) =
19.72, p < .001) indicating the greater advantage due to Typicality that occurs in the Positive M sentences.
A mixed two-way ANOVA, using Context and Criterion
as factors was carried out on sentences contrasting directly
Membership and Typicality. It showed a significant (F(1,62) =
40.48, p < .001)) main effect of Criterion, obtaing the former
(mean = 40.31) higher scores than the latter (mean = 29.72).

General discussion and conclusions
In the previous section we have reported three experiments,
all leading to concordant results. First of all, the experiments
confirmed the graded membership and the typicality effects
characterizing concepts, and their importance in determining
the degree of agreement with a series of statements asserting
or denying the membership of an instance to a class.
Between the two factors, membership played the dominant
role. In all the experiments, when the factors were directly
contrasted, participants assigned higher scores to sentences
in which the instances were atypical members of the class in
comparison with those in which the instances simply shared
some similarity with the class members.
This is a general result that was not affected by any attempt to modulate it by providing participants with different
evaluation contexts. Even when explicitly instructed to take
into account the similarity between the instance and the typical exemplars of the class (Experiment 1), participants were
guided by the membership criterion. In Experiment 2 the simultaneous comparison between contradictory statements led
to a polarization of judgments (with higher scores for sentences asserting membership and lower scores for those denying it, when the instance was indeed a member of the class)
but did not change the general pattern of results. The same
was true in Experiment 3 when assertions and negations were
expressed directly in the sentences or were somehow dampened by the introductory phrase “In a sense”.
Membership and typicality are not independent factors but
they interact with each other in a subtle way. In case of affirmative sentences, the gain in the score due to typicality is
higher for non-members than for the members of a category
while it is virtually identical when the sentences are negative.
This is the most interesting and original finding deriving from
all the experiments and, at least to our knowledge, no existing
model of concepts is able to predict and explain it.
The results of our experiments highlight some interesting
issues for models of concepts based on the theory of fuzzy
sets. Due to space limitations we mention only two, both

1138

related to the interpretation of negative sentences.
From a strictly logical point of view, denying that an instance is a member of a set can be considered as equivalent
to stating that it is a member of the set complement: negating that bats are birds is like claiming that they are non-birds.
Concepts such as not a bird, defined in a negative way, are
often cited (Connolly, Fodor, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 2007)
as examples of concepts for which no prototype exists. Although it may be relatively easy to establish whether a certain
instance is a non-bird, in this determination the similarity between the instance and non-birds should not play any role.
The problem is that in our experiments typicality manifests
its effect also in negative sentences: the NMT “Penguins are
not birds” receives higher scores than the NMT, “Canaries
not are birds”, and the same is true for the sentences whose
instance is a member of the category.
It is possibly true, as state by a paper reviewer, that “the
fact that typicality is present in negative sentences does not
mean that it is the effect of any prototype for the negation of
the concept. It just means that participants are still capable of
evaluating the distance of a nonmember to the prototype of
the positive category in terms of similarity”. The fact is that
what appears as a strong pragmatic effect of negation cannot
be easily adapted into the mathematical theory of fuzzy sets.
A second issue concerns the scores given to a sentence and
its negation. The function defining the complement of a fuzzy
set is monotonically decreasing, i.e. for every instance a, b of
a set A and their respective membership degrees, µ(a) and
µ(b), if µ(a) < µ(b) then c(µ(b)) ≥ c(µ(a)), where c is the
function defining the complement of A. While this relation is
maintained in the aggregated data, in many cases the individual scores given by participants do not respect this property,
a fact that casts some further doubts about the possibility of
translating directly the axioms of the mathematical theory of
fuzzy sets into predictions about the participants behavior.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1989). Intraconcept similarity and its implications for interconcept similarity. In S. Vosniadou &
A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp.
76–121). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bellezza, F. S. (1984). Reliability of retrieval from semantic
memory: Common categories. Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society, 22, 324–326.
Belohlavek, R., & Klir, G. J. (2011). Fallacious perceptions
of fuzzy logic in the psychology of concepts. In R. Belohlavek & G. J. Klir (Eds.), Concepts and fuzzy logi (pp.
121–148). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Cai, Y., Yeung, C. M. A., & Leung, H. F. (2012). Fuzzy
computational ontologies in context. Beijing and Berlin:
Higher Education Press and Springer.
Connolly, A., Fodor, J. A., Gleitman, L. R., & Gleitman, H.
(2007). Why stereotypes don’t even make good defaults.
Cognition, 103, 1-22.

Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
18, 441–461.
Hampton, J. A. (1993). Prototype models of concept representation. In I. V. Mechelen, J. A. Hampton, R. S. Michalski, & P. Theuns (Eds.), Categories and concepts: Theoretical views and inductive data analysis (pp. 67–95). London: Academic Press.
Hampton, J. A. (2011). Conceptual combinations and fuzzy
logic. In R. Belohlavek & G. J. Klir (Eds.), Concepts
and fuzzy logic (pp. 209–231). Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Hampton, J. A., Dubois, D., & Yeh, W. (2006). Effects
of classification context on categorization in natural categories. Memory & Cognition, 34, 14319–14436.
Kamp, E., & Partee, B. (1995). Prototype theory and compositionality. Cognition, 57, 129–191.
Machery, E., & Seppälä, S. (2011). Against hybrid theories
of concepts. Anthropology and Philosophy, 10, 97–126.
McCloskey, M., & Glucksberg, S. (1978). Natural categories:
Well-defined or fuzzy set? Memory & Cognition, 6, 462–
472.
Mervis, C. B., Catlin, J., & Rosch, E. (1976). Relationship
among goodness-of-example, category norms, and word
frequency. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 7, 283–
284.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Osherson, D. N., & Smith, E. E. (1981). On the adequacy
of prototype theory as a theory of concepts. Cognition, 9,
35–58.
Rips, L. J. (1975). Inductive judgments about natural categories. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
14, 665–681.
Rips, L. J., Shoben, E. J., & Smith, E. E. (1973). Semantic
distance and the verification of semantic relations. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 1–20.
Rosch, E. (1973). On the internal structure of perceptual and
semantic categories. In T. M. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of language (pp. 111–144).
New York: Academic Press.
Rosch, E., Simpson, C., & Miller, R. S. (1976). Structural bases of typicality effects. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 2, 491–
502.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8,
338-353.
Zarl, F., & Fum, D. (2014). Theories of concepts and
contradiction acceptance. In P. Bernardis, C. Fantoni, &
W. Gerbino (Eds.), TSPC2014: Proceedings of the Trieste
Symposium on Perception and Cognition (pp. 157–161).
Trieste, Italy: EUT: Edizioni Università di Trieste.

1139

