Construal level affects intuitive moral responses to narrative content
Nicholas A. Lester (nlester@umail.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, South Hall 3432
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

René Weber (renew@comm.ucsb.edu)
Department of Communication, 4005 Social Sciences & Media Studies Bldg
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
Abstract
The Model of Intuitive Morality and Exemplars (MIME)
predicts a mutual dependency between the moral scrutiny of
mediated narratives and media exposure. This study proposes
moral judgments of media content are not only related to basal
moral domain salience and exemplars, but also to the immediate
processing state of the individual at the moment of exposure. An
experiment manipulating construal level prior to exposure to a
mediated narrative was conducted to test this proposal. The results
suggest that evaluations of moral violations are modulated by
construal level. High-level construal led to harsher, more
consistent judgments of domain-violator morality, eliminating the
effect of baseline moral intuitions. Low-level construal induced an
apparent trade-off in moral evaluation strategy which is sensitive to
both narrative outcome and domain salience. When domain
violators were punished, intuitive moral salience was negatively
correlated with moral evaluations; however, when domain
violators were rewarded, the opposite trend emerged. These
findings indicate the need for an adjustment to the MIME model to
allow for processing states to interact with moral domain salience
and moral judgments of media content. They also suggest that the
strength and quality of moral intuitions are not robust to broader
cognitive processes, but interact with them.
Keywords: Model of intuitive morality and exemplars; moral
foundation theory; construal level theory; media enjoyment.

Introduction
Recent work on media perception has emphasized the role
of instinctive moral responses in shaping the enjoyment of
media narrative. This research explains that the affective
dispositions that individuals form towards characters and
events in a given dramatic context vary as a function of their
basal moral inclinations. For example, characters that
violate heavily weighted moral principles tend to be
evaluated more negatively than characters that violate less
heavily weighted principles (Tamborini, Eden, Bowman,
Grizzard, Weber, & Lewis, 2013). These intuitive moral
inclinations are thought to interact with experientially
derived schemas or exemplars, which allow for the fast
mapping of moral expectations onto characters (e.g., hero
vs. villain), even on the basis of very little evidence.
However, the specifics of the timeline for the operation of
schema-based and intuition-based processes remains a point
of debate (Raney, 2004).
The most comprehensive model to emerge from this
strand of research is the Model of Intuitive Morality and
Exemplars (MIME; Tamborini, 2013). The MIME integrates
short-term and long-term processes to account for

individuals’ local responses to media content and global
patterns of selective media exposure. The short-term
processes identified so far have dealt with relatively
enduring qualities of the individual (e.g., basal moral
intuitions) or properties of the stimulus itself (e.g., similarity
to available moral-narrative schemas or presence/absence of
moral conflict). However, several studies working from the
perspective of Construal-level Theory (CLT) have
demonstrated that more transient cognitive states can have
powerful effects on moral judgment (Eyal, Liberman, &
Trope, 2008; Gong & Medin, 2012; Žeželj & Jokić, 2014).
In the present study, we attempt to link these two strands of
research.

Intuitive Morality and MIME
The fundamental structure of the MIME is based on the core
tenants of Disposition Theory (DT; Zillmann, 2000). Both
approaches hold that the enjoyment of dramatic narrative
hinges on the satisfaction of moral expectations developed
relative to characters and the outcomes they experience. In
the classical model, these moral expectations arise from
continuous moral scrutiny over the course of the narrative.
If we deem a character to be morally righteous, we form a
positive affective disposition towards that character. This
disposition leads us to empathize with that character, and so
to hope that they receive positive outcomes. The opposite
situation holds for characters toward which we have
developed negative dispositions: we do not empathize with
them and hope for negative outcomes. This path from moral
scrutiny to empathic response has received empirical
support. Weber, Tamborini, Lee, and Stipp (2008) asked
participants to rate the characters and plots of a popular soap
opera along several dimensions: morality of characters,
liking of the characters, and perceived positivity/negativity
of character outcomes. Their findings show correlations
between perceived character morality, degree of positivity
or negativity of outcome relative to perceived character
morality, and character liking. But what system informs the
constant moral evaluations which underlie the formation of
affective dispositions?
Moral Foundations Theory (MFT; Haidt, 2001; Haidt &
Joseph, 2007) provides part of the answer. MFT proposes
that every moral judgment is in part determined by a
spontaneous, emotionally driven response – a gut intuition –
that appears immediately and with a simple valence. These
intuitions emerge in five distinct domains: care/harm,

1847

fairness/cheating, loyalty/betrayal, authority/ subversion,
and sanctity/degradation (Haidt & Joseph, 2007). The
care/harm domain relates to empathy and suffering;
fairness/cheating pertains to reciprocity rooted in a basic
sense of justice; loyalty/betrayal refers to the upholding of
social bonds; authority/subversion relates to social
hierarchies; and sanctity/degradation captures a general
aversion to disgusting objects or actions. These domains are
cross-culturally stable; however, the relative weighting of
the domains – so-called domain salience – tend to vary
between cultures, subcultures, and even individuals.
Tamborini (2013) places these five dimensions at the
heart of MIME. The baseline salience of each domain in
both absolute and relative terms interacts with cultural
environment, media exposure, and situational exemplar
salience to determine moral appraisals. Expanding on the
research of Weber et al. (2008), a few studies have begun to
validate the effects of domain salience on the formation of
affective dispositions towards characters and outcomes. For
instance, Tamborini et al. (2013) presented participants with
several brief narratives. In each narrative, the main character
commits a transgression relevant to only one of the intuitive
moral domains. The narratives were also manipulated for
outcome. Under one condition, the main characters
experienced positive outcomes; in the other condition, they
experienced negative outcomes. Tamborini and colleagues
also collected information about how heavily the
participants’ tended to weight each moral domain when
making moral judgments. As predicted, moral transgressions
were judged more harshly when participants cared more
about the domain.
One possibility not explored in the context of MIME so
far is that moral intuitions and exemplar salience might be
shaped by a person’s immediate cognitive environment.
Cognitive environment here refers to general properties of
an individual’s cognitive processing state immediately prior
to and concurrent with the media exposure. One reason to
believe that cognitive environment could affect even these
rapid, automatic moral intuitions comes from the growing
literature on CLT (Trope & Liberman, 2010). Studies in this
vein have repeatedly shown that judgments from many
different cognitive domains depend on how the individual
represents or construes the target of a judgment before it is
passed on to other cognitive systems.

Construal-level Theory
CLT proposes that one and the same stimulus can be
processed – or construed – at different levels of abstraction
(or concreteness). The system that imposes this degree of
abstraction, or construal level, exerts its effect before other
‘downstream’ cognitive systems have access to the
conceptual material. As such, it acts as a kind of filter, one
which determines both what information is to be extracted
from the perceptual input and how that information should
be integrated into the resulting concept. Construal levels are
usually divided into two opposing types, high-level
construals and low-level construals. High-level construals

have been shown to result in schematic, homogeneous, and
decontextualized representations. Low-level construals, on
the other hand, produce specific, heterogeneous, and
context-dependent representations. Differences in construal
level have been shown to affect downstream cognition in
several domains (see Trope and Liberman, 2010, for a
review).

CLT and Moral Evaluation
Eyal, Liberman, and Trope (2008; Study 1) tested whether
manipulations of construal level would alter participants’
evaluations of moral transgressions. Participants were asked
to read several vignettes containing morally reprehensible
behavior (along with mitigating circumstances that might
partially justify that behavior; e.g., a family eating their pet
dog after it has been accidentally run over). After reading
each vignette, the participants were presented either with an
expression summarizing the general moral principle at stake
(e.g., dishonoring the family pet; high-level construal) or a
specific description of the actions involved (e.g., eating the
meat of a dead dog; low-level construal). Eyal et al. found
that participants in the high-level construal condition rated
the transgressions as more negative than participants in the
low-level construal condition. These results were replicated
in several follow-up experiments with different
manipulations of construal level.
Eyal and colleagues explain these findings by suggesting
that construal level operates independently of and prior to
our intuitive emotional responses. High-level construals
mask mitigating details while low-level construals draw
them into focus. The difference in representation leads to a
difference in moral appraisal. Further support for this
explanation comes from Agerström and Björklund (2009),
who found that high-level construal resulted in harsher
appraisals of individuals who acted selfishly under
conditions favoring altruistic behavior.
Gong and Medin (2012) were unable to replicate these
findings. Using slightly different (though arguably more
direct) construal-level priming techniques, they found that
high-level construal resulted in less harsh appraisals lowlevel construal. Even in a direct replication of Eyal and
colleagues’ Study 2, they still found a vitiating effect of
high-level construal (for similar results see Lammers, 2012).
More recent research has supported this challenge. In
replications with higher-power designs (1-β = 0.95) than the
studies reported in Eyal et al. (2008) and Gong and Medin
(2012), Žeželj and Jokić (2014) found results mostly in line
with those of Gong and Medin. Most importantly, they
found harsher evaluations for low-level construal when
using direct manipulations of construal level (in agreement
with Gong and Medin’s Study 1).
But why should low-level construal result in harsher
evaluation of moral transgressions? Both Gong and Medin
(2012) and Žeželj and Jokić (2014) suggest that focusing on
contextual factors may render the transgression all the more
vivid (or imageable). Thus, instead of attenuating the

1848

severity of the act, low-level construal may actually enhance
it, leading to a more powerful intuitive-emotional response.
One aspect of the intuitionist moral approach that has not
been addressed in the research on CLT and morality so far is
the notion of domain salience. No study has controlled for
which moral domain was being violated or upheld. Indeed,
one reason for the conflicting results may be that the
domains represented in the vignettes were weighted
differently by the different populations recruited for the
different studies. These differences in domain salience
might lead to differences in the strength of the construallevel effect, or even to a difference in evaluation strategy.
Another factor not accounted for in the CLT morality
literature is the possible effect of character outcomes. Many
of the vignettes adopted in this literature frame the moral
transgression in terms of prior mitigating factors (e.g., the
family pet is killed accidentally prior to its being
consumed). However, to our knowledge, only one of the
vignettes used in these studies contained a description of
what befalls the character after the transgression (this is the
cheating vignette, in which a student cheats on a test and is
rewarded with good grades; see Gong & Medin, 2012,
Appendix A). As character outcomes constitute a kind of
detail, and one standing temporally between the violation
exposure and the judgment measurement, they may interact
with low-level construal to influence the severity of the
judgment.

Present Study
The present study addresses the shortcomings in the
previous section by blending the methodologies of Gong &
Medin (2012) with those of Tamborini et al. (2013). We
combine a manipulation of construal level with the same
narrative stimuli used in Tamborini et al. (2013). In so
doing, we explore whether high- or low-level construal of
the narrative content impacts the response of the intuitive
moral system.

H1: Moral evaluations for domain violators will differ
between a low- and a high construal level at the moment of
exposure.
Based on the findings of Tamborini et al. (2013), we also
expect increased domain salience to result in harsher
appraisals of moral transgressors (H2), though we expect
this effect to interact with construal level in a way consistent
with the outcome of H1.
H2: With increasing domain salience moral evaluations
for domain violators will decrease. This relationship will be
moderated by construal level at the moment of exposure.
Weber et al. (2008) found that moral transgressors who
were perceived as more severely punished were judged
more harshly. Thus, character outcomes may operate
directly on both moral judgments and narrative appeal.
Based on the logic of H2, this outcome-driven effect should
further interact with domain salience and construal level.
The higher moral evaluations associated with reward
outcomes should diminish more sharply as domain salience
increases (contextual factors should have less of an effect
for people with strong intuitive reactions). Moral
evaluations for punishment outcomes, on the other hand,
should already be somewhat low for low-salience domains,
and should converge with reward narrative as salience
increases. As in H2, we expect construal level to moderate
this relationship.
H3: Moral evaluations of domain violators will be
lower/worse for punishment outcomes compared to reward
outcomes in narratives. With increasing domain salience,
moral evaluations will decrease/worsen more rapidly for
reward outcomes than for punishment outcomes. This
relationship will be moderated by construal level at the
moment of exposure.

Method

Hypotheses
Given the conflict outlined above, we restrict ourselves to
non-directional hypotheses. Harsher moral appraisals under
high-level construal will support Eyal et al. (2008) inter
alia, who predict that mitigating details become available
under low-level construal. We refer to this explanation as
the mitigation principle. Harsher appraisals under low-level
construal will support Gong and Medin (2012) inter alia,
who predict that the graphic detail of low-level construal
intensifies the negative emotional response triggered by the
moral violation. We refer to this explanation as the
intensification principle.
All prior studies on CLT and morality have returned an
effect of construal level on moral judgment of events.
Therefore, we predict that construal level will result in an
aggregate difference in the negativity of moral appraisals,
all else being equal. This prediction is formalized as H1
below.

The general paradigm is adapted from Tamborini et al.
(2013). First, we assess participants’ baseline salience for
each of the five intuitive domains using the Moral
Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ31; Haidt et al., 2006).
Then, we prime the participants for high-level or low-level
construal by means of a hypernym-hyponym word
categorization task (Fujita et al., 2006, Experiment 3; Gong
& Medin, 2012, Study 4). Following the priming task, we
present the participants with ten brief ‘film synopses’ in
which the main character violates one of the five moral
domains and is either punished or rewarded for that
transgression. In the critical task, we asked participants to
rate the characters’ morality.

Participants
217 undergraduates from a university on the west coast of
the United States of America were recruited to participate in
this experiment.

Stimuli and Design
Stimuli for the experiment include both priming materials
and narrative materials. The priming stimuli consisted of

1849

two sentential frames and a set of 40 common nouns to be
categorized. In the low-level condition, participants were
presented with a sentential frame designed to elicit a
hyponym of the target word: An example of (a/an) WORD
is __. For instance, if provided with cat, a participant might
successfully respond tabby but not animal. In the high-level
condition, participants saw a frame designed to elicit
hypernyms of the targets: (A/An) WORD is an example of
__. In this condition, a correct response to cat would be
animal, but not tabby. Semantic categorization tasks of this
kind have elsewhere been shown to effectively modulate
construal level (Fujita et al., 2006). The 40 nouns to be
categorized were extracted from the MRC Psycholinguistic
Database (Wilson, 1988). All words were matched for
concreteness and familiarity ratings as provided in the MRC
annotation (concreteness: M = 593.55, sd = 29.02;
familiarity: M = 583.83, sd = 37.21).
The narrative materials were taken directly from
Tamborini et al. (2013). These materials comprise 20
narratives. Each narrative concerns a focal character that
violates one of the five moral domains, such that each
domain is violated in two different narratives (10 narrative
skeletons total). Each of these narrative skeletons consists of
three parts: a positive introduction to the character (one or
two sentences), a description of the transgression (three or
four sentences), and a description of the outcome (one
sentence). Therefore, our narratives contain both mitigating
and damning details regarding each domain violator. This is
critical given that the different explanations invoked by the
mitigation principle compared to the intensification
principle ultimately turn on the availability of cues capable
of mitigating or intensifying the offense. The first two parts
for each narrative are identical across all conditions. The
third part varies as a function of the outcome manipulation:
in the ‘reward’ condition, the final sentence describes a
positive outcome; in the ‘punishment’ condition, it describes
a negative outcome. For a full discussion, see Tamborini et
al. (2013).
We employ a 2 x 2 x 5 mixed-effect design. Our betweensubjects variable is construal level; our within-subjects
variables are outcome and domain. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of four possible conditions based
on a crossing of narrative block (ordering) and construallevel condition. Each narrative block contained ten
narratives (two for each of the five domains). The blocks
were counterbalanced across the outcome condition, such
that participants in the two block conditions saw the same
narratives with opposite (punishment vs. reward) endings.
In the low-level and high-level construal conditions,
participants completed the hyponym and hypernym word
categorization tasks, respectively.

Procedure
All measures and stimuli were presented on a 17-in LCD
display with 1366 X 768 screen resolution. The interface
and data collection were implemented through OpenSesame
0.27.4 (Mathôt et al., 2012). As in the previous studies

using these narratives, participants were told that they would
be viewing a number of brief film synopses.
Prior to the main task, each participant completed the
Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ31; Haidt, Graham,
& Hersh, 2006), a 31-item survey with two parts. In Part
One, 15 factors involved in making moral judgments (e.g.,
“Whether or not someone was harmed”) are rated on a scale
from 0 = “not at all relevant” to 5 = “extremely important”.
This section also includes one catch question (“Whether or
not someone believed in astrology”) designed to help in
identifying disengaged participants. In Part Two, 15
statements regarding personal beliefs are rated from 0 =
“strongly disagree” to 5 = “strongly agree”. Presentation of
MFQ items was randomized within each part for each
participant, though all participants completed Part One
before Part Two.
In the main task, participants read each of the ten
narratives described above. Each narrative was presented
individually, followed by three questions adopted from
Tamborini and colleagues’ domain violation questionnaire.
The critical question elicited a moral evaluation of the focal
character based on their actions (How moral were NAME’s
actions in this movie plot?); the others (not evaluated here)
targeted perceived ethicality and enjoyment of the narrative.
Responses were collected using a 7-point Likert scale
running from 1 = ‘extremely immoral’ to 7 = ‘extremely
moral.’ The order of presentation of both the narratives and
the domain violation questions was randomized for each
participant. Responses and reaction times were collected.
Only the former are considered here.
Data Trimming
Prior to running our data analysis, we omitted several
problematic data points on a priori grounds. Five
participants were excluded from the study due to technical
errors. Another eight participants were removed due to
unreliable MFQ responses, as indicated by a response of 3
or higher to the ‘catch’ question. Such a response indicates
low engagement with the task. In addition, we removed any
responses with response latency less than 2000 ms.

Results
We fit a linear mixed effect models to predict participants’
moral evaluations of focal domain violators. Participant and
narrative type (the narrative skeleton, two per domain) were
included as random effects (intercepts only) to partial out
the idiosyncrasies of individual participants and narratives.
We also include a fixed effect of domain (harm, fairness,
authority, purity, loyalty) as a control to ensure that our
results generalize to the total intuitive-moral system. To test
H1, we include a main effect of construal level. To test H2,
we add a main effect of domain-salience (MFQ scores) and
the interaction between construal level and domain salience.
Finally, to test H3, we further add a main effect of outcome
condition (punishment or reward), along with the three-way
interaction between outcome condition, construal level and
domain salience. Prior to the regression analysis, the raw

1850

evaluation scores were transformed by adding one to avoid
the presence of zeroes.

Figure 1: Interaction of construal level, narrative outcomes,
and domain salience on morality ratings
H1 and H2
Our model did not uncover a significant main effect of
construal level (F(1, 1259.34) = 0.85, n.s.). Neither did the
two-way interaction between construal level and domain
salience reach significance (F(1, 1379.00) = 0.10, n.s.).
Unexpectedly, we also found no main effect of domain
salience (F(1, 1083.07) = 0.25, n.s.). Therefore, we do not
find support for a simple relationship between construal
level and domain salience. It appears that construal level has
interfered with general effect of domain salience observed
in other studies.
H3
We did uncover a significant three-way interaction of
construal level, domain salience and outcome condition
(β=±0.05, F(1, 1345.58) = 4.55, p < 0.03). These results are
summarized in Figure 1.
High-level construals (left two panels) are insensitive to
domain salience, as indicated by the essentially zero slope
of both regression curves. For low-level construals (right
two panels), the picture is more complex. On the one hand,
domain violators that were punished for their transgressions
were rated more negatively as domain salience increased.
On the other hand, domain violators that were rewarded for
their transgressions were given increasingly positive ratings
as domain salience increased.

Discussion and Conclusions
The present experiment provides support for a moderating
role of construal level in the formation of moral appraisals
during exposure to media content. Whereas previous
studies have demonstrated generally negative correlations
between moral assessment of domain violators and the

intuitive salience for the violated domain, the present study
only replicated this pattern under a single condition: lowlevel construal of narratives with negative outcomes for
domain violators. If the character receives a positive
outcome under low-level construal, the trend is entirely
reversed. Moreover, if the participant is operating under
high-level construal with either positive or negative
outcome, the effect of domain salience disappears
altogether.
Our findings shed light on the current controversy
between
mitigation-based and intensification-based
accounts of the effects of low-level vs. high-level construal.
Both accounts emphasize the effect of details extracted
through low-level construal, but differ with respect to the
nature of this effect. The mitigation principle (e.g., Eyal et
al., 2008) states that low-level construal increases moral
ratings by focusing details that deflate the intensity of the
emotional response. The intensification principle (e.g.,
Gong & Medin, 2012) states that low-level construal
decreases moral ratings by focusing details that exacerbate
the negativity of the emotional response. Our results speak
in favor of both principles, though each appears to operate
only under certain conditions.
First, consider the imperviousness of high-level construal
to details within the narratives. These details include the
character introductions (which included positive statements
about the characters, casting them as upholders of other
moral domains) and the outcomes they experienced. No
matter how (un)important the domain being violated, these
details were not capable of raising morality scores above
floor performance. This fact is predicted by both the
mitigation and the intensification accounts in that both
assume a lack of conceptual articulation for high-level
construal. However, the fact that high-level construal
consistently produces lower ratings relative to low-level
construal is not compatible with the intensification
principle, which states that moral evaluations under lowlevel construal should sink well below – not approach –
those of high-level construal. Instead, this relationship
meshes with the mitigation principle; lack of access to
relevant mitigating details leads to low morality judgments.
But why should high-level construal eliminate the effect
of domain salience? To answer this question, we look to
Raney’s extension to DT. Raney (2004) proposed that not all
moral evaluations involve an intuitive moral response to the
actual content of the stimulus. Rather, he suggests that we
often rely on basic scripts or story exemplars to evaluate
characters. These scripts arise as we generalize over prior
experience with similar narratives. They allow us to rapidly
assign moral roles and expectations to characters. Returning
to the present study, the abstract representations generated
by high-level construal could lead to more focused (i.e.,
low-competition) activation of archetypal scripts and
exemplars through their similarity in form (conceptualstructural isometry). Support for this notion comes from the
fact that similarity in representational structure has been
shown to facilitate (analogical) co-mapping in other

1851

domains (e.g., Falkenheiner, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989).
This enhanced connectivity between stimulus and schema
could allow for rapid mapping between the domain violator
and an abstract ‘villain’ role, resulting in lowered morality
appraisals across the board.
Low-level construal yields a much more complicated
pattern of responses. Punishment narratives produce a
negative association between domain salience and morality
ratings, while reward narratives produce a positive
association. Thus, punishment narratives support the
intensification principle, while reward narratives support the
mitigation principle. Despite the apparent contradiction,
both of these trends may be explained by a single
mechanism within the MIME: the reciprocal link between
exemplars and intuitive moral responses. To understand this
point, we must deal with three facts. First, low-level
construal is sensitive to domain of violation, indicating
engagement with the intuitive moral system (unlike highlevel construal). Second, as domain salience increases, so
does the impact of the outcome effect, suggesting a ‘blind’
(i.e., non-monotonic) boost to the signal based on domain
salience. Finally, the directions of the effects seem to reflect
the quality of the outcome – punished characters are less
moral than rewarded characters, even though both
committed the same violation. Thus, we propose that the
detailed and context-dependent representations of low-level
construal activate the intuitive moral system, which
introduces a salience-proportional boost to the signal as
activation spreads into the exemplar network. This
activation spreads relative to the content of the narrative,
including the violation and the outcome. The more typical
punishment narratives feed activation into a coherent set of
compatible schemata dealing with the punishment of moral
transgression. In turn, these schemata reinforce negative
appraisals of the violator through the broad affective
annotation of a common ‘villain’ role. For reward
narratives, however, several incoherent and non-compatible
schemata are simultaneously activated: the violation
engages violation/punishment schemata like those described
above, while the reward outcome connects to virtue/reward
schemata. The advantage for the latter schemata may be a
result of the relative recency of the outcome as compared to
the violation. Such a recency effect could overshadow the
competing negative push of the violation to create the
overall positive interaction observed here.
The mechanisms sketched above have far-reaching
implications for our understanding of construal level, moral
appraisal, and response to media content. They raise many
important questions related to the dynamics (i.e., flexibility)
of the construal level system during extended exposure to
morally relevant content and how the local effects reported
here translate into long-term tuning of the moral system.

References
Agerström, J., & Björklund, F. (2009). Moral concerns are
greater for temporally distant events and are moderated by
value strength. Social Cognition, 27, 261–282.

Eyal, T., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2008). Judging near
and distant virtue and vice. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 44, 1204-1209.
Falkenheiner, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
Structure-Mapping Engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Fujita, K., Trope, Y., Liberman, N., & Levin-Sagi, M.
(2006). Construal levels and self control. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 90(3), 351-367.
Gong, H. & Medin, D. L. (2012). Construal levels and
moral judgment: Some complications. Judgment and
Decision Making, 7(5), 628-638.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment.
Psychological Review, 108(4), 814-834.
Haidt, J. & Joseph, C. (2007). The moral mind: How 5 sets
of innate moral intuitions guide the development of many
culture-specific virtues, and perhaps even modules. In P.
Carruthers, S. Laurence & S. Stich (Eds.), The innate
mind, Vol. 3 (pp. 367–391). New York, NY: Oxford.
Haidt, J., Graham, J., & Hersh, M. A. (2006). The moral
foundations
questionnaire.
Retrieved
from
http://faculty.virginia.edu/haidtlab/mf.html.
Lammers, J. (2012). Abstraction increases hypocrisy.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 475-480.
Mathôt, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012).
OpenSesame: An open-source, graphical experiment
builder for the social sciences. Behavior Research
Methods, 44(2), 314-324.
Raney, A. A. (2004). Expanding disposition theory:
Reconsidering character liking, moral evaluations, and
enjoyment. Communication Theory, 14(4), 348-369.
Tamborini, R. (2013). A model of intuitive morality and
exemplars. In R. Tamborini (Ed.), Media and the moral
mind (pp. 43-74). New York: Routledge.
Tamborini, R., Eden, A., Bowman, N. D., Grizzard, M.,
Weber, R., & Lewis, J. (2013). Predicting media appeals
from instinctive moral values. Mass Communication and
Society, 16(3), 325-346.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of
psychological distance. Psychological Review, 117(2),
440-463.
Weber, R., Tamborini, R., Lee, H., & Stipp, H. (2008). Soap
opera exposure and enjoyment. A longitudinal test of
disposition theory. Media Psychology, 4(1), 462-487.
Wilson, M. (1988). MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine-usable dictionary version 2.00. Behavior,
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 20(1), 610.
Žeželj, I. L. and Jokić, B. R. (2014). Replication of
experiments evaluating impact of psychological distance
on moral judgment (Eyal, Liberman, & Trope, 2008;
Gong & Medin, 2012). Social Psychology, 45(3)¸223-231.
Zillmann, D. (2000). Basal morality in drama appreciation.
In I. Bondebjerg (Ed.), Moving images, culture, and the
mind (pp. 53–63). Luton: University of Luton Press.

1852

