Contextual Events and Their Role in a Two-Choice Joint Simon Task
Steve Croker (s.croker@ilstu.edu), J. Scott Jordan (jsjorda@ilstu.edu),
Daniel S. Schloesser (dschloe@ilstu.edu), Vincent Cialdella (vtciald@ilstu.edu), Alex Dayer
(adayer@ilstu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Illinois State University
Campus Box 4620
Normal, IL 61790-4620 USA

Abstract
We examined the effects of individual versus joint action on a
Simon task using motion tracking to explore the implicit
cognitive dynamics underlying responses. In both individual and
joint conditions, participants were slower to respond, and were
differentially attracted to the distracter response location, when
the spatial component of the stimulus was incompatible with the
response location. When two people completed similar two
choice tasks together, the results were not statistically different
from the individual condition, even though the magnitude of the
stimulus-response compatibility effect was slightly larger.
Neither was there an increased effect when the partner had no
stimulus-response conflict to resolve. We found no evidence for
an action conflict when the responses of the two partners were
different. These data imply that the literature regarding the Joint
Simon task is still in the process of determining the relevant
events that interact with and support joint action.
Keywords: Joint action; Simon effect; motion tracking

In the two-choice Simon task, the spatial dimension of the
stimulus leads to an automatic activation of the response
corresponding to that spatial information (e.g., a stimulus
located to, or pointing to, the left, primes a left response). If
the correct response is located to the same side as the
stimulus, responses will be faster than when the spatial
features of stimulus and response do not overlap (Kornblum,
Hasbrouq, & Osman, 1990). Sebanz, Knoblich, and Prinz
(2003, 2005) had participants engage in a Simon task either
as individuals or as dyads. The task required that participants
respond to pictures of hands wearing a colored ring pointing
to the left or right. Response buttons were located to the left
or right of the screen. When participants did the task together,
one individual was responsible for responding to one
component of the stimulus (e.g., respond right for a green
ring) while the other was responsible for responding to
another component (e.g., respond left for a red ring).
Essentially, each participant engaged in a go/no-go task. That
is, they responded when the stimulus matched the condition
of their rule (i.e., a go trial) and did not respond when the
stimulus did not match the condition of their rule (i.e., a nogo trial). In each trial, the direction of response indicated by
the ring color was either compatible with the spatial
dimension of the stimulus (e.g., left response and hand
pointing left) or incompatible (e.g., left response and hand
pointing right). For dyads, response times (RTs) were
significantly longer on incompatible trials than compatible
trials. This Simon effect did not occur when participants
engaged in the same go/no-go task alone. In other words, the

spatial compatibility of the pointing hand only affected RTs
when participants completed the task with another person.
Sebanz et al. argue that the joint Simon effect (JSE) emerged
in the dyad condition because participants automatically
represented the action of their partner. Consequently, when
their partner’s co-represented action conflicted with their
own, they had to resolve a response conflict.
An alternative account of the JSE is presented by Dolk,
Hommel, Prinz, and Liepelt (2013; Dolk et al., 2014).
According to their referential coding hypothesis, the JSE does
not emerge via co-representation of another’s action, but
rather the co-actor is treated as a spatial reference frame for
coding one’s actions. In the individual go/no-go task, there is
only one response, which is not spatially coded. When a coactor is introduced, a response is coded as “left” or “right”
relative to the co-actor. Dolk et al. also suggest that, on this
view, the source of the reference frame need not be an
intentional agent. To test this claim, they replaced the coactor with objects such as a waving cat, a clock, and a
metronome, and found that the JSE still appeared.
Croker, Jordan, Schloesser, and Cialdella (2015) had
participants engage in a Simon task alone or with a
confederate. However, whereas most researchers have each
participant effectively engage in a go/no-go task, Croker et
al. asked participants to respond to one of two choices on
every trial. In their task, participants always followed the
same response rule (i.e., right for a green ring and left is the
ring was not green). In the individual condition, participants
completed this task alone. In the joint-color condition, a
confederate worked alongside the participant and responded
left for red rings and right if the ring was not red. In the jointdirection condition, a confederate worked alongside the
participant and responded to the direction of the pointing
hand. This joint-direction condition created two kinds of
trials: trials in which the two stimulus dimensions primed the
same response for the participant and confederate (i.e., nonconflict trials) and trials in which the stimulus primed
opposite responses for the participant and confederate (i.e.,
conflict trials). In addition to requiring participants to respond
on every trial, Croker et al. diverged from the Sebanz et al.
(2005) paradigm by having participants indicate their
responses using a computer mouse, while the confederate
made responses on a button box. To make a response,
participants moved a mouse cursor from the bottom center of
the screen to a response location in the left or right upper
corner of the display. In addition to providing RTs, the use of
mouse trajectory responses—instead of button presses—

1913

allowed the authors to obtain an implicit measure of the
cognitive dynamics underlying response choice: maximum
deviations toward the distracter response (MDs). In order for
movement data to be informative, it is necessary to make both
response options available to participants. In go/no-go tasks,
in which only one response location is utilized (even if the
alternative is displayed), participants move the mouse in a
straight line from the start location to the response location,
even on spatially incompatible trials. A two-choice task
means that participants always have to consider both
response locations, and we can observe the extent to which a
movement is attracted to the alternate response location prior
to its arrival at the correct response. Croker et al. replicated
the basic Simon effect in both the RT and MD data across all
three conditions; both RTs and deviations toward the
distracter responses were greater on incompatible trials than
compatible trials. On compatible trials, mouse trajectories
were attracted toward a single strong attractor for that
problem. On incompatible trials there was greater
competition between the two response options, as different
dimensions of the stimuli (i.e., color and direction) primed
different responses, and there was greater deviation towards
the distracter response. Croker et al. also found that RTs were
increased, and MDs were decreased, in the joint conditions.
This finding was interpreted as evidence for the role of
inhibition; participants took longer to respond, but took more
direct routes to the response, suggesting that the increased
RTs were due to the presence of a co-actor, and not due to
increased response-path lengths.
The purpose of the current study is to extend the work of
Croker et al. (2015) in two ways. First, to examine the
temporal dynamics of both partners’ response selection in a
two-choice Joint Simon task. In addition to the research
described above, many other studies have shown a joint
Simon effect (JSE) for dyads sharing a task in a go/no-go
fashion (e.g., Malone, Castillo, Kloos, Holden, &
Richardson, 2014; Welsh, 2009), but in the present study, we
look at two participants who are both engaged in two-choice
tasks. Croker et al. (2015) were only able to record movement
trajectories for one person in joint-action conditions. In the
present study, we use motion tracking to record response
trajectories of two participants working alongside one
another. Second, Croker et al. failed to replicate some of
Sebanz et al.’s (2005) findings, concluding that such effects
may have emerged specifically out of the unique constraints
of the Sebanz et al. task. By collecting data from two
participants both engaged in arm reach responses (as opposed
to mouse and button responses) we can determine the extent
to which the mouse trajectory data and arm reach trajectory
data are consistent, or whether Croker et al.’s findings were
are also a function of the specific task context.
If the inhibition account of the Joint Simon data proposed
by Croker et al. (2015) generalizes beyond the task
constraints of that experiment then, in addition to anticipating
a replication of the basic Simon effect (i.e., larger RTs and
MDs for incompatible trials than compatible trials), we
predict that the presence of a co-actor will cause greater

automatic inhibition, and thus we expect both partners to
exhibit longer RTs in the joint conditions than the individual
condition, but we do not expect to see increased MDs.
Alternatively, given Malone et al.’s (2014) assertion that
Joint Simon effects emerge out of a “…dynamical (timeevolving) interpersonal coupling that operates to perturb the
behavior of socially situated actors…” (p. 1), the social
availability of each actor’s movement dynamics in the
present task may lead to the two participants’ dynamics
becoming coupled. This would be consistent with Malone et
al.’s finding that the trial-to-trial RTs collected in a Joint
Go/No task were more correlated over the long-term than RT
streams collected from pseudo pairs (i.e., randomly paired
data from the Individual condition). Such time-evolving,
interpersonal coupling in the present task might lead to the
participants’ real-time dynamics synergistically influencing
each other and, as a possible result, generating response
synchrony that serves to negate any Joint Simon effects. Such
an outcome would imply that the effects deemed due to
inhibition in the Croker et al. study do not generalize to a
situation in which both actors respond on every trial via
socially-observable movements.

Method
Participants and materials
Forty participants (32 female; mean age = 20.2 years) from
Illinois State University volunteered as participants for extra
course credit. Stimuli consisted of a set of four images, and
one image appeared center screen on each trial. Every image
was comprised of two stimulus dimensions: hand direction
and ring color. In each trial, a hand was presented pointing
either left or right wearing a ring that was either green or red.
This yields four possible stimulus combinations: left-pointing
hand/green ring, left-pointing hand/red ring, right-pointing
hand/green ring, and right-pointing hand/red ring. We used a
modified version of the Sebanz et al. (2005) paradigm to
accommodate motion tracking technology. Stimuli were
presented on a screen using Inquisit software
(http://www.millisecond.com/), and pairs of participants
responded using a wooden hammer to tap either a left or right
wooden target (23” apart and 26” above the start location). A
Polhemus Patriot motion sensor was attached to each hammer
in order to capture the motor dynamics of each response (see
Figure 1). Participants were told to respond as quickly as
possible and to return to the starting location after each trial.
On trials in which one or both of the participants responded
incorrectly, a red X was presented on the corresponding side
of the screen.

Procedure
After completing four practice trials, participants completed
three blocks (100 trials each) of the Sebanz et al. task. In each
block, all four images (left-pointing hand/green ring, leftpointing hand/red ring, right-pointing hand/green ring, and
right-pointing hand/red ring) were presented 25 times each in
a randomized order.

1914

Figure 2: Sample trajectories: (a) a left response with a
negative deviation; (b) a right response with a positive
deviation.

Figure 1: Experimental setup. Each participant responded to
a left or right response location using a wooden hammer
with a motion sensor attached to it, starting from a point
marked on the table (grey square).

Design and Analyses
In the individual block, participants completed the task on
their own. They were asked to tap the right target whenever
the ring was green, and the left target if the ring was not
green. In the joint-color and joint-direction blocks,
participants completed the task with a partner. They were
instructed that their partner would respond on every trial to
the same stimulus at the same time, but that the partner was
following a different rule. In the joint-color block,
participants responded to ring color. Each participant’s rule
was different, but their actions were the same. Partner A’s
task was to respond to red rings by tapping the left target and
to non-red rings by tapping the right target. Partner B’s task
was to respond to green rings by tapping the right target and
non-green rings by tapping the left target. There were two
joint-direction conditions: joint-left and joint-right. In both
joint-direction conditions, one partner responded to the
spatial component of the stimulus (direction) while the other
responded to the non-spatial component (color). In the jointleft condition, the partner responding to direction (i.e.,
Partner A) had the task of responding to hands pointing left
by tapping the left target and to hands not pointing left by
tapping the right target. Partner B’s task was to respond to
green rings by tapping the right target and to non-green rings
by tapping the left target. In the joint-right condition, partner
A’s task was to respond to hands pointing right by tapping
the left target and to hands not-pointing right by tapping the
right target. Partner B’s task was the same as Partner B’s task
in the joint-left condition: to respond to green rings by
tapping the right target and to non-green rings by tapping the
left target. Partner A completed the individual condition
before the joint conditions and partner B completed the
individual condition after the joint conditions. Joint
conditions were counter-balanced between participants.

The dependent variables were response time and maximum
deviation from an idealized trajectory toward the correct
response. Streaming x, y, and z coordinates from each pair of
participants were recorded at a rate of 60Hz using a Polhemus
Patriot magnetic motion tracking system and Liberty 8
Capture software (Richardson, 2007). As the movement of
interest is in the y (left-right) and z (up-down) planes, we did
not include x-coordinate data (forward-backward) in our
analyses. We recorded a continuous data stream for each
condition (i.e., 100 trials), and defined trial onset as the point
at which the tangential velocity of the movement in the y and
z planes exceeded 5% of the maximum, and trial offset as the
point at which tangential velocity dropped below 5% of the
maximum, after passing one third of the maximum value.
This procedure ensured that we captured just the outward
portion of the motion, from the start location to the response
location. We computed maximum deviation by comparing
the y,z coordinates of the movement trajectory for each trial
with a direct line between the start and end points of each
trajectory. The greatest distance between the actual and
idealized trajectories is the maximum deviation. A positive
MD value indicates deviation towards the distracter response,
and a negative deviation indicates deviation away from the
distracter (see Figure 2). Only correct responses were
included for analysis, but error rates were small (0.6%). Some
trials had to be excluded due to noisy data resulting from
electromagnetic interference to the magnetic field used by the
motion tracking system; in a few cases this meant eliminating
all trials for a given participant. After data were excluded, we
had 38 participants in the individual condition, and 37 in each
of the joint-color and joint-direction conditions.

1915

Results

Response Times (ms)

Responses to Color

Individual and Joint-Color Conditions

500
480
460
440
420
400
Individual

Joint Color

Compatible

Incompatible

Figure 3: Response times (with standard error bars)

Maximum Deviations (cm)

Responses to Color
5
4
3
2
1

Joint-Direction Condition

0
Individual

Joint Color

Compatible

Incompatible

Figure 4: Maximum deviations (with standard error bars)

Responses to Direction and Color
Response Times (ms)

The individual condition enables us to explore whether we
observe the basic Simon effect, and whether motion tracking
gives us any additional insight into the effect. The joint-color
task, in which partner A responds left to red, and partner B
responds right to green, allows us to determine whether the
addition of a co-actor with a different task rule, but the same
actions, increases the size of the effect. We found an effect of
spatial compatibility both for response times (RTs), F(1,35)
= 30.303, p < .001, ηp2 = .464, and maximum deviations
(MDs), F(1,35) = 22.825, p < .001, ηp2 = .395, for both the
individual and joint-color conditions (see Figures 3 and 4).
The increase in MDs on spatially incompatible trials shows
that participants were differentially attracted to the
unselected, incorrect response on these trials, suggesting an
early response to the task-irrelevant spatial component of the
stimulus, which was later inhibited.
The difference in RTs between compatible and
incompatible trials was larger in the joint-color condition
than the individual condition (18ms vs. 14ms), as was the
difference in MDs. Although the differences were
numerically greater in the joint-color condition, we found no
statistical difference between the individual and joint-color
conditions and, importantly, no interactions between
condition and spatial compatibility for either dependent
variable.

500
480
460
440
420
400
Left

Right

Direction
Conflict

Left

Right
Color

No Conflict

Figure 5: Response times for conflict vs. no-conflict
responses for the joint-left and joint-right conditions (with
standard error bars).

The joint-direction condition allows us to explore the effects
of a co-actor who is following a different task rule and
sometimes producing different actions. On some trials, both
participants respond to the same location (no-conflict); on
others, they respond to different locations (conflict).
Participants who completed the joint-left task in the jointdirection condition were instructed to respond left to leftpointing hands, which means that all their responses were
spatially compatible with the stimulus. Participants who
completed the joint-right task in the joint-direction condition
were instructed to respond left to right-pointing hands,
meaning that all trials were incompatible. We conducted
mixed ANOVAs on the effects of task (direction vs. color—
between subjects), direction-compatibility for the partner
responding to the direction of the hand (left vs. right—
between subjects), and action conflict between the two
participants (conflict vs. no-conflict responses—within
subjects) on RTs and MDs.
For RTs, there was an interaction between task, directioncompatibility, and action conflict, F(1,33) = 9.249, p = .005,
ηp2 = .219, whereby conflict and no-conflict trials differed for
the color-task participants only, and the direction of the effect
difference varied according to the direction-compatibility of
their partner (see Figure 5). The two stimuli to which the
participant given the right-direction task responded to the
same location as the color-task participant are right/green and
left/red. The two stimuli to which the left-direction response

1916

Discussion
As expected, the spatial compatibility of a stimulus had an
effect on RTs and MDs in the individual condition. This is

Maximum Deviations (cm)

Responses to Direction and Color
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
Left

Right

Direction
Conflict

Left

Right
Color

No Conflict

Figure 6: Maximum deviations for conflict vs. no-conflict
responses for the joint-left and joint-right conditions (with
standard error bars).

Responses to Direction
Maximum Deviations (cm)

was different to the color-task response are also right/green
and left/red, both of which are spatial conflict trials for the
color-task participant. Therefore, the interaction between
action conflict and direction-compatibility can be explained
as a simple stimulus-response compatibility effect. The
participants given the direction task did not respond
differentially on conflict or no-conflict trials, suggesting that
they did not need to distinguish between own- and otherresponses. Note that we do not expect to see stimulusresponse compatibility effects for these participants because
all responses in the left-direction condition are spatially
compatible with the stimuli, and all responses in the rightdirection condition are spatially incompatible with the
stimuli.
There was an interaction between direction condition and
response type for MDs, F(1,33) = 16.314, p < .001, ηp2 = .331,
whereby MDs were largest for conflict responses in the leftdirection condition and no-conflict responses in the rightdirection condition. As with the RT data, these larger MDs
correspond to spatially-incompatible trials for the participant
given the color-task, yet there was no interaction with
participant task (direction vs. color), probably because this
pattern also held for participants in the left-direction task.
There was also an interaction between direction condition
and task, F(1,33) = 5.75, p = .022, ηp2 = .148, such that MDs
were larger in the left-direction condition than the rightdirection condition for participants given the color task, but
there were no differences between these two conditions for
participants given the direction task (see Figure 6).
In order to test the prediction that the presence of a co-actor
would lead to larger RTs, but not MDs, for the color-task
participant, we conducted 2 (task: individual vs. jointdirection) x 2 (spatial compatibility) repeated-measures
ANOVAs. We found no main effect of task on RTs, F(1,17)
< 0.01, p = .989, ηp2 = .000. As with the joint-color condition,
the difference between compatible and incompatible trials
was numerically larger in the joint-direction condition than
the individual condition (13ms vs. 8ms), but the condition x
compatibility interaction was non-significant, F(1,17) = 1.36,
p = .260, ηp2 = .074. There was no effect of task on MDs,
F(1,17) = 0.40, p = .533, ηp2 = .023.
Finally, given that the role of partner A was just to respond
to direction, we conducted mixed ANOVAs on the effects of
stimulus direction, stimulus color, and directioncompatibility of the task for partner A only. There was an
interaction between stimulus direction and condition for both
RTs, F(1,17) = 6.018, p = .025, ηp2 = .261, and MDs, F(1,17)
= 39.657, p < .001, ηp2 = .700. RTs and MDs were greater for
left stimuli for participants responding to right and vice versa.
For the stimuli in which the direction of the hand was
congruent with the rule, the MDs are actually negative –
participants were repelled from the distracter response (see
Figure 7).

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
Joint Left
Left Pointing Stimulus

Joint Right
Right Pointing Stimulus

Figure 7: Maximum deviations for left vs. right stimuli for
partner A (with standard error bars).
the basic Simon effect whereby participants take longer to
respond to stimuli with conflicting spatial and non-spatial
cues. The MD data give us direct evidence that participants
are differentially attracted to the distracter response on
spatially incompatible trials; reach trajectories showed early
attraction to the response indicated by the direction of the
hand, prior to moving toward the correct response location
indicated by the color of the stimulus. This effect persisted
when participants worked alongside a partner, regardless of
whether their partner was responding to the color or spatial
dimension of the stimulus. Our prediction that RTs would
begreater in the joint conditions was not supported. This is
surprising, as we previously found increased RTs for
participants responding to color using a mouse tracking
paradigm (Croker et al., 2015). However, aside from the
difference between moving a mouse cursor through two
dimensions and a motion sensor through three dimensions,

1917

the major difference between the two studies is the response
modality of the co-actor. Croker et al. had a confederate
respond with a button press whereas, in the present study, coactors responded by generating a reach behavior. These
behaviors were emitted by both participants simultaneously,
in full view of the other. Perhaps the difference in findings
between Croker et al. (2015) and the present study is due to
an entrainment that may have emerged between the
movements of the two participants as they generated
responses in the format demanded by the present task.
Contrary to the predictions of both the action corepresentation and referential coding accounts, we found no
effect of conflict vs. no-conflict trials in the joint-direction
condition. If it is the case that participants represent or encode
both their action and that of their partner, we would expect
faster and more direct responses on trials where both
participants respond to the same location than trials where
one responds to the left and the other to the right. Participants
did not take longer to respond when their action was the
opposite of their partner. However, we also found no support
for the prediction, based on our inhibitory account, that RTs
would be greater in the joint condition than the individual
condition.
The MD data present a slightly more complicated picture.
We found evidence for a basic Simon effect for the color-task
participants, in that MDs were larger for spatially
incompatible trials, yet there was no interaction with task
(direction vs. color). As shown in Figure 6, the lack of an
interaction is probably due to the difference in MDs between
conflict and no-conflict trials for participants in the leftdirection condition. It could be the case that participants
given the left-direction task also encoded the spatial
incompatibility for their partners in the conflict trials, and
reflected their partner’s shifting trajectory as their partners
resolved the spatial stimulus-response incompatibility. If this
were the case, we would then also expect to see a similar
effect for the no-conflict trials for participants given the rightdirection task; an effect we did not observe. However, all
trials are spatially incompatible in the right-direction task,
and the response patterns of these participants may reflect this
fact. Rather than a response cost for the left-direction
participants on conflict trials, there may be a facilitation on
the no-conflict trials, in which neither participant has to
resolve a spatial conflict, either on the basis of partner
response or stimulus-response compatibility. This
interpretation is consistent with the fact that the MDs for
participants given the direction task are smallest on leftdirection/no-conflict trials. We also found that participants
given the direction task exhibit small, even negative,
deviations when the stimulus direction matches the target
direction given in the task instructions. Participants given the
“respond left to left hands” rule showed a spatial bias towards
the left for all stimuli, and participants given the “respond left
to right hands” rule showed a bias to the right. This finding
suggests that, even though the instructions can be interpreted
as stating how to respond to both left- and right-pointing

hands, the movement data reflect the fact that only one spatial
direction was explicitly mentioned.
In sum, using a novel motion-tracking methodology, we
found that movement trajectories offer confirmatory
evidence that the response time cost for spatially
incompatible trials in the Simon task is due to an initial
attraction to the direction indicated by the stimulus. In
addition, the present data seem to constitute yet another study
that reveals the contextually sensitive nature of Joint Simon
effects. That is, while the data of Sebanz et al. (2003, 2005)
are consistent with a co-representation account, the data of
Dolk et al. (2013, 2014) with a referential coding account, the
data of Croker et al. (2015) with an inhibition account, and
the data of the present study with an entrainment account, it
seems all of these accounts fail to survive generalization to
different task constraints. While this lack of replication
makes it difficult to assert the “correctness” of any one
account, it simultaneously clarifies the immense complexity
of interacting factors that contextually and contingently
interact and support the phenomenon of joint action.

References
Croker, S., Jordan, J. S., Schloesser, D., & Cialdella, V.
(2015). The effects of racial similarity and dissimilarity
on the joint Simon task. In D. C. Noelle, R. Dale, A. S.
Warlaumont, J. Yoshimi, T. Matlock, C. D. Jennings, &
P. P. Maglio, P. P. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 37th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 489-494).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Dolk, T., Hommel, B., Prinz, W., & Liepelt, R. (2013). The
(not so) Social Simon effect: A referential coding
account. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 39, 1248-1260.
Dolk, T., Hommel, B., Colzato, L.S., Schütz-Bosbach, S.,
Prinz, W., & Liepelt, R. (2014). The joint Simon effect: A
review and theoretical integration. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5:974.
Kornblum, S., Hasbroucq, T., & Osman, A. (1990).
Dimensional overlap: Cognitive basis for stimulusresponse compatibility – A model and taxonomy.
Psychological Review, 97, 253-270.
Malone, M., Castillo, R. D., Kloos, H., Holden, J. G., &
Richardson, M. J. (2014). Dynamic structure of jointaction stimulus-response activity. PloS One, 9, e89032.
Richardson, M. J. (2007). Liberty 8 Capture [Computer
Software].
http://www.xkiwilabs.com/downloads_polhemus.html
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Representing
others’ actions: just like one’s own? Cognition, 88, 11-21.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2005). How two share
a task: Corepresenting stimulus-response mappings.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 31, 1234-1246.
Welsh, T. N. (2009). When 1+ 1= 1: The unification of
independent actors revealed through joint Simon effects
in crossed and uncrossed effector conditions. Human
Movement Science, 28, 726-737.

1918

