Context, but not proficiency, moderates the effects of metaphor framing:
A case study in India
Paul H. Thibodeau (paul.thibodeau@oberlin.edu)
Daye Lee (daye.lee@oberlin.edu)
Department of Psychology, Oberlin College
120 W. Lorain Street; Oberlin, OH 44074 USA

Stephen J. Flusberg (stephen.flusberg@purchase.edu)
Department of Psychology, Purchase College, SUNY
735 Anderson Hill Road; Purchase, NY 10577 USA
Abstract

percentage of people who report speaking a language other
than English at home increased 158.2% between 1980 and
2010; Ryan, 2013), there are important practical motivations
for investigating whether and how how non-native (second
or foreign language) speakers are influenced by metaphor
frames.

Metaphors suffuse language and affect how people think. A
meta-analysis of metaphor framing studies conducted between
1983 and 2000 concluded that metaphors are about 6% more
persuasive than literal language (Sopory & Dillard, 2002).
However, each of these studies was conducted in English with
samples drawn from populations of native English speakers.
Here, we test whether and how language proficiency moderates
the influence of metaphor frames. Sampling from a population
of non-native, but generally proficient English speakers from
India, we found that metaphor frames systematically affected
people who reported using English primarily in informal contexts (i.e., among friends and family and through the media)
but not those who reported using English primarily in formal
contexts (i.e., for school or work). We discuss the implications of this finding for countries like the US, where English
is increasingly a non-native language for its residents, and for
theories of language processing more generally.
Keywords: Metaphor, framing, analogy, persuasion, political
psychology, reasoning

Introduction
Does the context in which people use a language moderate
the influence of metaphor on thought? Are fluent speakers
of a language more likely to use metaphors to reason about
complex problems than people who are less fluent in the language?
The results of several studies suggest that metaphor frames
can influence how people think about important sociopolitical issues (Hauser & Schwarz, 2014; Jia & Smith, 2013;
Landau, Keefer, & Rothschild, 2014; McGuire, 2000; Ottati,
Rhoads, & Graesser, 1999; Robins & Mayer, 2000; Sopory &
Dillard, 2002; Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013, 2015).
A meta-analysis of metaphor framing studies conducted between 1983 and 2000 concluded that metaphors are about
6% more persuasive than literal language (Sopory & Dillard,
2002). More recent experiments have found that metaphors
can influence how people think about everything from cancer prevention (Hauser & Schwarz, 2014) to immigration
(Landau, Sullivan, & Greenberg, 2009) and crime (Thibodeau
& Boroditsky, 2011, 2013, 2015).
However, each of these studies was conducted in English with samples drawn from populations of native English
speakers. Given the prevalence of metaphor in discussions of
socio-political issues and the changing landscape of language
demographics in countries like the United States (where the

Considering the role of language fluency in metaphoric
thinking may also inform how cognitive scientists think about
the role of language in reasoning more generally. One possibility is that people think more ”systematically” when using
a second language (Costa et al., 2014; Keysar, Hayakawa,
& An, 2012). Second languages may be less valenced and
arousing than first languages (e.g., Ayçiçeği & Harris, 2004;
Pavlenko, 2007) and processed less automatically (Favreau &
Segalowitz, 1983). If being influenced by a metaphor frame
is similar to well-studied decision-making biases (e.g., loss
aversion in gain/loss framing), then second language speakers
of English may be less likely to be influenced by metaphorical
descriptions of social dilemmas.
On the other hand, if metaphor is a core feature of language
or if there is nuanced variability in peoples’ facility with second languages, then one may expect to find systematic effects
of metaphor on decision-making among (at least a subset) of
a non-native speaking population (e.g, Harris, 2004).
In the present study, we identify a population of non-native,
but generally proficient English speakers from India. We distinguish between individuals who tend to use the language in
more formal environments like school and work from individuals who tend to use the language in more informal environments like with friends and family or through media
like television and radio. We hypothesized that people who
used English with friends and family (i.e., in informal contexts) – or simply more frequently – would be more likely to
be influenced by the metaphor frames (Freed, Segalowitz, &
Dewey, 2004). Using English in informal settings (or more
frequently) may imbue the language with more emotional valence and lead this subgroup to process metaphors more like
native English speakers.

1571

Experiment
Population and Participants
We recruited participants from India, a country with a diverse
population and a rich history of multilingualism (Annamalai,
2004). Although there are more than 150 recognized languages in India and over 500 dialects (Ahmad, 2009), two of
the most popular are the two official languages of the country: Hindi and English. As a result, many people who live
in India speak both English and Hindi. Importantly though,
there is variability in the setting in which people use these languages, the age at which they begin learning these languages,
and their level of proficiency with each language.
In addition to providing interesting language demographics, the population of India represents an understudied group
in cognitive science (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010).
With the increased use of internet-based methodologies (e.g.
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk; Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling,
2011), however, this population is now much more accessible.
A recent survey has found that there are more people on Mechanical Turk in India than any other country (Pavlick, Post,
Irvine, Kachaev, & Callison-Burch, 2014).
We asked participants in our sample whether they used English in primarily formal (e.g., school and work) or informal
contexts (e.g., at home, among friends, via media), as well as
a variety of other questions about their familiarity with and
use of English. As expected (see Table 1), participants who
reported using English more often in informal settings tended
to report learning English at an earlier age (p = .059) and using English more frequently overall – in every setting that we
asked about (e.g., at home, school/work, and among friends
and family); these participants also reported that they understood and could speak English better.
As shown in Table 1, participants who reported using English more often in informal settings tended to be more educated: 41.6% of these participants reported having an advanced degree (Master’s or Doctorate) compared to 24.7%
of participants who reported using English primarily in more
formal settings. Thus, the difference between groups may
be related to differences in education or motivation or intelligence between groups – but not in socioeconomic status, political ideology, or current age. We consider this possibility
by including participants’ educational history as a covariate
in our analyses.

Table 1: Patterns of English use as a function of where participants most commonly use the language. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences between groups at the
∗ p < .05 and ∗∗∗ p < .001 levels.
N
Age of acquisition
Frequency∗∗∗ (1-5)
Home∗∗∗ (1-4)
Media∗∗∗ (1-4)
Friends∗∗∗ (1-4)
Family∗∗∗ (1-4)
School∗∗∗ (1-4)
Work∗∗∗ (1-4)
Other∗∗∗ (1-4)
Understand∗∗∗ (1-5)
Speak∗∗∗ (1-5)
Age
Education∗∗∗ (1-7)
Ideology(0-100)
SES (1-4)
Gender: Male∗

Formal
160
9.49
3.11
2.24
2.90
2.71
2.11
3.27
3.29
2.44
4.07
3.83
33.44
5.92
47.73
2.26
66%

issues; they were designed to be interpretable by a broad audience (none were about specific issues in the United States,
for instance) with common conventional metaphors. Related
versions of the stimuli have been used to investigate how
metaphors influence thought among native English speakers,
thereby providing a point of comparison for the present study
(Thibodeau & Gehring, 2015; Thibodeau, in press).
Table 2: Issues and Frames
Issue
Crime
Income Inequality
Education
Environment
Partisan Politics
Scientific Research
Housing
Medicine
Cheating
Sports

Stimuli
Descriptions of 10 socio-political dilemmas were created. For
each issue, two metaphor frames were designed to promote
different ways of thinking about the dilemma (see Table 2
for domains and frames). For instance, a crime problem was
either described as a VIRUS plaguing or BEAST preying on
a community; in a discussion of education, schools were either described as GARDENS nurturing or FACTORIES molding
young minds.
The metaphor frames and candidate responses were
adapted from news reports and other descriptions of the target

Informal
209
8.25
3.50
3.00
3.26
3.08
2.83
3.73
3.59
2.85
4.42
4.31
31.95
6.30
49.16
2.31
54%

Frame A
Virus
Destabilize
Gardens
Backbone
Theater
Puzzle
Failing Organ
Ecosystem
Boxer
Detective

Frame B
Beast
Split
Factories
Gem
Battle
Summit
Blemish
Assembly Line
Goalkeeper
Sniper

A single follow-up question for each issue asked the participant to suggest a policy intervention, attribute blame, or
make an inference about the dilemma described. In every
case, participants were asked to select between two candidate
responses. For instance, after reading about a crime problem, participants were asked which of two policy interventions they thought would be most likely to reduce crime.

1572

For half of the items, the response options were aligned
with the metaphor frames; for half of the items, they were
not. Consider the following three ways of addressing a crime
problem:
(a) Increase street patrols that look for criminals.
(b) Reform educational practices and create after school programs.
(c) Expand economic welfare programs and create jobs.
Prior work has found that “increasing street patrols” is
more consistent with a crime BEAST while “reforming educational practices” and “expanding economic programs” are
more consistent with a crime VIRUS (Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013). Thus, when a participant is asked to choose
between options (a) and (b) or between options (a) and (c),
one should expect to find a systematic influence of the frames.
Reading about a crime BEAST should make people more
likely to suggest “increasing street patrols”; reading about a
crime VIRUS should make people less likely to suggest “increasing street patrols” in favor of “education” or “economic”
reform. And indeed that is what previous work has found.
However, if a participant is asked to choose between options
(b) and (c), one should not expect to find a systematic influence of the frames (i.e., because both options are either
congruent or incongruent with the metaphor frame).
The present experiment was designed so that each participant would encounter five issues for which the response options mapped clearly onto the metaphor frames (e.g., option a
contrasted against option b) and five issues for which the response options did not map onto different frames (e.g., option
b contrasted against option c).
Since there were only two metaphor frames for each issue,
the distinction between well-aligned and non-aligned refers
to a manipulation of the response options. For instance, response options (a) “increase patrols” and (b) “education reform” were considered well-aligned to the metaphor frames
for the crime dilemma, while response options (b) “education
reform” and (c) ”economic reform” were considered nonaligned to the metaphor frames for the crime dilemma, regardless of whether crime was framed as a BEAST or VIRUS.
Each participant read one of the four versions (one of the two
metaphor frames; one of the two pairs of response options) of
each of the 10 dilemmas.
This distinction between well-aligned and non-aligned
items was validated in a previous study. Thibodeau and
Gehring (2015) operationalized this distinction by presenting
participants with two metaphor frames and two response options for the 10 issues listed in Table 2 (N = 100 per item).
Participants were instructed to match the frames to response
options. The degree to which the sample matched response
options to frames consistently was taken to reflect the clarity
or congruence of conceptual mappings.
For instance, one group of participants was told that
two politicians were using different metaphors (BEAST and

VIRUS ) to argue for different approaches to a city’s crime
problem: one was encouraging the city to “Increase street
patrols that look for criminals” while the other was encouraging the city to “Reform educational practices and create after school programs.” For this item, Thibodeau and Gehring
(2015) found that 77% of participants matched “patrols” to
BEAST and “education” to VIRUS , suggesting that these two
response options were well-aligned with the frames. Another
group of participants was asked to match the same frames
with different approaches to the city’s crime problem: “Reforming educational practices and create after school programs” and “Expanding economic welfare programs and create jobs.” For this item, participants showed less agreement: 59% matched “education” to BEAST and “economy”
to VIRUS, suggesting that these two response options were
not well-aligned with the frames.
Items designated well-aligned yielded patterns of matching
that were significantly more consistent (M = .778, SD = .086)
than items designated not well-aligned (M = .575, SD =
.056), t(9) = 11.605, p < .001, d = 3.670 (Thibodeau &
Gehring, 2015).
Including this manipulation yielded 40 items: 10 issues,
each with two metaphor frames, paired either with responses
that mapped clearly onto the frames (well-aligned) or with
responses that did not map clearly onto the frames (nonaligned).

Procedure
Data from 400 participants were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants were required to live in India and
have a good performance record on previous tasks. Participants were instructed to participate only if they were at least
18 years old.
The task involved reading and answering questions about
10 metaphorically framed dilemmas – of which five included
response options that were well-aligned with the frames and
five that included response options that were not well-aligned.
An embedded timer recorded how long participants spent
reading and responding to the dilemmas. Data from participants who spent less than 5 seconds on average or more than
a minute on average reading and responding to the dilemmas
were excluded (n = 31), leaving data from 369 participants
for analysis.
After reading and answering questions about the 10 dilemmas, participants were asked about their familiarity with English (i.e., “How frequently do you use English?” “How
would you rate your English speaking ability?” “How would
you rate your English comprehension ability?”; all rated
along 5-point scales), about the context in which they primarily used the language (formal: school, work; or informal:
among friends and family, through media like TV and radio),
and about the age at which they began learning English. Participants were also asked about the frequency with which they
used English overall and in specific settings (i.e., with friends,
family, at school, at work, at home, in media consumption,
and in other contexts). They responded to these questions

1573

using a 4-point scale that ranged from “never’ to “very frequently.”
Finally, participants were asked a set of more general demographic questions, including their age, educational history, socio-economic status, political ideology, and gender.
Summary statistics related to the language history and demographics of the sample are shown in Table 1.

cases – including for participants who reported using English
in formal settings for items that were well-aligned (see Figure 1).
0.60

Proportion Congruent

Well−aligned
Non−aligned

Analysis
Responses were coded as “congruent” or “incongruent” with
the frame they were presented with. For instance, in the
context of the crime example, “Increase street patrols” was
coded as congruent with the BEAST frame and incongruent
with the VIRUS frame for the well-aligned version (i.e., when
the response options contrasted “increasing street patrols”
with “education reform”); for the non-aligned version (i.e.,
when “education reform” was contrasted against “economic
reform”), “economic reform” was coded as congruent with
a crime VIRUS and incongruent with a crime BEAST.1 This
approach captures the joint effects of the pairs of metaphor
frames and is consistent with prior work on metaphor framing (e.g., Robins & Mayer, 2000; Thibodeau & Boroditsky,
2011, 2013).
One advantage of such a coding scheme is that it provides
a clear metric for interpreting the degree to which metaphors
influence judgments. Metaphor frames that do not systematically influence the way people think about an issue will yield
a congruence score close to .5; metaphor frames that influence people to choose the response option that is consistent
with the frame’s entailments will yield a congruence score
above .5; and metaphors that influence people to choose the
response option that is inconsistent with the frame’s entailments will yield a congruence score less than .5.

Results
Separate averages were computed by participant for the proportion of congruent responses to the well-aligned items and
for the non-aligned items. Then a mixed-ANOVA was fit to
these scores with two predictors: a within-subjects factor for
item type (aligned or not) and a between-subjects factor for
the context in which participants’ reported they used English
predominantly (2 levels: in formal settings like school or informal settings like at home). The model revealed a statistically significant interaction between item type and context,
F(1, 367) = 4.406, p = .037, η2 = .012. There were no main
effects of item type or English usage context, Fs < 2.1, ps
> .15.
As illustrated in Figure 1, participants who reported using
English in informal settings were systematically influenced
by the metaphor frames when the response options were wellaligned with the frames (M = .544, 95%CI = [.503, .585]).
Responses were no different from chance in the other three

0.55

0.50

0.45

0.40

Informal

Formal

Context of English Usage
Figure 1: Congruent responding by item type (aligned or not)
and where the participant reported using English. Error bars
denote 95% confidence intervals.
The percentage of congruent responses by issue for wellaligned items are shown in Table 3. One indication that the
metaphors affected people who used English in an informal
context more than for people who used English in a formal
context can be seen in the variability in congruence for the
two groups. For participants who reported using English in
an informal context, the proportion of congruent responses
was more consistent across items (SD = .055, 95%CI SD =
[.038, .100]) than for participants who reported using English
in a formal context (SD = .082, 95%CI SD = [.056, .150]).
Table 3: Percentage of congruent responses by issue for wellaligned items by English usage context.

1 Although

patterns of matching were less systematic for nonaligned items, they were different from chance, M = .575, 95%CI =
[.54, .61]; range = [.52, .68], allowing us to code responses as congruent or incongruent with the frame.

1574

Issue
Crime
Income Inequality
Education
Environment
Partisan Politics
Scientific Research
Housing
Medicine
Cheating
Sports

Informal
52
55
51
55
64
59
46
57
47
54

Formal
41
36
48
44
62
51
57
38
53
49

As noted earlier, participants who reported using English

primarily in informal settings tended to be better educated
than participants who reported using English primarily in formal settings. To test whether this difference could account
for the effect of usage context, we added participants’ educational history to the ANOVA. In this analysis, the interaction between usage context and item type was consistent
with that of the previous model, F(1, 365) = 4.445, p = .036.
The model did not reveal a main effect of education or interactions (either 2- or 3-way) between education, item type,
and usage context, Fs < 3, ps > .08. However, we did find a
marginally significant interaction between education and item
type, F(1, 365) = 2.969, p = .086. Controlling for where
participants reported using English, the model suggested that
more educated participants were somewhat less likely to give
a response that was congruent with how the well-aligned
dilemmas were framed, B = −.017, SE = .012 (for comparison, B = .025, SE = .012, for the interaction between item
type and usage context).2
We also tested whether language usage frequency, a scalar
measure, rather than the setting in which participants reported
using English most often, moderated the influence of the
metaphor frames. A two-way mixed ANOVA revealed no interaction between item type (aligned or not) and English usage frequency, F(1, 367) = 2.115, p = .147, suggesting that
the setting in which people use language impacts how people
process metaphor frames—and not just how frequently they
use the language.3

Discussion
The present study was designed to test whether language proficiency moderates the effects of metaphor framing on reasoning. Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that Indian
participants who reported using English in informal settings –
at home, with friends and family, and through the media – as
opposed to in formal settings like school and work were most
likely to show a systematic influence of the metaphor frames.
As predicted (and consistent with prior research), this effect
was restricted to items for which there was a clear alignment
between the frames and response options.
There are several important implications of this finding.
First, it represents an initial step toward understanding how
non-native speakers process and use metaphors that commonly suffuse discussions of socio-political issues. We found
a shift of about 9 percentage points toward the congruent response among participants who reported using English in informal settings, for well-aligned items. The magnitude of this
effect is similar to what was found with these stimuli among
native English speakers: a shift of about 6 percentage points.
2 Substituting the measure of education for English usage context revealed no significant main effects or interactions: F(1, 367) =
1.637, p = .202 for the interaction between item type and education
in this model.
3 A model with all three predictors revealed a significant interaction between item type and language context, F(1, 365) = 4.437,
p = .036, consistent with the initial analysis reported, and no other
significant main effects or interactions.

This finding suggests that the context in which we learn
and use a language can influence how we interpret linguistic
information and how the language affects decision-making.
Rather than simply distinguishing between native and nonnative speakers of a language or between people who are
more or less proficient in the language, we found that usage
context affected behavior. On this view, “foreign language effects” (Costa et al., 2014; Keysar et al., 2012) may result from
differences in where and how multilinguals use the languages
they speak.
Studies of where and how people use language support this
interpretation (Marian, Blumenfeld, & Kaushanskaya, 2007).
First languages tend to be learned primarily through interactions with friends and family and through media (in relatively informal contexts), whereas second languages are often
learned in classroom environments (in comparatively formal
contexts).
Of course, it is difficult to distinguish the general influence
of language proficiency from the more nuanced influence of
contextual factors, as these variables are highly related. People who tend to use a language in familial or social settings
tend to consider themselves more proficient in the language.
However, an analysis of our data, in which a measure of language fluency was substituted for the measure of usage context, revealed no statistically significant effects, suggesting
that the context in which people reported using English mattered more than their self-reported fluency with the language.
That said, future work should seek to obtain more objective
measures of language proficiency in order to more carefully
examine these relationships.
The present work also complements ongoing crosslinguistic investigations of metaphor in conceptual representation. Cognitive linguists have identified remarkable similarity in the kinds of metaphors used for abstract domains
like emotions, mental states, and time in different languages
(Yu, 1998; Ferreira, 2008). For instance, HEAT is a common
metaphor for ANGER in English, as well as in Chinese and
Portuguese.
To our knowledge, there has not been systematic investigation of the kinds of conventional metaphors commonly used
to discuss socio-political issues across languages. Crime, for
instance, may or may not be commonly discussed as a VIRUS
or BEAST in places other than the US and in languages other
than English. However, our findings suggest that people who
use English informally — to talk with friends and family
and through the media — are affected by metaphor frames in
ways that are quantitatively similar to native English speakers.

References
Ahmad, A. (2009). Geography of the south asian subcontinent: A critical approach. New Delhi: Concept Publishing
Company.
Annamalai, E. (2004). Nativization of english in india and its
effect on multilingualism. Journal of Language and Poli-

1575

tics, 3(1), 151–162.
Ayçiçeği, A., & Harris, C. (2004). Bilinguals’ recall and
recognition of emotion words. Cognition & Emotion, 18,
977-987.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Amazon’s mechanical turk a new source of inexpensive, yet
high-quality, data? Perspectives on psychological science,
6(1), 3–5.
Costa, A., Foucart, A., Hayakawa, S., Aparici, M.,
Apesteguia, J., Heafner, J., & Keysar, B. (2014). Your
morals depend on language. PLoS ONE, 9(4), e94842.
Favreau, M., & Segalowitz, N. S. (1983). Automatic and
controlled processes in the first-and second-language reading of fluent bilinguals. Memory & Cognition, 11(6), 565–
574.
Ferreira, L. C. (2008). A psycholinguistic study on metaphor
comprehension in a foreign language. ReVEL, 6(11), 1-23.
Freed, B. F., Segalowitz, N., & Dewey, D. P. (2004). Context
of learning and second langauge fluency in French: Comparing regular classroom, study abroad, and intensive domestic immersion programs. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 26, 275–301.
Harris, C. L. (2004). Bilingual speakers in the lab: Psychophysiological measures of emotional reactivity. Journal of multilingual and multicultural development, 25(2-3),
223–247.
Hauser, D. J., & Schwarz, N. (2014). The war on prevention
bellicose cancer metaphors hurt (some) prevention intentions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41(1),
66-77.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The
weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and brain sciences, 33(2-3), 61–83.
Jia, L., & Smith, E. R. (2013). Distance makes the
metaphor grow stronger: A psychological distance model
of metaphor use. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49(3), 492–497.
Keysar, B., Hayakawa, S. L., & An, S. G. (2012). The
foreign-language effect thinking in a foreign tongue reduces decision biases. Psychological Science, 23(6), 661–
668.
Landau, M. J., Keefer, L. A., & Rothschild, Z. K. (2014).
Epistemic motives moderate the effect of metaphoric framing on attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 53, 125–138.
Landau, M. J., Sullivan, D., & Greenberg, J. (2009). Evidence
that self-relevant motives and metaphoric framing interact
to influence political and social attitudes. Psychological
Science, 20(11), 1421–1427.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007).
The language experience and proficiency questionnaire
(leap-q): Assessing language profiles in bilinguals and
multilinguals. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 50(4), 940–967.
McGuire, W. J. (2000). Standing on the shoulders of an-

cients: Consumer research, persuasion, and figurative language. Journal of consumer research, 27(1), 109–114.
Ottati, V., Rhoads, S., & Graesser, A. C. (1999). The effect
of metaphor on processing style in a persuasion task: A
motivational resonance model. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77(4), 688.
Pavlenko, A. (2007). Emotions and multilingualism. Cambridge University Press.
Pavlick, E., Post, M., Irvine, A., Kachaev, D., & CallisonBurch, C. (2014). The language demographics of amazon
mechanical turk. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2, 79–92.
Robins, S., & Mayer, R. E. (2000). The metaphor framing
effect: Metaphorical reasoning about text-based dilemmas.
Discourse Processes, 30(1), 57–86.
Ryan, C. (2013). Language use in the united states: 2011.
US Census Bureau: American Community Survey Reports,
3, 1-16.
Sopory, P., & Dillard, J. P. (2002). The persuasive effects of
metaphor: A meta-analysis. Human Communication Research, 28(3), 382–419.
Thibodeau, P. H. (in press). Extended metaphors are
the home runs of persuasion: Don’t fumble the phrase.
Metaphor and Symbol.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS One,
6(2), e16782.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2013). Natural language
metaphors covertly influence reasoning. PloS one, 8(1),
e52961.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2015). Measuring effects
of metaphor in a dynamic opinion landscape. PloS one,
10(7), e0133939.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Gehring, K. (2015). Comparing
metaphors reveals their persuasive capacity. In D. Noelle
et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting of the
cognitive science society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Yu, N. (1998). The contemporary theory of metaphor: A
perspective from chinese. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

1576

