Discriminability of sound contrasts in the face of speaker variation quantified
Christina Bergmann (chbergma@gmail.com)
Alejandrina Cristia (alecristia@gmail.com)
Emmanuel Dupoux (emmanuel.dupoux@gmail.com)
Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, ENS/EHESS/CNRS; 29, rue d’Ulm
75005 Paris, France
Abstract
How does a naive language learner deal with speaker variation
irrelevant to distinguishing word meanings? Experimental data
is contradictory, and incompatible models have been proposed.
Here, we examine basic assumptions regarding the acoustic
signal the learner deals with: Is speaker variability a hurdle in
discriminating sounds or can it easily be ignored? To this end,
we summarize existing infant data. We then present machinebased discriminability scores of sound pairs obtained without
any language knowledge. Our results show that speaker variability decreases sound contrast discriminability, and that some
contrasts are affected more than others. However, chance performance is rare; most contrasts remain discriminable in the
face of speaker variation. We take our results to mean that
speaker variation is not a uniform hurdle to discriminating
sound contrasts, and careful examination is necessary when
planning and interpreting studies testing whether and to what
extent infants (and adults) are sensitive to speaker differences.
Keywords: language acquisition; speech; acoustics; machine
classification

Background
One important problem that infants are confronted with during language development is speaker variability. The same
word might be implemented differently at the phonological
level (as popularized in the song stating “I say tom[e]to, you
say tom[A]to”), acoustic targets can vary (Cristia, 2011), and
speakers may differ in the shape of their vocal tract. As a
result, the same word spoken by different people varies in
its acoustic realization, even within the same accent. This
problem is so potent that it requires drastic measures within
speech recognition technologies to ensure proper handling of
speaker variation: Typically, systems implement speaker normalization components which are trained with hundreds of
speakers to attain a reasonable, but not perfect, performance
on unknown speakers. Infants face the same problem: they
have to recognize words as identical across speakers while
maintaining the ability to distinguish different words (e.g.,
take1 and take2 , versus bake1 ). Alas, infants cannot use the
same mechanisms as automatic speech recognition systems,
while managing to learn their native language successfully
and become adults who can generally deal with speaker variation (while being nonetheless affected by it). It is unclear
which abilities infants bring to this task and which computational mechanisms they use.
Psycholinguistic models of speech and speaker processing
range between two extremes. In the abstractionist view, infants are born with or rapidly acquire a system which separates speaker dependent and linguistically relevant phonetic
information. For example, following a study with neonates,
Dehaene-Lambertz and Pena (2001) state that “normalization

is present from birth and is not the consequence of the establishment of phonetic prototypes following extensive exposure
to speech.” This means sounds and words are represented as
abstract entities, invariant across speakers. The other end of
the theoretical spectrum is the episodic view, where phonetic
and speaker-specific information is not separated (Goldinger,
1998). In hybrid models, both invariant and speaker dependent formats of representation are combined to varying degrees (for a recent review see Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, 2015).
All models make implicit assumptions about the acoustic
signal, which forms the basis for processing, representation,
and learning. If a normalization and abstraction mechanism is
innate, it seems necessary that, for a learner who starts from
acoustic representations, linguistically contrastive information can be a priori separated from speaker-specific ‘noise’.
However, it is unlikely that such a separation is universally
possible, since linguistic and speaker-specific variation has
been stated to be intertwined and difficult to separate in several cases (Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, 2015). If, on the other
hand, a normalization and abstraction mechanisms is learned,
then previous to learning, abstractionist and exemplarist models are indistinguishable. In brief, before we can separate abstractionist from exemplarist models, it is important to establish which cases of speaker variability can be dealt with on
the acoustic level and which require learning. As a preliminary of this, we need a method, which can, in a case by case
fashion, quantify the amount of acoustic variation introduced
by speaker variation.
Here, we propose a systematic measurement of the discriminability of phonetic categories of English (e.g., /a/ vs
/o/, /a/, vs /i/, etc) as a function of speaker variability. We
use a computerized ABX discrimibility score, whereby the
acoustic distance between tokens that belong to the same category is compared to the distance between tokens from different categories. We systematically vary whether all tokens
are spoken by the same or different speakers to quantify the
impact of speaker variation1 .
In this paper, we first review some of the findings on the
effect of speaker variability in infants’ discrimination abilities. We then compute the acoustic discriminability scores of
English vowels and consonants with a focus on the contrasts
that were tested empirically.
1 This

method is not a model of infants or adults performing a
particular discrimination paradigm. Instead, it is intended to evaluate how well the phonetic categories of a language are intrinsically
separated in an acoustic/auditory representation.

1331

Table 1: Studies on infants’ sound discrimination abilities in the face of speaker variation. Age is reported in months; Support
indicates how the results were interpreted; Discrimination abilities are divided into tasks where the speaker does not change
(within) and where speaker variation was present (across). Differences are split into numerical (“>” signifies higher performance within-speaker, 6= means there is a difference but a direction cannot be established) and statistical difference, based on
tests of the interaction (sound type and task; significant: ∗ , non-significant: ns .)
Contrast
/p/-/t/
/b/-/d/
/a/-/i/
/a/-/i/
/a/-/i/
/a/-/O/
/b/-/p/ (/n/-/N/)
/E/-/I/

Age

Reference

Support for

0
2
2,3,6
5
6
6
7.5
12

Dehaene-Lambertz and Pena (2001)
Jusczyk, Pisoni, and Mullennix (1992)
Marean, Werner, and Kuhl (1992)
Polka, Masapollo, and Ménard (2014)
Kuhl (1979)
Kuhl (1983)
Clough (2015)
Escudero, Bonn, Aslin, and Mulak (2015)

Abstract
Episodic
Abstract
Hybrid
Abstract
Abstract
Abstract
Episodic

Discrimination results
Within Across Difference
Yes
No
>ns
Yes
Yes/No >
Yes
Yes
NA
NA
Yes
NA
Yes
Yes
NA
Yes
Yes
NA
Yes
Yes
6=ns
Yes
NA
NA

Infants’ Sound Discrimination Abilities in the Face
of Speaker Variability

al. (1992), frequently cited to support an episodic view, are
actually comparable, as we show next.

Infants’ ability to deal with speaker variation has been investigated using a range of tasks, including word segmentation
(Houston & Jusczyk, 2000), word learning (Rost & McMurray, 2009), learning of phonotactic rules (Seidl, Onishi, &
Cristia, 2014), and sound discrimination. The last is most
relevant for the present study, an overview can be found in
Table 1. For reasons of space, we present in detail a representative selection of this line of work.
The logic of infant discrimination studies is as follows:
infants first hear sequences of isolated syllables serving as
background, followed by deviating stimuli. If a significant
difference arises between (new tokens of) background and
deviating stimuli, this is taken as evidence that infants can
discriminate the two stimulus classes. Most studies analyze
overt behavior, such as looking to an unrelated visual display,
as indicator of infants’ processing. We summarize each study
in order of infant age. While infants’ general discrimination
ability matures over the course of the covered age range (Tsuji
& Cristia, 2014), we cannot discern a clear developmental
trend in the existing experimental literature pertaining to their
ability to deal with speaker variation.
Dehaene-Lambertz and Pena (2001) measured electrophysiological responses to a deviating syllable compared to a
background syllable, which was either spoken by one or multiple speakers, in a group of sleeping neonates. The authors
took a main effect of condition (deviant versus background)
and the lack of an interaction with speaker (within versus
across) as evidence of infants’ ability to ignore irrelevant information by normalizing over speakers. However, post-hoc
tests within the infant group who heard multiple speakers revealed that discrimination in the “across” condition was not
significant. Further, the analyzed electrodes (and thus presumably underlying regions) differed for the within- versus
across-speaker condition. Despite these differences, the study
by Dehaene-Lambertz and Pena (2001) is taken to support an
abstractionist viewpoint, whereas the findings by Jusczyk et

Jusczyk et al. (1992) tested two-month-olds in a highamplitude sucking habituation-dishabituation paradigm. In
this paradigm, infants are first exposed to the background
stimulus contingently with their high-amplitude sucking. In
this phase, sucking always results in repetition of the same
stimulus list, so, usually, the sucking rate wanes over time.
The measure of interest is infants’ sucking rate when hearing
test tokens, which are either the same as before for controls or
new tokens for the experimental group. A difference in sucking rate in the latter compared to the former group indicates
that infants dishabituated due to detecting a difference in the
stimuli. In Jusczyk et al. (1992), infants in the single-talker
condition were habituated with the word “bug” spoken by one
voice, and tested with “dug” in the same voice; or they first
heard “bug” spoken by 6 different talkers (3 male, 3 female),
and were tested with “dug” in the same 6 voices. Infants detected changes regardless of condition. In a follow-up experiment, the authors introduced a 2-minute delay between habituation and test. In this setting, only infants in the single-talker
condition detected the phoneme change, whereas infants in
the multi-talker condition failed. This failure was replicated
when the 6 habituation talkers were all drawn from one gender. Through additional experiments, Jusczyk and colleagues
demonstrated that infants detected a phonemic change even
in the face of within-talker variation (i.e., using multiple different tokens from the same talker), leading them to conclude
that talker variability can be disruptive. However, considering only the first experiment, infants succeeded in the multitalker condition, and additionally there were no direct statistical comparisons of within- versus across talker-conditions.
Kuhl (1979) trained six-month-olds over several days to
react to a change in stimuli with a head-turn, by initially presenting a salient deviating stimulus and letting a toy appear
on one side at the same time. Thus, turning the head to the
side indicates infants’ detection of phonemic changes, which
the authors then used to test infants with vowels in the face

1332

of variation of vowel pitch, talker identity, and both, in that
order. Only when infants succeeded in detecting changes at
a given performance level and within a set number of trials
were they exposed to subsequent stages with more variability. All tested infants completed the experiment, including
the most variable stage, which included both talker and pitch
variation. This finding is frequently taken as evidence for abstraction. A follow-up study by Kuhl (1983) extended these
results to different vowels, and Marean et al. (1992) obtained
similar results with younger babies. Due to the study design
it is not possible to compare within- and across-talker performance directly.
The most recent study on the topic measured dishabituation to a psycho-acoustically salient contrast versus a more
subtle one (/p/-/b/ versus /n/-/N/), either in the presence of, or
without, talker variability (Clough, 2015). Infants showed a
significant difference between habituation and novel stimuli,
although in opposite directions across the two phonetic contrasts. As is typical in this paradigm, infants looked longer
when hearing the novel stimulus in the /p/-/b/ condition, for
the more subtle contrast they looked longer when hearing the
habituation stimulus. The second pattern, a so-called familiarity preference, is difficult to interpret, but might indicate
greater processing demands (Hunter & Ames, 1988). A direct test of discrimination in within- and across-speaker conditions revealed no difference in performance.
In summary, the evidence of infants’ ability to discriminate
sound contrasts in the face of speaker variation and change is
scarce and has been used to support incompatible standpoints:
Either infants abstract over speaker-specific characteristics or
not. It becomes crucial to establish how speaker differences
impact the acoustic signal to determine how infants will be
affected by them in an episodic framework or to better understand which problem they have to solve to achieve abstraction. In this paper, we assess the impact of speaker variation
on the acoustic signal, both overall and focusing on those contrasts previously tested on infants.

Experiment
We test whether speaker variation impacts the discriminability of speech sounds in the absence of lexical or phonological
knowledge (Schatz et al., 2013, 2014; Martin et al., 2015).
Importantly, we do not implement automatized speaker normalization procedures and provide no language-specific information on any level.
Supplementary information, including lists of experimental tokens, raw data, figures, scripts, and results is available at
https://osf.io/mvnjy/.

Speech Material
The Articulation Index Corpus (Schatz et al., 2015) contains
noise-free recordings of all American English phones in diphone pairs (e.g., /ba/, /la/, ...), pronounced by 20 speakers (8
women). The contrast /n/-/N/ cannot be tested, as /N/ does not
naturally appear at the onset of syllables in English (Clough,
2015); it thus was not included in our study. Otherwise, our

corpus choice is similar to the stimuli typically used in infant studies, as both are recorded under noise-free conditions
and based on prompted and isolated instead of spontaneous,
connected productions.

Acoustic Representations
We use two common acoustic representations of the speech
signal: Mel filterbanks and Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs). These representations encode the spectral
properties of thin slices of the speech signal, and have been
argued to be similar to the first stages of human auditory processing (Gold & Morgan, 2000). In the subsequent reports
we focus on Mel filterbanks since the results do not differ
substantially for MFCCs.

Discriminability Scores
To quantify how discriminable a contrast is within and across
speakers, we compute an ABX discriminability score (Schatz
et al., 2013, 2014). This score quantifies how often a test
sound X, e.g., ba1 , is correctly identified as member of the
same category as A (ba2 ) and not B (da1 ).
The machine-based discriminability score was used previously by Martin et al. (2015) to assess whether mothers speak
more or less clearly to their infants compared to adults, systematically testing the so-called hyperarticulation hypothesis.
The scores can be computed automatically over large data sets
and allow us to quantify discriminability in a non-parametric
way over various sound contrasts using a single metric.
We use the ABXpy package (Schatz, Thiolliere, Synnaeve,
& Dupoux, 2016) and follow essentially the same procedure
as Martin et al. (2015).2 To calculate the score the following
steps are taken: (1) Encode all available tokens in terms of
their acoustic properties (here: Mel filterbanks or MFCCs);
(2) Align pairs (either from the same category, e.g., ba1 and
ba2 or crossing categories, e.g., ba1 and da1 ) via dynamic
time warping (using the implementation by Synnaeve, 2016)
and compute their distance; here, we use the mean of the inverse cosine deviation from the diagonal (signifying identity);
(3) Identify all possible combinations of tokens which can
function as A, B, and X, respectively; (4) Compare distances
of A − X and B − X, where A, X versus B represent a given
contrast (e.g., /b/-/d/), and count a success when X was attributed to the correct category because the pairwise distance
was smaller for the pair from the same category; (5) Count the
successfully categorized triplets and divide by the total number of triplets to get the normalized final score, which ranges
between 0 and 1; chance level is .5.
We compute ABX scores in two conditions: Either all
three tokens in a triplet stem from the same speaker, or
the test token X is sampled from a different speaker than
both A and B. To directly tap into the difference of withinversus across-speaker discriminability, we compare absolute
2 We use mean and not sum difference, which leads to
overall more robust performance.
Details can be found at
https://osf.io/mvnjy/.

1333

scores for the two conditions. We further compute a difference score by subtracting across-speaker scores from withinspeaker scores. The absolute scores take into account the ease
of discriminating each contrast while the difference scores
show how much each contrast is affected by speaker variability. To obtain distributional information, we randomly subsample speakers for each contrast 1000 times.

Results
The mean discriminability scores, both within- and acrossspeaker, for every available contrast in the corpus (a total of
358) are shown in Figure 1. Figure 2 shows the difference
scores for the subset of contrasts that we selected on the basis of infant research on this topic (results using both male
and female speakers). Table 2 contains the discriminability
scores that form the basis for the depicted difference scores.
Together, the two figures and the table illustrate the following:
1. There is always an advantage (a higher score,) for withincompared to between- speaker discriminability. The mean
difference score for all contrasts is .115 (95% CI: [.087,
.142]; score range: .003-.278).
2. A ceiling effect leads to the smallest observed differences
(points closest to the diagonal), as exemplified by /a/-/i/.
3. Only very few contrasts drop to chance level (see Figure 1).
4. The speaker variability effect seems to be lower when only
including women (see the subsets in Figure 1), but the
difference between these groups is reliable (mean acrossspeaker score .827; mean across-women score .853; mean
within-speaker score for both speaker sets .941; 95% CI
for paired difference scores on all contrasts: [-.020, .083]).
These general observations hold when changing the acoustic
representation to MFCCs, which leads to overall lower absolute scores, leaving the difference score largely unaffected
(mean scores within-speaker .876 (vs .941); across-speaker
.760 (vs .827); difference score .116 (vs .115)).
Table 2: Summary of results for contrasts tested in infant
studies, presented as means and 95% CIs.
a-O
p-t
b-p
E-I
b-d
a-i

Within-Score
.734 [.682, .788]
.858 [.828, .888]
.813 [.777, .848]
.871 [.837, .906]
.813 [.781, .848]
.999 [.998, 1]

Across-Score
.553 [.523, .593]
.686 [.658, .717]
.642 [.623, .664]
.710 [.675, 746]
.654 [.629, .682]
.990 [.984, .996]

Difference
.181 [.143, .218]
.173 [.140, .207]
.171 [.142, .202]
.161 [.125, .194]
.159 [.124, .194]
.009 [.004, .014]

Discussion
We set out to quantify the impact of speaker variability on
sound discriminability. Our results show that there is an overall negative impact of speaker variation on sound discriminability. Considering psycholinguistic models, our findings
have implications for both abstractionist and episodic models. For the former, this study specify the set of contrasts that
are especially non-invariant, and for which a putative innate

Figure 1: Mean discriminability scores for all possible contrasts in the corpus, showing within- versus across-speaker
scores. The x mark comparisons across all available speakers,
the o the results for a subset containing only female speakers.
The diagonal (no difference) is indicated by a dotted line.

normalization module has to be specified. For episodic and
hybrid models, we make quantitative predictions on the deterioration expected when speaker variability is introduced.
How do our data compare to studies testing whether infants
are able to normalize across speakers? The adverse effect
of speaker variation we observe is not catastrophic, and can
even be seen as modest, as the vast majority of sound contrasts remain discriminable acoustically (better than chance)
in the face of talker variation. Furthermore, the impact varies
greatly across contrasts, and we observe a ceiling effect. It
is important to reflect that this could potentially undermine
the possibility of empirically testing episodic models, as follows. A frequent prediction, at least in infant literature,
seems to be that episodic models should yield a complete
absence of discrimination abilities as soon as talker variation is introduced (Dehaene-Lambertz & Pena, 2001). However, our results show an overall adverse effect of speaker
variation. It should be noted that infants’ abilities might not
be reflected in their performance in the indirect measures
described in detail above, although the two are frequently
equated (e.g., Apfelbaum & McMurray, 2011; Bergmann, ten
Bosch, Fikkert, & Boves, 2013).
In addition, as the size of the adverse effect depends
strongly on the chosen contrast, it is possible to observe no
difference at all. In fact, the first study supporting early normalization in infants (Kuhl, 1979) chose /a/-/i/, a contrast
that is, put simply, always easy. The follow-up study with

1334

impact on infant behavior might be difficult to measure and/or
require a(n unfeasibly) high number of participants.
We suggest, nonetheless, to test infants’ developing discrimination abilities in the face of speaker variability by comparing two contrasts that are matched on within-speaker discriminability, but that differ maximally in the across-speaker
task, as measured by the difference score. The difference
between these two scores would provide a measure of how
much infants are sensitive to specific difficulties introduced
by speaker change, and would therefore provide us with the
required quantitative evaluation of episodic versus abstractionist models.
Extrapolating from our data to language acquisition outside the laboratory, our results suggest that infants’ input becomes more difficult to learn from when talker variability is
present. This holds from both theoretical viewpoints, as long
as abstraction is not innate, and has to be (at least partially)
acquired. Given that infants tune into their native language
based on the acoustic signal, being exposed to higher input
variability in the form of more speakers leads to a more difficult learning problem.

Figure 2: Differences of mean discriminability scores within
and across speaker, for the six contrasts tested on infants. A
positive difference score indicates that the performance is better within than across speaker.
/a/-/O/ (Kuhl, 1983), the only contrast in the infant literature
that approaches (but is above) chance level, trained infants
over several days in increasingly variable and difficult conditions. This training might explain continued success with
added speaker variability, an advantage our evaluation did not
implement.
Clough (2015) tested /b/-/p/ and found a numerical difference of within- versus across-speaker performance, which
can be taken as consistent with our finding that this contrast
is strongly affected by speaker variation. There was, however, no statistically significant effect, which the author herself attributes to insufficient statistical power. We believe that
the same low power may also explain the lack of a significant interaction in the study by Dehaene-Lambertz and Pena
(2001). Although this is difficult to determine (Gelman &
Stern, 2006), we repeat that the discrimination response was
significant in the within-speaker condition, and not in the
across-speaker condition.
The observation that non-significant results might be
grounded in a lack of power, especially when testing interactions, makes it necessary to discuss the sensitivity
of infant measures. As a recent meta-analysis showed,
there is substantial variability (I 2 =76.87%) in infants’ native
vowel discrimination performance and only a medium-sized
overall effect (Cohen’s d=.6, SE=.05; data retrieved from
metalab.stanford.edu, consulting the dataset of Tsuji &
Cristia, 2014). This leads to frequently underpowered studies on the topic, a problem only worsened when testing an
interaction with a small effect (within- or across-speaker discrimination). In other words, since speaker variation has a
consistent, but moderate effect (we cannot expect a complete
breakdown of discrimination abilities across speakers), the

The present results were based on a corpus that was both
maximally exhaustive and recorded under ideal conditions,
much like the stimuli infants are typically confronted with
in the lab. Follow-up experiments will address how our results generalize to corpora of infant-directed speech (IDS),
which are often not available in sufficiently high quality. It
remains an open question, and one orthogonal to the issue
of hypo- or hyperarticulation in IDS (Martin et al., 2015),
whether the acoustic markers, such as higher, but also more
variable, pitch, emphasize or lessen speaker differences. We
may thus in an extension of the present work quantify the
learning problem infants face in real life when confronted
with multiple talkers on a daily basis.
The present work has implications for adult models of
speech processing, as it maps out the extent of the problem
of introducing speaker variation, a task adults need to solve
as well, albeit with more knowledge and experience. Here,
too, predictions from abstractionist models have to be carefully examined. To better test whether or not listeners generate a speaker invariant representation it is not correct to expect
chance performance when introducing multiple speakers; for
some contrasts we predict no adverse effects for a system
without any normalization and language knowledge. Thus,
paradigms sensitive to decreased performances and a contrast
chosen to maximize the predicted difference can better tap
into the question of how adults process speaker variance.
In sum, we have shown that speaker variation poses a hurdle for sound discrimination but does not necessarily lead to
confusion, even for a naive learner. In quantifying the effect,
we can derive more precise predictions when testing competing psycholinguistic models.

1335

Acknowledgements
We thank T. Schatz, X.-N. Cao, R. Thiolliere, M. Bernard,
and G. Synnaeve for their help. The present work was supported by the European Horizon 2020 programme (Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant No 660911), the European Research
Council (E-2011-AdG 295810 BOOTPHON), the Agence
Nationale pour la Recherche (ANR-2010-BLAN-1901-1
BOOTLANG, ANR-14-CE30-0003 MechELex, ANR-10IDEX-0001-02 PSL*, ANR-10-LABX-0087 IEC), and the
Fondation de France.

References
Apfelbaum, K. S., & McMurray, B. (2011). Using variability
to guide dimensional weighting: Associative mechanisms
in early word learning. Cognitive Science, 35(6), 1105–
1138.
Bergmann, C., ten Bosch, L., Fikkert, P., & Boves, L. (2013).
A computational model to investigate assumptions in the
headturn preference procedure. Frontiers in Psychology,
4(676).
Clough, L. T. (2015). Does variability impact infants’
sound discrimination? (Unpublished Thesis, accessed via
http://hdl.handle.net/10150/578957)
Cristia, A. (2011). Fine-grained variation in caregivers’
/s/ predicts their infants’ /s/ category. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 129(5), 3271–3280.
Dehaene-Lambertz, G., & Pena, M. (2001). Electrophysiological evidence for automatic phonetic processing in
neonates. Neuroreport, 12(14), 3155–3158.
Escudero, P., Bonn, C. D., Aslin, R. N., & Mulak, K. E.
(2015). Indexical and linguistic processing in infancy: Discrimination of speaker, accent and vowel differences. In
Proceedings of the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences.
Gelman, A., & Stern, H. (2006). The difference between
“significant” and “not significant” is not itself statistically
significant. The American Statistician, 60(4), 328–331.
Gold, B., & Morgan, N. (2000). Chapter 14: Ear Physiology.
In Speech and Audio Signal Processing: Processing and
Perception of Speech and Music (pp. 189–203). New York:
J Wiley.
Goldinger, S. D. (1998). Echoes of echoes? An episodic theory of lexical access. Psychological Review, 105(2), 251–
279.
Houston, D. M., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2000). The role of talkerspecific information in word segmentation by infants. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 26(5), 1570–1582.
Hunter, M. A., & Ames, E. W. (1988). A multifactor model of
infant preferences for novel and familiar stimuli. Advances
in Infancy Research, 69–95.
Jusczyk, P. W., Pisoni, D. B., & Mullennix, J. (1992). Some
consequences of stimulus variability on speech processing
by 2-month-old infants. Cognition, 43(3), 253–291.

Kleinschmidt, D. F., & Jaeger, T. F. (2015). Robust speech
perception: Recognize the familiar, generalize to the similar, and adapt to the novel. Psychological Review, 122(2),
148–203.
Kuhl, P. K. (1979). Speech perception in early infancy:
Perceptual constancy for spectrally dissimilar vowel categories. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
66(6), 1668–1679.
Kuhl, P. K. (1983). Perception of auditory equivalence
classes for speech in early infancy. Infant Behavior and
Development, 6(2), 263–285.
Marean, G. C., Werner, L. A., & Kuhl, P. K. (1992). Vowel
categorization by very young infants. Developmental Psychology, 28(3), 396–405.
Martin, A., Schatz, T., Versteegh, M., Miyazawa, K.,
Mazuka, R., Dupoux, E., & Cristia, A. (2015). Mothers
speak less clearly to infants than to adults: A comprehensive test of the hyperarticulation hypothesis. Psychological
Science, 26(3), 341–347.
Polka, L., Masapollo, M., & Ménard, L. (2014). Whos talking now? infants perception of vowels with infant vocal
properties. Psychological Science, 25(7), 1448–1456.
Rost, G. C., & McMurray, B. (2009). Speaker variability
augments phonological processing in early word learning.
Developmental Science, 12(2), 339–349.
Schatz, T., Cao, X.-N., Kolesnikova, A., Bergvelt, T., Wright,
J., & Dupoux, E. (2015). Articulation Index lscp (Speech
Corpus No. LDC2015S12). Linguistic Data Consortium.
Schatz, T., Peddinti, V., Bach, F., Jansen, A., Hermansky,
H., & Dupoux, E. (2013). Evaluating speech features
with the minimal-pair ABX task: Analysis of the classical MFC/PLP pipeline. In 14th Annual Conference of the
International Speech Communication Association.
Schatz, T., Peddinti, V., Cao, X.-N., Bach, F., Hermansky, H.,
& Dupoux, E. (2014). Evaluating speech features with the
minimal-pair ABX task (II): Resistance to noise. In 15th
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association.
Schatz, T., Thiolliere, R., Synnaeve, G., & Dupoux,
E.
(2016).
ABXpy v0.2.
Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.45268
Seidl, A., Onishi, K. H., & Cristia, A. (2014). Talker variation aids young infants phonotactic learning. Language
Learning and Development, 10(4), 297–307.
Synnaeve, G. (2016). DTW Cython. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.45257
Tsuji, S., & Cristia, A. (2014). Perceptual attunement in
vowels: A meta-analysis. Developmental Psychobiology,
56(2), 179–191.

1336

