Distributed Cognition in the Past Progressive: Narratives as Representational Tools
for Clinical Reasoning
Katherine D. Lippa (lippa2@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy
Dayton, OH 45435 USA

Valerie L. Shalin (Valerie.shalin@wright.edu)
Ohio Center of Excellence in Knowledge-Enabled Computing (Kno.e.sis)
Department of Psychology, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy
Dayton, OH 45435 USA

the challenges of retrospective cognition distributed
between patient and practitioner.

Abstract
Cognition may require access to past events, for example to
understand undesirable outcomes or diagnose failures. When
cognition is distributed between multiple participants, a
particular representational challenge occurs because not all of
the participants may have directly experienced the focal
event. Language can transcend temporal and physical
limitations on event accessibility. We suggest that people
create complex linguistic constructs as tools to facilitate
retrospective cognition. We illustrate this process by
analyzing the use of a particular linguistic construct
(narrative) in the domain of clinical reasoning. Results
demonstrated that narratives support clinical cognition during
practitioner-patient interactions. Narratives extended access to
clinically relevant events providing information about
circumstances, subjective experiences, patient functioning,
and prior decisions. Whereas, the hermeneutic nature of
narrative allowed collaborative hypothesis testing and
creation of meaning. The use of narrative in clinical cognition
challenges Bruner’s (1991) distinction between narrative and
paradigmatic reasoning and enriches the understanding of
medical narratives.
Keywords: distributed cognition;
narrative; doctor-patient interaction

medical

Language as a Cognitive Tool
Research has established the cognitive utility of language
for both individual and distributed cognition. On an
individual level, the use of words facilitates myriad
cognitive processes including perceptual discrimination,
memory, and attention (Yoshida & Smith, 2005; Fulkerson
& Waxman, 2007). Moreover, the semiotic functions of
language provide an organizational structure for people to
effectively parse their environment (Bloom & Keil, 2001).
The semiotic connection that language creates between
thought and the environment (Clark, 2006) is especially
significant during distributed cognition. Under this
paradigm, the unit of analysis for cognitive functions
includes environmental artifacts and other participants
(Hutchins, 1995.) When cognition is distributed between
participants, language acts synergistically with cognition,
physical context and culture to create a space for interaction
(Cowley, 2011). Whether an actor is in the next room or on
the other side of the planet, the distribution of cognition
across space requires language to extend the interaction
space (Tylen, et al., 2010). Similarly, when actors have
access to different portions of the environment (e.g. they are
working on different displays or have specialized expertise
that allows them to understand particular aspects of the
environment) language allows them to create mutually
accessible representations of key environmental elements
(Bødker & Anderson, 2005).
Participants naturally track aspects of the environment
under discussion, creating a joint focus of attention
(Eberhard, et al, 1995). Moreover, language allows actors
to monitor each other’s understanding and coordinate task
performance (Bangerter & Clark, 2003). However, these
basic utilities of linguistic communication regard its
function as the assertion of propositions. Larger linguistic
constructs, such as narrative, are complex, intentionally
constructed representations. In contrast to the fixed tools of
a task environment such as displays, constructed
representations are emergent, and are both shaped by and
shape thought processes (Chandrasekharan & Nersessian,
2015; Nersessian, 2009).

cognition;

Introduction
Retrospective cognition is often required to understand
adverse events. Whether people are attempting to
understand intelligence failures after a terrorist attack, the
origin and significance of a technical error, or the evolution
of a disease, the reasoning task creates representational
challenges. The onset of the focal event may not have been
recognized in real time and significant aspects of the
environment may have been missed or misinterpreted.
Crucially, those involved in retrospective analysis may not
have directly experienced the events in question. All of
these properties make retrospective cognition dependent on
representations of past experience suitable for exchange
with reasoning partners. Some of these representations take
the form of physical tools, such as record systems. But
others are ephemeral linguistic compositions. In this paper,
we analyze how one representational medium, medical
narrative, is used as a psycholinguistic tool for overcoming

496

Narrative1 Cognition

illness related events following a clinical encounter.
(Hunter, 1991; Crossley, 2000). Nevertheless, there is little
understanding of the role narrative plays in distributed
physician-patient clinical cognition. In this study, we look at
the cognitive significance of narratives for physicians and
patients managing Multiple Sclerosis (MS).

Several scholars link narrative and cognition (Bruner, 1991;
Pennington & Hastie, 1992; Bower, Black & Turner, 1979).
Notably, Bruner has suggested that narrative constitutes a
unique form of cognition divorced from paradigmatic (i.e.
logical, scientific) thought. Under Bruner’s conception,
narrative cognition has 10 core properties: diachronicity,
genericness, canonicity and breach, normativeness,
particularity, intentional state entailment, hermeneutic
composability, context sensitivity, referentiality, and
narrative accrual. Despite the fact that Bruner proposed a
dichotomous separation between narrative and paradigmatic
thought, many of these narrative attributes may facilitate
conventional cognitive functions.
Narrative facilitates the organization of individual pieces
of information into a coherent whole. On a temporal level,
the creation of a narrative entails the (re)configuration of
events into a unified structure that orders individual events
within a coherent ‘plot’ (Ricouer, 1980). Narrative genres
guide attention with a template for the inclusion, structuring
and presentation of particular elements (Barthes, 1975).
Organizational advantages explain the benefit of narrative
on memory (Bower, Black & Turner, 1979).
Narratives offer more than structure for representing
events. Narratives facilitate event reasoning. The reasoning
involved in narrative composition includes causal argument.
The temporal nature of narrative facilitates abductive
reasoning. Some theorists advocate that all narratives are
causal arguments employing post hoc ergo propter hoc
logic (Robinson & Hawpe, 1986). These intermingled
processes of reasoning and narrative composition result
from a single individual or emerge as part of a social
dynamic as two or more actors co-construct a narrative
(Ochs, Smith and Taylor, 1989). The co-construction of
narratives suggests its utility for distributed cognition.
Research also suggests that narratives may suit reasoning
about complex environments. The combination of
particularity and genre conventions allows narrative to
generate theory by filtering noisy data in recognizable
patterns. Dubba et al. (2012) have shown this effect in an AI
system for modeling an airport through spatio-temporal
narratives. Their work demonstrates the understanding of a
dynamic domain by combining inductive and abductive
processes through a narrative framework.

Methods
We observed 24 patients with MS interacting with 3
medical practitioners (2 neurologists and 1 nurse
practitioner) at a university neurology clinic. Clinical
sessions were audio recorded (n=10) or documented with
field notes (n=14). Follow-up interviews with all patients
were audio recorded within 2 weeks of their appointment.
All audio recordings were transcribed using a literary
transcription method.
Field notes were elaborated
immediately after each clinical session and original notes
were retained for comparison.
Narratives (defined as speech describing one or more
particular events and including temporal, evaluative and
contextual components) were identified in the transcripts
and notes. More than a year later approximately 25% of the
corpus was recoded to verify coding reliability, resulting in
Kappa = .82 (CI .78-.86).
All narratives were examined in successive rounds of
analysis. Initial analyses verified the elements of narrative
as defined by Bruner (1991) in this context. Subsequent
analysis focused on identifying patterns concerning the
cognitive and pragmatic utility of these narratives in the
clinical context. Once patterns of use were identified, the set
of narratives was reanalyzed for how those patterns
manifested and varied. We used an additional focused
coding scheme to identify causal reasoning and the use of
functional descriptions, establishing reliability with a
second independent rater (Kappa=.63 [CI .41-.85]). All of
the patterns described below appeared in both the notes and
the transcripts. To allow for greater depth of discussion
specific examples below are taken from transcripts.

Results
Eighty-eight narratives were identified including one or
more from each clinical session and interview. A sample of
these appears in Table 1. In the discussion below, we
analyze and provide examples of how narrative served as a
tool to facilitate a variety of cognitive functions. As
representations of external events, narratives provided joint
access to clinically relevant content including contextual
information. They helped focus attention on specific issues
and relevant parameters for understanding those issues.
Finally, they facilitated causal reasoning, and the integration
of intentional and metacognitive components into clinical
cognition.

Narratives in Medicine
The conventional medical decision making research
paradigm focuses on the reasoning of individual physicians
with factual data. Yet, patients share narratives with
practitioners by recounting acute episodes and elements of
their medical history (Haidet & Paterniti, 2003). Both
practitioners and patients use narratives to understand
1
There are many definitions for narrative (Bruner, 1991;
Ricoeur, 1980; Labov, 1997). In this study, narrative is defined as
a recounting of events with temporal, evaluative, and contextual
elements.

497

Table 1. Narrative Exemplars
Example 1 (male, 40s, minimal disability, college educated)
Patient: Um, two weeks ago I had a um, um I guess an episode is what you’d call it. Um where I had a visual problem. I
had kind of a backwards c shape blurry spot, you know in my vision, and it lasted about ten minutes…
Practitioner: Did you have optic neuritis before in that eye? {Uh} 2 Like did you lose vision before? Or have blurry vision
for some time before in that eye?
Patient: Um, I’ve had a what people have told me it’s called a like floater in my eye for a long {uh huh} time. Since like
93, 94. I have like uh like uh I haven’t experienced that kind of loss of field in my eye before. And as I sat there I thought
you know is it the right or the left, so {ok} then I you know closed my right and checked and then closed my left and
checked and it seemed like it was in both, so it didn’t seem like it was in one or the other in particular. And so then I
closed both eyes and you could still like when you sit down and stare at a light bulb you still got that kind of greenish.
Well it was still there…
Practitioner: How big was it?
Patient: Um, it was fairly large. I mean um I guess it was kind of like a field in my vision and I guess if I was looking at
my computer there were certain portions where I was looking where I wouldn’t be able to see what I was typing, because it
would be obscured by the blurriness.
Practitioner:
[Do you get migraines?
Patient: No, I do have headaches but I’ve never experienced what people told me is a migraine…
Patient’s Wife: He had me drive home it scared him that much…
Practitioner: But it lasted only half an hour right?
Patient: I don't even think it lasted that long? I know on Friday it only lasted 10 minutes because when it started I thought
‘well this is unusual’ and I looked at my watch and I wrote down in my notebook…
Practitioner: Cause usually like MS attack would last it has to last more than 24 hours right, so we wouldn’t consider it MS
attack. What you describe to me is not really what sound like {but} MS related problem.
Example 2 (female, late teens, minimal disability, high school educated)
Practitioner: Ok. Difficulty walking? Difficulty with balance?
Patient: there was an episode that I had when I lived with my grandma. She has carpet floors and I got up for school. This
was when I was still in school. I got up for school that morning in my bedroom to get dressed. And when I got up I felt
fine, but when I started to walk I fell and I hit the carpet with my head.
Practitioner: ok, oh really, wow, so you had a fall. Do you get dizzy?
Example 3 (male, 40s, significantly disabled, college educated)
Practitioner: Which medication helps you the best? Pain medication?
Patient: Hydrocodone, the Methadone, the Methadone seemed to help a lot. But when I tried to get off the Methadone,
which I did…It was, it was the worst thing that’s ever happened to me.
Practitioner: What happened?
Patient: Um, my body went into the worst type of shock. Just withdrawal and shock. Uh,uh,uh. I never want to take
anything that my body becomes that reliant on. {yeah} I mean it hurt. It hurt so bad I would lay in home in bed. The
sweats were so bad and I was freezing cold. I had cloths on, a down comforter on, I had a heater blowing on my body, and
I could not get warm and I am just shaking so bad. I was seeing things, got a bad headache. When I go go to the restroom
it was terrible. Didn’t eat, dropped probably about 15 pounds in a week because I didn’t eat any food.
helped guide joint attention and provided anchors for
Narrative Cognition and Representation
understanding subjective symptom reports.
Contextualization Narratives often began with a broad
Medical
decision
making
research
paradigms
sketch
of the environment, including both temporal and
notwithstanding, real clinical reasoning depends upon a
other
contextual
elements. Many of the narratives
great deal of information that the practitioner cannot directly
incorporated
a
reference
to temporal context that was either
access either because it is phenomenological or concerns
calendar
based,
as
in
example
1 “two weeks ago” (43% of
events outside the clinic. Practitioners must know about the
the corpus) or tied to key events in the participant’s life, as
qualitative nature of symptoms and the context, sequence
in example 2 “when I lived with my grandma”. One patient
and timing of episodes for diagnostic purposes (Lippa &
even used events from the news as a temporal referent. The
Shalin, 2015). The patient must bring these subjective and
specification of temporal attributes converges with a
environmentally distributed elements into the clinic (Lippa,
physician’s interest in the recency of an event as an
et al., submitted). The participants in this data used
indicator of meaning.
Older narratives indicate the
narratives as a tool for bringing external events into the
clinic. This mutually accessible representation of events,
2

498

{} denote minor interjections.

persistence of experience of increased import, while more
recent narratives may reflect fortuitous and transient events
of limited significance to disease. The provided contextual
overviews varied a great deal including information about
the patient’s case history, personal background, emotional
state, physical location, etc.
Event Classification Having situated events in context,
narratives typically focused on a particular problem. This
problem became the plot of the narrative to which all
subsequent particulars and events needed to relate.
Sometimes the patient began the narrative with a clear
understanding that the events described constituted a
problem and the function of the narrative was to draw
attention to the focal problem and provide information to
facilitate distributed problem solving. But in many cases,
this information helped classify whether and to what extent
the central events constituted a MS related problem.
Example 1 includes both functions. The patient immediately
concluded the symptom was disruptive and notable. This is
clear from the fact that he wrote down the exact time of
onset. We believe that he told his story hoping the
practitioner would clarify the parameters of the problem and
their relationship to MS. When she ended the discussion
without a clear explanation, he was confused. He expressed
this confusion during the follow up interview: “I couldn’t
really understand what she’s saying about it but what I got
from her was that she didn’t really think it was MS related
so I don’t know what to think now.”
Inclusion of Detail In MS management narrative genres
appear to be co-constructed by patients and practitioners
(for a similar effect in psychotherapeutic settings see Sluzki,
1992). As patients and physicians interact, the physicians’
questions help patients to define what aspects of their
experience are relevant to MS management. We see this in
example 1 when the practitioner asks first about the
specifics of the symptom (“How big was it?”) and later
about the time course (“But it lasted only half an hour
right?). The patient could have chosen to respond to each
question with a brief statement of facts, but instead he
responded with extensive descriptions –mini-narratives by
themselves. The practitioner’s questions showed which
aspects of the narrative she was attending to and directed the
patient’s attention to elements worth elaborating. This type
of interaction signals to patients the kinds of information to
include in clinical narratives. Over time they learn to tell
stories that incorporate the specific information that
physicians need (for a discussion of this process see Lippa
& Shalin, 2015).
Functional Anchoring In addition to the basic leveraging
of narrative structure described above, patients used
narratives about functioning to anchor otherwise amorphous
symptom descriptions. In most of the narratives in this
study, including examples 1, 2 and 3, at some point patients
directly reported their experiences (e.g. I had kind of a
backwards c shape blurry spot, you know in my vision; I felt
fine; it hurt so bad). Such descriptions were often

insufficient, employing ambiguous terms. A mutually
understood anchor conveyed a more specific meaning.
To meet this challenge, patients often included supportive
functional descriptions for subjective reports, or emphasized
clinically relevant information in their narratives. Twenty
nine functional descriptions appeared in 26 distinct
narratives (30% of the corpus). In example 1, the patient
addresses one of the practitioner’s questions about the
characteristics of the symptom by providing details
concerning how the symptom affected his living activities,
in this case, work at the computer. Other functional
descriptions convey a sense of magnitude. In example 3,
the patient emphasizes the severity of his pain by saying he
couldn’t function normally but had to “lay in home in bed”
and even to “go to the restroom was terrible.” Functional
descriptions related symptoms to tasks with culturally
grounded demands to impart meaning to the severity of the
symptom.
Intentionality and Metacognition By design, medical
records document physical information. They track disease
processes (and support insurance reimbursement) rather
than intentional information driving medical decisions.
Narratives complement this content with information about
phenomenological experiences, context and motivation that
are not typically included in medical records.
In fact, practitioners asked patients to retell parts of their
case history to recapture details or intentional elements
contributed by the practitioner and/or patient during earlier
interactions. Practitioners either asked patients to elaborate
on brief descriptions from their records (“What happened
[when a particular medicine was discontinued]?”) or to
recount why decisions noted in the record were made (“I’ll
go check something {looks at computer} Did we stop the
Ultram because it wasn’t doing the trick anymore? And you
liked the Tylenol?). These questions suggest that the record
noted that events occurred but not how or why. The
practitioner had to solicit the patient’s narrative recall to
recapture significant particulars. Many of these cases
involved recapturing the same kind of external and
phenomenological content that seem to be a key affordance
of narratives throughout the clinical encounter. Example 3
centers on this type of elaboration. This interchange was
part of a long discussion of pain management. In this case
the practitioner had access to a record of which medications
had been given when but there was little information on
why specific drugs were selected or discontinued. The
example illustrates both the absence of such content in
conventional medical records and the relevance of narrative
content to link physical conditions, phenomenological
experiences and decision processes.

Reasoning through Narrative
Narrative is a representational product, but it is also a
hermeneutic process. Both the act of creating a narrative and
the act of listening involve interpretation of the events
depicted. Participants used the hermeneutic quality of
narratives to facilitate collaborative reasoning.

499

At the most basic level, patients used narrative to present
events of uncertain significance so that the physician could
assign an appropriate interpretation. Example 2 follows this
pattern. The physician asks a question. Rather than
answering directly the patient describes an event of
uncertain significance allowing the physician to interpret its
significance.
A hermeneutic process also facilitates the hypothesis
testing that is often considered a key part of diagnostic
reasoning. Sometimes the practitioner would present one or
more possible diagnoses during the course of the narrative
and ask the patient questions to see if information either
from the narrative or from past experience supported her
hypothesis. In example 1, the practitioner proposes two
possible diagnoses during the narrative (i.e. optic neuritis
and migraines) and for each diagnosis asks the patient
questions that might provide information to support her
hypothesis. In cases like this one, the practitioner’s
questions and the patient’s responses allowed them to test
possible assignations of meaning to key events while coconstructing a narrative. Ideally, this led to a mutually
understood and accepted interpretation of events. However,
sometimes
participants
maintained
discordant
interpretations even as the narrative concluded. In example
1, the patient did not support the practitioner’s hypothesis
and by the end of the interaction began to object to her
interpretation interjecting a ‘but’ into her summary.

Narratives as Psycholinguistic Tools
Like physical tools, language extends our functional
capacities. As tools become more complex, they facilitate
the creation of more specialized tools. Thus if basic
language is like an abacus, complex language is like a
computer. It is a tool in itself but it also facilitates the
creation of more specialized, context specific tools.
In this study, narratives served as tools to address the
demands of ongoing clinical cognition.
Participants
constructed narratives as informational resources to
represent external and/or prior events, support
metacognition, coordinate care between medical
practitioners, and provide detailed, functional accounts of
symptom episodes. In addition, the interpretive aspects of
narrative facilitated hypothesis testing and causal reasoning.
This suggests physicians should view narratives not just as a
socio-emotional concern but also as a cognitive resource
that can be used (and recorded) more or less efficiently.
Whereas this study examined a single environment,
transient, localized experience is common to many domains,
suggesting that this psycholinguistic representational tool
may support distributed cognition in other contexts.

Narrative Cognition
Narrative cognition has typically been discussed as divorced
from other forms of cognition, especially cognition involved
in problem solving, logical reasoning and hypothesis testing
(Bruner, 1991). However, the narratives in this study were
integrated ongoing cognitive processes including analytic
reasoning. In fact, many of the properties of narrative that
Bruner presented as definitional and distinct from
paradigmatic reasoning served to facilitate classically
defined cognitive processes, (see Table 2).
This suggests that paradigmatic and narrative cognition
should not be considered dichotomous or opposing. But
rather that they can, and are, productively intermingled. In

Conclusions
The results of this study suggest that people use language to
create artifacts, in this case, representations of events, that
simplify cognition. These patients and practitioners faced a
variety of cognitively demanding tasks that required
reasoning about past events. In carrying out these tasks, they
composed narratives whose composition and contents
addressed a variety of cognitive challenges.

Property
Narrative
Diachronicity
Genericness

Canonicity and
Breach
Normativeness
Particularity

Intentional
State
Entailment
Hermeneutic
Composability

Table 2. Cognitive and Clinical Functions of Narrative Properties
Description
Cognitive Functions
Use in Clinical Cognition
Inherent temporality
Memory &
Maintain understanding of case history
Reasoning
Construction in relation to
Attention & Memory Combination of episode based and case
stylistic and plot conventions
history narratives to recall clinically relevant
information
Focus on a disruption in the
Problem Solving
Problem definition
normal flow of events
Construction in relation to
Problem solving
Problem definition
implicit norms
Inclusion of highly specific
Reasoning
Creation of functional representations &
details
representation of relevant elements outside the
clinical encounter
Incorporation of
Meta-cognition
Recording reasoning processes not included in
phenomenology and
official records
psychology of characters
Both creating and
Hypothesis Testing
Co-construction of narratives and hypothesis
comprehension are interpretive
testing
activities

500

this study, the properties of narrative served critical
functions in distributed practitioner-patient cognition by
providing a vehicle for patients to create representations of
key elements of the clinical problem space that would not
otherwise be accessible to practitioners. In this data set,
narrative was not opposed to paradigmatic reasoning but
rather was a tool that facilitated clinical reasoning, including
causal reasoning and hypothesis testing.

contexts. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 409–
436.
Fulkerson, A. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2007). Words (but
not tones) facilitate object categorization: Evidence from 6and 12-month-olds. Cognition, 105(1), 218-228.
Haidet, P. & Paterniti, D.A. (2003). “Building” a history
rather than “taking” one: A perspective on information
sharing during the medical interview. Archives of Internal
Medicine, 163, 1134-1140.
Hunter, K.M. (1991). Doctors’ stories: The narrative
structure of medical knowledge. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speed.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Labov, W. (1997). Some further steps in narrative
analysis. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 7, 395-415.
Lippa, K.D. & Shalin, V.L. (2015). Stepping up to the
blackboard: Distributed cognition in doctor-patient
interactions. Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society.
Lippa, K.D., Feufel, M.A., Robinson, F.E. & Shalin, V.L.
(submitted). Navigating the decision space: A study of
medical decision making as distributed cognition
Nersessian, N.J. (2009). How do engineering scientists
think? Model-based simulation in biomedical engineering
research laboratories. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(4),
730-757.
Ochs, E., Smith, R., & Taylor, C. (1989). Detective
stories at dinnertime: Problem-solving through co-narration.
Cultural Dynamics, 2(2), 238-257.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1992). Explaining the
evidence: Tests of the Story Model for juror decision
making. Journal of personality and social psychology,
62(2), 189.
Ricoeur, P. (1980). Narrative time. Critical Inquiry, 7(1),
169-190.
Robinson, J.A. & Hawpe, L. (1986). Narrative thinking as
a heuristic process. In T.R. Sarbin (Ed.) Narrative
Psychology: The storied nature of human conduct. (pp.
111-125). New York: Praeger.
Sluzki, C. E. (1992). Transformations: A blueprint for
narrative changes in therapy. Family process, 31(3), 217230.
Ty'len, K., Weed, E., Wallentin, M., Roepstorff, A., &
Frith, C.D. (2010). Mind & Language, 25 (1), 3–29.
Yoshida, H., & Smith, L. B. (2005). Linguistic cues
enhance the learning of perceptual cues. Psychological
Science, 16(2), 90-95.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by DGE-0504438, 2005-14 (J.
Flach, PI). IGERT: Technology Based learning with
Disabilities.

References
Bangerter, A., & Clark, H. H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cognitive Science, 27, 195-225;
Barthes, R., (1975). An introduction to the structural
analysis of narrative. New literary history, 237-272.
Bloom, P., & Keil, F. C. (2001). Thinking through
language. Mind & Language, 16(4), 351-367.
Bødker S., Anderson P.B. (2005). Complex mediation.
Human-Computer Interaction, 20, 353–402.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts
in memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11(2), 177-220.
Bruner, J. (1991). The narrative construction of reality.
Critical Inquiry, 18(1), 1-21.
Chandrasekharan, S. & Nersessian, N.J. (2015). Building
cognition:
The
construction
of
computational
representations for scientific discovery. Cognitive Science
39, 1727-1763.
Clark, A. (2006). Language, embodiment, and the
cognitive niche. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(8), 370374.
Cowley, S.J. (2011). Taking a language stance.
Ecological Psychology, 23, 1–25.
Crossley, M. L. (2000). Narrative psychology, trauma and
the study of self/identity. Theory & Psychology, 10(4), 527546.
Dubba, K., Bhatt, M., Dylla, F., Hogg, D. C., & Cohn, A.
G. (2012). Interleaved inductive-abductive reasoning for
learning complex event models. In Inductive Logic
Programming (pp. 113-129). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Eberhard, K. M., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Sedivy, J. C.,
& Tanenhaus, M. K. (1995). Eye movements as a window
into real-time spoken language comprehension in natural

501

