Do classifier categories affect or reflect object concepts?
Laura J. Speed1
Jidong Chen2
Falk Huettig3
Asifa Majid1,3,4
(l.speed@let.ru.nl) (jchen@csufresno.edu) (Falk.Huettig@mpi.nl) (asifa.majid@let.ru.nl)
1

Centre for Language Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
2
California State University, Fresno, USA
3
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
4
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL

Abstract
We conceptualize objects based on sensorimotor information
gleaned from real-world experience. To what extent is
conceptual information structured according to higher-level
linguistic features? We investigate whether classifiers, a
grammatical category, shape the conceptual representations of
objects. In three experiments native Mandarin speakers (a
classifier language) and native Dutch speakers (a language
without classifiers) judged the similarity of a target object with
four objects (presented as words or pictures). One object shared a
classifier with the target, the other objects did not. Overall, the
target object was judged as more similar to the object with the
shared classifier than distractor objects in both Dutch and
Mandarin speakers, with no difference between the two
languages. Thus, even speakers of a non-classifier language are
sensitive to object similarities underlying classifier systems, and
using a classifier system does not exaggerate these similarities.
This suggests that classifier systems reflect, rather than affect,
conceptual structure.
Keywords: classifiers; object concepts; Mandarin; Dutch;
linguistic relativity; language and thought

Introduction
When asked to describe the similarity between a knife and a
sword, one might describe their visual properties: they are
both “sharp”, “metallic”, “shiny”, etc. Likewise for the
similarities between a saw and a pair of scissors, there are
numerous similarities. The present research investigates
whether the addition of a shared grammatical category
between nouns would serve to increase conceptual
similarity of objects too. Do conceptual representations
reflect universal sensory and motor regularities? Or can they
also be structured according to higher-level linguistic
information?
For decades psychologists, linguists, and anthropologists
have debated whether or not the language we speak can
affect the way we think about the world. Evidence for some
effect of language on thought has been provided for many
domains, such as color (e.g., Davidoff, Davies, & Roberson,
1999; Gilbert, Regier, Kay, & Ivry, 2006; Winawer,
Witthoft, Frank, Wu, Wade, & Boroditsky, 2007), spatial
cognition (e.g., Levinson, 2003; Majid, Bowerman, Kita,
Haun, & Levinson, 2004), and time (e.g., Boroditsky, 2001;
Boroditsky, Fuhrman, McCormick, 2010), to name but a
few.
One linguistic domain in which effects of language on
thought have been extensively investigated is grammatical

gender. Grammatical gender divides nouns into classes
according to the behavior of associated words (e.g., articles,
adjectives; cf. Corbett, 2006). In some languages, nouns are
grammatically classified according to sex, i.e., masculine or
feminine. For example apple is masculine in German, der
Apfel, but feminine in French, la pomme. Grammatical
gender tends to be semantically arbitrary for objects without
a natural gender; however, it has been shown to affect how
speakers of such languages think about objects. For
example, Spanish and German speakers are more likely to
ascribe male qualities to grammatically masculine objects
and female qualities to grammatically feminine objects
(Boroditsky, Schmidt, & Phillips, 2003).
We may ask, however, whether such linguistic features
are, in fact, changing the conceptual structure of objects, or
whether they are merely being used as strategic devices
during language processing. One way to test this is to assess
the effect of such grammatical systems using tasks that
recruit language to a greater or lesser extent. Phillips and
Boroditsky (2003) provided some evidence that
grammatical gender affects object concepts for German and
Spanish speakers. They found effects of grammatical gender
on judgments of similarity between people and objects even
when the task was completed in English (a language with no
gender system), when performing a non-linguistic task
(using pictures), and during a verbal interference task
(suggesting real conceptual change). On the other hand,
Bender, Beller, and Klauer (2011) suggest grammatical
gender is only available as a syntactic property, and does
not change conceptual representations. Lexical decisions to
nouns were faster when they had been preceded by words
matching in grammatical gender but not for words matching
in semantic gender (natural gender). That is, congruence in
the syntactic features (grammatical gender) facilitated
responses, but congruence between grammatical gender and
semantic gender (which would reflect conceptual similarity)
did not affect response time. Recently, Bender, Beller, and
Klauer (2016) have suggested grammatical gender effects
may in fact be due to “personification” (with nouns being
associated to personified allegories such as Lady Liberty),
rather than grammatical information, per se.
Here we look at a different grammatical category
associated with nouns, i.e., numeral classifiers. In languages
with numeral classifiers, their use is obligatory when a
specific quantity is indicated, with certain quantifiers, and
with demonstratives. Numeral classifiers are said to refer to
1

2267

a specific feature (e.g., material, shape, size) of the entity
associated with the corresponding noun (cf., Allan, 1977).
For example, the Mandarin classifier tiao2 refers to long,
rope-like objects such as legs, snakes, and rivers. Although
classifier categories have underlying conceptual meanings,
there can be large variability with respect to category size
and coherence, with some classifiers covering a broad range
of objects and taxonomic categories (e.g., Saalbach & Imai,
2012). So, although tiao2 is used with “long” things, it can
also be used for less prototypically long things, such as
dogs, underwear and a piece of news.
It appears that speaking a language with a classifier
system can affect how speakers of a language conceptualize
objects. Lucy and Gaskins (2003), for example, compared
speakers of Yucatec Maya (an indigenous language of
Mexico that contains numeral classifiers) with English
speakers. Speakers of the two languages judged the
similarity of objects differently: Yucatec Mayans had a
preference for matching objects according to material,
whereas English speakers matched the same objects
according to shape. Zhang and Schmitt (1998) and Saalbach
and Imai (2007) found Mandarin speakers rated pairs of
nouns that shared a classifier as more similar than nouns
that did not share a classifier, but speakers of non-classifier
languages (English and German) rated both pairs similarly.
But, do classifier systems really affect the conceptual
organization of object concepts, or do they reflect
conceptual organization instead? Classifiers are usually not
arbitrarily related to features of objects. They pick out
common features of the entities they classify (cf., Allen,
1977; Lakoff, 1987). There is evidence to suggest there is
some conceptual salience to the features classifiers denote.
For example, Clark (1976) noted the parallel between the
conceptual features frequently found in classifier languages
and the conceptual features salient to children in early word
learning. Classifiers often denote features such as “long”,
“round”, or “animate”; the exact features on which children
base their over-generalization errors. No language has been
found with a classifier system that distinguishes referents on
the basis of color, and similarly children do not use color as
a basis of their over-generalizations.
Thus, instead of classifiers influencing the organization of
object concepts, classifiers could reflect the organization of
object concepts, thus providing evidence for the effect of
thought on language. Classifier categories may be structured
around natural similarities in the world. If so, speakers of
non-classifier languages should perceive relations between
objects sharing classifiers similarly to those speaking
classifier languages. Consistent with this, Saalbach and Imai
(2005) found speakers of German, as well as Mandarin,
judged objects sharing a classifier as more similar than pairs
of objects that did not share classifiers.
If classifiers reflect universally recognized similarities
between objects, how does this reconcile with previous
findings of linguistic relativity (e.g., Zhang & Schmitt,
1998; Saalbach & Imai, 2007)? The answer may lie in the
experimental details. The majority of previous experiments

investigating effects of classifier systems present people
with words from the participants’ language; e.g., Mandarin
speakers are presented with names of objects in Mandarin,
and English speakers with names in English. So, in one
sense, it is not surprising speakers of classifier languages are
sensitive to the grammatical information associated with
nouns. If we think of current psycholinguistic models of
language use, then when a noun is activated grammatical
information forming part of the lemma level representation
would also be activated. Linguistic relativity effects could
be explained by the activation of the relevant grammatical
feature associated with the word form, rather than
differences in the conceptual representation of objects, per
se (cf., Kousta, Vinson, & Vigliocco, 2008). To test whether
classifiers, in fact, affect the structure of object concepts or
whether they serve only to facilitate processing of words
with shared grammatical features, parallel experiments with
linguistic and non-linguistic stimuli need to be conducted.
We investigated one classifier language – Mandarin – and
one language without classifiers – Dutch. Participants were
presented with a target object and had to rate its similarity to
four other objects. Using a rating task means more finegrained differences can be detected, compared to, for
example a forced-choice task (e.g., Lucy & Gaskins, 2003;
Saalbach & Imai, 2007, Experiment 1), where participants
have to choose one object over another. One of the four
objects used a noun that possessed the same classifier as the
target object, the other three objects did not. If classifiers
affect the way objects are thought of, we could expect
speakers of Mandarin would judge the target object and
classifier object as more similar than the other objects, but
Dutch speakers would not, because having a shared
classifier will increase perceived similarity. If, on the other
hand, classifiers reflect real-world similarities amongst
objects, then we would expect both Mandarin and Dutch
speakers to judge the target object and classifier object as
more similar than the distractor objects. A third possibility
is that both Mandarin and Dutch speakers judge the
classifier object as more similar to the target than the
distractors, because of real-world similarities that the
classifier system is built upon, but that this effect is greater
in Mandarin than Dutch speakers (cf., Saalbach & Imai,
2007, Experiment 2 and 3). Further, if classifier systems
affect object representations, rather than lexical
representations, then we should see differences between
Mandarin and Dutch speakers on judgments of pictures, as
well as words. In the following three experiments we assess
the effect of classifiers on similarity judgments with pictures
and words.

Experiment 1. Picture-picture similarity
Method
Participants
25 native Mandarin speakers and 24 native Dutch speakers
participated in the experiment (average age 23, range 182

2268

33). All speakers were familiar with other languages.
Mandarin speakers came from different dialect backgrounds
(e.g., Shandong, Henan, Shanxi, Jilin, Hubei, Jiangsu), but
were all educated in Putonghua (standard Mandarin) and
mainly use this language daily, both at work and at home.
Dutch speakers were all multilingual with English, German,
Spanish and French. None of the Dutch participants were
familiar with Mandarin, or any other language with
classifiers.

Figure 1. Example page of the stimulus booklet (left) with
target (scissors), classifier match (chair) and comparison
objects, with response sheet (right).
Stimuli
Line drawings of everyday objects, familiar to both groups
of participants, were used. Each trial consisted of a target
object and four comparison objects. The target object shared
a classifier with one of the comparison objects. A norming
study was first conducted in which a separate set of twelve
native Mandarin speakers named 240 line drawings of
concrete and imageable objects. Classifier choice for a noun
was not strict (i.e., nouns could take different classifiers),
but there was a clear dominant classifier for each object.
Based on the norming results, we chose noun pairs that
shared the same dominant classifier. The remaining three
comparison objects were “distractors”, and did not share a
classifier with the target. On each trial, pictures of the four
comparison objects were presented on a piece of paper, laid
out in a two-by-two grid. The target object was centered
under the comparison objects (see Figure 1). Participants
were given a separate response sheet, consisting of four
empty boxes in the same configuration as the comparison
objects, with a picture of the target object at the bottom of
the sheet. The experiment consisted of 48 trials. The
classifier match appeared equally often in each of the
positions within the gird, and the position of an each item
was counter-balanced across participants.
Procedure
Participants were instructed, in their native language, to
judge how similar each target object was to each of the other
objects. They were asked to indicate their judgments in the
corresponding boxes in their answer sheet, with 0 indicating
“no similarity” and 10 “identical in similarity”.

Results
Previous studies have shown Chinese participants give
overall higher similarity ratings than Westerners (Saalbach
& Imai, 2007). In order to control for any differences in
how the similarity scale was used across individuals, we
transformed each participant’s rating scores into
standardized z-scores. The transformed data were then
analyzed with a language (Mandarin vs. Dutch ) by object
(classifier match vs. distractor 1 vs. distractor 2 vs.
distractor 3) mixed ANOVA, treating participants and items
as random effects.
There was a main effect of object type on similarity
ratings F1(3, 141) = 40.05, p < .0001, η2p = .46; F2 (3, 144) =
5.72, p < .0001, η2p = .11. Simple planned comparisons
revealed the classifier match received higher similarity
ratings than any of the other distractors: classifier vs.
distractor-1 F1(1, 47) = 67.64, p < .001, η2p = .6; F2 (1, 48) =
17.02, p < .001, η2p = .26, classifier vs. distractor-2 F1(1, 47)
= 57.4, p < .001, η2p = .557; F2 (1, 48) = 12.37, p < .001, η2p
= .21, classifier vs. distractor-3 F1(1, 47) = 105.18, p < .001,
η2p = .69; F2 (1, 48) = 11.05, p = .002, η2p = .19. There were
no significant differences between the distractor objects.
There was no significant main effect of language F1 < 1;
F2 <1. Crucially, there was no significant language by object
type interaction F1(3, 141) = 1.4, p = .25, η2p = .03; F2 <1
(see Figure 2).

Figure 2. Mandarin and Dutch speakers’ picture-picture
similarity judgments (z-score) Experiment 1 (bars = 1SE).

Experiment 2. Word-picture similarity
We found a robust effect of classifier pair similarity, but no
indication of a difference between Mandarin and Dutch
speakers in Experiment 1. This suggests object
representations are not affected by classifiers, but does not
rule out lexical-level language-specific effects. In
Experiment 2 we presented the target object as a word, in
order to encourage activation of the classifier categorization.
Participants
A different set of 25 Mandarin speakers and 24 Dutch
speakers (average age 23 years, range 18-28) participated in
3

2269

the experiment. The demographic characteristics and
recruitment procedure was the same as in Experiment 1.

years, range 18-28). The demographic characteristics and
recruitment procedure was as in Experiment 1 and 2.

Stimuli
The stimuli were as in Experiment 1 but now the target was
presented as a word (without the classifier) in the native
language and the comparison objects were presented as
pictures.

Stimuli
The stimuli were as in Experiment 1 and 2, but participants
were presented with words instead of pictures. Mandarin
participants were presented with nouns in Mandarin
characters and Dutch participants with the Dutch nouns.

Procedure
Participants were asked to judge similarity of the target
object to the comparison objects on a scale from 1 (no
similarity) to 10 (identical in similarity).

Procedure
Participants were asked to judge similarity of the target
object to the comparison objects on a scale from 1 (no
similarity) to 10 (identical in similarity).

Results
Data was analyzed as in Experiment 1. There was a main
effect of object type on similarity ratings F1(3, 141) = 52.92,
p < .001, η2p = .53; F2 (3, 144) = 8.66, p < .001, η2p = .15.
Simple planned comparisons revealed the classifier match
received higher similarity ratings than any of the other
distractors: classifier vs. distractor-1 F1(1, 47) = 70.79, p <
.001, η2p = .6; F2 (1, 48) = 20.57, p < .001, η2p = .30,
classifier vs. distractor-2 F1(1, 47) = 73.05, p < . 001, η2p =
.61; F2 (1, 48) = 20.61, p < .001, η2p = .30, classifier vs.
distractor-3 F1(1, 47) = 73.71, p < .001, η2p = .61; F2 (1, 48)
= 11.54, p < .001, η2p = .19. There were no significant
differences between the distractor objects.
There was again no main effect of language F1 <1; F2 <
1and no significant language by object type interaction F1(3,
141) = 1.54, p = .21 η2p = .03; F2 <1 (see Figure 3).

Results
Data was analyzed as in Experiment 1 and 2. There was a
main effect of object type on similarity ratings F1(3, 141) =
52.92, p < .001, η2p = .53; F2 (3, 144) = 9.6, p < .001, η2p =
.17. Simple planned comparisons revealed the classifier
match received higher similarity ratings than any of the
other distractors: classifier vs. distractor-1 F1(1, 47) =
145.22, p < .001, η2p = .6; F2 (1, 48) = 27.25, p < .001, η2p =
.36, classifier vs. distractor-2 F1(1, 47) = 201.19, p < . 001,
η2p = .81; F2 (1, 48) = 16.95, p < .001, η2p = .26, classifier vs.
distractor-3 F1(1,47) = 80.56, p < .001, η2p = .63; F2 (1, 48)
= 7.99, p = .007, η2p = .19. There were no significant
differences between the distractor objects.
There was again no main effect of language F1 (3, 141) =
1.54, p = .21, η2p = .03; F2 < 1 and crucially no significant
language by object type interaction F1(3, 141) = 1.54, p =
.21 η2p = .03; F2 <1 (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. Mandarin and Dutch speakers’ word-picture
similarity judgments (z-score) Experiment 3 (bars = 1SE)

Figure 4. Mandarin and Dutch speakers’ word-word
similarity judgments (z-score) Experiment 2 (bars = 1SE).

Experiment 3. Word-word similarity
Again, in Experiment 2 we find a robust classifier effect, but
no difference between Dutch and Mandarin speakers. As a
final test of a classifier effect we maximized the linguistic
context by presenting both the target and the comparison
objects as words.
Participants
A different set of 25 Mandarin speakers and 24 Dutch
speakers participated in the experiment (average age 23

Discussion
Across three experiments we found objects were judged as
more similar to a target object when they shared a classifier
in Mandarin compared to when they did not. However, this
effect was observed both in a language that uses classifiers –
i.e., Mandarin – as well as a language that does not have a
classifier system – i.e., Dutch. Moreover, the magnitude of
this effect did not differ between Mandarin and Dutch
4

2270

speakers. From these results we conclude classifiers do not
impact overall object similarity.
Why do some studies find differences in similarity ratings
between languages with and without classifiers, but we do
not? Our study focused on overall similarity of objects, and
used stimuli (e.g., visual pictures) which emphasized shape.
We did not use real objects, unlike Lucy and Gaskins
(2003), who found what distinguished Yucatec from English
speakers was attention to shape vs. material. It is possible,
therefore, that we missed a critical ontological distinction.
Nevertheless, other studies have focused on pictorial or
linguistic stimuli and have reported linguistic relativity
effects (Zhang & Scmitt, 1998; Saalbach & Imai, 2007). So
this cannot be the whole story.
It is possible a shared classifier is more salient when there
are fewer objects to judge. For example, when comparing
only two objects at a time, with no distractors, a greater
number of features of a word (such as grammatical
category) can be attended to. However, when there are four
objects to compare simultaneously, it is likely that only the
most salient similarities are attended to. It is also possible
that we failed to find an effect of language on classifier
similarity judgments because we did not present the words
with their classifiers, but as bare nouns. Huettig, Chen,
Bowerman, and Majid (2010) found people look towards
objects sharing a classifier with a spoken word more than
visual distractors, but only when the classifier was explicitly
used, and Gao and Malt (2009) found heightened classifier
effects when a classifier was present in a sentence compared
to when it was not. Similarly, Vigliocco, Vinson, Indefrey,
Levelt, and Hellwig (2004) found grammatical gender
effects in speech substitution errors only when nouns were
produced with determiners marked for gender, but not for
single noun phrases or noun phrases with indefinite
determiners not marked for gender. Thus, grammatical
information may need to be explicit and salient to affect
categorization.
It is also possible that using similarity judgments as a
measurement is not sensitive enough to reveal differences
between Dutch and Mandarin speakers. That is, since
classifiers are mostly built on shared real-world features, the
similarity between the target object and the classifier object
in terms of these features may be quite obvious for explicit
similarity judgments. That is, in some sense, the judgments
could be at ceiling level. Perhaps a more low-level,
automatic task, closer to real-world language use, could
reveal the linguistic advantage of a classifier system.
However, Saalbach and Imai (2011) found the opposite
results: Chinese speakers showed an enhanced classifier
similarity effect compared to German speakers in a
similarity rating task, but not a speeded word-picture
matching task.
Similarly, Gao and Malt (2009) propose there are three
classifier categories: “well-defined” categories in which
there is a clear feature that all objects sharing the classifier
possess; “prototype” categories in which there is a typical
feature, but also a gradient of typicality in category

membership; and “arbitrary” categories for which there are
no typical features defining membership. One might predict
that objects belonging to the “well-defined” classifier
category could easily be grouped in terms of similarity by
speakers of a non-classifier language, but only speakers of
that specific classifier language could group the “arbitrary”
category correctly. Thus, it is possible that the classifiers
used in the present study fit more into the “well-defined”
category. It could be predicted that an advantage for
speakers of a classifier language could be found if the
classifier pairs used shared “arbitrary” classifiers. However,
Goa and Malt (2009) only found an advantage for the “welldefined” category amongst Mandarin speakers when testing
recall of nouns with shared classifiers.
So, does language influence thought? Our results suggest
that a grammatical feature, classifiers, does not have an
influence on the way that objects are categorized, as
measured by global similarity judgments. However, it is
likely that other forms of linguistic information do affect the
way objects are thought about. For example, effects of
grammatical gender on object categorization appear to be
well-attested. As noted above, classifiers are said to
highlight only one, or a few, features of an object (e.g.,
“shape”; cf. Allen, 1977), and not information relevant to
the entire concept. This contrasts with grammatical gender,
which could affect the way all features of an object are
conceptualized. For example, Spanish speakers described
the word key, a noun with female grammatical gender, with
female characteristics “golden, intricate, little, lovely, shiny
and tiny” (Boroditsky, Schmidt & Phillips, 2003). Thus,
gender attributes have knock-on effects onto other features:
e.g., size, hedonics, texture, visual appearance (perhaps
through connotative meaning; cf. Osgood, Suci, &
Tannenbaum, 1957).
Previous research on the cognitive consequences of
speaking a classifier language have been mixed, with the
suggestion that effects are modest. In three experiments we
failed to find language-specific heightened sensitivity of
object similarity for speakers of a classifier language
compared to speakers of a non-classifier language, using
pictures and words. We, therefore, conclude that classifier
systems do not affect overall conceptual representations of
objects. Previous evidence could be the result of strategic or
explicit use of classifier information that does not reflect
typical categorization processes. Alternatively, classifiers
may affect conceptualization of specific object features,
which cannot be observed with overall similarity judgments
(e.g., Lucy & Gaskins, 2003).
Both speakers of a classifier language and a non-classifier
language judged objects sharing a classifier as more similar
than objects that did not share a classifier. Thus, classifier
systems do not impact overall object similarity, but instead
likely reflect the way the world is organized.

Acknowledgements
5

2271

This research was funded by the Max Planck Gesellschaft.
LS and AM are supported by The Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research: NWO VICI grant.

References
Allan, K. (1977). Classifiers. Language, 53(2), 285-311
Bender, A., Beller, S., & Klauer, K. C. (2011). Grammatical
gender in German: A case for linguistic relativity?
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 64(9), 1821–1835.
Bender, A., Beller, S., & Klauer, K. C. (2016). Lady Liberty
and Godfather Death as candidates for linguistic
relativity? Scrutinizing the gender congruency
effect on personified allegories with explicit and
implicit measures. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 69(1), 48–64.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?:
Mandarin and English Speakers’ conceptions of
time. Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1–22.
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2010). Do
English and Mandarin speakers think about time
differently? Cognition, 118(2), 123–129.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex,
syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner & S. GoldinMeadow (Eds.) Language in mind: Advances in
the study of language and thought (pp. 61–80).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chao, Y-R. (1968). A grammar of spoken Chinese.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Corbett, G. G. (2006). Gender, grammatical. The
Encyclopedia of language and linguistics. 2nd
Edition. Oxford: Elsevier, (pp.749–756).
Clark, E. V. (1976). Universal categories: On the semantics
of classifiers and children's early word
Meanings. In A., Juilland (Ed.) Linguistic studies
offered to Joseph Greenberg on the occasion of his
sixtieth birthday. Vol 3, (pp. 449-62) Saratog, CA:
Anma Libri.
Davidoff, J., Davies, I. & Roberson, D. (1999) Colour
categories of a stone-age tribe. Nature, 398, 203204.
Gao, M. Y., & Malt, B. C. (2009). Mental representation
and cognitive consequences of Chinese individual
classifiers. Language and Cognitive Processes,
24(7-8), 1124–1179.
Gilbert, A. L., Regier, T., Kay. P. & Ivry R. B. (2006).
Whorf hypothesis is supported in the right visual
field but not the left. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 103(2), 489–494.
Huettig, F., Chen, J., Bowerman, M., & Majid, A. (2010).
Do language-specific categories shape conceptual
processing? Mandarin classifier distinctions
influence eye gaze behavior, but only during
linguistic processing. Journal of Cognition and
Culture, 10(1), 39–58.

Kousta, S.-T., Vinson, D. P., & Vigliocco, G. (2008).
Investigating linguistic relativity through
bilingualism: The case of grammatical gender.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 34(4), 843–858.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Levinson, Stephen C. (2003). Space in language and
cognition. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.
Lucy J. A, & Gaskins S. (2003) Interaction of language type
and referent type in the development of nonverbal
classification preferences. In D. Gentner & S.
Goldin-Meadows (Eds). Language in mind:
Advances in the study of language and thought.
(pp. 465-492). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., &
Levinson, S. C. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(3), 108-114.
Osgood, C.E., Suci, G., & Tannenbaum, P. (1957). The
measurement of meaning. Urbana, IL: University
of Illinois Press
Phillips, W., & Boroditsky, L. (2003). Can quirks of
grammar affect the way you think? Grammatical
gender and object concepts. In Proceedings of the
25th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Mahwah,
NJ.
Saalbach, H., & Imai, M. (2005). Do classifier categories
structure our concepts? In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou
& M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Mahwah,
NJ.y
Saalbach, H., & Imai, M. (2007). The scope of linguistic
influence: Does a classifier system alter
object concepts? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136(3), 485-501.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Indefrey, P., Levelt, W. J. M.,
& Hellwig, F. (2004). Role of grammatical gender
and semantics in German word production. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30(2), 483–497.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M. C., Wu, L., Wade, A.
R., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal
effects of language on color discrimination.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
104(19), 7780–7785.
Zhang, S., & Schmitt, B. (1998). Language-dependent
classification: The mental representation of
classifiers in cognition, memory, and ad
evaluations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 4(4), 375–385.

6

2272

