Do Do Do, The The The:
Interactivity and Articulatory Suppression in Mental Arithmetic
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Miroslav Sirota
Department of Psychology, University of Essex
Colchester UNITED KINGDOM CO4 3SQ
msirota@essex.ac.uk

Gaëlle Vallée-Tourangeau
Department of Management, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT2 7LB
g.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
Doing long sums in the absence of complementary
actions or artefacts is a multi-step procedure that quickly
taxes working memory; congesting the phonological
loop further handicaps performance. In the experiment
reported here, participants completed long sums either
with hands down—the low interactivity condition—or
by moving numbered tokens—the high interactivity
condition—while they repeated ‘the’ continuously,
loading the phonological loop, or not. As expected,
articulatory
suppression
substantially
affected
performance, but more so in the low interactivity
condition. Independent measures of basic arithmetic
skill and mathematics anxiety moderated the impact of
articulatory suppression on performance in the low but
not in the high interactivity condition. These findings
suggest that working memory resources are augmented
with interactivity, underscoring the importance of
characterizing the properties of the system as it is
configured by the dynamic agent-environment coupling.

adults. However, calculating the correct answer in a
multi-step procedure requires temporary storage and
executive skills: interim totals are calculated and
rehearsed, numbers tagged as having been added, others
tagged as not, attention allocated to certain areas of the
visual presentation or switched to others to identify what
number or the easiest number to add next, arithmetic
knowledge retrieved from long term memory to facilitate
the identification of congenial sub-totals. Some of these
processes rely on the sub-vocal rehearsal of cumulative
interim sums. It is no surprise that loading the
phonological loop in dual-task paradigms interferes with
mental arithmetic that requires counting (Fürst & Hitch,
2000; Logie, Gilhooly, & Wynn, 1994).

Complementary Actions and Interactivity

Keywords:
Interactivity,
Mental
Arithmetic,
Articulatory Suppression, Working Memory, Systemic
Cognition

Introduction
Different components of working memory are engaged in
doing long sums without external aids or complementary
actions (Raghubar, Barnes, & Hecht, 2010). The exact
involvement of these components depends on the
complexity of the arithmetic task, the presentation format
and modality of presentation, as well as the agent’s level
of mathematical competence (DeStefano & LeFevre,
2004). Take the task of adding a long series of single-digit
numbers presented visually all at once in a random
pattern. The requisite arithmetic skills to compute the
correct total are certainly mastered by numerate young

1949

The role of working memory in mental arithmetic is
traditionally established with an experimental procedure
that limits or prevents participants from modifying the
problem presentation in working out an answer. These
research efforts reflect a commitment to a representational
and internalist model of cognitive processing. In order to
create an unadulterated window onto the processes
implicated in mental arithmetic and to permit the clinical
precision of their segmentation, simple problems devoid
of content are presented in a manner that cannot be
modified by the agent. However, once released from the
confines of the cognitive psychologist’s laboratory,
mental arithmetic is often situated (Lave, 1988) and
naturally supported by a range of complementary actions,
such as pointing, to guide attention and bind elements in a
functional sequence (Kirsh, 1995, Carlson, Avraamides,
Cary, & Strasberg, 2007). Gesturing can also lighten the
cognitive load: individuals who were not allowed to

gesture while explaining how they solved a mathematical
problem also exhibited poorer recall on an interfering
memory task compared to individuals who were allowed
to gesture (Goldin-Meadow, Nusbaum, Kelly, & Wagner,
2001).
Interacting with an external representation of the
problem can modify its physical presentation and the
agent’s “mental” computations are reflected in the
dynamic changes in the problem’s appearance. Imagine,
again, adding a long series of single digit numbers,
however, this time, the numbers do not configure a static
visual presentation, but rather adorn the face of wooden
tokens creating a malleable physical configuration which
participants can modify as they work on the problem. The
calculation unfolds along a spatio-temporal itinerary
wrought by the agent’s actions. These actions modify the
problem presentation and in doing so the problem is
restructured, added numbers can be physically
demarcated, no longer exerting attentional pull, congenial
interim totals (e.g., 8+7) are identified and physically
segregated, shifting the affordances of what to do next,
guiding the agent to identify complementary sub-totals
(e.g., 9+6), that inter-lock to create easy-to-remember
provisional sums (e.g., 30), improving efficiency and
reducing error. Thus, the dynamic reconfiguration of the
problem guides, in part, the allocation of attentional
resources and strategy selection (Vallée-Tourangeau,
2013).

The Present Experiment
The present experiment employed a dual-task procedure
to explore the impact of articulatory suppression in a
mental arithmetic task. The task involved adding 11
single-digit numbers presented either as a static
configuration (a low interactivity condition) or as a set of
number tokens that could be manipulated in calculating
the answer (a high interactivity condition). Participants
completed the task either with articulatory suppression—
by repeating aloud ‘the’ continuously— or without. Thus
the experiment employed a 2(Interactivity: Low, High) ×
2(Articulatory Suppression: Without, With) design with
both factors as repeated measures. Past research findings
led us to expect poorer performance with articulatory
suppression, but better performance with interactivity. If
interactivity augments an agent’s working memory
capacity, the impact of articulatory suppression on
performance should be mitigated in the high interactivity
condition, such as to result in an interaction between the
two factors: The performance advantage conferred by a
high degree of interactivity should be greater with
articulatory suppression than without.
We also profiled participants in terms of their (i) basic
arithmetic skills, (ii) level of mathematics anxiety, and
(iii) executive function with an attention-switching task.
We used these concomitant variables to determine
whether they were moderators of the impact of

1950

suppression on mental arithmetic, and whether the
moderation was the same in the low and high interactivity
condition. We expected all three variables to moderate the
impact of suppression primarily in the low interactivity
condition; if a higher degree of interactivity augments
working memory resources, then participants’
performance would be more resilient and the moderating
properties of these factors might be attenuated.

Method
Participants
Fifty-two Kingston University psychology undergraduate
and postgraduate students (45 females) participated in the
experiment in exchange for course credits (Mage = 21.8, SD
= 4.0).

Materials and Measures
Arithmetic Task. Participants were invited to add series
of 11 single digits. For each sum the digits were arrayed in
a random cloud pattern, and were presented either on a
sheet of A4 or as identically-arranged wooden tokens.
Participants were instructed to calculate the sum as quickly
as they could and announce their answer to an
experimenter. They did so either with their hands flat on
the table top in front of them and were not allowed to use
their fingers to count or point (low interactivity) or by
moving the tokens about as they saw fit in producing an
answer (high interactivity). Performance on this arithmetic
task was measured in terms of accuracy—percentage
correct and absolute calculation error—solution latencies
and efficiency. Participants’ efficiency at calculating the
sums was measured as the ratio of their accuracy—
percentage correct—over the resources invested in arriving
at the answer. The later was operationalized as the
proportion of time taken to announce an answer out of the
maximum of time to do so as indexed by the average
latency of the slowest quartile. Thus, if a participant’s
accuracy was 80%, taking an average of 60 seconds to
announce an answer, and that the average latency for the
slowest quartile was 80 seconds, that participant’s
efficiency ratio would be 80%/(60/80) or 80%/75%, hence
1.067. A ratio of 1 or greater indicates efficient
performance, whereas a ratio below 1 indicates inefficient
performance.
Mathematics Anxiety Scale. Participants completed a
25-item Mathematics Anxiety Scale-UK (MAS-UK; Hunt,
Clark-Carter & Sheffield, 2011). The questionnaire invited
participants to imagine how anxious they would feel in
certain situations (1 = “not at all” and 5 = “very much”),
such as “Working out how much your shopping bill comes
to” or “Taking a maths exam”.
Basic Arithmetic Skill. Basic arithmetic skill was
measured by having participants complete as many of 45

simple expressions (such as 11-9 = ?) in a 60-second
period.
Executive Function: Shifting. The plus-minus task
reported in Miyake, Friedman, Emerson, Witzki and
Howerter (2000) was employed to measure attention
switching skills. With three different series of 30 doubledigit numbers, participants were instructed to add 3 to each
in the first series, subtract 3 to each in the second series,
and alternate between adding and subtracting 3 with the
third series. The switching cost, measured in seconds, was
the difference in completion time for the third series minus
the average completion time for the first two. Larger
differences indicated poorer switching skills.

Procedure
Ten different sums of 11 single-digits were created: none
of the sums were the same and totals ranged from 57 to 80.
From these, five were randomly selected and allocated to
the low interactivity condition, and the other five to the
high interactivity condition for each participant.
Participants completed these five sums twice within each
level of interactivity: Once with articulatory suppression,
once without. Thus the design employed was a 2
(Interactivity: Low, High) × 2 (Articulatory Suppression:
Without, With) repeated measures. The order of the four
conditions for each participant was constructed as follows:
One of the four conditions was randomly selected to be the
first condition experienced by the participant. Once that
first condition was identified, the order of the other three
was determined by the following constraint: conditions
with the same level of interactivity could not be presented
in succession (e.g., the two high interactivity conditions
experienced consecutively). For example, if the condition
with low interactivity and with articulatory suppression
was the first condition experienced by a participant then
the remaining conditions could be presented in the
following order: (ii) high interactivity without articulatory
suppression; (iii) low interactivity without articulatory
suppression; (iv) high interactivity with articulatory
suppression. As a result, participants never calculated the
same set of five sums in succession. The first presentation
of a condition with articulatory suppression was always
preceded by a training task during which participants were
asked to write successive subtractions of 3 starting from
100 for one minute while continuously repeating ‘the’. The
instructions read: “You will be presented with 5 addition
problems involving single digit numbers. For each of the
problems, you must add the digits as quickly and as
accurately as you can”. The low interactivity instructions
then read “During this task you will be required to keep
your hands flat on the table and must not move them for
the duration of this task” while the high interactivity
instructions read: “During this task you will be able to
manipulate the tokens as you see fit for this task”.
Participants experienced each interactivity condition twice,

1951

once with articulatory suppression, once without. The
articulatory suppression instructions read: “You will also
be required to repeat the word “the” throughout the
duration of the task as you did in the practice task. You can
start repeating the sound and calculating the sums when
prompted”. Participants were instructed to announce their
answer to the experimenter once completed. In the
articulatory suppression conditions if more than two
seconds elapsed without participants engaging in the
secondary task, they were prompted to comply with the
task. Finally, the presentation of each condition was
separated by the completion of either the Basic Arithmetic
Skill test, the Mathematics Anxiety Scale, or the Attention
Switching task; the order of these three tasks was
counterbalanced across participants.

Results
Mental Arithmetic Performance
Participants’ performance was measured in terms of the
percentage of sums correctly solved (out of five), the
average absolute calculation error, the average latency to
solution, and the efficiency ratio in each of the four
conditions.
Percentage Correct. The mean percentage of correct
additions in the four experimental conditions are reported
in the top portion of Table 1. As expected, participants
were better at providing correct answers in the absence of
articulatory suppression; however performance was always
better in the high interactivity condition. In addition, the
decline in performance with articulatory suppression
appeared steeper in the low interactivity condition. A 2×2
repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)
confirms these impressions: The main effect of
suppression was significant, F(1, 51) = 60.1, p < .001, p2
= .54, as was the main effect of interactivity, F(1, 51) =
13.6, p = .001, p2= .21; the interaction was also
significant, F(1, 51) = 4.06, p = .049, p2 = .07.
Absolute Calculation Error. The mean absolute
calculation error in the four conditions are plotted in
Figure 1. These data illustrate a substantial effect of
suppression, with larger deviations from the correct
answers recorded with suppression than without. Errors
were generally smaller in the high interactivity condition,
and more important, articulatory suppression appeared not
to have as dramatic an impact on calculation accuracy in
the high interactivity condition. In a 2×2 repeated
measures ANOVA the main effects of suppression, F(1,
51) = 36.2, p < .001, p2 = .42 and interactivity, F(1, 51) =
9.69, p = .003, p2 = .16, were significant, as was the
interaction, F(1, 51) = 6.02, p = .018, p2= .11.
Solution Latency. The mean solution latencies are
reported in the middle portion of Table 1. In the absence of
articulatory suppression, solution latencies were similar in
the low and high interactivity conditions. And while

participants were generally slower with articulatory
suppression, they were slowest in the high interactivity
condition. The 2×2 repeated measures ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect of suppression, F(1, 51) = 16.4, p <
.001, p2 = .25, a significant main effect of interactivity,
F(1, 51) = 11.5, p < .001, p2 = .19, as well as a significant
interaction, F(1, 51) = 18.6, p < .001, p2 = .27.
Table 1: Mean and standard deviation for the percentage
correct, latency (measured in seconds), and efficiency ratio
for the five sums in the low and high interactivity
condition without and with articulatory suppression.

skill, or math anxiety level) predicts differences in
performance between two conditions. Thus we determined
how these variables moderated the difference in
performance with and without articulatory suppression
(within each level of interactivity, and then by collapsing
level of interactivity). Table 2 reports the correlations
between each of the concomitant variables and the
difference in absolute calculation errors between the
condition with articulatory suppression and the condition
without, when interactivity level is low, high, and when
collapsing over the two levels of interactivity (df = 50 for
all correlation coefficients).

Articulatory Suppression
Without
With
Percentage Correct

Low Interactivity

High Interactivity

M
56.0%

SD
27.7%

M
26.9%

SD
31.7%

High

63.5%

28.2%

44.6%
Latencies

29.5%

Low

M
38.1

SD
16.4

M
41.5

SD
21.2

High

37.4

14.8
51.2
Efficiency Ratio

27.2

Low

M
1.20

SD
0.99

M
0.68

SD
0.95

High

1.16

0.70

0.99

0.84

Mean Absolute Error

8.0

Interactivity
Low

7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

Without

With

Articulatory Suppression

Efficiency Ratio. The mean efficiency ratios are
reported in the bottom portion of Table 1: Participants
were much more efficient in the absence of articulatory
suppression, and efficiency declined sharply with
suppression. However, in the high interactivity condition,
participants’ efficiency ratio remained good even with
articulatory suppression. A 2×2 repeated measures
ANOVA supported these impressions: The main effect of
suppression was significant, F(1, 51) = 32.8, p < .001, p2
= .39, but the main effect of interactivity was not, F(1, 51)
= 2.61, p = .113, p2 = .05; however, the interaction
between suppression and level of interactivity was
significant, F(1, 51) = 7.47, p = .009, p2 = .13.

Moderators of the Impact of Suppression on
Calculation Error
Participants were profiled in terms of their basic arithmetic
skills, level of math anxiety and executive function using
an attention switching task. To test our moderation
hypotheses we conducted a moderation analysis for withinsubject design using ordinary least square regression with
difference scores, as proposed and formalized by Judd,
Kenny and McClelland (2001). This was a preferred
solution for the current experiment with a sample size that
is not optimal for a multilevel modelling. Judd et al.
suggested that the moderation in within-subject designs
occurs when a concomitant variable (e.g., basic arithmetic

1952

Figure 1: Mean absolute deviation (with standard errors) in
the low and high interactivity condition as a function of the
absence and presence of articulatory suppression.
Basic Arithmetic Skill. Overall, the increase in absolute
calculation error when collapsing across interactivity
conditions was moderated by basic arithmetic skills, r =
-.37, p = .007, that is the higher was participants’
arithmetic skill, the smaller the increase in calculation
error with articulatory suppression. This relationship was
also observed in the low interactivity condition, r = -.28, p
= .042 but less so in the high interactivity condition, r =
-.27, p = .056.
Math Anxiety. When collapsing the data over both
interactivity conditions, levels of mathematic anxiety
moderated the impact of articulatory suppression, r = .34, p
= .014; that is, the higher the level of math anxiety, the
higher the increase in calculation error with articulatory
suppression. However, this overall pattern obscures a more
interesting pattern across levels of interactivity. Thus in the
low interactivity condition math anxiety was a significant
moderator of the increase in error with suppression, r =
.41, p = .003, but not in the high interactivity condition, r =
.01, p = .951.
Attention Switching. As the correlation coefficients
reported in the bottom row of Table 2 indicate, scores on
the attention switching test did not moderate the increase
in calculation error with articulatory suppression.

Table 2: Correlation between increase in absolute
calculation error as a function of articulatory suppression
and Basic Arithmetic Skill (BAS), Math Anxiety Score
(MAS), and Attention Switching Score (SWITCH) in the
low and high interactivity condition, and overall (df = 50).
Interactivity Condition
Low
BAS
MAS
SWICH

-.28 *
.41 **
-.01

High
-.27
.01
.04

Overall
-.37 **
.34 *
.01

Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01

Discussion
This experiment explored how interactivity could mitigate
the impact on mental arithmetic performance of a
reduction in working memory resources through
articulatory suppression. We predicted that performance
overall would be influenced by both articulatory
suppression and interactivity, and more important, that
these two factors would interact such that the impact of
articulatory suppression would be more pronounced in the
condition with low interactivity. This is what we observed:
While mental arithmetic performance was always poorer
with articulatory suppression, the deterioration of accuracy
was always significantly greater when participants
completed the sums with their hands palm down on the
table top. The repeated-measures design ensured that
differences across conditions were not in themselves a
reflection of differences in arithmetic skills or working
memory capacity across participants.
The data reported here on the effect of articulatory
suppression on counting performance corroborate previous
findings (see Raghubar et al., 2010). However,
interactivity attenuated the impact of a secondary task that
taxed the phonological loop which reduced participants’
ability to rehearse interim totals or plan counting strategies
sub-vocally. The possibility of restructuring the physical
problem presentation over the course of the calculation
ensured that the participants could reconfigure the
environment in a manner that compensated for the
reduction in internal working memory capacity. This is not
to say that working memory was augmented such as to
soak up completely the resources depletion caused by
articulatory suppression since performance was affected by
the secondary task, but nonetheless it was sufficiently
robust to ensure efficient calculations, as reflected by the
efficiency ratio measure that did not dip substantially
below 1 as it did in the low interactivity condition with
articulatory suppression.
Accuracy in the high interactivity conditions dropped by
20% with articulatory suppression, and latency increased
by nearly 14 seconds on average (a 37% increase in

1953

latency). In contrast, the latency across the low
interactivity conditions increased by 3.4 seconds on
average with articulatory suppression (a 9% increase in
latency). At first, the latency data might suggest
participants did not fully engage with the secondary task in
the low interactivity condition, yet accuracy was down by
30% and absolute calculation error were four times as
large with articulatory suppression in the low interactivity
condition (see Fig. 1). Rather, what these relatively short
latencies indicate was that the task was very hard in the
low interactivity condition with articulatory suppression:
participants abandoned more quickly than in the high
interactivity condition and were more likely to guess the
answer. It is interesting to note that participants’ level of
mathematics anxiety was a significant moderator of the
impact of suppression on calculation error, but only in the
low interactivity condition. This suggests that math
anxious participants might have guessed more in low
interactivity condition, reducing problem latency but also
increasing error. This pattern has been previously reported
in the math anxiety literature (e.g., Ashcraft & Klause,
2007). Thus, in this simple arithmetic task, the reduction of
internal working memory capacity through articulatory
suppression had its most deleterious effect on participants
with higher levels of math anxiety.
Participants’ basic arithmetic skills moderated the impact
of articulatory suppression. This pattern was marginally
more pronounced in the low than in the high interactivity
condition. Along with the moderating influence of math
anxiety on the impact of suppression across levels of
interactivity, these data suggest that a higher degree of
interactivity produced more resilient performance
irrespective of differences in skills and anxiety. Finally, the
attention switching scores did not moderate the impact of
suppression on performance either in the low or high
interactivity condition. This finding is a little puzzling. To
the extent that this task gauges participants’ ability to
switch their attention, we expected these scores to correlate
positively with changes in performance as a function of
suppression; they did not. A more precise measure of
attention switching, perhaps using an automated task, or a
composite score from different attention switching tasks,
might offer a more informative window on how switching
skills might moderate the influence of articulatory
suppression on mental arithmetic.
Overall, these moderation patterns are interesting.
Psychometric efforts to unveil the cognitive capacities and
dispositions subserving performance in a domain must be
interpreted relative to a context of reasoning. In the
experiment reported here, the context varied in terms of the
degree of interactivity it afforded and the cognitive
resources that could be deployed on the primary task. Math
anxiety may be an important moderator of mental
arithmetic performance (Ashcraft, 2002), but allowing
participants to interact with a malleable problem
presentation attenuates the impact of math anxiety on

performance. Similarly, a high interactivity context
elevates performance such that participants with poorer
arithmetic skills perform in a manner similar to
participants with stronger skills.
The data presented here validate a systemic perspective
on cognition, one that seeks to describe cognitive products
and processes of a system configured by the dynamic
coupling of an agent and his or her physical environment
(Vallée-Tourangeau & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2014; ValléeTourangeau, Abadie, & Vallée-Tourangeau., 2015). In the
present mental arithmetic task, interacting with the
physical problem presentation transformed an agent’s
ability to solve these problems. The resulting performance
invites a characterization of the cognitive capacities of the
system rather than of the agent. Profiling an agent’s
cognitive resources—such as working memory capacity—
with tasks that eliminate interactivity with a physical
problem presentation will paint an inaccurate and perhaps
distorted picture of how these resources are deployed,
augmented and transformed once the agent is released
from the psychologist’s laboratory and is embedded in the
physical world.

Acknowledgements
We thank Emily Cox-Crowley, Lisa Guthrie, Alexandra
Licudi, and Francesca Tromans for their help with the
preparation of the experimental material and the recruiting
and running of the participants.

References
Ashcraft, M. H. (2002). Math anxiety: Personal,
educational and cognitive consequences. Current
Directions in Psychological Research, 11, 181-185.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Krause, J. A. (2007). Working
memory, math performance, and math anxiety.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 243-248.
Carlson, R. A., Avraamides, M. N., Cary, M., & Strasberg,
S. (2007). What to the hands externalize in simple
arithmetic? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 747-756.
DeStefano, D., & LeFevre, J. (2004). The role of working
memory in mental arithmetic. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 16, 353-386.
Fürst, A. J., & Hitch, G. J. (2000). Separate roles for
executive and phonological components of working
memory in mental arithmetic. Memory & Cognition,
28, 774-782.
Hunt, T. E., Clark-Carter, D., & Sheffield, D. (2011) The
development and part validation of a UK scale for

1954

mathematics anxiety. Journal of Psychoeducational
Assessment, 29, 455-466.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S. D., &
Wagner, S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing
lightens the load. Psychological Science, 12, 516-522.
Judd, C. M., Kenny, D. A., & McClelland, G. H. (2001).
Estimating and testing mediation and moderation in
within-subject designs. Psychological Methods, 6, 115134.
Kirsh, D. (1995). Complementary strategies: Why we use
our hands when we think. In J. M. Moore & J. L.
Lehman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 212217). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Publishers.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics
and culture in everyday life. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Logie, R. H., Gilhooly, K. J., & Wynn, V. (1994).
Counting on working memory in arithmetic problem
solving. Memory & Cognition, 22, 395-410.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A.
H., & Howerter, A. (2000). The unity and diversity of
executive functions and their contributions to complex
frontal lobe tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive
Psychology, 41, 49-100.
Raghubar, K. P., Barnes, M. A., & Hecht, S. A. (2010).
Working memory and mathematics: A review of
developmental, individual difference, and cognitive
approaches. Learning and Individual Differences, 20,
110-122.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2013). Interactivity, efficiency, and
individual
differences
in
mental
arithmetic.
Experimental Psychology, 60, 302-311.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Sirota, M., & Villejoubert, G.
(2013). Reducing the impact of math anxiety on mental
arithmetic: The importance of distributed cognition. In
M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 36153620). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., & Vallée-Tourangeau, G. (2014).
Diagrams, jars and matchsticks: A systemicist’s toolkit.
Pragmatics & Cognition, 22, 187-205.
Vallée-Tourangeau, G., Abadie, M., & Vallée-Tourangeau,
F. (2015). Interactivity fosters Bayesian reasoning
without instruction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 144, 581-603.

