Effect of Aging on Inhibitory Attentional Mechanisms
Maegen Walker (maegenw@hawaii.edu)
Margeaux Ciraolo (ciraolo@hawaii.edu)
Andrew Dewald (adewald@hawaii.edu)
Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Abstract

sorting version of a visual search task and found that,
compared to younger individuals, older adults were slower
to respond when presented with a distractor card that was
very similar, compared to cards that were dissimilar, to the
target card. This finding suggests that older adults are more
likely to be distracted by these items, indicating a reduced
ability to inhibit irrelevant items from re-orienting attention.
Additional studies of selective attention demonstrate that,
as adults progress in to old age, top-down control over
attentional allocation may become impaired when viewing
displays containing moving items (Folk & Lincourt, 1996;
Watson & Maylor, 2002). In this case, older individuals
appear to have more trouble visually identifying the target
stimulus (Watson & Humphreys, 1997; 1998). This suggests
that they may be less able to inhibit processing of previously
viewed distractor objects such that they continue to capture
attention during the visual search task. Therefore, being
unable to inhibit processing for the irrelevant items appears
to negatively impact perception of the target stimulus in
moving displays.
The most compelling evidence supporting the perspective
that the ability to inhibit the processing of irrelevant
information declines as adults age has come from work with
the classic Stroop task. During this task, participants are
presented with a series of written color words appearing in a
variety of different colors (i.e., the word “yellow” written in
the color red). Participants must inhibit reading the word
(e.g., yellow) and report only the color (e.g., red). When
comparing performance on this task between younger and
older adults, the tendency to incorrectly report the word
rather than the color (i.e., Stroop interference) is
significantly more pronounced for older participants (Brink
& McDowd, 1999; Hartley, 1993; Spieler, Balota & Faust,
1996). That is, the ability to inhibit the incorrect responses
appears to be compromised in older adults.
Milham et al. (2002) conducted further work exploring
inhibitory processes with the Stroop task in aging adults
using fMRI. Along with higher instances of Stroop
interference in older participants, results from this study
suggest decreased responsiveness in brain regions believed
to be associated with attentional control and working
memory, in particular the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) and the parietal cortex (Banich et al., 2000a,
2000b; MacDonald, Cohen, Stenger, & Carter, 2000;
Sinnett, Snyder, & Kingstone, 2009). These particular brain
regions are associated with the modulation of neural activity

The ability to inhibit the processing of irrelevant information
declines as adults age (Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Lustig, Hasher
and Tonev, 2006; Mayr, 2001). However, previous research
investigating inhibitory control in older adults has not
evaluated the extent to which irrelevant information is
processed and later recognized. Using a dual task paradigm
with young adults, Dewald, Sinnett, and Doumas (2011)
demonstrated inhibited recognition for previously ignored
words, provided they had appeared infrequently with targets
in the primary task, compared to words that did not appear
with targets. The current study adapted this paradigm to
examine inhibitory mechanisms in a sample of older adults.
Here, older adults exhibited inhibited recognition for all
words while young adults continued to show greater
inhibition for words that had appeared with targets compared
to words that had not. This finding suggests that older adults
may experience a decline in the selective inhibition of
irrelevant information.
Keywords: Aging; Attention; Dual
Inhibition; Inattentional Blindness

Task

Paradigms;

Introduction
One critical mechanism for information processing is the
ability to inhibit irrelevant information from being
processed (Tipper, 1992). This is accomplished by directing
attention toward the desired target or task while ignoring
potential distractors. For example, in order to drive a car one
must be able to focus on driving (e.g., minding roads and
traffic signals) while ignoring potential distractors, such as
billboards or an incoming text message. However,
attentional capabilities change over the course of the human
lifespan and it is well established that performance
decreases as adults progress in to old age (Campbell, Grady,
Ng, & Hasher, 2012; Mayr, 2001; Rabbitt, 1965; Störmer,
Heekeren, & Lindenberger, 2013). This age related
cognitive decline in attention has been largely attributed to
deficiencies in inhibitory control, with older adults
unsuccessfully inhibiting the processing of irrelevant
information (Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Kramer, Hahn, &
Gopher, 1999; Lustig, Hasher and Tonev, 2006; Madden,
Pierce, & Allen, 1996; Mayr, 2001; Plude & Hoyer, 1986).
Illustrative of this cognitive decline, older individuals
exhibit difficulties in tasks involving selective attention (i.e.,
selecting a stimulus of interest and focusing attentional
resources toward it while inhibiting irrelevant information).
A study conducted by Farkas and Hoyer (1980) used a card-

848

by facilitating processing systems that contain task-relevant
information while inhibiting systems that contain taskirrelevant information. Through this early inhibition of
processing irrelevant information, the DLPFC suppresses
activation of semantic and phonological associations as well
as potential actions related to the irrelevant information
(Banich et al., 2000b).
The Stroop task is favored among those investigating the
modulation of inhibitory attentional mechanisms with an
aging population because participants must simultaneously
facilitate the processing of the written word color (i.e., say
“red” if the word “yellow” is written in the color red) and
inhibit the processing of the semantically written word (i.e.,
“yellow”). However, this, and previously used behavioral
methods, have two important limitations. First, when using
the Stroop task it is difficult to isolate facilitatory from
inhibitory mechanisms because this paradigm does not offer
an effective method for dissociating these two processes.
Thus, when Stroop interference occurs it is difficult to
determine if the attentional system is failing to facilitate
processing of the presented color (i.e., the relevant
information) or if it is failing to inhibit processing of the
written word (i.e., the irrelevant information). Second, other
previously utilized behavioral methods evaluate the function
of inhibitory mechanisms by looking at rates of distraction
induced by the irrelevant stimuli. That is, the ability to
inhibit processing of the irrelevant item is assessed by
examining accuracy or reaction time to a target that is
presented at the same time as the distracting item, with
higher rates of distraction and slower reaction times
indicating reduced inhibitory control. While this is useful
information, the extent to which these ignored items are
actually processed and subsequently stored in long-term
memory is presently undetermined.
To address these gaps in the literature, we adapted a dualtask paradigm (see Dewald, Sinnett, & Doumas, 2011;
2012) for use with older adults. This paradigm overcomes
the ambiguity presented in the Stroop task by varying the
frequency with which irrelevant distractor (i.e., ignored)
items are presented simultaneously (i.e., paired) with
attended target items. This method allows for the isolation
and examination of both inhibitory and facilitatory
mechanisms separately. Previous research using this
paradigm with young adults has shown that infrequently
pairing the ignored distractor items with targets in the
attended task leads to inhibited processing of these
distractor items over ignored distractor items that are not
paired with targets (see Dewald et al., 2011)1. The extent to
which the irrelevant information may have been processed

is evaluated through the use of a surprise recognition test for
the previously ignored distractor items.
The current study focuses on evaluating the proposed
inhibitory effect in an older adult population and compares
performance on this task to a sample of younger adults.
Based on findings from previous research suggesting that
older adults experience an overall decline in their ability to
inhibit processing of irrelevant information (Hasher &
Zacks, 1988; Kramer et al., 1999; Lustig et al., 2006;
Madden, et al., 1996; Mayr, 2001; Plude & Hoyer, 1986),
we predict that older adults will be less able to inhibit
processing the distractor items during the primary task
compared to the young adults. This decline in inhibitory
control should lead to the ignored items being processed to a
greater extent. As a result, older adults should have overall
higher recognition scores than the younger adults on the
surprise recognition test as younger adults tend to inhibit
these items (Dewald et al., 2011). Specifically, older adults
should recognize all distractor items at or around chance
levels while younger adults should exhibit greater inhibition
for distractor items that were paired with task targets when
compared to distractor items that were not paired with task
targets. This finding would suggest that older adults are less
able to inhibit processing of the irrelevant information
resulting in greater amounts of the ignored information
capturing attention, being stored in long-term memory, and
subsequently recognized more often later.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-nine young adults (23 female, mean age of 20.7)
were recruited from undergraduate courses at the University
of Hawai`i at Mānoa in exchange for course credit. The
results from one participant were excluded from the
analyses due to a failure to complete the surprise recognition
task. The final analyses were conducted with the remaining
38 young adults (22 female, mean age of 20.8).
Twenty-six healthy older adult participants (18 female,
mean age of 72.2) were recruited, on a voluntary basis, from
local retirement communities around Honolulu, Hawai`i, as
well as from continuing education programs for seniors at
the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. This target age group
(>60 years old) was chosen based on criteria set by the
World Health Organization (2014) designating 60 as the
generally accepted age at which an individual is considered
to be ‘elderly’. All participants were naïve to the
experiment, provided informed consent, and had normal, or
corrected to normal, vision and hearing.

Stimuli
1

This same body of literature has also demonstrated facilitated
processing of ignored information using a variation of this
paradigm, (Dewald & Sinnett, 2012, 2013; Walker, Dewald, &
Sinnett, 2014; Seitz & Watanabe, 2003; Watanabe, Nàñez &
Sasaki, 2001). However, the current study is only concerned with
conditions of inhibited processing.

A total of 50 pictures (on average 5 to 10 cms) were
selected from the Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) picture
database (i.e., attended stimuli). Each picture was
superimposed with a single English word (i.e., ignored
distractor items) selected from a pool of high frequency
words retrieved from the MRC psycholinguistic database

849

(Wilson, 1988). All words had an average length of 5 letters
(range 4-6) and average frequency of 120 per million (range
28-686). The words were superimposed over the pictures in
bold, capitalized letters and presented in Arial font (24
points). Care was taken to ensure that picture-word
combinations did not have any semantic relationship.

test consisted of 50 words from the experiment along with
50 never before seen foil words, selected from the same
database (Wilson, 1988). Because of the high number of
words presented, two types of surprise recognition tests
were created for each version of the experiment. One tested
only the 50 TA words along with 50 foil words and the
other tested only the 50 NA words along with 50 foil words
for a total of 100 words in each recognition test. Each
participant was randomly assigned to get one type of test
only (TA words or NA words). The recognition tasks were
randomized and presented one word at a time. The words
were written in bold, capitalized letters in Arial font at a size
of 24 points (i.e., identical to their initial presentation in the
repetition detection task).

Attended Stimuli The 50 pictures were duplicated resulting
in two copies of each picture (i.e., picture pairs). All
pictures were randomly rotated +/-30 degrees from their
original orientation to ensure that the task is sufficiently
demanding in each version of the experiment (see Rees et
al., 1999). To create an experimental block, half (25) of the
picture pairs were presented as immediate picture
repetitions. These immediate picture repetitions served as
the identification targets for the attended task. The
remaining 25 pairs did not occur as immediate repetitions in
the same block. Instead, they were separated from their
duplicate and randomly inserted in between occurrences of
repeating picture pairs creating the non-repeating pictures in
the visual stream. This process was repeated to create the
second experimental block using the same stimuli.
Critically, the 25 picture pairs that served as immediate
repetitions in the first block did not repeat in the second
block and those that did not repeated in the first block did
repeat in the second block (i.e., picture pairs that were
identification targets in the first block were non repeating
pictures in the second block and vice versa). Therefore, each
of the original 50 pictures was presented four times, once as
a target repetition pair in the first block, then again as a nonrepeating picture pair in the second block.

Procedure
Participants were seated in front of a computer with the
screen a comfortable distance away. They were then shown
a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) of the pictureword stream, using DMDX software (Forster & Forster,
2003). In the primary repetition detection task participants
were instructed to ignore the superimposed words and
attend only to the pictures. Participants were required to
respond when they noticed a picture immediately repeat by
clicking the left mouse button with their preferred hand.
Each item in the picture-word presentation was presented
for 500ms with a 150ms inter-stimulus interval (ISI; blank
screen) between each item for a stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) of 650ms (see Figure 1). Before the first
experimental block, a training block of eight trials was
given and repeated until participants were familiar and
comfortable with the task. Immediately after the primary
picture repetition detection task, the surprise word
recognition test was administered to all participants. Words
were presented, one at a time, on the computer screen, again
using DMDX software (Forster & Forster, 2003). Each
word remained on the screen until a response (key press)
was given. Participants were instructed to press the “B” key
if they felt that they had seen the word during the repetition
detection task or, instead, the “V” key if they felt that they
had not seen the word before. Response buttons were
counterbalanced across participants.

Ignored Distractor Items 100 words were randomly
selected and superimposed on the pictures. Half (50) of the
words appeared superimposed on immediate picture
repetitions (i.e., targets), serving as the target-aligned (TA)
words, and the other half were superimposed on the nonrepeating pictures in the stream, serving as non-aligned
(NA) words. This created a block size of 100 picture-word
combinations with 25 immediate target picture repetitions
and accompanying superimposed TA words for each of the
two blocks. The same 100 words and 50 picture pairs used
in the first block were used in the second block and the
same procedure was applied. Like the pictures, the 25 words
that were TA in the first block were NA in the second block
and vice versa. Therefore, all of the words were presented
twice in the experiment. Twenty-five of the 50 TA words
were presented as TA in the first block and were then
presented as a NA words in the second block and vice versa.
The NA words were always presented on top of nonrepeating pictures in both blocks (i.e., always NA). This
method was used to create six different versions of the
experiment (see Dewald et al., 2011).

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the task. Immediately
repeated pictures serve as the attended task targets while
superimposed words are the ignored distractor items. Words
appearing with attended task targets are the TA words (i.e.,
“City” and “List”); all other words are NA words.

Surprise Recognition Test The later surprise recognition
test for the ignored words was administered after
participants had completed the primary attended task. This

850

Results

words [t(36) = 1.71, p = 0.04] (see Figure 3).

Because our interest was focused on determining if
recognition rates for TA and NA words differ between
young and old adults, statistical analyses include a two-way
ANOVA as well as pre-planned t-tests within each age
group. These analyses were designed to assess performance
both within and across age groups.
Immediate Repetition Accuracy Overall performance
accuracy for both younger and older adults on the repetition
detection task revealed that participants had an equal
number of hits and misses on the primary task, [hit rate: M
= 0.50, SE = 0.025, miss rate: M = 0.50, SE = 0.025, t(63) =
0.030, p = 0.488]. Performance on this task was
significantly above chance [t(63) = 16.67, p < 0.01], which
was taken to be an indication of the successful detection of
picture repetitions on the primary task. A target appears, on
average, in one of every 15 trials. Therefore chance is
calculated as the probability of obtaining a hit in any given
presentation of 15 trials (i.e., 7%).
Older adults accuracy (hit rate: M = 0.37, SE = 0.032)
was significantly lower than young adults (hit rate: M =
0.58, SE = 0.031) when detecting picture repetitions on the
primary task [t(62) = 4.64, p < 0.001], indicating that the
repetition detection task may have been more difficult for
them. There was no significant difference in false alarm
(FA) rates for older adults (M = 0.01, SE = 0.003) compared
to young adults (M = 0.007, SE = 0.001) [t(62) = 0.783, p =
0.218].

Figure 2: Recognition rates and SE for all word types (TA
and NA combined) between young and older adults. The
ANOVA revealed a marginal main effect for age (p = 0.07)
suggesting older adults recognized fewer words, overall,
compared to young adults.
Older Adult Accuracy Performance Overall word
recognition on the surprise recognition test was M = 0.33
(SE = 0.036), which was significantly different from chance
[t(25) = 4.64, p < 0.001]. Recognition for TA words (n = 13,
M = 0.32, SE = 0.055) was significantly different from
chance [t(12) = 3.18, p < 0.008], and recognition for NA
words (n = 13, M = 0.34, SE = 0.047) was also significantly
different from chance [t(12) = 3.29, p < 0.007]. Recognition
for TA words was not significantly different from NA
words [t(24) = 0.253, p = 0.401] (see Figure 3).

Overall Recognition Performance In order to assess
whether age modulated overall word recognition, a two-way
ANOVA was conducted on surprise recognition test
performance with age (young vs. old) and target-alignment
(TA vs. NA) as between subject factors, and accuracy as the
dependent variable. There was a marginal main effect for
age [F(1, 64) = 3.35, p = 0.07], suggesting that older adults
recognized fewer words on the surprise recognition test
compared to young adults. There was no main effect for
target alignment indicating that overall TA word recognition
(M = 0.35, SE = 0.030) was not significantly lower than NA
(M = 0.40, SE = 0.026) [F(1, 64) = 1.75, p = 0.190], and no
interaction [F(1, 64) = 0.495, p = 0.485] (see Figure 2).
Although an interaction was not observed, in order to
assess any possible influence of age on later surprise
recognition rates pre-planned t-tests were conducted on
accuracy performance for each age group.

	  

Young Adult Accuracy Performance Overall word
recognition on the surprise recognition test was M = 0.40
(SE = 0.022), which was significantly different from chance
[t(37) = 4.15, p < 0.001]. Recognition for TA words (n = 19,
M = 0.37, SE = 0.033) was significantly different from
chance [t(18) = 3.85, p < 0.001], while recognition for NA
words (n = 19, M = 0.44, SE = 0.027) was only marginally
significantly different from chance [t(18) = 2.02, p = 0.06].
Recognition for TA words was significantly lower than NA

Figure 3: Recognition rates and SE for TA words (dark grey
bar) compared to NA words (light grey bar) for young and
older adults. Young adults recognized TA words
significantly less often than NA words; NA words were
recognized around chance levels. Older adults showed no
significant difference in recognition rates between word
types, however all words were recognized at rates below
chance.

851

Discussion

task. Lavie (2005) has demonstrated that distracting
information has less influence on task performance when
task difficulty is increased. This is likely due to the fact that
increased task difficulty requires additional attentional
resources (i.e., increased cognitive load). As a result,
processing of irrelevant information is more likely to be
inhibited. Therefore, if the primary task was more difficult
for the older adults, larger amounts of attentional resources
may have been required in order to identify and respond to
targets during this portion of the experimental session.
Therefore, rather than selectively filter the most intrusive
irrelevant information (i.e., TA words), as young adults
appear to do, older adults seem to employ a more global
inhibitory control leading to more extensive filtering of all
irrelevant information.
Alternatively, the observed lower recognition rates for the
older adults may be due to a reduced ability to attend to the
words during the primary task. This may also be reflected
by older adults’ lower performance in the repetition task
when compared younger adults. Thus, it could be argued
that lower recognition rates in the surprise task may be due
to a lack of attentional allocation rather than a decline in
selective inhibitory control. However, we would expect
older adults to exhibit chance performance on the surprise
recognition test if this were the case, which would suggest
that the information failed to be processed rather than
undergoing active inhibition.
Taken together, the findings tentatively demonstrate that
as we progress in old age, inhibitory control may diminish,
resulting in an inability to execute selective inhibition over
irrelevant information presented in attention-demanding
tasks. Additional research is necessary in order to fully
understand how these mechanisms may operate in old age.
Future studies will investigate this further by systematically
increasing task difficulty, through faster presentation rates,
in a young adult population. We predict that increased
presentation speed of the RVSP stream will result in
reduced performance on the primary task (as seen in older
adults here). If young adults continue to show preferential
inhibition for TA words under these circumstances, this may
provide additional support for a decline in selective
inhibitory control in an older adult population.

This experiment directly assessed the ability to inhibit the
processing of irrelevant information within an elderly
population. In the past, researchers have evaluated
inhibitory processes in younger and older adults by
measuring rates of distraction from irrelevant items during
an attention-demanding task (see Brink & McDowd, 1999;
Farkas & Hoyer, 1980; Folk & Lincourt, 1996; Hartley,
1993; Milham et al., 2002; Spieler et al., 1996; Watson &
Maylor, 2002). While informative, this approach does not
allow one to evaluate the extent to which ignored
information is processed and subsequently recalled or
recognized later. The paradigm employed here allows for
such analyses to be made by testing memory of the
irrelevant information via a surprise recognition test.
Using this paradigm with young adults, Dewald and
colleagues (2011) revealed inhibited processing for TA
words, as they were recognized less often than NA words
during the surprise recognition test. This finding was
replicated in the current study with our young adult sample.
Previous research has demonstrated that older adults may
have difficulty inhibiting the processing of irrelevant
information (Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Kramer, Hahn, &
Gopher, 1999; Lustig, Hasher and Tonev, 2006; Madden,
Pierce, & Allen, 1996; Mayr, 2001; Plude & Hoyer, 1986).
Therefore, it was reasonable to predict that this age group
would show a decline in the ability to inhibit irrelevant
information on this task as well, resulting in similar
recognition rates for TA and NA words. Consistent with our
prediction, we found that older adults showed no difference
in recognition rates between TA and NA words. This
finding suggests that older adults processed all irrelevant
words to a similar extent regardless of target-alignment.
Due to a reduction in the ability to execute inhibitory
control, we expected that older adults would have overall
higher recognition rates during the surprise recognition test
compared to the younger adults. Specifically, we expected
that older adults would recognize all word types at or
around chance levels, while younger adults would
demonstrate below chance recognition rates for TA words
and at chance recognition for NA words (as seen in Dewald
et al., 2011). However, we found that older adults actually
recognized significantly fewer words overall, compared to
younger adults. Therefore, it appears that older adults
inhibited all types of irrelevant information in order to
complete the task, rather than just those items appearing
with targets, as the young adults seem to do.
It is possible that older adults experienced a reduced
ability to selectively inhibit word processing while attending
to the pictures in the RSVP stream. This reduction in
selective inhibitory control may have resulted in a more
global inhibition of processing for all presented irrelevant
words during the exposure stage, regardless of target
alignment. This may be due to the fact that the primary task
may have been more difficult for the older adults. Indeed,
older adults exhibited overall lower accuracy scores when
detecting picture repetitions during the primary attended

References
Banich, M., Milham, M., Cohen, N. J., Wszalek, T., Kramer,
A., Liang, Z.-P., Gullet, D., Shah, C., & Brown, C. (2000a).
Prefrontal regions play a predominant role in imposing an
attentional ‘‘set’’: Evidence from fMRI. Cognitive Brain
Research, 10, 1–9.
Banich, M., Milham, M., Atchley, R., Cohen, N.J., Wszalek,
T., Kramer, A., Liang, Z. P., Gullet, D., Shah, C., & Brown,
C. (2000b). FMRI studies of Stroop tasks reveal unique roles
of anterior and posterior brain system in attentional selection.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 988–1000.
Brink, J. M., & McDowd, J. M. (1999). Aging and selective
attention: an issue of complexity or multiple mechanisms?.
The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological
Sciences and Social Sciences, 54(1), P30-P33.

852

Campbell, K. L., Grady, C. L., Ng, C., & Hasher, L. (2012).
Age differences in the frontoparietal cognitive control
network: implications for distractibility. Neuropsychologia,
50(9), 2212-2223.
Dewald, A. D., & Sinnett, S. (2012). Enhanced Performance
for Recognition of Irrelevant Target-Aligned Auditory
Stimuli: Unimodal and Cross-modal Considerations. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 294-299).
Dewald, A. D., & Sinnett, S. (2013). Speed Facilitation In The
Absence Of Enhanced Recognition For Target-Aligned But
Irrelevant Stimuli Under Cross-modal Presentations. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2183-2188).
Dewald, A. D., Sinnett, S., & Doumas, L. A. (2011).
Conditions of directed attention inhibit recognition
performance for explicitly presented target-aligned irrelevant
stimuli. Acta psychologica, 138(1), 60-67.
Farkas, M. S., & Hoyer, W. J. (1980). Processing consequences
of perceptual grouping in selective attention. Journal of
Gerontology, 35(2), 207-216.
Folk, C. L., & Lincourt, A. E. (1996). The effects of age on
guided conjunction search. Experimental Aging Research,
22(1), 99-118.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1), 116124.
Hartley, A. A. (1993). Evidence for the selective preservation
of spatial selective attention in old age. Psychology and
Aging, 8(3), 371.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1988). Working memory,
comprehension, and aging: A review and a new view. In G.
H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation
(Vol. 22, pp. 193-225). New York: Academic Press.
Kramer, A. F., Hahn, S., & Gopher, D. (1999). Task
coordination and aging: Explorations of executive control
processes in the task switching paradigm. Acta Psychologica,
101(2), 339-378.
Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted and confused?: Selective attention
under load. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(2), 75-82.
Lustig, C., Hasher, L., & Tonev, S. T. (2006). Distraction as a
determinant of processing speed. Psychonomic bulletin &
review, 13(4), 619-625.
MacDonald, A. W., III, Cohen, J. D., Stenger, V. A., & Carter,
C. S. (2000). Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral
prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control.
Science, 288(5472); 1835–1838.
Madden, D. J., Pierce, T. W., & Allen, P. A. (1996). Adult age
differences in the use of distractor homogeneity during visual
search. Psychology and aging, 11(3), 454.
Mayr, U. (2001). Age differences in the selection of mental
sets: the role of inhibition, stimulus ambiguity, and responseset overlap. Psychology and aging, 16(1), 96.
Milham, M. P., Erickson, K. I., Banich, M. T., Kramer, A. F.,
Webb, A., Wszalek, T., & Cohen, N. J. (2002). Attentional
control in the aging brain: insights from an fMRI study of the
stroop task. Brain and cognition, 49(3), 277-296.
Pashler, H. E. (1998). The psychology of attention (Vol. 15).
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.

Plude, D. J., & Hoyer, W. J. (1986). Age and the selectivity of
visual information processing. Psychology and Aging, 1(1),
4.
Rabbitt, P. (1965). An age-decrement in the ability to ignore
irrelevant information. Journal of Gerontology, 20(2), 233238.
Rees, G., Russell, C., Frith, C. D., & Driver, J. (1999).
Inattentional blindness versus inattentional amnesia for
fixated but ignored words. Science, 286(5449), 2504-2507.
Seitz, A. R. & Watanabe, T. (2003). Psychophysics: Is
subliminal learning really passive? Nature, 422, 36.
Sinnett, S., Snyder, J. J., & Kingstone, A. (2009). Role of the
lateral prefrontal cortex in visual object-based selective
attention. Experimental brain research, 194(2), 191-196.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized set
of 260 pictures: norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of
experimental psychology: Human learning and memory,
6(2), 174.
Spieler, D. H., Balota, D. A., & Faust, M. E. (1996). Stroop
performance in healthy younger and older adults and in
individuals with dementia of the Alzheimer's type. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 22(2), 461.
Störmer, V. S., Li, S. C., Heekeren, H. R., & Lindenberger, U.
(2013). Normal aging delays and compromises early
multifocal visual attention during object tracking. Journal of
cognitive neuroscience, 25(2), 188-202.
Tipper, S. P. (1992). Selection for action: The role of inhibitory
mechanisms. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
1(3), 105-109.
Walker, M., Dewald, A. D., & Sinnett, S. (2014). The role of
modality congruence in the presentation and recognition of
task-irrelevant stimuli in dual task paradigms. In Bello P.,
Guarini M., McShane M. & Scassellati B. (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1736-1741). Austin TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Watanabe, T., Náñez, J. E., & Sasaki, Y. (2001). Perceptual
learning without perception. Nature, 413(6858), 844-848.
Watson, D. G., & Humphreys, G. W. (1997). Visual marking:
prioritizing selection for new objects by top-down attentional
inhibition of old objects. Psychological review, 104(1), 90.
Watson, D. G., & Humphreys, G. W. (1998). Visual marking of
moving objects: A role for top-down feature-based inhibition
in selection. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 24(3), 946.
Watson, D. G., & Maylor, E. A. (2002). Aging and visual
marking: Selective deficits for moving stimuli. Psychology
and Aging, 17(2), 321.
Wilson, M. (1988). MRC Psycholinguistic Database: Machineusable dictionary, version 2.00. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 20(1), 6-10.
World Health Organization (2014). Definition of an older or
elderly person. United Kingdom: WHO press.
Wright, R. E. (1981). Aging, divided attention, and processing
capacity. Journal of Gerontology, 36(5), 605-614.

853

