Event participants and linguistic arguments
Roxana-Maria Barbu (RoxanaMariaBarbu@cmail.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Ida Toivonen (Ida.Toivonen@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science & School of Linguistics and Language Studies, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
Abstract

the motion (Linda in (3)), the entity moved (the potatoes) and
perhaps the goal or path (in the bucket).

Although there is a clear and intuitive mapping between linguistic arguments of verbs and event participants, the mapping
is not perfect. We review the linguistic evidence that indicates
that the mapping is imperfect. We also present the results of a
new experimental study that provides further support for a dissociation between event participants and linguistic arguments.
The study consists of two tasks. The first task elicited intuitions on conceptual event participants, and the second task
elicited intuitions on linguistic arguments in instrument verbs
and transaction verbs. The results suggest that while instrument phrases and currency/price phrases are considered necessary event participants, they are not linguistic arguments.
Keywords: event participants; linguistic arguments; syntax;
semantics; psycholinguistics

(2) Karim ran to the store.
(3) Linda threw the potatoes in the bucket.
Despite the clear and intuitive connection between arguments
and event participants, the two notions are independent: there
is not always a perfect mapping between linguistic arguments
and event participants. We will provide a short review of work
from the theoretical linguistics literature that illustrates this
point. We then present the results from a new psycholinguistic study with two tasks. One task elicited intuitions about
how many and what type of people or things are conceptually needed for different events to take place. The other
task gauged how many and what type of people or things are
syntactically needed in order for a sentence to be considered
linguistically complete. The two tasks yielded different results, and the study thus provides experimental support for a
separation between the concept of event participants and the
concept of linguistic arguments, assuming that linguistic arguments are syntactically needed for the sentence to be complete (we revisit this assumption later). Before we turn to our
experiment, we discuss the difference between arguments and
adjuncts, and we also present linguistic evidence that verbal
arguments are different from event participants.

Introduction
The relation between events and event participants is expressed in language as the relation between verbs and their
arguments (Rissman, Rawlins, & Landau, 2015). This paper discusses the mapping between event participants and linguistic arguments. We argue that certain phrases (e.g., instrument and currency/price phrases) are difficult to classify
as arguments or adjuncts because they are conceptualized as
event participants but are not syntactically required.
When a verb is used in a sentence, that verb is typically
accompanied by words or phrases that express who or what
was engaged in or affected by the activity denoted by the verb.
Consider, for example, the verb praise as it is used in (1):

Linguistic arguments

(1) Lisa praised the child last evening.
In (1), Lisa and the child are directly involved in the praising
activity, and those noun phrases are referred to as arguments.
The noun phrase last evening is not directly involved in the
activity denoted by the verb, and it is referred to as an adjunct.
The number and type of a verb’s arguments partly depends
on the nature of the event that the verb denotes. For example,
a running or strolling event involves fewer participants than a
throwing or a putting event.1 Similarly, a basic motion verb
such as run or stroll is likely to have fewer arguments than
a caused motion verb like throw or put. The arguments of
a motion verb refer to someone moving (Karim in (2)) and
perhaps also a goal or a path (to the store). The arguments of
a caused motion verb refer to whoever (or whatever) caused
1 By participant, we do not necessarily mean a person. Here,
we use the word in a general sense. For our present purposes, a
participant can be a person or a thing, or perhaps a place or a time.

Tallerman (2005, 98) defines linguistic arguments as phrases
that are selected by the head (often a verb) and that have
an especially close relationship with the head. This definition is similar to other characterizations in the literature, but
there is no universally agreed upon definition of argumenthood. However, scholars of language generally agree that
verbs come with restrictions concerning their argument structure. This assumption is shared among theoretical linguists,
descriptive linguists, psycho- and neurolinguists, computational linguists, and philosophers of language. By argument
structure, we mean a set of elements linguistically required by
the verb. There is debate on exactly how to determine what
the argument structures of different verbs look like, and what
information needs to be included in the structures.
Argument structure has been given distinct formal treatments within different strains of formalist/generative frameworks. Examples include SUBCAT lists in Head-Driven

1961

Phrase Structure Grammar, argument lists in LexicalFunctional Grammar, and theta grids in Principles and Parameters Theory. Yet other theoretical conceptualizations of argument structures are presented in Valency Grammar, Dependency Grammar, and Role and Reference Grammar. We will
not make an attempt to review the vast literature where these
topics are treated, but Levin and Rappaport Hovav (2005) is
a good starting point. We turn instead to the distinction between arguments and adjuncts.
Consider again example (1), Lisa praised the child last
evening, which includes two arguments (Lisa, the child) and
one adjunct (last evening). Unlike arguments, adjuncts are
not selected by the head; they are modifiers and added to
clauses more freely. Example (1) is relatively straightforward, but it is sometimes difficult to determine whether a
phrase is an argument or an adjunct.2 For example, there is
evidence that to the park is an argument in Sandy ran to the
park, but in the park is not an argument in Sandy ran in the
park (Van Luven, 2014; Kearns, 2011, 39), although this is
not immediately obvious. Another tricky case is the passive
by-phrase (e.g., by Tara in the book was read by Tara).
There is a battery of syntactic tests sensitive to whether a
given phrase is an argument or an adjunct. The tests are useful, but do not always give consistent results (Christie, 2015;
Needham & Toivonen, 2011). The two most commonly used
diagnostics are conceptual necessity and syntactic obligatoriness. Phrases that are conceptually necessary in order for the
event to take place are arguments. The syntactic counterpart
to the conceptual necessity requirement states that arguments
are obligatorily present in the linguistic string. We will argue below that there is an important distinction between event
participants and linguistic arguments, and the two tests, conceptual necessity and syntactic obligatoriness, actually target
different notions. However, the two notions often align, and
when they do, they successfully differentiate between arguments and adjuncts. For example, the conceptual necessity
and syntactic obligatoriness tests work well for (1): in order
for a praising event to take place, it seems necessary that a
praiser and something praised be present. It does not seem
necessary to know about the point in time when the praising
took place. Of course, most events take place at some time,
but praise is not a verb that directly concerns time (by contrast, the verb last requires a temporal complement: the meeting lasted one hour). The time phrase is also not syntactically
obligatory (overly expressed) in conjunction with praise: last
evening can be omitted from (1).
What is conceptually necessary is not always expressed.
For example, in order to yell, there has to be something that
you yell, but it is nevertheless fully grammatical to say Joe
was yelling without mentioning what he was yelling. The two
tests thus do not always align. Jackendoff (2002, 138–149)
2 The blurry line between arguments and adjuncts has been discussed by Forker (2014); Hedberg and DeArmond (2009); Tutunjian
and Boland (2008); Dowty (2003); Koenig, Mauner, and Bienvenue
(2003); Croft (2001); Schütze and Gibson (1999); Whaley (1993);
Grimshaw (1990); and many others.

argues that the conceptual necessity test is semantic and the
obligatoriness test is syntactic. We take a slightly different
position: conceptual necessity concerns how we understand
different types of events and is not a linguistic notion.
Syntactic obligatoriness is, however, a linguistic notion,
but it is not foolproof. Adjuncts are not obligatory (though
see Goldberg & Ackerman, 2001 for some interesting potential examples of obligatory adjuncts). Arguments may be
optional, but if a complement is obligatory, then it is an argument. The experiment we report in this paper taps into the different intuitions behind these two tests. We focus specifically
on phrases that have been identified as difficult to classify
with respect to argumenthood. We are not directly concerned
with optional direct objects of verbs like eat and wash.
There are several other syntactic diagnostics that distinguish arguments from adjuncts (at least in English). These
tests involve manipulating the structure of the sentence in
ways sensitive to whether phrases are arguments or adjuncts.
For example, pseudo-clefting is possible with adjunct but not
argument targets (Hedberg & DeArmond, 2009):
(4) What Lisa did last evening was praise the child.
(5) *What Lisa did the child was praise last evening.
According to this diagnostic, if a phrase can occur after do in
a pseudo-cleft, then that phrase is an adjunct. If the occurrence of a given phrase after do renders the phrase ungrammatical, then that phrase is an argument. Similarly, adjuncts
but not arguments can appear after do so in VP anaphora:
(6) Lisa praised the child last evening and Bob did so today.
(7) *Lisa praised the child and Bob did so the teenager.
The exact explanations for how these tests work vary
depending on theoretical framework. However, the VPanaphora test can be understood quite straightforwardly with
minimal appeal to technical machinery: do so is an anaphor
that refers back to a verb and its arguments (or a minimal
VP). In (7), do so therefore refers back to praise the child and
the sentence is ungrammatical for the same reason as *Bob
praised the child the teenager: arguments cannot be repeated.

The difference between linguistic arguments and
event participants
The examples in (2–3) above illustrate that the type of event a
verb denotes can be a predictor of how many and what type of
argument(s) a verb takes. Basically, an event seems to involve
(perhaps entail) certain participants, and the number and type
of participants depend on the nature of the event. However,
the mapping between participants and linguistic arguments is
not deterministic, and different verbs denoting similar events
do not necessarily take the same argument structure. We will
illustrate this point with a few oft-cited examples.
The first example has to do with verbs used to describe the
ingestion of food. Examples include eat, devour, dine, munch,
gobble, and nibble. These verbs describe different types of

1962

eating events, and seem to involve an eater and something
that is eaten. All the verbs take a subject (the eater), but they
differ in how the complement (what is eaten) is linguistically
expressed. The verb eat takes an optional object (8) (as indicated by the parentheses), the verb devour takes an obligatory
object (9–10), and dine cannot take a direct object (11–12).

from that literature that only some distinctions are linguistically relevant: knowing what participants are involved in
an event is not enough to pinpoint the precise characteristics
of linguistic arguments. Examples of relevant work include
Pylkkänen (2008); Grimshaw (2005); Levin and Rappaport
Hovav (2005); Wechsler (1995); Tenny (1994); Marantz
(1993); Bresnan and Moshi (1990); Bresnan and Zaenen
(1990); Grimshaw (1990); and Jackendoff (1990, 1983).

(8) Mike ate (an apple).
(9) Sally devoured the pizza.

Experiment

(10) *Sally devoured.
(11) Jasleen and Sam were dining.
(12) *Jasleen and Sam were dining a great meal.
The verbs munch, nibble and gobble can take a complement,
but not as a plain noun phrase object directly after the verb.
The preposition on is required for munch and nibble:
(13) Fiona munched/nibbled on some potato chips.
(14) *Fiona munched/nibbled some potato chips.
Similarly, the particle up is required for gobble. Together,
the examples in (8–14) illustrate that classifying a verb as a
verb of ingestion might tell you that the event described by
the verb involves two participants (an eater and something
eaten). However, it does not tell you the exact number or
types of arguments the verb takes.
Another example concerns pairs of verbs that describe the
same event from different perspectives: flee and chase, win
and beat, borrow and lend, receive and give, etc. These pairs
describe the same general events: a chasing event, a winning
event, a lending event, or a giving event (see, e.g., Gleitman,
1990). However, the verbs that describe the same event differ
in their argument structure. Compare flee and chase:
(15) The hare fled (from the fox).
(16) The fox chased the hare.
The verb flee requires the individual being chased (or expelled) to be expressed, but the individual or thing the subject is fleeing from is only optionally expressed as a prepositional phrase. The verb chase requires both the chaser and the
fleer to be expressed, and both are expressed as noun phrases.
In this case, the individual who is fleeing is a direct object
and not a subject. We conclude, as we did with the ingestion
verbs, that knowing what type of event the verb refers to is
not enough to predict whether or how those participants are
realized as linguistic arguments.
This is not to say the realization of arguments is completely
arbitrary. Many interesting generalizations have been proposed connecting specific semantic characteristics to the syntactic realization of arguments. For example, verbal aspect
can be signaled in the realization of arguments (see, e. g.,
the papers in Demonte & McNally, 2012; Levin & Rappaport Hovav, 2005 and Tenny, 1994). However, it is clear

The aim of the study was to explore speakers’ intuitions about
event participants and linguistic arguments. On the one hand,
we wished to explore how many and what participants were
considered conceptually necessary in order for events of different types to take place. On the other hand, we wanted to
gauge what participants were considered linguistically necessary in conjunction with the verbs corresponding to the different events. Our experiment is similar to those of Rissman
et al. (2015) and Koenig et al. (2003), as they also explore the
status of instruments by eliciting speakers’ intuitions.
Our studies differed in methodology: Rissman et al. (2015)
explored speakers’ semantic judgements; however, they instructed speakers with respect to what arguments are. Koenig
et al. (2003) instructed speakers to add something that makes
sense and is grammatical to the end of a phrase. Koenig et
al. (2003), Rissman et al. (2015), and our study all yielded
similar results.

Methods
Seventy-nine students with no background in Linguistics
were recruited from Carleton University, using the school’s
psychology recruitment system. As compensation for participating in the experiment, students received 0.75% class credit
towards a psychology or neuroscience course. All students
were English speakers between the ages of 18 and 24.
The experiment consisted of two tasks. In task 1, speakers were instructed to think about an event such as writing
and to state the participants required for the event to occur.
Specifically, speakers were instructed to imagine a verb-ing
event taking place in a large box and were asked to answer
the following question: What needs to be in the box (people,
objects, places etc.) for the verb-ing event to take place? Before beginning the experiment, speakers were provided with
two sample events, eating and dancing. To accentuate the
open-ended nature of the task, speakers were provided with a
series of answers ranging in the number of participants such
as a person; a person and food; a person, food, and place for
an eating event.
In task 2, speakers were presented with the beginning of a
sentence and asked to complete the sentence however it made
most sense to them. Once again, they were provided with
sample answers in order to illustrate the range of possibilities.
Given the phrase the woman ate, possible ways to complete
it include but are not limited to: not adding anything; an ice
cream; an ice cream with a spoon; an ice cream from Vito’s
Gelateria; an ice cream sitting on her balcony.

1963

This study focuses on two particular classes of verbs which
we call instrument verbs and transaction verbs. Instrument
verbs denote events that typically require some kind of tool
or instrument. The verbs included in this task were cut, draw,
paint, scrape, scratch, scrub, sketch, and write. It is not clear
whether instruments are arguments or adjuncts of verbs such
as cut or draw (see Rissman et al., 2015; Rissman, 2013;
Koenig et al., 2003; and others). For example, in a sentence
like (17), it is not clear whether with her new knife is an argument or an adjunct:
(17) Rita cut the bread with her new knife.
We wanted to test whether the unclear status of instruments
might be due to a misalignment between conceptual participants and linguistic participants. For example, perhaps instruments are conceptually necessary in order for the event to
take place, but they are not necessary as syntactic arguments
in the clause.
Transaction verbs describe activities where the possession
of an object changes from person A to person B, and person
A receives something in exchange. The transaction verbs included in the study were sell, buy, and purchase, and these
verbs are exemplified in (18–19):
(18) Bo sold the bags (to Jay) (for $870).
(19) Jay bought/purchased the bags (from Bo) (for $870).
The goal and price phrases are usually considered optional for
the verb sell. Similarly, the source and price are optionally
mentioned in clauses headed by the verbs buy and purchase
(Stamenov, 1997).
It is important to note that some verbs allow an instrument
or a price as a subject or an object, and we did not include
such verbs here. Examples include the key opened the door
where the key is an instrument, and this book costs $20 where
$20 is a price.
Speakers’ responses were coded based on the expected results. For task 1, we predicted someone performing the action, something the action was performed on, an instrument,
and new categories were added as needed (e.g., time, place,
manner). Given a scrubbing event, answers coded as having
one conceptual participant include sponge; a brush; cleaning
materials. Answers coded as having two conceptual participants include something used to scrub, and something to be
scrubbed; dirty dish and soap; a person, a scrub. Answers
coded as having three conceptual participants include scrubber, a mess, an item to scrub; surface, person, and sponge;
person, something to be scrubbed, an object to scrub with
like a sponge.
Since the speakers were given the beginning of the sentence in task 2, one linguistic participant (the subject) was
already provided. An answer was coded as having only one
linguistic participant if the speaker did not add any linguistic
material to the phrase provided (e.g., Mike scrubbed). Answers interpreted as having two linguistic participants typically include the object, such as the floor; toilets; the window.

Answers interpreted as having three linguistic participants include mud off the floor; the vomit off the classroom floor. For
more detail about the method, please see Barbu (2015).

Results
Instrument verbs We expected responses to tasks involving instrument verbs such as scrub to include some sort of
tool or instrument such as sponge in addition to someone doing the scrubbing and something being scrubbed. We were
interested in whether speakers would be more likely to mention instruments in one of the two tasks. Recall that task 1 was
designed to gauge what participants are conceptually necessary for the event to take place, whereas task 2 specifically
targeted what arguments should naturally be expressed in the
linguistic string.
In task 1 speakers’ responses averaged out to 1.97 conceptual participants per event. In task 2, speakers mentioned 2.24
linguistic participants on average, so the average is slightly
higher than the average for conceptual participants provided
in task 1. While the number of conceptual and linguistic participants did not vary greatly between the two tasks, the specific participants listed did. Interestingly, there was a striking
difference between the two tasks. While instruments were
mentioned for each event in task 1, this was not the case in
task 2, where an instrument was mentioned for only one of
the events, drawing, and only by 5% of the speakers. Table 1
illustrates the number of mentions of an instrument in task 1
(conceptual participants) and task 2 (linguistic participants).
The responses are given per verb. For example, when presented with a writing event, 90% of the speakers mentioned
an instrument (e.g., pencil, pen) in task 1, while no speakers
mentioned one in task 2.
Table 1: Mentions (%) of instruments as conceptual participants (Task 1) and linguistic participants (Task 2)
Event
Conceptual Linguistic
scratch
39%
0%
scrape
47%
0%
paint
80%
0%
sketch
85%
0%
write
90%
0%
scrub
95%
0%
cut
95%
0%
draw
100%
5%
In sum, while speakers often mentioned instruments as
necessary in order for a particular activity (e.g., scrubbing)
to take place, they did not provide instrumental phrases (e.g.,
with a sponge) as linguistic material to complete sentences
headed by the verb scrub.
Transaction verbs For transaction events, expected responses include two people (someone selling, buying, or purchasing something to or from someone else), the transferred

1964

item, and some sort of monetary compensation. Answers
coded as having one conceptual participant include money;
products; credit cards. Answers coded as having two conceptual participants include something to buy, someone to buy it;
shopaholics, items for sale; someone purchasing something.
Answers coded as having three conceptual participants include a person, something to sell, someone to sell it to; items
to sell, money, people; people, items, place. Answers coded
as having four conceptual participants include objects to sell,
seller, buyer, place. In task 1, speakers mentioned on average
2.8 conceptual participants per event.
Recall that one linguistic participant (e.g., the car dealer)
and a verb were already provided for task 2. Answers coded
as having two linguistic participants include a car; a broken
car; 12 cars. Answers coded as having three linguistic participants include 20 cars throughout the day; 10 Ferraris today; a car for more than he thought it was worth. In task 2,
speakers provided an average of 2.3 linguistic participants per
event.
The number of conceptual and linguistic participants did
not vary greatly between the two tasks, but the types of participants listed did. For example, there was a significant difference between the two tasks with respect to currency. While
in task 1 at least some speakers mentioned some form of currency, almost none of the speakers did in task 2. For example,
when asked to list the participants involved in a buying event,
47% of the speakers listed some form of currency in task 1,
while none of the speakers listed currency in task 2. Table 2
summarizes the mentions of currency for tasks 1 and 2.
Table 2: Mentions (%) of currency as conceptual participant
(Task 1) and linguistic participant (Task 2)
Event
Conceptual Linguistic
purchase
83%
0%
buy
47%
0%
sell
21%
5%
Table 2 illustrates that currency was mentioned much more
in task 1 than in task 2, and on our interpretation, this means
that currency is a necessary event participant at a conceptual
level, but is not a linguistic argument.

are perceived as involving some form of money, yet phrases
that refer to money are not syntactic arguments.
Despite the fact that at least some speakers mentioned an
instrument for each of the verbs in this class, there is a difference between verbs. This is expected, as conceptual participants are strongly related to the meaning of the verb, and
explanations for these differences might be found in the lexical semantics of the specific verbs used to elicit judgments.
For example, all subjects listed some kind of instrument for
a drawing event, but only 39% of subjects listed an instrument for a scratching event. This difference might be due to
body parts not being conceptualized as instruments (see, e.g.,
Rissman et al., 2015; Carlson & Tanenhaus, 1989). When
asked to think about a scratching event, it is quite likely that
speakers thought of fingernails or claws. However, it is more
difficult to think of drawing events where a body part is used
as an instrument, although it is of course possible to draw
with your finger on a steamed up window.

The syntax of instrument and currency phrases
Our results suggest that speakers view instruments for verbs
like scrub and payments for verbs like buy as conceptual
event participants, even though they are not linguistically
necessary complements of the verbs. Recall that obligatory phrases are arguments, but arguments are not necessarily obligatory (e.g., the optional object of eat). Are instrument and currency phrases arguments, even though they are
not obligatorily expressed? In order to answer this question,
we would need a full linguistic investigation. Here, we will
simply present a tentative answer based on the syntactic argumenthood tests introduced above, pseudo-clefting and VPanaphora. Introspective judgements of the grammaticality of
pseudo-cleft and VP-anaphora examples suggest that instrument and currency phrases are not syntactic arguments.
Example (20) shows a pseudo-clefted version of Suzie
scrubbed the floor with a brush and is grammatical. The VPanaphora example in (21) is also grammatical. Arguments
cannot appear in these syntactic frames, so these examples
suggest that instruments are adjuncts, assuming that with a
brush in this example is representative of instruments.
(20) What Suzie did with the brush was scrub the floor.
(21) Suzie scrubbed the floor with a brush and Tom did so
with a sponge.

Discussion
A simple analysis based solely on the number of participants/arguments mentions suggests that the results of the two
tasks of this study are quite similar. However, a more careful
analysis reveals important differences between the two tasks,
both for instrument verbs and transaction verbs. For instrument verbs, instruments were commonly mentioned in task 1,
while being nearly absent in task 2. These results suggest that
an instrument is perceived as being a necessary component
of events such as writing and scrubbing, but the instrument
phrase is nevertheless not a syntactic argument of the verbs
used to describe those events. Similarly, transaction events

Examples (22–23) target the currency phrase for $500. Example (22) is a pseudo-clefted version and (23) is a VP-anaphora
version of Tom bought a bike for $500. The grammaticality
of these examples indicates that currency/price phrases are
adjuncts, not arguments.
(22) What Tom did for $500 was buy a bike.
(23) Tom bought a bike for $500 and Sue did so for $1000.
The syntactic diagnostics based on pseudo-clefting and VPanaphora point to the same conclusion as the results of task

1965

2 in our experiment: instrument and currency phrases are not
linguistic arguments, even though they are conceptually necessary event participants.

Conclusion
This paper addressed the following question: Is there a distinction between event participants and linguistic arguments?
We revisited arguments from the linguistics literature that
have previously pointed to an imperfect mapping between the
two notions. We also presented the results of a new study consisting of one task targeting conceptual event participants and
another task targeting syntactic arguments. The results can
be interpreted as capturing differences between conceptual
and linguistic participants in instrument verbs and transaction
verbs. Despite the open-ended nature of the tasks, there was
agreement across speakers that while instruments and currency are conceptual participants, there is no need for them
to be overtly stated. On our interpretation, the experimental
data presented here suggests that while instruments and currency are conceptualized as event participants and potential
semantic arguments, syntactically they behave as adjuncts.
This conclusion is supported by the results of two traditional
syntactic argumenthood tests.

References
Barbu, R.-M. (2015). Verbs and participants: Non-linguists’
intuitions. Unpublished master’s thesis, Carleton University.
Bresnan, J., & Moshi, L. (1990). Object asymmetries in
comparative Bantu syntax. Linguistic Inquiry, 21, 147–85.
Bresnan, J., & Zaenen, A. (1990). Deep unaccusativity in
LFG. In K. Dziwirek, P. Farrell, & E. Mejias-Bikandi
(Eds.), Grammatical relations: A cross-theoretical perspective (pp. 45–57). Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Carlson, G., & Tanenhaus, M. (1989). Thematic roles and
language comprehension. In G. Carlson & M. Tanenhaus
(Eds.), Linguistic structure in language processing: Studies
in theoretical psycholinguistics (pp. 263–89). Dordrecht
and Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Christie, E. (2015). The English resultative. Doctoral dissertation, Carleton University, Ottawa.
Croft, W. (2001). Radical construction grammar: Syntactic
theory in typological perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Demonte, V., & McNally, L. (2012). Telicity, change, and
state: A cross-categorial view of event structure. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Dowty, D. (2003). The dual analysis of adjuncts and complements in categorial grammar. In E. Lang, C. Maienborn,
& C. Fabricius-Hansen (Eds.), Modifying adjuncts. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Forker, D. (2014). A canonical approach to the argument/adjunct distinction. Linguistic Discovery, 12(2), 27–
40.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb meaning.
Cognition, 1(1), 3–55.

Goldberg, A., & Ackerman, F. (2001). The pragmatics of
obligatory adjuncts. Language, 77(4), 798–814.
Grimshaw, J. (1990). Argument structure. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Grimshaw, J. (2005). Words and structure. Stanford: CSLI.
Hedberg, N., & DeArmond, R. C. (2009). On complements
and adjuncts. Snippets, 19, 11-12.
Jackendoff, R. (1983). Semantics and cognition. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of language: Brain,
meaning, grammar, evolution. Oxford University Press.
Kearns, K. (2011). Semantics, 2nd edition. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Koenig, J.-P., Mauner, G., & Bienvenue, B. (2003). Arguments for adjuncts. Cognition, 89, 67–103.
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (2005). Argument realization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marantz, A. (1993). Implications of asymmetries in double
object constructions. In S. A. Mchombo (Ed.), Theoretical
aspects of Bantu grammar (pp. 113–50). Stanford, CA:
CSLI.
Needham, S., & Toivonen, I. (2011). Derived arguments. In
M. Butt & T. H. King (Eds.), Proceedings of the LFG11
conference (pp. 401–421). Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Pylkkänen, L. (2008). Introducing arguments. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Rissman, L. (2013). Event participant representations and
the instrumental role: A cross-linguistic study. Doctoral
dissertation, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore.
Rissman, L., Rawlins, K., & Landau, B. (2015). Using instruments to understand argument structure for gradient representation. Cognition, 142, 266–290.
Schütze, C., & Gibson, E. (1999). Argumenthood and english
prepositional phrase attachment. Journal of Memory and
Language, 40, 409–432.
Stamenov, M. I. (1997). Language structure, discourse and
the access to consciousness (Vol. 12). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Tallerman, M. (2005). Understanding syntax, 2nd edition.
London: Hodder Arnold.
Tenny, C. L. (1994). Aspectual roles and the syntaxsemantics interface. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Tutunjian, D., & Boland, J. E. (2008). Do we need a distinction between arguments and adjuncts? Evidence from
psycholinguistic studies of comprehension. Language and
Linguistic Compass, 2, 631–646.
Van Luven, K. (2014). The argument status of directional
PPs. (B.A. thesis, Carleton University)
Wechsler, S. (1995). The semantic basis of argument structure. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Whaley, L. (1993). The status of obliques in linguistic theory. Doctoral dissertation, State University of New York,
Buffalo.

1966

