Examining the Specificity of the Seductive Allure Effect
Emily J. Hopkins (hopkinse@sas.upenn.edu)
Deena Skolnick Weisberg (deena.weisberg@psych.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3720 Walnut St., Solomon Labs
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Jordan C. V. Taylor (jordt@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Claudia Cohen Hall, Room 433
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Abstract
Previous work has found that people feel significantly more
satisfied with explanations of psychological phenomena when
those explanations contain neuroscience information — even
when this information is entirely irrelevant to the logic of the
explanations.
This seductive
allure
effect was
first
demonstrated by Weisberg, Keil, Goodstein, Rawson, & Gray
(2008), and has since been replicated several times in
independent labs (e.g., Fernandez-Duque, Evans, Christian, &
Hodges, 2014; Rhodes, Rodriguez, & Shah, 2014; Weisberg,
Taylor, & Hopkins, 2015). However, these studies only
examined
psychological
explanations
with
added
neuroscience information. The current study thus investigated
the generality of this effect and found that the seductive allure
effect occurs across several scientific disciplines whenever
the explanations include reference to smaller components or
more fundamental processes. These data suggest that people
have a general preference for reductive explanations.
Keywords: seductive allure; explanations; decision-making

Introduction
What is the relationship between the form of an explanation
and its content? In ideal circumstances, the quality of an
explanation should be determined by its success at
generating understanding of the target phenomenon; form
should matter less, if at all. However, there are many cases
where the form of an explanation erroneously influences
people’s judgment of its quality, as when people judge
longer explanations as better (Kikas, 2003; Langer, Blank,
& Chanowitz, 1978). Similarly, people often feel that they
have gained a sense of understanding from statements or
situations that aren’t actually explanatory (see Trout, 2002).
For example, both adults (Lombrozo & Carey, 2006) and
children (Kelemen, 1999) preferentially endorse teleological
explanations that refer to goals or end-states, even when
mechanistic explanations would be more appropriate.
One particularly interesting instance of this kind of error
is the seductive allure effect in psychology: People judge
explanations of psychology findings as better when those
explanations contain logically irrelevant neuroscience
information (Weisberg et al., 2008). That is, people feel that
they understand a psychological phenomenon better when it
is described using the language of neuroscience, although
this language should make no difference. Further, this effect

is much stronger for poor-quality, circular explanations.
Participants judged bad explanations as significantly better
when they contained added neuroscience terminology.
Ratings of explanations that were already of high quality —
in most cases, these were the explanations that researchers
themselves gave for the psychological phenomena — were
unaffected by added neuroscience information.
Although this finding has been replicated several times,
demonstrating its robustness (Fernandez-Duque et al., 2015;
Rhodes, Rodriguez, & Shah, 2014; Weisberg, Taylor, &
Hopkins, 2015), it is still unclear why this effect happens.
One possibility is that it is specific to psychology and
neuroscience; something about neuroscientific language in
particular plays a role in improving explanations of
psychological phenomena. However, recent work has failed
to identify the mechanism by which neuroscience content
may have this effect. Although early evidence suggested
that neuroscience images influence people’s judgments
(McCabe & Castel, 2008), these results have failed to
replicate (see Farah & Hook, 2013, for review).
Additionally, neuroscience jargon (e.g., “fMRI imaging”)
has no effect over and above references to the brain in plain
language (e.g., “brain scans”; Weisberg, Taylor, & Hopkins,
2015, Study 3). Therefore, neither appealing imagery nor
scientific jargon is responsible for making neuroscience
information seductive. Although it is still possible that some
other property unique to the pairing of psychology and
neuroscience is responsible for the seductive allure effect,
an alternative explanation is that this effect is representative
of a more general bias in judging explanations.
The current work investigates one candidate for this
general bias: a preference for reductive explanations (see
Craver, 2007). Scientific reductionism holds that
explanatory elements from one discipline may be reduced to
elements of a more fundamental or basic discipline if the
laws of the “higher” discipline follow as logical
consequences of the more fundamental one (Nagel, 1961).
People may thus judge explanations of psychological
phenomena that contain irrelevant neuroscience information
as better because the brain plays this reductive role for
psychological states. To test the hypothesis that the
seductive allure effect is indicative of a general preference
for reduction, we presented subjects with descriptions of

1829

phenomena across a range of sciences in a plausible
reductive hierarchy (Figure 1); in this hierarchy, each
science is most immediately explainable in terms of the one
below it. If people do have a general preference for
reduction, the seductive allure effect should be seen any
time an explanation contains reference to the next level
down on the hierarchy, leading to preferences of chemical
explanations for biological phenomena, for example.
Social Science
Psychology
Neuroscience
Biology
Chemistry

13.5% were seniors; 1 participant did not report his or her
year.

Design
All participants completed an online survey hosted by
Qualtrics. The explanations task used a 2 (Explanation level:
horizontal, reductive) x 2 (Quality: good, bad) x 6 (Science:
physics, biology, chemistry, neuroscience, psychology,
social science) design. Explanation level was betweensubjects: Participants were randomly assigned to either the
horizontal (74 MTurk workers, 54 undergraduates) or
reductive (73 MTurk workers, 58 undergraduates)
condition. Quality and Science were within-subjects
variables: All participants rated two explanations from each
science, one good and one bad.

Physics

Materials

Figure 1: Hierarchy of sciences.
For each phenomenon, we constructed four explanations,
according to a Quality (good/bad) x Explanation Level
(horizontal/reductive) design. Horizontal explanations refer
only to the science from which the phenomenon itself is
drawn (e.g., biological explanations for biological
phenomenon). Reductive explanations include reference to
the next level downwards in the hierarchy (e.g., chemical
explanations for biological phenomenon). If participants
show a general preference for reduction, they should judge
reductive explanations as better than horizontal explanations
for all sciences, even though the explanatory content of both
is the same. If the seductive allure effect is unique to the
pairing of psychology and neuroscience, however, we
should observe this preference only for psychology and not
for the other sciences.

Method
Participants
Participants were recruited from two different populations:
Workers on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (n = 167) and
undergraduate students enrolled in psychology classes at the
University of Pennsylvania (n = 152). MTurk workers were
paid for their participation, and undergraduate students
received course credit. Some of these participants (20
MTurk workers and 40 undergraduates) were excluded from
the sample for failing attention check questions (described
in the Procedure). The final sample used for all analyses
thus consisted of 147 MTurk workers and 112
undergraduates. MTurk workers (80 women, 55 men, 12 did
not report gender) were 39.8 years of age on average (range:
19-71), and undergraduates (64 women, 44 men, 4 did not
report gender) were 19.8 years of age on average (range: 1823). Most of the MTurk workers (89.8%) had completed at
least some college. Among the undergraduates, 36.0% were
freshmen, 28.8% were sophomores, 20.7% were juniors,

The Rating Explanations task used 24 phenomena (four per
science). The phenomena described concepts, principles, or
research findings from each of the six sciences. Each
phenomenon had four corresponding explanations:
horizontal-good, horizontal-bad, reductive-good, reductivebad (Table 1). The good versions of the explanations were
the ones that researchers or textbooks provided for the
phenomena; all explanations were verified by experts in the
respective fields. The bad explanations were worded so as to
provide no information regarding why the phenomena
occurred. They were either circular restatements of the
phenomenon, or they provided additional information that
was irrelevant with no mechanistic information that could
explain the phenomenon. Experts in each field confirmed
that the bad explanations were non-explanatory.
Both horizontal-good and horizontal-bad explanations
used only terminology and concepts from the same
discipline as the phenomenon. That is, biological
phenomena were described only in biological terms,
chemical phenomena were described only in chemical
terms, etc. Explanations in the reductive condition used
terminology from the discipline below that of the
phenomena in our reductive hierarchy: biological
explanations
were
supplemented
with
chemistry
information, chemistry explanations were supplemented
with physics information, etc. For phenomena from the
domain of physics, the reductive explanations referred to
smaller particles and/or more fundamental forces (e.g.,
reducing “friction” to “vibration of molecules”).
Importantly, the reductive information did not add any
additional explanatory information beyond what was
already contained in the horizontal explanation; this was
also verified by experts.
For each phenomenon, the four versions of the
explanation were matched as closely as possible outside of
the manipulations for quality and explanation level. The
added reductive text was identical for good and bad versions
of the explanation. Length of explanation was carefully

1830

Table 1: Sample Phenomenon from Biology
Male anole lizards bob their heads up and down rhythmically as part of a mating ritual to attract females. They typically
increase their rate of head-bobbing when they see a female lizard of their species. However, their rate of head-bobbing also
increases when they see another male lizard of the same species, even if no female lizards are present.
Why do male lizards bob their heads when other males are nearby?
Good
Bad
Horizontal This happens because the male lizards are extremely This happens because the male lizards are seeking
territorial, and head-bobbing is a distinctive behavior mates, and head-bobbing is a distinctive behavior
typical of this particular species of lizard. During typical of this species of lizard. During mating
mating season when they are in competition with season when they are trying to attract females, males
each other for females, males use various dominance use a variety of behaviors that are characteristic of
displays to defend their territory. They perceive anole lizards. They perceive the presence of other
other males as a threat and engage in increased head- males and engage in increased head-bobbing, which
bobbing, which is a sign of aggression.
is commonly seen during mating season.
Reductive This happens because the male lizards are extremely This happens because the male lizards are seeking
territorial. During mating season when they are in mates. During mating season when they are trying to
competition with each other for females, males use attract females, males use a variety of behaviors that
various dominance displays to defend their territory. are characteristic of lizards. They perceive the
They perceive other males as a threat and engage in presence of other males and engage in increased
increased head-bobbing, which is a sign of head-bobbing, which is commonly seen during
aggression. Aggressive behavior is known to be mating season. Aggressive behavior is known to be
associated with elevated levels of testosterone and associated with elevated levels of testosterone and
other aggression-enabling hormones.
other aggression-enabling hormones.
matched; within a phenomenon, the four versions of the
explanation never differed in length by more than 4 words.
Additionally, there were no significant differences in
average word count among the six sciences.
The 24 phenomena were divided into two pre-determined
sets of 12 (two per science), and participants were randomly
assigned to receive one of the two sets. Each set was further
subdivided into two blocks of six phenomena (one per
science); the order in which these two blocks were presented
was randomly determined for each participant. Within each
block, the six phenomena were presented in a random order.
Each participant saw one good and one bad explanation
from each science; two combinations of good and bad
explanations were pseudorandomly determined ahead of
time and participants were randomly assigned to one of the
two different permutations. Participants were randomly
assigned to either the horizontal or reductive condition, and
all 12 explanations that they rated came from their assigned
explanation level. This counterbalancing method led to 16
different randomly-assigned presentation orders in a 2 (Item
Set: A or B) x 2 (Block Order) x 2 (Good/Bad combination)
x 2 (Explanation Level: horizontal, reductive) design.

Procedure
Participants used a sliding scale ranging from -3 to 3 to
indicate their ratings of each explanation. They were first
given instructions on how to use the slider; this also served
as a check that participants were reading instructions. They
were told to use the slider to select 0 on the first page in
order to proceed with the survey. If they selected anything

other than 0, they were directed to another page asking them
again to select 0. Participants who did not select the correct
response on this second page (3 MTurk workers and 9
undergraduates) were excluded from analyses.
After these general instructions on using the slider,
participants were given instructions for the explanations task
(modified from Fernandez-Duque et al., 2015):
You will now be presented with descriptions of
various scientific findings. All the findings come
from solid, replicable research; they are the kind of
material you would encounter in a textbook. You will
also read an explanation of each finding. Unlike the
findings themselves, the explanations of the findings
range in quality. Some explanations are better than
others: They are more logically sound. Your job is to
judge the quality of such explanations, which could
range from very poor (-3) to very good (+3).
On each trial, participants were presented with a
description of a scientific phenomenon, which was
displayed for 10 seconds before participants could advance
to the next screen. On the next screen, an explanation was
displayed below the phenomenon, and participants were
instructed to rate the quality of the explanation. Participants
rated 12 explanations, with an attention check trial
administered after the first six (Oppenheimer, Meyvis, &
Davidenko, 2009). This trial was similar in format to the
others. First, a description of a phenomenon was presented
for 10 seconds. When participants advanced to the next
screen, instead of seeing an explanation, they saw text

1831

3
2
1
0
−1

Average Rating

−3

−2

Horizontal−Good
Reductive−Good
Horizontal−Bad
Reductive−Bad

All Sciences

Physics

Chemistry

Biology

Neuroscience

Psychology Social Science

Science

Figure 2: Average ratings of explanations by science, condition, and quality. Error bars are 95% CIs.
instructing them to select 3 on the scale. Participants who
did not select 3 (17 MTurk workers and 31 undergraduates)
were excluded from analyses.
Perceptions of Science. After the explanations task,
participants responded to three questions designed to assess
their views of 10 scientific disciplines: physics, chemistry,
biology, neuroscience, psychology, sociology, economics,
and political science (measure adapted from FernandezDuque et al., 2015). Participants rated the perceived
scientific rigor of each discipline, the extent of the
knowledge gap between a novice and an expert in each
discipline, and the societal prestige of each discipline
(presented in a random order). For each discipline, the
ratings of the three items were made on a 10-point scale,
which were summed to create a single score (out of 30).1

Results
Data from the explanations task (Figure 2) were analyzed
using a mixed-effects linear regression model predicting the
rating given on each trial from the sample (MTurk,
undergraduates), explanation level (horizontal, reductive),
explanation quality (good, bad), and science (physics,
chemistry, biology, neuroscience, psychology, and social
science). Sample and explanation level were betweenparticipants variables; quality and science were within1

Participants also completed measures of reflective thinking,
logical reasoning, and general scientific literacy. For brevity, data
from these measures will not be discussed here.

participants variables. All possible interactions were tested,
but the four-way interaction and most of the three-way
interactions did not significantly improve model fit and
were dropped. The best-fitting model included random
intercepts by participant and item and a random effect of
item on the slope for the quality variable. The science
variable was backwards-difference coded to test five
planned contrasts between pairs of adjacent sciences:
chemistry vs. physics, biology vs. chemistry, neuroscience
vs. biology, psychology vs. neuroscience, and social science
vs. psychology (Figure 1). Significance levels were
determined by generating bootstrapped confidence intervals
around the regression coefficients.

Main Effects
There were significant effects of Sample (β = -0.25, 95% CI
[-0.44, -0.07]), Quality (β = 1.27, 95% CI 1.07, 1.47]), and
Explanation Level (β = 0.21, 95% CI [0.02, 0.42]).
Undergraduate students (M = 1.01, SD = 1.85) gave
significantly lower ratings on average than MTurk workers
(M = 1.26, SD = 1.76). Good explanations (M = 1.76, SD =
1.43) were rated significantly higher than bad explanations
(M = 0.53, SD = 1.93). Reductive explanations (M = 1.26,
SD = 1.71) were rated significantly higher than horizontal
explanations (M = 1.04, SD = 1.88). Finally, the contrast
between psychology and neuroscience was significant (β =
-0.55, 95% CI [-1.06, -0.06]): Neuroscience explanations (M
= 1.41, SD = 1.67) were rated higher than psychology
explanations (M = 0.88, SD = 1.85). No other contrasts
between adjacent pairs of sciences were significant.

1832

Interactions
A significant Sample x Quality interaction (β = 0.54, 95%
CI [0.30, 0.76]) indicates that the difference in ratings
between MTurk workers and undergraduates was driven
primarily by their ratings of the bad explanations. Ratings of
good explanations were similar between the two groups (MM
= 1.76 and MU = 1.77), but the MTurk workers gave higher
ratings to bad explanations than undergraduates did (MM =
0.76 for and MU = 0.24).
There was also an Explanation Level x Science
interaction, wherein the contrast between social science and
psychology was significant (β = -0.60, 95% CI [-0.97, 0.27]). This indicates that the effect of reductive information
was significantly different between these two sciences. In
psychology, as well as in physics, chemistry, biology, and
neuroscience, the reductive explanations were rated higher
on average than the horizontal explanations. However, the
opposite was true for social science: Reductive explanations
(M = 0.90, SD = 1.91) were rated lower than horizontal
explanations (M = 1.13, SD = 1.84).
Finally, there was a significant, three-way Sample x
Quality x Explanation Level interaction (β = 0.49, 95% CI
[0.01, 0.94]), indicating that the magnitude of the Quality x
Explanation Level interaction was larger for MTurk workers
than for undergraduates. Separate analyses of the two
groups revealed a significant Quality x Explanation Level
interaction in the MTurk sample, but not in the
undergraduate sample. Among MTurk workers, there was a
larger difference between the horizontal and reductive
conditions for bad explanations (MH = 0.52 and MR = 0.99)
than for good explanations (MH = 1.71 and MR = 1.80).

Explanation Level interaction for biology (β = -0.48, 90%
CI [-1.00, -0.01]) and psychology (β = -0.50, 90% CI [-1.00,
-0.07]). Post-hoc tests found significant differences between
reductive-bad and horizontal-bad explanations in biology,
t(257) = 2.07, p < .05, and psychology, t(257) = 3.03, p <
.01, but there was no significant difference by explanation
level for good explanations in either biology or psychology.
For stimuli from the other sciences, the effect of explanation
level was not moderated by the quality of the explanation.

Perceptions of Science
As described in the Method section, each science was rated
on a 10-point scale for three different questions; the three
ratings were summed to give a single score out of 30 for
each science. The summed scores for sociology, economics,
and political science were highly correlated (alpha = .79 for
undergraduates and .82 for MTurk workers), and the three
were averaged to create a “social science” score. By and
large, these ratings mirror our predicted reductive scale of
the sciences, with the more fundamental sciences being
rated as more rigorous, difficult, and prestigious (Figure 3).
The exception to this is neuroscience, which was rated
higher than physics, chemistry, and biology. Paired t-tests
were conducted on all adjacent pairs of fields; all
comparisons were statistically significant (p < .001).

Analyses by Science
To further investigate whether the seductive allure effect,
which was previously observed with psychology
explanations augmented by neuroscience information,
occurred for other pairs of sciences, we conducted separate
regression analyses for each science testing for main effects
of Quality, Explanation Level, and a Quality x Explanation
Level interaction. These models also included random
intercepts for participant and item to account for repeated
measures and differences between the individual stimuli
used within each science.
There was a significant, positive effect of Quality in all
six sciences, mirroring the strong effect of Quality observed
in the earlier regression. The effect of explanation level was
statistically significant for psychology (β = 0.43, 95% CI
[0.12, 0.71]), and marginally significant (p < .10) for
physics, chemistry, biology, and neuroscience. Also
consistent with the prior analyses, the Explanation Level
effect was in the opposite direction for social science
compared to the other five sciences.
As has been observed in some previous studies on this
effect (Fernandez-Duque et al., 2015; Weisberg et al.,
2008), there was a marginally significant Quality x

Figure 3: Avg. perception scores. Error bars are 95% CIs.

Discussion
The main goal of the current study was to investigate the
generality of the seductive allure effect. Prior research has
demonstrated that adding irrelevant neuroscience
information to explanations of psychological phenomena
makes these explanations seem better to naïve participants.
We hypothesized that this effect is due to a general
preference for reductive explanations, which should
manifest across different scientific domains. Our data
support this hypothesis: Participants judged explanations
containing irrelevant reductive information as better across a
range of sciences. The seductive allure effect is thus not
unique to the pairing of psychology and neuroscience.
However, we did find that the preference for reductive
information was strongest for the psychology/neuroscience
pairing. In addition, the effect for the social
science/psychology pairing was in the opposite direction,

1833

with participants preferring the horizontal (non-reductive)
explanations in this case. Taken together, these results point
to a general disinclination for person-level explanations.
This is in line with previous work finding generally poor
public opinions about psychology as a science (Keil,
Lockhart, & Schlegel, 2010; Lilienfield, 2012).
Regardless, participants were reliably able to discriminate
good from bad explanations across all sciences,
demonstrating an intact ability to sense explanation quality.
However, even bad explanations tended to be rated
positively on average. Undergraduate students were more
critical of bad explanations than MTurk workers, perhaps
because being in an academic environment encourages more
skepticism. Interestingly, participants were less critical of
bad neuroscience items than bad items from other sciences.
Together with the high prestige ratings for neuroscience,
this suggests that neuroscience information may exert some
unique allure, even if this does not fully explain its appeal in
explanations of psychological phenomena.
Future work should investigate this particular effect, as
well as why reduction is so appealing as an explanatory
form in the sciences. One interesting set of questions
concerns the proper level for reduction: Are explanations
seen as more appealing when they contain information only
from the immediately adjacent science (e.g., chemistry for
biology), or would further reduction make explanations
seem even better (e.g., physics for biology)? Alternatively,
do people prefer explanations that reference an additional
field of science, regardless of whether that field is more
fundamental? A current study is investigating these
questions; participants were asked to select the methods that
would be useful for investigating phenomena from various
sciences. Preliminary results show that participants most
often selected methods from the field of the phenomenon
(46% of the time) or the immediately reductive field (37%),
suggesting that they believe there is a particular level of
reduction for each science that is maximally explanatory.
Finally, future work should examine the potential role of
training in ameliorating the seductive allure effect. Previous
work (Weisberg et al., 2008, Study 3) found that
neuroscience experts were not seduced by irrelevant
neuroscience. Ongoing work in our lab expands this
investigation to experts in all six of our target sciences to
determine the role of expertise: Does training in a particular
science protect against the seductive allure effect for that
science, or in general? Answering this question can provide
further insight into the nature of the effect itself and into
people’s judgments of scientific explanations in general.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the John Templeton
Foundation through the Varieties of Understanding project.
We’d like to thank Don Berry, Martha Farah, Simon Garcia,
Cindy Keeler, Phil Nelson, Sam Reznik, and Paul
Sneigowski for their assistance with stimulus creation.

References
Craver, C. F. (2007). Explaining the brain: Mechanisms
and the mosaic unity of neuroscience. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Farah, M. J., & Hook, C. J. (2013). The seductive allure of
“seductive allure.” Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 8(1), 88–90.
Fernandez-Duque, D., Evans, J., Christian, C., & Hodges, S.
D. (2015). Superfluous neuroscience information makes
explanations of psychological phenomena more
appealing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(5),
926–944.
Keil, F. C., Lockhart, K. L., & Schlegel, E. (2010). A bump
on a bump? Emerging intuitions concerning the relative
difficulty of the sciences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 139(1), 1–15.
Kelemen, D. (1999). Why are rocks pointy? Children’s
preference for teleological explanations of the natural
world. Developmental Psychology, 35(6), 1440–1452.
Kikas, E. (2003). University students’ conceptions of
different physical phenomena. Journal of Adult
Development, 10(3), 139–150.
Langer, E. J., Blank, A., & Chanowitz, B. (1978). The
mindlessness of ostensibly thoughtful action: The role of
“placebic” information in interpersonal interaction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(6),
635–642.
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2012). Public skepticism of psychology:
Why many people perceive the study of human behavior
as unscientific. American Psychologist, 67(2), 111–129.
Lombrozo, T., & Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation
and the function of explanation. Cognition, 99, 167–204.
McCabe, D. P., & Castel, A. D. (2008). Seeing is believing:
The effect of brain images on judgments of scientific
reasoning. Cognition 107(1), 343-352.
Nagel, E. (1961). The Structure of Science. Problems in the
Logic of Explanation. New York: Harcourt, Brace &
World, Inc.
Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, N. (2009).
Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting satisficing to
increase statistical power. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 45(4), 867–872.
Rhodes, R. E., Rodriguez, F., & Shah, P. (2014). Explaining
the alluring influence of neuroscience information on
scientific reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40(5), 1432–1440.
Trout, J. D. (2002). Scientific explanation and the sense of
understanding. Philosophy of Science, 69, 212–233.
Weisberg, D. S., Keil, F. C., Goodstein, J., Rawson, E., &
Gray, J. R. (2008). The seductive allure of neuroscience
explanations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(3),
470–477.
Weisberg, D. S., Taylor, J. C. V., & Hopkins, E. J. (2015).
Deconstructing the seductive allure of neuroscience
explanations. Judgment and Decision Making, 10(5),
429–441.

1834

