Feature Overlap in Action Sequence
Alexandra M. Stubblefield (a.stubblefield@wsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, PO Box 644820, Johnson Tower 233
Pullman, WA 99164 USA

Lisa R. Fournier (lfournier@wsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, PO Box 644820, Johnson Tower 233
Pullman, WA 99164 USA

Abstract
This study determined if features of an action plan held in
working memory are activated to the same extent (consistent
with serial memory theories) or in a gradient (consistent with
theories that assume serial order is imposed prior to response
selection). Two visual events (A and B) occurred in a
sequence. Participants planned an action (3-finger, key
sequence) to the first event (Action A) and maintained this
action in working memory while executing a speeded
response (1-finger key-press) to the second event (Action B).
Afterwards, participants executed Action A. We manipulated
whether Action B overlapped with the first, second or final
feature of Action A, and examined the pattern of correct,
Action B RTs at the different overlap locations by finger
(index, middle, ring), as well as the error rates of both Action
A and Action B. Results indicate that 3-finger sequences
were not activated equally or in a gradient. Instead, feature
activation reflected a serial position curve or a reverse serial
position curve dependent on finger.
Keywords: feature overlap, cognitive interference, action
planning, partial repetition costs

Introduction
Everyday actions such as reaching for a water glass or
preparing a meal require action planning; one must decide
what to do and when to do it (Keele, 1968; Lashley, 1951).
In some cases action plans can be comprised of complicated
sequences that must be planned, like preparing a meal
(Rhodes, Bullock, Verwey, Averbeck, & Page, 2004). When
carrying out these action sequences, some elements of the
sequence need to be held in memory, while others are being
executed (Logan, 2004; Schneider & Logan, 2006). Various
theories provide different ideas as to how these action
elements are represented in memory. There are theories of
serial memory, which posit that all action features within an
action plan are activated equally and simultaneously (Crump
& Logan, 2010; Hartley & Houghton, 1996; Lashley, 1951;
Rosenbaum, Inhoff, & Gordon, 1984). These theories
assume that serial order may be imposed later, during
response selection and execution. On the other hand, there
are theories that postulate that earlier features within the
action plan are more active than later ones, creating a
gradient of activation in working memory (WM) that
preserves serial order (Averbeck, Chafee, Crowe, &
Georgopoulos, 2002; Page & Norris, 1998; Dell, Burger, &
Svec, 1997; Rhodes et al., 2004). How the features of an

action plan are represented in WM was investigated in the
current study.
Research consistent with theories of serial memory has
shown that highly skilled, hierarchically controlled tasks,
such as speaking or typing, appear to activate all action
features within an action plan in parallel (Rosenbaum,
Inhoff, & Gordon, 1984; Crump & Logan, 2010; Logan,
Miller, & Strayer, 2011). Crump and Logan (2010) gave
skilled typists words five to seven letters long as a prime,
followed by either a repeated exposure to the same word
that typists had to re-type or a single-letter prompt they had
to type. If the single-letter prompt was given, it was the first,
middle, or last letter of the original word, or it was a
completely unrelated letter. Results showed that the singleletter prompt was typed faster if the letter appeared in the
original word, and that priming was greater for the first
letter than for the middle or last letters - with no difference
in priming between the middle and last letters. This suggests
that the original word primed all the letters in the word
sequence. The authors assumed that activation of the first
letter was greater due to priming, likely because it needed to
be typed first. They stated that since the middle and last
letters were activated to a similar extent, that their results
support the idea of equivalent parallel activation of features.
They argue that their findings are consistent with models
that suggest equivalent, parallel activation with serial order
determined at response selection (Crump & Logan, 2010;
Hartley & Houghton, 1996; Lashley, 1951; Rosenbaum,
Inhoff, & Gordon, 1984).
In contrast, some models assume that serial order is
determined by a gradient of parallel feature activation (Dell
et al., 1997; Page & Norris, 1998; Rhodes et al., 2004).
These models assume that tasks that are less practiced may
produce a primacy gradient of parallel feature activation in
which each successive feature in the sequence is activated
less than the preceding one (Rhodes et al., 2004; Dell et al.,
1997; Page & Norris, 1998). Neurophysiological evidence
for this model is provided by Averbeck, Chafee, Crowe, &
Georgopoulos (2002), who trained rhesus macaque
monkeys to draw geometric shapes (e.g. triangle, rhombus)
using a specific line segment order. The researchers first
identified patterns of neural activity in the prefrontal cortex
that corresponded to the drawing of each segment, and then
recorded activity from these neurons just prior to and during
the time in which the monkeys drew a shape. They found
that prior to executing the segments, the neurons associated

1361

with the different segments of the shape were activated in
parallel, and the strength of activation was highest for
neurons corresponding to the first segment drawn, followed
by a decrease in neuronal activation corresponding to each
subsequent segment drawn, revealing a gradient of
activation of features within the action plans.
Other evidence supporting the idea that feature activation
within an action plan may follow a gradient is provided by
Fournier, Gallimore, Feiszli, and Logan (2014). They used a
partial repetition paradigm (Stoet & Hommel, 1999). In this
paradigm, two stimuli were presented in a sequence.
Participants were instructed to plan an action to the first
stimulus and hold it in memory while they perceived and
responded to a second stimulus. After they responded to the
second stimulus, they executed the response of the action
plan maintained in memory. Previous research showed that
the execution of an action plan can be delayed if there are
features of that plan that partially overlap with features of
another action plan currently maintained in WM, relative to
when there is no overlap between action plans (e.g., Stoet &
Hommel, 1999; Wiediger & Fournier, 2008). This delay in
responding is referred to as partial repetition costs. Partial
repetition costs are assumed to occur when a feature code
from the current action plan reactivates (primes) the action
plan maintained in WM (Hommel 2004; Fournier et al.,
2014). Reactivating the action plan retained in WM leads to
temporary confusion as to which action plan is relevant for
the current task: the current plan or the plan maintained in
WM (Hommel 2004; 2005; Mattson & Fournier 2008,
Fournier et al., 2014). Fournier et al. (2014) found partial
repetition costs when the current action overlapped with the
first feature of the action sequence maintained in WM, but
no significant costs when the overlap was on the last
feature. Partial repetition costs were used to measure
activation strength of each feature in the action feature
sequence within an action plan. Larger partial repetition
costs (or greater reaction times [RTs]) when overlap is on a
particular feature, are indicative of higher activation of that
feature compared to others in the action plan; lower costs
(lower RTs) are indicative of less activation of that feature.
The authors concluded that the features of an action plan are
not activated to the same degree in WM. Rather, the first
feature of the action plan is activated to a greater extent than
the last feature, consistent with a gradient of activation.
However, a limiting factor of the Fournier et al. (2014)
study is that there were only two action features
representing the action plan maintained in WM (e.g., move
joystick “left” then “up”). As a result, it is not clear whether
this pattern of activation truly follows a gradient of
activation (Dell et al., 1997; Page & Norris, 1998; Rhodes et
al., 2004) or if there is just something special about the first
feature (Dell et al., 1997; Crump & Logan, 2010). The
present study investigated whether action plans are
represented by a gradient of feature activation in memory by
improving upon Fournier et al.’s design. Participants in this
study maintained action plans that consisted of three
features, as opposed to two features. The advantage of

using a partial repetition paradigm to understand how action
plans are represented in working memory is that it allows
insight into the representation of an action plan prior to
execution.
A modification of the partial repetition paradigm (Stoet
& Hommel, 1999) was employed to determine if features of
an action plan maintained in WM are represented by a
gradient of activation or whether the first feature in the
action sequence has a higher level of activation than other
features in the sequence which do not differ in activation
strength (no gradient). Participants planned an action to the
first stimulus event (Event A) and maintained this action
plan in WM while waiting for the presentation of a second
visual event (Event B) that required an immediate speeded
response. After participants executed the response to Event
B, they executed the planned action for Event A. The main
manipulation was whether response to Event B overlapped
with the first, second, or third response in the action
sequence planned for Event A. If features of an action plan
maintained in WM are activated in a gradient, then response
RTs to Event B (Action B) should differ based on whether
Action B overlaps with the first, second, or third feature of
the action plan maintained in WM (Action A). Specifically,
Action B RTs should be slowest when it overlaps with the
first feature, intermediate when it overlaps with the second
feature, and fastest when it overlaps with last feature of
Action A. If instead, there is not a gradient of activation but
rather just something special about the first feature, there
should be higher activation for the first feature relative to
the second and third features, and equivalent activation
between the second and third features.

Methods
Participants
Forty-four undergraduates from Washington State
University participated for optional extra credit in
psychology courses. This study was approved by the
Washington State University Institutional Review Board,
and informed consent was obtained. All participants were
right-handed and had at least 20/40 uncorrected or corrected
visual acuity assessed using a Snellen eye chart.

Apparatus
Instructions and stimuli were presented on a computer
screen 61 cm from the participant. Key-press responses
were collected using a standard keyboard. The keys 7, 8,
and 9 on the keyboard were covered with white stickers, and
were used to record responses from the index, middle, and
ring finger of the right hand respectively. The space bar on
the keyboard was pressed by the thumb of the right hand to
initiate each trial and the pinky finger rested on the P key.
The participants’ right hand placement on the keyboard and
space bar were consistent throughout the task.
Event A was a sequence of three different boxes lighting
up. The three boxes were arranged in a horizontal array
centered one half centimeter above a white fixation cross at
the center of the screen. The boxes were each two

1362

centimeter squares, spaced a half centimeter apart from one
another. The sequence in which the three boxes lit up
varied, and each box lit up once in the sequence (i.e. “left
box–right box–middle box). Event A required a three keypress response using the index, middle and ring fingers of
the right hand. Finger mappings for this response were
always spatially compatible where the first box
corresponded to the index finger, the middle box
corresponded to the middle finger, and the last box
corresponded to the ring finger. Participants planned and
maintained an action for Event A in the reverse order in
which the Event A stimuli appeared. For example, if the
light stimulus appeared first in the right box, then in the
middle box, followed by the left box, then the participant
planned to press the key corresponding to the left box first
(index finger), then the middle box (middle finger),
followed by the right box (ring finger).1
Event B was a left arrowhead (<), a circle (O), or a right
arrowhead (>) centered one half centimeter below the
fixation cross. Each symbol measured two centimeters in
height. Event B required a speeded double key-press
response with the index, middle, or ring finger of the right
hand, dependent on the particular symbol presented.
Participants responded with a double key-press with the
index finger to the right arrowhead, a double key-press with
the middle finger to the circle, and a double key-press with
the ring finger to the left arrowhead. These finger mappings
were consistent across all participants.

Procedure
All stimuli appeared on a black background. The sequence
of events for each trial is presented in Figure 1. A white
fixation cross occurred in the center of the screen and
remained throughout the trials. When initiating a trial by
pressing the space bar, the fixation cross appeared for
1000ms followed by a horizontal array of three boxes above
the fixation cross (Frame A0). After this, Event A (Frames
A1, A2, and A3) appeared for 1200ms above the fixation
cross, followed by the fixation cross alone for 1500ms.
During this inter-stimulus interval, participants were
instructed to plan their response (Action A) to the lighted
box sequence (Event A). Event B then appeared for 50ms
below the fixation cross followed by a blank screen which
appeared until a response to Event B (Action B) was
detected, or for 1300ms in the absence of a response.
1 The box sequence was chosen as a stimulus after many pilot
studies were run that included stimuli with response associations
that proved to be too complex for participants to learn. These
included, but are not limited to, colored shapes and number
sequences. It would be possible to train participants to provide
sufficient practice for them to lean more difficult tasks; however it
was important to the study that responses not be highly automatic.
Additionally, participants responded to the reverse box order in
attempt to make sure participants’ working memory was being
sufficiently engaged by the task, as pilot studies indicated that
responding to the same order was too easy of a task to elicit
significant interference effects.

Figure 1: The sequence of events for each trial.
Following Action B, a blank screen appeared until Action A
was executed, or up to 3000ms. Participants were instructed
to respond to Event B (Action B) as quickly and accurately
as possible. They were instructed to then execute their
response to Event A (Action A) maintained in memory as
accurately as possible. Following the execution of Action A,
reaction time (RT) and accuracy feedback for Action B was
presented (600ms), followed by accuracy feedback for
Action A (600ms). The initiation screen, with the
instructions “Press Space Bar to continue,” then appeared
until the next trial was initiated. The next trial began when
participants pressed the space bar on the keyboard with their
right thumb.
Both RT and accuracy for Action B were measured.
Action B RT was measured from the onset of Event B until
the first key press response was detected. Only accuracy
was measured for Action A. Participants were instructed to
not execute Action A until after executing Action B.
Participants were also instructed not to use any finger
movements or other external cues to help them remember
Action A, but instead to hold this action plan in memory.
Those who used body movements or other external cues
(identified via post-task questionnaire) were eliminated
from data analyses (eight participants), as they did not
follow instructions. Additionally, any participants with an
overall task accuracy below 80% were excluded
(two participants). Data were analyzed for the remaining
thirty-four participants.
Feature overlap between Action B and Action A was
manipulated within participants. Action B, executed with
the index, middle, or ring finger overlapped with the first,
second, or third response feature of Action A. All possible

1363

stimuli for Action A and Action B were equally paired
together, and feature overlap (first, second, or third feature)
occurred with equal probability in a random order in each
block of trials. Participants completed 24 practice trials
followed by ten blocks of 24 experimental trials.

Results
A 3 X 3 repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with the within-subjects factors of feature overlap (first,
second, or third) and finger (index, middle, or ring) was
conducted separately on the correct RTs for Action B,
percentage of errors for Action B, and the percentage of
errors for Action A. Analysis of mean RTs for Action B was
restricted to trials in which Action B and Action A were
both executed accurately. Analysis of Action B error rate
was restricted to trials in which Action A was executed
accurately. All comparisons between means were conducted
using Bonferroni Pairwise Comparisons (p<.05). Figure 2
shows the mean correct RTs and correct error rates for
Action B. As is evident in the figure, RTs based on feature
overlap varied, and this RT pattern differed depending on
which finger was used to respond.
Action B There was a significant main effect of feature
overlap [F(2,32)=8.51, p<.01, ηp2=.21], and of finger
[F(2,32)=42.65, p<.01, ηp2=.56], and a significant
interaction between these two factors [F(4,30)=8.63, p<.01,
ηp2=.21] for RT. For the middle finger, the pattern of
responses across feature overlap conditions (see Figure 2)
resembled a serial position curve, while the pattern for the
index and ring finger responses resembled a reverse serial
position curve. Pairwise comparisons conducted on the main
effect of finger showed that RT for the index and ring
fingers were overall slower compared to the middle finger
(ps<.01), while index and ring fingers did not differ from
one another (p=.56). Moreover, pairwise comparisons
conducted on the interaction showed the following. For the
middle finger, RTs were significantly slower when Action B
overlapped with Action A on the third feature (M=652ms)
compared to the second feature (M=624ms; p<.01), and RT
for the first feature overlap condition (M=640ms) was not
significantly different than the second or third feature
overlap conditions (p=.09, p=.19 respectively). For the
index finger, RTs were significantly slower when Action B
overlapped with Action A on the second feature (M=718ms)
compared to the first feature (M=685ms; p<.01), and RTs
for third feature overlap condition (M=703ms) were not
significantly different than first (p=.17) or second (p=.13)
feature overlap conditions. For the ring finger, RTs were
significantly slower when Action B overlapped with Action
A on the second (M=726ms) and third feature (M=705ms)
compared to the first feature (M=686ms; p<.01; p=.05,
respectively), and RTs were not significantly different
between the second and third feature overlap conditions.
These results suggest that the amount of feature activation
within the planned action sequence was not equal across the
first, second, and third feature overlap conditions. Also, the

Figure 2: Feature Overlap. Action B correct reaction times
(RTs) and percent error rates for each Action B finger
response (index, middle, and ring) when Action B
overlapped with Action A on the first, second, or third
feature.
finger used to respond to Action B influenced the speed of
Action B responses and the pattern of Action B responses
found across feature overlap conditions.
Mean error rate was small, only 1%. There was a
significant effect of finger [F(2,32)=6.31, p<.05, ηp2=.16]
for error rate. However, the main effect of feature overlap
(F<1) and the interaction between feature overlap and finger
(F<1) were not significant. Pairwise comparisons conducted
on the main effect of finger showed that error rate for the
middle finger was significantly smaller than that for the
index finger (p=.04) and the ring finger (p=.01). These
results suggest that the Action B RT interpretations above
are not due to a speed-accuracy tradeoff.
Action A Mean error rate was 12%. There was a significant
main effect of feature overlap [F(2,32)=5.72, p<.01,
ηp2=.15] and a significant interaction between feature
overlap and finger [F(4,30)=2.52, p=.05, ηp2=.07] for error
rate. There was no main effect of finger [F(2,32)=0.20,
p=.82, ηp2=.006] on error rate. Pairwise comparisons
conducted on the interaction showed the following. For the
ring finger, error rates were significantly greater when
Action B overlapped with Action A on the first feature
(M=13%) and second feature (M=17%) compared to the
third feature (M=9%; p=.05; p<.01, respectively). For the
index finger, error rates did not significantly differ across
the first (M=12%), second (M=15%), or third (M=10%)

1364

feature overlap conditions (ps>.08). For the middle finger,
error rates also did not significantly differ across the first
(M=13%), second (M=11%), or third (M=12%) feature
overlap conditions, (all ps=1.0). The error rate in recalling
Action A across the feature overlap conditions resembles a
serial position curve for the middle finger and a reverse
serial position curve for the index and ring fingers –
although this pattern was not significant. This error rate
pattern was similar to the pattern of RTs found for Action B.
This suggests that both responding to Action B and recalling
Action A were similarly affected by feature overlap.

Discussion
In summary, results revealed differences in Action B
performance when Action B overlapped with Action A on
the first, second, or third feature in the Action A sequence.
Also, the differences in Action B performance across the
action overlap conditions varied depending on the finger
involved in executing Action B. The results suggest that
features of the action sequence maintained in WM have
different levels of activation. However, the predicted
gradient of activation was not found. Instead the pattern of
activation resembled a serial position curve for actions
executed with the middle finger, and a reverse serial
position curve for actions executed with either the index
finger or ring finger. Importantly, variable activation across
action features within an action plan is not consistent with
serial memory models that assume equal activation of
features within an action plan (Crump & Logan, 2010;
Hartley & Houghton, 1996; Lashley, 1951; Rosenbaum,
Inhoff, & Gordon, 1984), or those models that assume
features are activated in a gradient (Averbeck, Chafee,
Crowe, & Georgopoulos, 2002; Page & Norris, 1998; Dell,
Burger, & Svec, 1997; Rhodes et al., 2004).
The current findings are consistent with Fournier et al.
(2014) in that they also showed unequal activation between
conditions of feature overlap on the first feature and second
feature. More specifically, they found higher activation of
the first feature of an action plan than the second, which is
consistent with the results of the middle finger in the present
study. However, the pattern for the index and ring fingers
showed the opposite pattern. It is unclear, given the design
of their study, if the response pattern they got would have
represented a serial position curve if they had included a
third feature overlap condition in their study.
There were some differences in design between the
current study and Fournier et al. (2014) that may account for
the different feature activation patterns. In their study, the
design used a more fluid joystick response to execute the
action being maintained in working memory, compared to
the more distinct key-press movements of this study. For
example, actions requiring a left and upward response were
carried out by moving a joystick with the right hand to the
left and then upward. In the current study, fingers were
mapped to particular keys, and required three very distinct
key-presses using different digits on the right hand. It is
possible that fluid movements within an action plan are

represented differently than discrete movements within an
action plan. For example, action features representing fluid
movements may be more strongly associated within a single
action plan (e.g., Fournier & Gallimore, 2013). Also, in the
Fournier et al. study, participants were taught to associate
certain stimuli with directional movements (e.g. left-up),
and those directional movements were spatially congruent
with the physical movement they executed with the joystick.
This was also true in the current study, however, most
participants (87%) subjectively reported (via questionnaire)
representing the sequence of finger movements in memory
as numbers (index as 1, middle as 2, ring as 3). It is possible
that differences in how the action plan is represented could
have contributed to differences in response patterns.
The different Action B response patterns found across
feature overlap conditions dependent on response finger
may be simply due to the faster Action B responses for the
middle finger versus the index and ring fingers. This
response speed difference may be attributed to differences
in discriminability among the stimuli mapped to the middle
versus the index and ring fingers. It may also be due to the
differences in the speed at which one can execute a motor
response with the middle finger versus the index and ring
fingers. Why the different response patterns occurred across
feature overlap conditions based on the overall speed of the
Action B response is an interesting question for future
research. In a follow-up experiment (not reported here),
Action B was reduced to two responses (index and ring
finger based on direction of arrowheads), and the same
feature overlap patterns for the index and middle fingers
were found. Other follow-up experiments investigating the
different feature overlap patterns across fingers (i.e.,
whether due to the actual finger or the spatial representation
of finger response) are in progress.
One important limitation of the current study is that we
could not be certain that participants represented the Action
A sequence (the reverse box order of Event A) in WM or
the Event A sequence (the forward box order of Event A) in
WM prior to executing Action B. This is currently being
addressed in follow-up experiments via post-task survey.
Also, we do not know if the activation patterns found in this
study are limited to the stimulus and responses used in this
study or whether they will generalize to other types of
stimuli and responses.
The serial-position curve pattern of activation found
across the different feature overlap conditions for middle
finger responses is similar to that found in a comparable
study by Mushiake, Saito, Sakamoto, Itoyama, & Tanji
(2006), though the patterns found across the index and ring
fingers both show the opposite pattern. Importantly, the
features within the action plan maintained in WM showed
variable activation, indicating that these action features
maintained in WM were not equally activated.
In summary, this study shows variable patterns of
activation across multiple features within an action plan
maintained in working memory. This study also provides
additional evidence that serial order is represented prior to

1365

response execution in that the different patterns of activation
across features were not equal. This contradicts both serial
order models that predict equal activation across all features,
and those that predict a gradient of activation across
features. Specific patterns of feature activation might be
dictated by task goals, the response requirement of the task,
or how one is representing the task goals themselves.

References
Averbeck, B. B., Chafee, M. V., Crowe, D. A., &
Georgopoulos, A. P. (2002). Parallel processing of serial
movements in prefrontal cortex. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 99(20), 13172-13177.
Crump, M. J., & Logan, G. D. (2010). Hierarchical control
and skilled typing: Evidence for word-level control over
the execution of individual keystrokes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 36(6), 1369-1380.
Dell, G. S., Burger, L. K., & Svec, W. R. (1997). Language
production and serial order: A functional analysis and a
model. Psychological Review, 104(1), 123-147.
Duncan, J., & Humpheys, G. W. (1989). Visual search and
stimulus similarity. Psychological Review, 96(3), 433458.
Fournier, L. R., & Gallimore, J. M (2013). What makes an
event:
Temporal
integration
of
stimuli
or
actions? Attention, Perception and Psychophysic, 75(6),
1293-1305.
Fournier, L. R., Gallimore, J. M., Feiszli, K. R., & Logan,
G. D. (2014). On the importance of being first: Serial
order effects in the interaction between action plans and
ongoing actions. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(1),
163-169.
Hartley, T., & Houghton, G. (1996). A linguistically
constrained model of short-term memory for nonwords.
Journal of Memory and Language, 35(1), 1-31.
Hommel, B. (2004). Event files: Feature binding in and
across perception and action. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(11), 494-500.
Hommel, B. (2005). How much attention does an event file
need? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 31(5), 1067-1082.
Keele, S. W. (1968). Movement control in skilled motor
performance. Psychological Bulletin, 70(6p1), 387-403.
Lashley, K. (1951). The problem of serial order in behavior.
In L.A. Jeffress (ed.), Cerebral mechanisms in behavior.
Ney York: Wiley.
Logan, G. D. (2004). Working memory, task switching, and
executive control in the task span procedure. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133(2), 218-236.
Logan, G. D., Miller, A. E., & Strayer, D. L. (2011).
Electrophysiological evidence for parallel response
selection in skilled typists. Psychological Science, 22(1),
54-56.
Mattson, P. S., & Fournier, L. R. (2008). An action
sequence held in memory can interfere with response
selection of a target stimulus, but does not interfere with

response activation of noise stimuli. Memory &
Cognition, 36(7), 1236-1247.
Mushiake, H., Saito, N., Sakamoto, K., Itoyama, Y., &
Tanji, J. (2006). Activity in the lateral prefrontal cortex
reflects multiple steps of future events in action plans.
Neuron, 50, 631-641.
Page, M., & Norris, D. (1998). The primacy model: a new
model of immediate serial recall. Psychological Review,
105(4), 761-781.
Rhodes, B. J., Bullock, D., Verwey, W. B., Averbeck, B. B.,
& Page, M. (2004). Learning and production of
movement sequences: Behavioral, neurophysiological,
and modeling perspectives. Human Movement Science,
23(5), 699-746.
Rosenbaum, D. A., Inhoff, A. W., & Gordon, A. M. (1984).
Choosing between movement sequences: A hierarchical
editor model. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 113(3), 372-393.
Schneider, D. W., & Logan, G. D. (2006). Hierarchical
control of cognitive processes: Switching tasks in
sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
135(4), 623-640.
Stoet, G., & Hommel, B. (1999). Action planning and the
temporal binding of response codes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 25(6), 1625-1640.
Wiediger, M. D., & Fournier, L. R. (2008). An action
sequence withheld in memory can delay execution of
visually guided actions: The generalization of response
compatibility interference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 34(5),
1136-1149.

1366

