Gender Differences in the Effect of Impatience on Men and Women’s
Timing Decisions
Moojan Ghafurian and David Reitter
moojan@psu.edu
reitter@psu.edu
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, 16802, USA
Abstract

is that risk-taking increases in the face of gains compared to
potential losses (Daniel Kahneman, 1979). This is true more
so for men than for women in surveys and in abstract gambles (Schubert, Brown, Gysler, & Brachinger, 1999): here,
women are comparatively more risk-taking towards losses.
An explanation for the differences, if they exist, may be
that women are more sensitive to punishment (Cross, Copping, & Campbell, 2011). However, Schubert et al. (1999)
specifically showed that in financial decisions, the relative
risk propensity of men and women is strongly affected by
the decision frame. For practical contexts, however, men and
women were not reliably different in terms of their propensity
to take risks with gains vs. losses. Thus, gender differences
are not uncontroversial in discrete decision-making, and warrant careful analysis in other types of decisions, too.

Decisions over the timing of actions are critical in several
safety, security and healthcare scenarios. These decisions, similar to discrete decisions, can be influenced by biases and individual traits. In this paper, a bias of impatience is studied
in an experiment with 626 participants, with a focus on gender differences. Impatience was moderated with a manipulation of a variable-speed countdown. Men and women differed
in how they expressed impatience. While men systematically
and irrationally act earlier when become impatient following
the slower countdowns, women react by irrationally requesting earlier information about the outcome of each trial, and
impulsively pressing an inactive key.
Keywords: Impatience; gender differences; decision-making;
timing decisions; women; men

Introduction
When people make decisions, their choices are gravely affected by systematic biases and individual preferences. This
set of well-known phenomena has been extensively studied
for the case of choices between discrete alternatives (e.g.,
Tversky & Kahneman, 1974; Gigerenzer, 1996; Wittmann &
Paulus, 2008 ;Croskerry, 2002). However, we know much
less about the case of decisions over a time continuum, that
is, when rather than how to act. Timing decisions, which are
decisions about when to take an action, as opposed to what
to do, are critical in several security, safety, and healthcare
scenarios, where acting early and late can both lead to dramatic losses (e.g. when to undergo medical screening, when
to change car tires, or when to check smoke detectors in a big
company).
In this paper, we study a bias we found on timing decisions: impatience. We specifically examine the hypothesis
that men and women react differently to induced impatience.
Understanding gender differences, we believe, is essential to
accurately modeling the effects of biases and individual differences in timing decision-making.
The existence of gender differences in timing decisions is
to be expected, if discrete decision-making serves as a comparison. Risk-taking behavior of men and women has been
investigated especially in the context of financial decision
making. Powell and Ansic (1997) proposed that women are
generally less risk-seeking compared to men, regardless of
the costs, ambiguity of the situation, task familiarity, and
framing. They also showed that men and women use different strategies in financial decisions, even if this difference
did not reliably affect the final outcome.
The relative risk propensity of men and women is strongly
affected by framing. For the general case, the classical result

Gender differences do affect how individuals value future
rewards in relation to the time gap between the discrete decision made now and the reward obtained later. Dittrich and
Leipold (2014) asked participants to choose between two options: receiving $100 in one month, or receiving $100+N in
13 months. Women accept delayed gratification considerably
more than men. Based on these results, they concluded that
women tend to be more patient compared to men (Dittrich
& Leipold, 2014). We consider this to be a result of differences in temporal discount rate. Although impatience can
be a factor affecting temporal discounting, we believe that it
has a broader definition, which is different from the discount
rate. We hypothesize that it can be reflected differently by
individuals, and by people of different genders. For lack of
a better operationalization, we refer to The Oxford English
Dictionary, which defines impatience as “the feeling of being
annoyed or irritated by somebody/something, especially because you have to wait for a long time”, and “the desire to
do something soon or for something to happen soon”. This
latter definition is the operational one for the present study,
and we refer to the earlier definition by checking participants’
overall satisfaction in our experiments. We investigate gender
differences in the reactions to an impatience-inducing manipulation, which may prompt individuals to act earlier than they
would otherwise, or to make costly choices that allow them to
obtain information earlier than they would otherwise. These
biases apply even when associated with a lower expected reward.
We will present two experiments, in which people decide
on timing of actions. In experiment 1, we moderate impatience and study the effect on different genders. In experi-

1223

ment 2, which involves a more straightforward task, we further study differences in how men and women reflect impatience.

Experiment 1
We use experimental games to study participants’ choice of
timing in situations that are similar to real-world. In the first
experiment, we use a game, which is inspired by the FlipIt
game of “stealth takeover” (Van Dijk, Juels, Oprea, & Rivest,
2013). In our game, participants are required to find a strategy to search for an unknown action made by an opponent.
Each round lasts 30 seconds. Each attempt to catch the opponent, and each second of latency in catching her/him have
costs. In each round of the game, participants first decide
on the timings of checking on the opponent. After setting the
timings of checks, participants choose between the two possible ways to start the game: the first choice is to start the game
normally. By choosing it, participants get visual updates on
whether the opponent has played or not when they reach one
of their checks. That is to say, if a participant sets two checks
at t1 and t2 , and the opponent plays at tO (t1 < tO < t2 ), and
he/she starts the game normally, then at t1 he/she will realize that the opponent has not played yet, and at t2 he/she will
be updated that the opponent has played at tO and he/she has
caught it at t2 (see Figure 1). The second option is to start it
live. The live option, which costs the equivalent of two additional checks (200 points), lets participants see when the opponent plays instantly. That is to say, in the aforementioned
example, participants see the opponent’s action as soon as it
plays at tO , however, they still need to wait until t2 to be able
to catch it (see Figure 1). We hypothesize that impatience can
lead to a tendency to receive information faster, and we use
the live option to study our hypothesis. We consider the live
option as an irrational way of starting the game, since participants need to pay to choose it. However, this choice would
have no benefits for them: it neither affects the duration of
the game, nor their outcome, since even though they see the
opponent’s action, they would still need to wait for their next
check to catch it.
The experiment has four conditions. In all the conditions
except for the control condition, we introduce a 15-second
countdown (and a sensible explanation “Saving Checks”) between choosing to start the round and actually watching the
round. We hypothesize that waiting before watching the
round increase participants’ impatience. We also hypothesize
that it is possible to moderate impatience by showing different speeds of countdown, and test it in different conditions of
the experiment. Thus, the conditions of the experiment are as
follows:
• NoWait (control): Participants experience no waiting and
the game starts right away.
• 5CD: Participants experience a 15-second wait between
starting and watching the game, which is accompanied by
countdowns from 5 to 1 (each count lasts 3 seconds).

Figure 1: Feedback during a round, which is started normally.
The game is current and at point B. Since the latest check time
of the participant is set to be at point A, no information after
point A is revealed. The dots on the bar represent check times
that are set by the participant.

Figure 2: Feedback during a round, which is started live. The
game is current and at point C. The latest check time of the
participant is set to be at point A, and we can see that the opponent has played at point B. However, the participant needs
to wait until the next set check (shown with dots on the game
bar) to catch the opponent.
• 10CD: Participants experience a 15-second wait between
starting and watching the game, which is accompanied by
countdowns from 10 to 1 (each count lasts 1.5 seconds).
• 15CD: Participants experience a 15-second wait between
starting and watching the game, which is accompanied by
countdowns from 15 to 1 (each count lasts 1 second).
After participants are randomly assigned to the experimental conditions, they first complete a survey with four demographic questions, three basic integrity questions, seven risk
propensity assessing questions (Meertens & Lion, 2008), and
five need for cognition (NFC) assessing questions (Wood &
Swait, 2002). Afterwards, they see the game instructions and
start the game.
Since we want to make sure that the participants are paying attention to the game, we prevent them from switching
to other windows on the screen, and monitor their attention
by asking to press a specific key immediately after the unpredictable end of the game.

Cover Story
We add a cover story to the game and call it the Cookie Monster Game to make it easier to understand for the participants
on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants are told that they
have invited the Cookie Monster (the opponent) over for dinner. While they are cooking for their guest in the kitchen, the
Cookie Monster is waiting in the living room with a big box
of cookies. Participants are told that the Cookie Monster will
definitely start eating the cookies, and with a constant pace,
but no one knows when. They need to find a strategy (set
different alarm times) to check on him. Whenever they catch
the Cookie Monster, the game ends. However, if they check
on the Cookie Monster before he has started eating the cookies, they need to give him some cookies to apologize for not

1224

600

Delta t for Women

Delta t for Men

600

400

200

400

200

0

0
NoWait

5CD

10CD

15CD

NoWait

Countdown Condition

5CD

10CD

15CD

Countdown Condition

Figure 3: Average time between check times for men in
each condition. Lower values reflect earlier (more frequent)
checks. Men who see the slower countdown check more frequently.

Figure 4: Average time between check times for women in
each condition. Lower values reflect earlier (more frequent)
checks. Speed of countdown does not significantly affect the
frequency of women’s checks

trusting him. The number of remaining cookies will translate
to the bonus money that they will receive at the end of the
experiment.

Table 1: Regression model predicting ∆t for different genders. Count duration and round num are centered. The model
was not sensitive to age as a predictor.

Method
Covariate
genderF
genderM
round num
need for cognition
genderF:count duration
genderM: count duration

503 volunteers (211 female and 292 male, age mean 33.9y,
range: 18-77) on Amazon Mechanical Turk participated and
passed the attention tests. Each participant played 6 rounds
of the game. The results of the first round is not included in
the analysis: it was labeled “practice round”, and the participants first experienced countdowns and learned about the live
option in this round.

Results
We calculate an average time difference between the checks,
per participant, and per round. We call it ∆t. ∆t represents
the average time that participants decide to wait between their
checks, which reflects how frequently they check. We believe
that a change of ∆t in different conditions can reflect a change
in the level of participants’ impatience. ∆t is calculated for
all participants in all experimental conditions, and based on
genders. The results for men and women are visualized in
Figures 3 and 4.
In a linear mixed-effect model (see Table 1), we investigate the effect of our manipulation on participants’ ∆t, which
we interpret as impatience. The model predicts men’s and
women’s ∆t based on round number, need for cognition, and
the duration of each count in the countdown (1 for 15CD,
1.5 for 10CD, and 3 for 5CD). Round number reflects partic-

Estimate
5.810
6.257
0.242
0.016
-0.271
-1.011

SE
0.361
0.293
0.102
0.020
0.538
0.488

t
16.114
21.379
2.368
0.767
-0.504
-2.071

Pr ( > |t|)
< 0.0001
< 0.0001
< 0.05
0.444
0.615
< .05

ipants’ proficiency in the game. NFC, which is the tendency
to engage in thinking (Olson, Camp, & Fuller, 1984) reflects
how much individuals enjoy and are desired to think. We
use it in our model as we hypothesize that NFC affects participants’ strategy. A random intercept varying by subject is
fitted to account for the individual differences.
Men’s ∆t is significantly affected by the speed of countdown (se = 0.488, t = −2.071, p < .05). Men seeing the
faster countdowns play less frequently than the ones seeing
the slower countdowns. Women’s ∆t, however, is not affected
by the countdown manipulation (se = 0.538, t = −0.504,
p = 0.615).
In another model we investigate the effect of our manipulation on the choice of live. The model uses NFC, count
duration, and round number to predict choice of live. A random intercept varying by subject is fitted to account for the

1225

Table 2: Regression model predicting choice of live. Count
duration and round num are centered.
Covariate
genderF
genderM
NFC
genderF:count duration
genderM:count duration

Estimate
1.135
1.133
-0.0002
0.112
0.002

SE
0.059
0.060
0.002
0.048
0.044

t
19.149
19.020
-0.122
2.319
0.040

Table 3: Predicting positive comments based on the game
condition.

Pr ( > |t|)
< .0001
< .001
0.903
< .05
0.968

Covariate
genderF
genderM
need for cognition
genderF:log(countDuration)
genderM:log(countDuration)

Estimate
-1.461
-1.039
0.054
0.027
-1.096

SE
0.312
0.235
0.019
0.458
0.439

z
-4.683
-4.428
2.793
0.059
-2.496

Pr ( > |z|)
< .0001
< .0001
< .01
0.953
0.013

number of women’s positive comments is not affected by the
speed of countdown (se = 0.458, z = 0.059, p = 0.953).
0.20

Proportion of Live choices

Experiment 2
0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
NoWait

5CD

10CD

15CD

Countdown Condition

Figure 5: Proportion of live choices for women in each condition
individual differences (see Table 2). Women’s choice of live
is reliably affected by the speed of countdown (se = .048,
t = 2.319, p < .05). Women seeing the slower countdown
pay to choose live reliably more (see Figure 5). Men’s choice
of live, however, is not affected by the speed of count down
(se = .044,t = .040, p = .968).
We report no correlation between ∆t and the measured risk
propensity.
Overal satisfaction: At the end of the game, participants
had a chance to leave us comments. Since it was not mandatory, many participants left without leaving any comments 1 .
Positive comments were predicted based on NFC and count
duration (see Table 3). The number of men’s positive comments is significantly affected by the speed of countdown.
Men seeing faster counts leave reliably more positive comments (se = 0.439, z = −2.496, p = 0.013). However, the
1 Some examples of the positive comments are: ”Great taks”,
”Thanks. It was very fun & unique.”, ”Wow!!! I loved this game.
Please send me another one like this in the future. Thanks”. Negative comments pertained to technical issues; they were very low in
number.

In order to test more explicitly for impatience, we consider
data from a simpler game. In this section, we provide analysis of data reported previously (Ghafurian & Reitter, 2014,
Exp.2). 123 participants recruited on MTurk took part for
compensation that included an incentive-compatible bonus.
The game is similar, but much less complicated than the game
in Experiment 1. In this game, the opponent played exactly
once during the game, and the participants were asked to either check (play) before the opponents move (early condition), or after it (late condition). Participants were given only
one chance to check, and based on the experimental condition, the best strategy was to either play early (at the beginning of the game), or late (at the very end). This experiment
allows us to study impatience in a situation where decisionmaking is dynamic and the rational choice is clear, as opposed
to the first experiment, where checks were pre-defined and the
rational choice was not clear.
Participants in both early and late conditions were also assigned to either of two different trial durations (5 and 15 seconds). To make sure that participants are not motivated to
play early (to finish the experiment faster), the game did not
end after they made their single check, and continued for the
full period of the round. In Ghafurian and Reitter (2014), we
discussed how impatience affected the participants’ actions.
Participants performed reliably better in the early condition,
and showed a consistent preference to play early.
With a view of gender differences, we measured the check
times as well as how many times participants pressed check
impulsively, despite the fact that they only had one chance
(this was made clear to them). A check was considered impulsive when the space key was pressed repeatedly, even though
though the button was deactivated and hidden after the first
time. The number of times the space bar was pressed (or the
area on the screen was clicked) was counted.
We will analyze the timing of each check, as well as the
number of impulsive attempts for checking.

Cover Story
To make it easier to understand for the participants on Amazon Mechanical Turk, we add the Cookie Monster Game

1226

cover story to this experiment as well. However, in this game,
the story is different. The abstract version of the cover story
for early and late conditions are as follows:
Late condition: Imagine you are the Cookie Monster and
your neighbor has promised to bring you some cookies. However, she has not told you when. You have only one chance to
check very quickly. Your job is to figure out when to check.
You know that your neighbor will definitely put the cookies
outside for you, but you do not know when. If you check and
they are still not there, you have lost your chance. Your job is
to decide when to open the door.
Early condition: The cover story in the early condition
is very similar to the late condition. In this condition, the
cookies are definitely left for them in the beginning of the
game, however, the neighbor might take them at some point.
Number of cookies will translate to a bonus money in both
conditions, and in this experiment, the participants either get
all the bonus in each round, or none of it.

Method
123 volunteers (43 female, 79 male, 1 unknown; mean age
31y, from 18 to 67) recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk
and each played 10 rounds of the game. Participants were
randomly assigned to game lengths of 5 or 15 seconds, and to
one of the early or late conditions.

Table 4: Regression model predicting Num p in the long (15second) game. NFC is centered. Condition by itself (shown in
the last two rows of the table) is not meaningful in predicting
numbers pressed, since in the early condition, more time is
available to press the key after the first check.
Covariate
Intercept
NFC
genderM
genderF:condLate
genderM:condLate

Estimate
2.631
-0.044
-0.794
-1.571
-0.520

SE
0.297
0.019
0.385
0.392
0.328

z
8.856
-2.284
-2.063
-4.007
-1.588

Pr ( > |z|)
P < .0001
p < .05
< .05
p < .0001
0.112

In all participants, a higher need-for-cognition trait was reliably associated with a decreased number of repeated button
presses (se = 0.019, z = −2.284, p < .05).
We report no correlation between either ∆t, or Num p and
the measured risk propensity.

Discussion

Results
In this experiment, we define ∆t as the time delay between
the start of the game and participant’s check in the early condition, and the time delay between participant’s check and the
end of the game in the late condition. We also calculate the
number of times participants press “check” impulsively, and
call it Num p . We label the 5-second and 15-second games
short and long respectively.
We hypothesize that behavior of both men and women are
influenced by impatience, but they might reflect it differently.
Using linear-mixed effect and models, we investigate ∆t and
Num p in early and late conditions, and in the short and long
duration games. Random intercept varying by subject is fit in
all the models.
Women’s ∆t is generally affected by the experimental condition. Women in the late condition have a reliably higher ∆t,
which shows that they fail to wait until the end of the game
to make their checks (short game: se = 0.589, t = 2.168,
p < .05 ;long game: se = 0.486, t = 2.197, p < .05). No
reliable values for men could be obtained from the data (short
game:p = 0.318, long game: p = 0.138)
In the shorter game, we did not get any reliable effect for
Num p . This is sensible as 5-seconds is too short for pressing
a key several times. In the longer game and in the early condition, where people should wait longer for the game to end
after they make their check, we see a significant difference between Num p of men and women (see Table 4): men’s Num p
is significantly less than women’s: women impulsively press
the key reliably more than men ( se = 0.384, z = −2.053,
p < .05 ).

In the first experiment, we effectively moderated impatience,
using faster countdowns during a 15-second waiting time.
This manipulation reliably affected the quality of timing decisions of men and women. We observed differences in how
impatience is reflected in behavior by each gender. Impatient men checked more frequently. Impatient women paid to
activate a valueless option. Further, men were less satisfied
with the game when impatient; men seeing slower counts left
fewer positive comments at the end. Women, on the other
hand, did not react in this way to the manipulation.
The second experiment, which is a more fine-grained analysis of existing data, showed that women reflect impatience
by making their check early in the late condition. Which
means that women fail to wait until the end of the game
in the late condition, doing which guarantees receiving a
bonus. Further, in shorter games and in the early condition,
women impulsively (“impulsive” is defined by Carver, 2005
as “at tendency to act spontaneously and without deliberation”) pressed a valueless key. We believe that this number
represents an impulsive action made because of impatience.2
A major difference between the first and the second experiment is the difficulty of finding the best strategy to play.
Although the rational solution of the second experiment is
immensely straightforward, the best strategy for the first experiment is difficult to find for a participant using deliberative
reasoning. The key to solving the game through reasoning is
understanding that the hazard rate increases after each unsuccessful check, because we obtain information that the oppo2 We do see a potential confound. If women were less attentive
to the technical description of the task, they might have mistakenly
believed that once they press the button, the game would end. If this
were true, we would see an effect among low numbers of checks,
because after the first few, it is evident that the trial does not end
when a check is made. The actual number of checks is relatively
high (mean: 10.55, range: [1,424]).

1227

References

nent has not played until now, and because we know that the
opponent will definitively play before the round ends.
The results from our experiments are likely compatible
with a model that has men perceiving this hazard rate differently. In other words, as men become impatient, the perceived hazard rate might increase (which would explain why
they play more frequently in Experiment 1). In contrast, we
would model a women’s reaction to impatience as an increase
in impulsive actions (which would explain why they choose
live more frequently in Experiment , press the inactive check
frequently in Experiment 2, and failed to wait until the end
of the game in experiment 2). Further research is required to
validate such models.
Finally, men’s impatience affected their overal satisfaction
of the game, and reflected their impatience by leaving less
positive comments. However, women’s overal satisfaction of
the game was not affected by the level of impatience.

Conclusion
In this paper, we compared men and women’s timing
decision-making using two games of timing. We found a
set of interesting and surprising differences in how genders
realize impatience in decision-making. The impatience effects were provoked using a visual countdown run at different
speeds in a between-subject design. This manipulation created different changes in behavior in men and women. Men
systematically changed the timing of their actions, even if this
timing reduced their task performance: the slower the countdown that preceded the round, the more did men advance the
timing of their actions. We could not detect such an effect for
women. On the other hand, women expended their incentive
payments on a costly (but valueless) option that allowed to
view the outcome of each trial earlier. This option, however,
neither affected the duration of the round, nor the outcome.
In a second, confirmatory experiment, we elicited impatience without a countdown manipulation, and found that,
again, men and women behaved differently. Women showed
systematically more impatience through their direct game behavior, which affected their outcome. They also showed impulsive actions that could not influence the payoff.
Understanding why people make irrational decisions requires better models of how individuals make those decisions.
Rather then reflecting a hypothetical average human being,
we strive for models that take individual differences into account. Gender is a simple and coarse distinguishing factor,
which, as it turns out, is highly relevant. Still, much is not yet
understood. However, the empirical comparison of strategies
and biases in timing decisions warrants further analysis, not
only in terms of the potential biological mechanisms, but also
regarding the cognitive architecture that gives rise to such behavioral effects.

Carver, C. S. (2005). Impulse and constraint: Perspectives
from personality psychology, convergence with theory in
other areas, and potential for integration. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 9(4), 312–333.
Croskerry, P. (2002). Achieving quality in clinical decision
making: cognitive strategies and detection of bias. Academic Emergency Medicine, 9(11), 1184–1204.
Cross, C. P., Copping, L. T., & Campbell, A. (2011). Sex
differences in impulsivity: a meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 137(1), 97.
Daniel Kahneman, A. T. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis
of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47(2), 263-291.
Dittrich, M., & Leipold, K. (2014). Gender differences in
time preferences. Economics Letters, 122(3), 413–415.
Ghafurian, M., & Reitter, D. (2014). Impatience, risk propensity and rationality in timing games. In Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(CogSci), Quebec City, Canada (p. 2841-2846).
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On narrow norms and vague heuristics: a reply to kahneman and tversky. Psychological Review, 103, 592–596.
Meertens, R. M., & Lion, R. (2008). Measuring an individual’s tendency to take risks: The risk propensity scale.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 38(6), 1506–1520.
Olson, K., Camp, C., & Fuller, D. (1984). Curiosity and need
for cognition. Psychological Reports, 54(1), 71–74.
Powell, M., & Ansic, D. (1997). Gender differences in risk
behaviour in financial decision-making: An experimental
analysis. Journal of Economic Psychology, 18(6), 605–
628.
Schubert, R., Brown, M., Gysler, M., & Brachinger, H. W.
(1999). Financial decision-making: are women really more
risk-averse? The American Economic Review, 89(2), 381–
385.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157), 1124–
1131.
Van Dijk, M., Juels, A., Oprea, A., & Rivest, R. L. (2013).
Flipit: The game of stealthy takeover. Journal of Cryptology, 26(4), 655–713.
Wittmann, M., & Paulus, M. P. (2008). Decision making,
impulsivity and time perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(1), 7–12.
Wood, S. L., & Swait, J. (2002). Psychological indicators
of innovation adoption: Cross-classification based on need
for cognition and need for change. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 12(1), 1–13.

Acknowledgements
We thank Jens Grossklags, Frank Ritter, Pezhouhan
Tavassoti-Kheiry, Bill McDowell, and Alexander G. Ororbia
for their comments.

1228

