Inductive Ethics: A Bottom-Up Taxonomy of the Moral Domain
Justin F. Landy (justinlandy@chicagobooth.edu)
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Daniel M. Bartels (bartels@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Abstract
Moral Foundations Theory (MFT) posits that people moralize
at least six distinct kinds of virtues. These virtues are divided
into “individualizing” and “binding” virtues. Despite
widespread enthusiasm for MFT, it is unknown how plausible
it is as a model of people’s conceptualizations of the moral
domain. In this research, we take a bottom-up approach to
characterizing people’s conceptualization of the moral
domain, and derive a taxonomy of morality that does not
resemble MFT. We find that this model more accurately
reflects people’s theories of morality than does MFT.
Keywords: morality; inductive
categorization; taxonomies

reasoning;

concepts;

Introduction
How do people conceptualize the structure of the moral
domain? Despite the recent explosion of research in the
cognitive science of morality, a satisfactory empirical
answer to this foundational question has not yet emerged.
An early attempt to understand conceptualizations of
morality focused on the distinction between acts that violate
moral principles, and acts that violate social conventions
(Turiel, 1983). “Domain Theory” (DT) posits that moral
violations concern “justice, rights, and welfare” (Turiel,
1983, p. 3), and that other prohibited actions, though
condemnable, only constitute violations of convention, and
could be permissible under alternative normative systems.
However, more recent evidence suggests that at least
some people treat some acts that cause no objective harm

and violate no rights as being truly morally wrong; people’s
moral domains are more complex than DT would suggest
(Haidt & Hersh, 2001; Haidt, Koller, & Dias, 1993; Landy,
2016; Royzman, Landy, & Goodwin, 2014). The most
prominent model of this complexity is Moral Foundations
Theory (MFT; Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009; Haidt &
Joseph, 2004). In brief, MFT posits that there are at least six
“moral foundations” – distinct, sometimes competing,
virtues that we are innately prepared to moralize. These six
virtues are divided into “individualizing” foundations that
are concerned with the rights and welfare of individuals –
harm prevention (“care”), fairness, and liberty – and
“binding” foundations that are concerned with preserving
the moral community – loyalty, respect for and obedience to
authority, and bodily and spiritual purity (“sanctity”). Figure
1 presents the taxonomic structure of MFT.
MFT was developed by joining insights from cultural
psychology and anthropology with evolutionary reasoning,
and it has not been tested as a model of people’s moral
concepts. Thus, despite the theory’s popularity, it remains
unknown whether it is a plausible model of people’s
cognitive representations of the moral domain. In this
research, we test the plausibility of MFT as such a model,
using methods from the study of inductive reasoning.
Specifically, we use people’s inductive judgments about
likely behaviors to derive a bottom-up model of people’s
taxonomy of the moral domain, and compare this with the
theoretical taxonomy proposed in MFT.

Figure 1: Moral Foundations Theory.

2303

Category-Based Induction and Moral Virtues
The study of category-based induction (Osherson, Smith,
Wilkie, López, & Shafir, 1990) is based on the premise that
concepts are represented taxonomically, and we accept this
as a working assumption here.1 On this assumption, the
strength of inductive inferences that a person makes from
one object to another is indicative of how closely related the
objects are in that person’s taxonomy. An example, adapted
from Osherson et al. (1990), illustrates this: consider the
premise “Robins use serotonin as a neurotransmitter.”
Among the (infinite) possible conclusions, “sparrows use
serotonin as a neurotransmitter” is typically considered
more likely to be true than “geese use serotonin as a
neurotransmitter.” This is because robins and sparrows are
closer to one another in people’s taxonomies of birds than
are robins and geese. More formally, there is greater
premise-conclusion similarity in the former case than in the
latter. Robins and sparrows might, for instance, both belong
to the superordinate category “songbirds”, whereas geese
would belong to a separate superordinate category.
We applied this same logic to taxonomies of moral
virtues, with the specific aim of testing the validity of MFT
as a model of these taxonomies. Consider the premise “Joe
commits a fairness violation.” If MFT’s taxonomy is a
reasonable model of people’s conceptualizations of the
moral domain, then the conclusion “Joe would also commit
a care violation” should be considered more likely to be true
than “Joe would also commit a loyalty violation.” Et cetera.
In Study 1, we had participants rate the likelihood that a
person would engage in a wide variety of actions that
exemplify the six moral foundations (conclusions), given
information about a previous behavior (premise). From
these likelihood ratings, we extracted a bottom-up taxonomy
of the moral domain. In Study 2, we used a similar task, but
also included ratings of the baseline likelihood of each
behavior (i.e., the likelihood of a conclusion in the absence
of any premise). The increases in inductive strength gained
from the inclusion of premises more closely resembled the
predictions of our taxonomy than MFT. Finally, in Study 3,
we presented participants with two premises, rather than
one. Participants’ likelihood judgments more closely
resembled the predictions of our taxonomy than MFT.

Stimulus Development
Stimuli in all three studies consisted of the long form of the
Moral Violations Database – Severity Equated (MVD-SE),
a subset of the Moral Violations Database (MVD), a set of
nearly 250 behavioral descriptions normed on several
criteria, including moral wrongness and representativeness
of each moral foundation. Most of the stimuli included in
1

There are, of course, numerous other models of how concepts
are represented (see Medin, Rips, & Smith, 2005, for a review).
We follow the majority of the research on category-based
induction, which we see our methodological approach as deriving
from, in focusing on taxonomic representations.

the MVD are original, or are modified forms of the Moral
Foundations Vignettes (Clifford, Iyengar, Cabeza, &
Sinnott-Armstrong, 2015). The development of the MVD
and MVD-SE is detailed elsewhere (Landy & Bartels,
2016), so we only briefly summarize it here.
The MVD-SE contains seven behaviors violating each
foundation, drawn from the larger MVD. These behavioral
descriptions passed a two-step validation process: one
sample rated how well each behavior exemplified each
moral foundation, then a second sample assigned each
behavior to the foundation that it best exemplified, in a
forced-choice task. Behaviors that were rated above the
scale midpoint for a foundation by the first sample, and
assigned to that foundation by a majority of the second,
were considered validated. From these validated stimuli,
seven were chosen to represent each foundation (e.g., a
person drives past a man on an empty road who is clearly
injured (care), hires their nephew instead of a more qualified
job applicant (fairness), forces their daughter to enroll as a
pre-med student in college (liberty), sends out an email
calling their boss an “idiot” (authority), makes critical
comments about their home country (loyalty), or looks at
pornography in which an adult model has been digitally
altered to look like she is 13 years old (sanctity)). These
stimuli uniquely exemplify the moral foundations, and
provide broad conceptual coverage of each one (e.g., the
liberty stimuli include both overbearing parents and
overreaching politicians). Moreover, the mean moral
wrongness ratings for the foundations are extremely closely
equated (5.20-5.26, on a 1-9 scale). The MVD-SE also
includes seven non-moral actions, which extensive
pretesting has found to be morally inert (e.g., “a person goes
parasailing”), and seven counter-normative behaviors that
do not exemplify any moral foundation (e.g., “while in a
rush, a person bumps into someone on the street, but does
not say ‘excuse me’”). These counter-normative actions
largely consist of violations of polite etiquette.

Study 1
Method
Participants (N = 367) were recruited online through
Amazon Mechanical Turk in exchange for monetary
compensation. The study was completed online.
Each participant made 64 likelihood judgments, one for
each possible premise/conclusion combination of the eight
conceptual
categories
in
the
MVD-SE
(e.g.,
authority/authority, authority/non-moral, etc.). Premises and
conclusions were randomly sampled from the MVD-SE for
each question, with the restriction that the premise and
conclusion could not be the same action. Questions took the
following form: “A person hires their nephew for a job,
instead of a more qualified applicant. Given this
information, how likely is it that, if they were driving along
an empty road and saw a man who was clearly injured, this
person would drive past the man and not stop to help him?”
(this is one of 7 premises x 7 conclusions = 49 possible

2304

Table 1: Mean conceptual relatedness scores.

Care
Fairness
Liberty
Authority
Loyalty
Sanctity
Non-Moral
Counter-Normative

Care
44%

Fairness
25%
49%

Liberty
22%
23%
45%

Authority
34%
34%
18%
52%

fairness/care questions). Likelihood ratings were made using
a sliding scale (0% = “There is no chance this person would
do this”; 100% = “This person would definitely do this”).

Results
For present purposes, we computed a measure of
conceptual relatedness between categories of actions by
multiplying likelihood estimates to and from pairs of
categories. For instance, if a participant rated the likelihood
of committing a fairness violation, knowing that a person
had committed a care violation, as 70%, and the likelihood
of committing a care violation, knowing that a person had
committed a fairness violation as 50%, that participant’s
fairness/care relatedness score would be 70% x 50% = 35%.
We submitted the mean relatedness scores (presented in
Table 1) to a hierarchical cluster analysis using between
groups linkage.2 In agreement with the pattern of means in
Table 1, violations of care, authority, fairness, and loyalty,
and counter-normative actions were close to one another in
Euclidean space and clustered together early in the analysis.
In contrast, violations of liberty and sanctity, and non-moral
actions were quite distant from all other categories. Figure 2
presents a dendrogram illustrating this analysis.
We confirmed this result by subtracting relatedness scores
from 100%, and submitting the resulting dissimilarity scores
to multi-dimensional scaling.3 We restricted our analysis to
a two-dimensional solution for ease of presentation, and
treated the dissimilarity scores as ordinal variables.4 As

Loyalty
29%
31%
17%
32%
45%

Sanctity
14%
11%
10%
15%
12%
36%

NonMoral
14%
18%
13%
16%
14%
8%
36%

Counternormative
30%
30%
18%
33%
22%
14%
16%
41%

shown in Figure 3, and consistent with the above analyses,
violations of care, authority, fairness, and loyalty, and
counter-normative actions are quite close to one another in
the resultant two-dimensional space, with liberty violations,
and especially sanctity violations and non-moral actions,
more distant. Model stress was .10, which is generally
considered acceptable (see, e.g., Kruskal, 1964a, 1964b;
Rosenberg, Nelson, & Vivekananthan, 1968).
These analyses converge on the conclusion that care,
fairness, authority, and loyalty violations, and counternormative actions, are quite closely related to one another in
people’s taxonomies of morality, while liberty and sanctity
violations and non-moral actions are less closely related. It
seems reasonable, therefore, to model the virtues of care,
fairness, authority, and loyalty, along with politeness, as
belonging to a single superordinate category. We
conceptualize this category as “obedience to rules”. We
think that this captures what sets these virtues apart from
liberty and sanctity – liberty has to do with not creating
rules that are burdensome or oppressive for others, and

2
The results are essentially identical when Ward’s method is
used instead. We present the results of the analysis using between
groups linkage because the resulting dendrogram makes the
relationships between categories easier to visualize.
3 Identical results are obtained if the dissimilarity scores are
calculated by subtracting relatedness scores from the maximum
observed relatedness (52%) than from the maximum possible
relatedness (100%). We therefore focus on the conceptually
simpler analysis.
4 The pattern of results is the same – indeed, it is somewhat
clearer – if the dissimilarity scores are treated as interval or ratio
variables, however, the model stress is unacceptably high under
these assumptions (.20 and .35, respectively).

2305

Figure 2: Dendrogram illustrating hierarchical cluster
analysis of relatedness scores. X-axis represents squared
Euclidean distances between agglomerated clusters.

the relative predictive validities of the two taxonomies.
Premises were randomly selected for each question. Rather
than randomly select the conclusion for each question,
however, each participant was randomly assigned one of
seven conclusions from each foundation, which appeared in
all likelihood judgments for that foundation. That is, each
participant saw the same conclusion from every foundation
seven times, so that their premised judgments were directly
comparable to their baseline likelihood judgments.
Likelihood ratings were made on the same sliding scale as
in Study 1.

Results

Figure 3: Two-dimensional solution derived from multidimensional scaling of relatedness scores.
sanctity violations tend to be so unusual that explicit rules
forbidding them (e.g., “Thou shalt not write erotic poetry
about thy cat”) are probably rarely articulated. Our bottomup taxonomy of the moral domain is presented in Figure 4.
Note that this taxonomy does not resemble MFT, and that
the individualizing-binding distinction did not emerge in our
analyses of people’s judgments.

Study 2
Method
Participants (N = 359) were recruited in the same manner as
in Study 1. Participants from Study 1 could not take part in
this study.
Each participant made 42 total likelihood judgments, one
for each possible premise/conclusion combination of the six
moral foundations, and six baseline likelihood judgments
with no premise. Politeness and non-moral characteristics
are not included in MFT’s taxonomy; therefore we did not
include the counter-normative and non-moral actions from
Study 1 in Studies 2 and 3, as they are not useful for testing

We created a measure of inductive strength gained from
knowledge of a premise by subtracting baseline likelihood
judgments from premised judgments (e.g., if a participant
rated the baseline likelihood of a person hiring their nephew
instead of a more qualified applicant at 30%, and the
likelihood of this, given that the person had driven past an
injured man on an empty road without stopping to help, at
65%, the gain in inductive strength would be 35%).
Both taxonomies classify 18 premise-conclusion pairs as
belonging to the same superordinate category (e.g.,
authority and care are both part of obedience to rules in our
taxonomy, and loyalty and sanctity are both binding virtues
in MFT), and 18 as belonging to different superordinate
categories (e.g., liberty and sanctity in both taxonomies).
Thus, we calculated the average inductive strength gained
from premises that belong to the same superordinate
category as the conclusion, versus premises that do not, in
each taxonomy. We expected a Premise x Taxonomy
interaction, such that more inductive strength would be
gained from within-category premises, versus betweencategory premises, according to our taxonomy, versus MFT.
Means and standard deviations are presented in Table 2.
Substantially more inductive strength was gained from
within-category premises than between-category premises in
both taxonomies (within-subjects ANOVA: F(1, 358) =
469.46, p < .001, η2p = .57), and there was no mean
difference in inductive strength gained across taxonomies
(F(1, 358) = .036, p = .850). However, as expected, the

Figure 4: A bottom-up taxonomy of the moral domain.

2306

Table 2: Mean gain in inductive strength from withincategory premises and between-category premises.

Within-Category
Between-Category

MFT
11.63 (12.07)
5.27 (11.29)

Bottom-Up
13.30 (13.65)
3.64 (11.51)

difference in strength gained from within-category and
between-category premises was significantly larger for our
taxonomy than for MFT, again suggesting that our
taxonomy is a better model of conceptualizations of
morality than MFT (interaction F(1, 358) = 21.92, p < .001,
η2p = .058).
We next examined cases in which the two taxonomies
make differing predictions regarding what premise should
be more informative about a given conclusion. For example,
in our taxonomy, fairness belongs to the same superordinate
category as authority, while sanctity does not; therefore, our
taxonomy predicts that the gain in inductive strength for
authority conclusions will be greater when participants are
given fairness premises than when they are given sanctity
premises. In MFT, the reverse is true; MFT therefore makes
exactly the opposite prediction. There are eight such
combinations, presented in Table 3. Paired- sample t-tests of
the gains in inductive strength generally agreed with the
predictions of our taxonomy – five of eight significantly
supported it, and none significantly supported MFT.
Finally, we constructed a matrix comparing the
categorizations in our taxonomy with those in MFT.
Premise-conclusion pairs which are in the same
superordinate category in our taxonomy but not in MFT
(e.g., care/authority) were coded as 1, pairs which are in the
same superordinate category in MFT but not in our
taxonomy (e.g., care/liberty) were coded as -1, and pairs that
both taxonomies categorize in the same way were coded as
0. We computed a correlation between this matrix of
categorizations and expressed gains in inductive strength for
each participant. A positive correlation indicates that a
participant’s judgments conform more to the predictions of
our derived taxonomy than to those of MFT, and a negative
correlation indicates the opposite.
Table 3: Within-Subjects t-tests of Study 2 Predictions.
Note: *p < .05; ***p < .001.

Two-hundred-twenty participants out of 358 (61%)5
expressed a positive correlation, which a binomial test
suggests is unlikely to be due to chance, p < .001.
Moreover, the median correlation, r = .042, is significantly
larger than 0, by a one-sample Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p
< .001. Finally, a one-sample t-test performed on the Fishertransformed correlations indicates that the mean, z = .047, is
significantly greater than zero, t(357) = 5.15, p < .001, d =
.27. Thus, participants’ judgments conformed more to the
predictions of the taxonomy derived in Study 1 than to the
predictions of MFT.
Thus, regardless of how they are analyzed, the gains in
inductive strength from learning about a prior behavior
consistently resembled the predictions of our taxonomy
more than those of MFT. This provides confirmatory
evidence that our derived framework better describes
people’s conceptualizations of morality than does MFT.

Study 3
Method
Participants (N = 363) were recruited in the same manner as
in the previous studies. Participants from Studies 1 and 2
could not take part in this study.
There are six combinations of two premises and a
conclusion in which the two taxonomies make differing
predictions about whether the conclusion belongs to the
same superordinate category as the premises (see Table 4).
Participants made 24 likelihood judgments of the same
form as in Studies 1 and 2, but with two premises instead of
one. The premise-conclusion combinations were randomly
selected, with the restriction that each participant received
four instances of each of the six combinations for which the
two taxonomies make differing predictions.

Results
As in Study 2, we created a matrix of categorizations
derived from the two taxonomies. Premise-conclusion
combinations that belong to the same superordinate
category in our taxonomy, but not MFT, were coded as 1,
whereas combinations that belong to the same superordinate
category in MFT, but not our taxonomy, were coded as -1.
Table 4: Study 3 Predictions.

Conclusion
Care
Care
Fairness
Fairness
Authority
Authority
Loyalty
Loyalty

Within-Category Premises
MFT
Bottom-Up
Liberty
Authority
Liberty
Loyalty
Liberty
Authority
Liberty
Loyalty
Sanctity
Care
Sanctity
Fairness
Sanctity
Care
Sanctity
Fairness

t(358)
3.99***
2.17*
4.18***
3.62***
4.90***
.40, ns
-.008, ns
-.88, ns

Premises
Care/Fairness
Care/Fairness
Care/Fairness
Authority/Loyalty
Authority/Loyalty
Authority/Loyalty

Conclusion
Liberty
Authority
Loyalty
Sanctity
Care
Fairness

Taxonomy Predicting
Same Category
MFT
Bottom-Up
Bottom-Up
MFT
Bottom-Up
Bottom-Up

5 One participant responded “50%” to every question,
expressing no variance in her judgments. Her data were excluded
from these analyses.

2307

We then computed within-subjects correlations between
these codes and participants’ likelihood judgments, as in
Study 2. A positive correlation indicates that a participant’s
judgments conform more to our predictions than to MFT,
while a negative correlation indicates the opposite. Three
hundred-forty-eight participants (96%) expressed a positive
correlation, while only 15 (4%) expressed a negative or zero
correlation, a result which is highly unlikely to be due to
chance, binomial test p < .001. Moreover, the median
correlation, r = .45, is significantly greater than zero, by a
one-sample Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p < .001. Finally, the
mean Fisher-transformed correlation, z = .48, is significantly
greater than zero, t(362) = 35.13, p < .001, d = 1.84. As in
Study 2, participants’ judgments conformed more to the
predictions of our derived taxonomy than to those of MFT.

General Discussion
Three studies converged on the conclusion that Moral
Foundations Theory (MFT) does not describe people’s
taxonomies of moral virtues well. In Study 1, we derived a
taxonomy of virtues, which does not resemble MFT. Study
2 examined the increases in inference strength that come
from knowledge of prior behavior, and found that the
strength of these gains aligned more closely with the
predictions of our taxonomy than those of MFT. Lastly,
Study 3 found that ratings of the likelihood of behaviors,
given information about two prior behaviors, conformed
more to the predictions of our taxonomy than MFT. It is
important to note, however, that our results speak only to the
plausibility of MFT as a model of people’s theories of
morality, and do not bear on its validity as an evolutionary
model of variation in moral virtues.
We do not claim that our derived taxonomy represents the
most comprehensive model possible of people’s theories of
morality. Indeed, because we used stimuli that were already
known to be uniquely good exemplars of the moral
foundations, we may have left out elements of the moral
domain that MFT overlooks. We think that a particularly
strong candidate for such an overlooked virtue is honesty,
which is sometimes considered part of the fairness
foundation, but seems intuitively to be valued even in the
absence of fairness concerns (see Landy & Uhlmann, 2016,
for a discussion of honesty in folk virtue ethics). Developing
a fully bottom-up model of the moral domain that does not
inherit the assumptions of any theory is a difficult task, but
such a model would be very informative and could help to
develop new theoretical advances. Therefore, we see the
development of a more comprehensive mapping of concepts
of morality as an important direction for future research.
In conclusion, MFT does not seem to model people’s
conceptualizations of the moral domain especially well. In
particular, the distinction between individualizing and
binding virtues does not seem to reflect a psychologically
real division that people make. By providing a more
accurate picture of how people parse their moral worlds, this
research helps to clarify a fundamental question in the
cognitive science of morality.

Acknowledgments
We thank Halley Bayer for assistance in conducting this
research, and Stephanie Chen and the members and guests
of the Morality Research Lab for valuable feedback.

References
Clifford, S., Iyengar, V., Cabeza, R., & Sinnott-Armstrong,
W. Moral foundations vignettes: A standardized stimulus
database of scenarios based on moral foundations theory.
Behavior Research Methods, 47, 1178-1198.
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and
conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 10291046.
Haidt, J. & Hersh, M. A. (2001). Sexual morality: The
cultures and emotions of conservatives and liberals.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 31, 191-221.
Haidt, J. & Joseph, C. (2004). Intuitive ethics: How innately
prepared intuitions generate culturally variable virtues.
Daedalus, 133, 55-66.
Haidt, J., Koller, S. H., & Dias, M. G. (1993). Affect,
culture, and morality, or, is it wrong to eat your dog?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 613628.
Kruskal, J. B. (1964). Nonmetric multidimensional scaling:
I. Psychometrika, 29, 1-27.
Kruskal, J. B. (1964). Nonmetric multidimensional scaling:
II. Psychometrika, 29, 115-129.
Landy, J. F. (2016). Form and content in the categorization
of moral violations. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.
Landy, J. F. & Bartels, D. M. (2016). The Moral Violations
Database. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.
Landy, J. F. & Uhlmann, E. L. (2016). Morality is personal.
Forthcoming in K. Gray & J. Graham (Eds.), The atlas of
moral psychology. New York: Guilford.
Medin, D. L. & Rips, L. J. (2005). Concepts and categories:
Memory, meaning, and metaphysics. In K. J. Holyoak &
R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of
thinking and reasoning (pp. 37-72). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., López, A., &
Shafir,
E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Rosenberg, S., Nelson, C., & Vivekananthan, P. S. (1968).
A multidimensional approach to the structure of
personality impressions. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 9, 283-294.
Royzman, E. B., Landy, J. F., & Goodwin, G. P. (2014).
Are good reasoners more incest-friendly? Trait cognitive
reflection predicts selective moralization in a sample of
American adults. Judgment and Decision Making, 9, 176190.
Turiel, E. (1983). The development of social knowledge:
Morality and convention. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

2308

