Inferring Generic Meaning From Pragmatic Reference Failure
Phil Crone

Michael C. Frank

pcrone@stanford.edu
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

properties shared by members of a kind may influence the
interpretation of potentially generic sentences. For instance,
the sentence “a bird does not fly” is likely to be interpreted
as being about some particular bird, given world knowledge
that, in general, birds fly.
Previous experimental work has confirmed the influence
of these three factors—morphosyntax, pragmatic context,
and world knowledge—on the interpretation of sentences as
generic. Adults and children can both use the definiteness of
subject NPs, as well as tense and aspect, to identify generics, and prefer generic interpretations when the subject NP
has no available referent in context (Gelman & Raman, 2003;
Cimpian, Meltzer, & Markman, 2011). By age 3, children
are less likely to assign a generic interpretation to a sentence
when its subject NP has a possible referent in the preceding linguistic context and can also use knowledge about the
generalizability of properties to kinds in identifying generics (Cimpian & Markman, 2008). World knowledge about
whether the subject of a sentence is animate or inanimate
also affects interpretations of genericity (Brandone & Gelman, 2009).
In the current paper, we propose that these findings can
be synthesized under a single explanation: generic interpretations are driven by a failure to find reference for entities or
events described by the sentence in question. We hypothesize
that listeners consider two possible interpretations of potentially generic statements: the speaker is either trying to be
informative about a particular entity or set of entities, or else
the speaker is trying to be informative about a kind. If reference to the particular fails conspicuously, then kind reference
becomes likely.
This hypothesis—which we refer to as the “pragmatic reference failure hypothesis”—is inspired by the finding that the
referential status of subject NPs in a particular context affects
judgements of genericity (Gelman & Raman, 2003). It also
provides a candidate explanation for morphosyntactic effects.
Like referential context, features like tense and definiteness
influence the probability that a speaker was referring to a specific entity. The definite determiner presupposes the existence
of a unique, salient entity in the common ground, suggesting
that the speaker intends to refer to a particular entity. Certain tenses and aspects, such as simple past and progressive
aspect, also have a referential character that English simple
present tense lacks.
In the current investigation, we build on the prior work
described above by assessing the impact of morphosyntactic
factors on adults’ judgments about genericity across a wide
variety of sentences. Most previous work on the identifica-

Generic sentences (e.g., “birds lay eggs”) express generalizations about kinds, in contrast to non-generic sentences that
express facts about specific individuals or sets of individuals
(e.g., “all birds lay eggs”). Although generics are pervasive in
natural language, there is no unique linguistic marker of genericity, making the identification of generics a challenge. We investigate the morphosyntactic cues that listeners use to identify
whether a sentence should receive a generic interpretation or
not. We find that two factors – the definiteness of a sentence’s
subject NP and the tense of the sentence – are extremely important in guiding intuitions about whether a sentence should
receive a generic interpretation. We argue that the importance
of these factors can be explained by taking generic interpretations to arise due to a failure to ground expressions as referring
to specific entities or events.
Keywords: Psycholinguistics; pragmatics; generics

Introduction
Generic sentences express generalizations about kinds and
are an important tool for the transmission of knowledge
(Gelman, 2003). A key difference between generic and
non-generic statements is that generics allow for exceptions:
“birds fly” expresses a generalization about the kind bird and
is true despite the fact that some birds do not fly, while “all
birds fly” is false, because, e.g., emus do not fly (Prasada,
2000). Despite their importance, generics are not consistently
marked by any particular lexical, morphological, or syntactic convention. This presents a challenge for speakers who
intend to communicate generic meanings and listeners who
must correctly interpret speakers’ intended meaning.
Prior work suggests that morphosyntactic features, pragmatic factors, and world knowledge all serve as cues that
guide the interpretation of sentences as generic or not. In
English, the subject noun phase (NP) of a generic sentence is
often a bare plural (“birds fly”), but it can also be an indefinite singular (“a bird has feathers”) or definite singular (“the
bird is a warm-blooded animal”). In contrast, definite plural
subject NPs (“the birds have beaks”) are generally thought
to force non-generic interpretations. Tense and aspect also
as cues to generic meaning; simple present tense sentences
(“birds fly”) are more associated with generic meanings than,
e.g., present progressive (“birds are flying overhead”) or past
tense (“birds flew by my window”) sentences (Carlson, 1977;
Krifka et al., 1995; Lyons, 1977).
Pragmatics and world knowledge also influence a sentence’s interpretation as generic or non-generic. For example,
if a unique bird is present in the context of an utterance of a
sentence with the subject NP “the bird,” this NP is likely to
be interpreted as referring to the bird in the context, giving
rise to a non-generic interpretation. World knowledge about

842

tion of generics has focused on children’s abilities, perhaps
stemming from an assumption that children face challenges
in identifying generics that are less relevant for adults. However, research on the probabilistic nature of language comprehension suggests that adults face a similar problem (Levy,
2008; Frank & Goodman, 2012). In the case of identifying generics, we take adults to reason about the likelihood
that an utterance is generic given morphosyntactic features of
the sentence, features of the context, and the their own world
knowledge. The current study also differs from previous work
in that we collect naturalistic examples of generic and nongeneric sentences generated by study participants, rather than
rely on artificially constructed examples. This allows us to
consider a realistic representation of genericity in natural language. In this way, we follow recent work on the interpretation of naturally-occurring uses of quantifiers involved in
scalar implicature patterns, rather than constructed examples
of scalar implicatures (Degen, 2015).
The paper is organized as follows. We first introduce an experimental paradigm that allows us to gather a large number
of naturalistic examples of generic and non-generic sentences
from study participants. We then collect judgments from a
second, independent set of participants, as to whether these
sentences should receive generic or non-generic interpretations (Experiment 1). We next use several machine learning
techniques to identify which factors are most useful in classifying sentences as generic or not. We find that just two
factors—definiteness of the subject NP and tense—prove extremely successful in classifying sentences. Finally, we validate the importance of tense for generic interpretation with
human subjects (Experiment 2). Taken together, the results of
these experiments show that judgments of whether a sentence
is generic or non-generic can largely be explained by considering whether the sentence can be referentially grounded.

second task took approximately 6 minutes. We excluded from
the analysis 4 participants from the first set and 6 participants
from the second set who indicated that their native language
was not English.
Stimuli In task 1, the first set of participants was presented
with a sequence of NPs followed by a single-line text box.
Participants were instructed to “write a sentence starting with
the phrase below.” The NPs were generated from a set of 48
nouns, split evenly between animates and inanimates. For
each participant, each noun was randomly assigned morphosyntactic features using a 2 × 2 factorial design crossing
number (singular, plural) with definiteness (definite, indefinite). Full NPs were created from the base noun and the randomly chosen number and definiteness features. For example, if the noun “panda” received values plural and definite,
the full NP would be “the pandas.”
The sentences produced by self-reported native English
speakers were then split into random sets of approximately
50 sentences each. For task 2, each set of sentences was presented to one individual from the second set of participants.
For a sentence whose subject NP was noun, participants indicated whether they thought the sentence was about “nouns,”
“a specific noun” (for sentences with singular subject NPs),
or “a specific group of nouns” (for sentences with plural subject NPs).1
Procedure In task 1, we first presented participants with
four example NPs. After providing a sentence completion
for each example item, participants were shown an example sentence completion that they could have written for the
given NP. These example sentences were constructed to favor non-generic interpretations for all NP types. Next, all
48 subject NPs were presented in pseudorandom order, counterbalanced so that no two consecutive NPs matched in both
number and definiteness. We required each sentence completion to be at least six characters in length. After providing
sentence completions for all NPs, participants reported their
native language.
In task 2, participants were instructed that they would be
viewing a sequence of approximately 50 sentences that had
been produced by other Mechanical Turk workers. Participants began by judging 4 example sentences constructed by
us for which the participants received feedback. The remaining sentences were presented in random order. After completing task 2, participants reported their native language. We
measured reaction times for each item, measured from the
time the item was presented until the time a response was submitted. Reaction times were used to exclude from the analysis
responses in whose reaction times were greater than 2 standard deviations from the mean, but were not further analyzed.

Experiment 1
It has previously been argued that the number and definiteness of a sentence’s subject NP influence its interpretation
as generic or non-generic. Previous work investigating these
cues to genericity have generally fixed the number of the subject NP as either singular (Cimpian et al., 2011) or plural
(Gelman & Raman, 2003) and only manipulated definiteness.
In Experiment 1, we considered the effects of number, definiteness, animacy, and their interaction on the interpretation
of generics. A set of participants performed a sentence completion task in which the subject NP was provided. A second
set of participants then classified these sentences as generic
or non-generic.

Method
Participants We recruited two sets of participants through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk website to complete two independent tasks. We restricted participants to individuals within
the United States and paid all participants 50 cents. The sets
consisted of 100 and 94 participants, respectively. The first
task took approximately 14 minutes to complete, while the

1 Participants included in task 1 also judged whether the sentences they produced were generic or non-generic in a similar manner. Their responses are not reported here, but were similar to the
results obtained in task 2 (r = 0.67). We also ran a separate rating
experiment using the phrasing “nouns in general” for the generic
question, and found consistent ratings (r = 0.99, Fleiss’ κ = 0.81).

843

Table 1: Example Productions from Experiment 1.
Definiteness
Indefinite
Indefinite
Indefinite
Indefinite
Definite
Definite
Definite
Definite

Number
Singular
Singular
Plural
Plural
Singular
Singular
Plural
Plural

Genericity
Generic
Non-generic
Generic
Non-generic
Generic
Non-generic
Generic
Non-generic

Examples
“An elephant is large.”, “A car is a form of transportation.”
“A dolphin swam alongside the boat.”, “A guitar kept me up all night.”
“Foxes chase rabbits.”, “Computers have made communication easier.”
“Owls were perched in the barn.”, “Marbles rolled all over the floor.”
“The peacock is a noisy bird.”, “The chair has four legs.”
“The pigeon landed on the car.”, “The trumpet was out of tune.”
“The kangaroos jump a lot.”, “The guitars are stringed instruments.”
“The pandas ate bamboo.”, “The fences were strong.”

spectively (Cimpian et al., 2011; Gelman & Raman, 2003).
The interaction between definiteness and plurality reveals a
superadditive effect by which indefinite, bare plurals were
rated more generic than would be predicted by the main effects of definiteness and plurality. This is unsurprising, as
bare plurals are often taken to be the canonical subject type
for English generics. The effect of animacy is also consistent
with previous findings that both children and adults produce
more generic statements when describing animals than when
describing artifacts (Brandone & Gelman, 2009).
Comparing the effect sizes across significant predictors,
we find that definiteness had the greatest influence on participants’ responses. This finding is straightforwardly interpretable in terms of the pragmatic reference failure hypothesis, which states that generic interpretation arises from reference failure. Since the definite determiner the, unlike indefinite determiners, presupposes the existence of a unique,
salient entity in the common ground, it follows that definite
subject NPs are more likely to refer to some particular entity.
Therefore, sentences with definite subjects are less likely to
have an intended generic interpretation.
Note, however, that there were sentences with definite subject NPs that were judged generic. Thus, we cannot conclude
that sentences with definite subject NPs categorically receive
non-generic interpretations. Rather, we argue that the presuppositions of the definite determiner are most easily satisfied
if the NP can be grounded in a concrete referent present in
the common ground. In principle, these presuppositions can
be satisfied by taking the NP to be kind-referring, but such
an interpretation requires an additional interpretative step to
conclude that the speaker does not intend to refer to particular
individual in the common ground.
One unexpected finding is that across all subject NP
types, including plural definites, sentences were occasionally
judged to be generic. This seems to clash with the general
view that definite plurals do not allow for generic interpretations in English. This result forced us consider whether
our methodology measured some property other than genericity. However, inspection of definite plurals that were judged
generic suggested that these ratings were at least prima facie appropriate (Table 1). Moreover, recent work has suggested that sentences with definite plural subject NPs in En-

Percentage Rated Generic

1.00

Plural

0.75

0.50
Singular
0.25

0.00
Definite

Indefinite

Definiteness

Figure 1: Percentage of sentences rated generic in Experiment 1 by definiteness and number. Error bars show 95%
confidence intervals.

Results and Discussion
Both definiteness and number affected judgments (Figure 1).
Sentences with indefinite subject NPs—especially bare plural subjects—were more likely to be rated generic (see Table 1 for examples). We fit a logistic mixed-effects model to
predict a sentence’s classification as generic or non-generic
from the interaction between definiteness, number, and animacy of the subject NP.2 The model identified significant
main effects of definiteness such that sentences with indefinite subject NPs were more likely to be rated generic (β =
3.29, z = 14.41, p < 0.001) and animacy such that sentences
with inanimate subjects were less likely to be rated generic
(β = −1.29, z = −3.33, p < 0.001). There were also significant interactions between animacy and definiteness such
that sentences with inanimate, indefinite subjects were more
likely to be rated generic (β = 0.86, z = 2.52, p < 0.05) and
between definiteness and number such that sentences with indefinite, singular subjects were less likely to be rated generic
(β = −1.84, z = −7.59, p < 0.001).
The results are consistent with previous findings that indefinite singulars and bare plurals facilitate generic interpretations compared to definite singulars and definite plurals, re2 All data and code can be viewed at https://github.com/
langcog/generic ref.

844

glish can receive generic interpretations, at least in certain
circumstances (Farkas & de Swart, 2007), but that such uses
may come with additional social meaning (Acton, 2014).

no

Tense = Past

yes

Classifying Generics
In Experiment 1, we directly manipulated the definiteness,
number, and animacy features of subject NPs and observed
how these manipulations influenced genericity judgments.
However, the sentences produced in Experiment 1 varied with
respect to many morphosyntactic, lexical, and semantic respects that we did not directly control. It is plausible that
these factors also contributed to judgments about the classification of sentences as generic or not. To probe the influence of these factors on participants’ responses, we extracted
additional linguistic features from the sentences produced in
Experiment 1 and then employed a number of classification
techniques to determine which were most important in determining whether a sentence would be judged generic.

Definiteness = Definite

Generic

Non−generic

Non−generic

Figure 2: Decision tree with three terminal nodes for classification of sentences as generic or non-generic.
of the time, virtually identical to the accuracy of the machine
classification techniques we employed (Cohen’s κ = 0.73).
The most striking finding in our attempt to classify sentences as generic was that the vast majority of factors considered did not prove useful in this classification task. In the end,
we were able to achieve human-level accuracy in the classification task using only the definiteness of a sentence’s subject
NP and the tense of the sentence. As discussed in the context
of the results of Experiment 1, the definite article presupposes
the existence of a unique, salient entity. Thus, a listener can
infer that the speaker intended to refer to some particular individual, rather than a kind.
The importance of tense can be understood in a similar
manner. Partee (1973) observes from the interaction of tense
and negation that the past tense in English has a referential
character. “I didn’t turn off the stove,” neither means that
there is no time in the past when the speaker turned off the
stove (which is false) nor that there is any time in the past
when the speaker did not turn off the stove (which is trivially
true). Rather, the speaker refers to a specific interval of time
during which he/she did not turn off the stove. In general, English simple past tense clauses refer to particular intervals of
time during which particular events occurred (Heim, 1994).
In contrast, the vast majority (92%) of non-past sentences
produced in Experiment 1 used simple present tense, which
is employed in English to express habits or ongoing states,
rather than strictly temporally delimited events. While kinds
are unlikely to participate in specific events, habits or states
may express general properties of kinds.
We propose that the influence of definiteness and tense on
the interpretation of sentences as generic or non-generic can
be explained by the pragmatic reference failure hypothesis.
Listeners attempt to referentially ground the expressions in
particular entities or events. Failure to identify referents for
these expressions gives rise to generic interpretations.

Method
We first used the Stanford part-of-speech (POS) tagger
(Toutanova, Klein, Manning, & Singer, 2003) to obtain POS
tags and tense/aspect features for verbs for all sentences
judged in Experiment 1. Using these POS tags, we automatically extracted the following features for each sentence:
tense, aspect, presence of main verb be or have, and presence
of a modal. We also calculated the total sentence length minus the length of the subject NP for each sentence.
We next split the sentences from Experiment 1 into training and test sets, with the training set consisting of 75% of
all sentences produced. Using the training set, we trained
a variety of models to classify sentences as generic or nongeneric. All models included definiteness, number, and animacy of the subject NP, the factors extracted using POS tags,
and sentence length as predictors. Models included generalized linear models, basic decision trees, boosted decision
trees, and random forests. Model parameters were optimized
using 10-fold cross-validation on the training set. The models
were then evaluated against the 25% held-out test set.

Results & Discussion
All models achieved classification accuracy on the test set
between 85% and 87%. The most straightforwardly interpretable of these methods was a basic decision tree pruned to
have three terminal nodes (Figure 2). This decision tree considers only the definiteness of the subject NP and the tense of
the sentence and achieved a test accuracy of 86.7%.
To assess the reliability of human judgments (and hence
the theoretical ceiling for the classifiers), an independent set
of participants re-rated the sentences in the held-out test set.
The experimental details were the same as those for task 2 of
Experiment 1. We recruited 41 participants, all of whom reported that their native language was English. The agreement
between these judgments and those collected in Experiment
1 was substantial: the judgments were in agreement 87.8%

Experiment 2
The results of the classification task described above suggest that tense plays a critical role in guiding judgments as

845

to whether a sentence should be interpreted as generic. In order to confirm this finding, we ran an experiment in which
we directly manipulated the tense of sentences to see if this
would change interpreters’ judgments about genericity. This
experiment is partial replication of Cimpian et al. (2011), in
particular their findings regarding the role of tense in guiding generic interpretations. However, our study differs from
previous work in that we compare the magnitude of the effect of tense to those of other effects. In addition, we consider whether tense meaningfully interacts with other factors
in driving generic interpretations.

Percent Rated Generic

1.00
Plural.Indefinite
●

0.75

Singular.Indefinite

0.50

●

Singular.Definite

●

●
●

0.25

0.00

Plural.Definite

●
●
●

Past

Present

Tense

Method
Participants Recruitment details were similar to those of
task 2 in Experiment 1. We recruited a total of 50 participants,
all of whom were self-reported native English speakers.

Figure 3: Percentage of sentences rated generic in Experiment 2 by tense, definiteness, and number. Error bars show
95% confidence intervals.

Stimuli We chose a set of 48 sentences produced in Experiment 1, one for each base noun used in the experiment.
All subject NP types, crossing definiteness, number, and animacy, were equally represented in this set. None of the selected sentences contained main verb be or have, a modal, or
a passive construction. The selected sentences were evenly
split between those with simple present and simple past tense
verbs. In several cases, sentences produced in Experiment 1
were slightly altered to avoid awkward phrasing or to change
the definiteness or number feature of the subject NP to ensure
that all pairs of number and definiteness features were equally
represented.
Once all 48 sentences were collected, we created alternate
versions of each sentence in which the tense of the main verb
was changed from simple present to simple past or vice versa.

mation of the findings of the classification task.
Note also that the consistency of the effect of tense across
all subject NP types further confirms that definite subject NPs
are not precluded from expressing generic meanings. Rather,
as discussed above, it is more difficult to arrive at a generic
interpretation of a sentence with a definite subject NP. However, this difficulty can be overcome if other factors, such as
tense, support a generic interpretation.

General Discussion
We set out to explore the question of what gives rise to generic
interpretations of sentences. The results here replicate previous findings about cues to genericity: Indefinite subject NPs
support generic interpretations more than definite subject NPs
(Cimpian et al., 2011; Gelman & Raman, 2003), present tense
sentences are more likely to be judged generic than past tense
sentences (Cimpian et al., 2011), and sentences with animate
subjects tend to be more generic than those with inanimate
subjects (Brandone & Gelman, 2009). Overall, we found that
the most important factors for identifying generic statements
were the definiteness of the sentence’s subject NP and the
tense of the sentence. We have argued that the importance of
these two factors can be explained by viewing generic interpretations as the result of listeners’ failure to ground expressions as referring to particular entities or events.
As noted above, there are exceptions to the generalizations
discussed here. Even past tense sentences with definite plural
subjects may be interpreted generically in certain cases (e.g.
“The dinosaurs went extinct.”) How can we account for such
cases? Judgments regarding generic or non-generic meanings
must be viewed as graded inferences about speakers’ intentions. The factors that we have discussed here influence the
likelihood that listeners will interpret a sentence as generic or
not, but none of these factors can be viewed as categorically
creating or precluding a generic interpretation.
We leave open for future research the question of the extent to which the pragmatic reference failure hypothesis is
generalizable to cover generic interpretations in other lan-

Procedure The procedure was similar to that of part 2 in
Experiment 1. Participants began by judging four example
sentences. After this, participants viewed all 48 sentences in
random order and indicated whether the sentence was about
“nouns” or “a specific noun/group of nouns.” Half of sentences judged by each participant contained simple present
tense verbs, while half contained simple past tense verbs.
Items were presented in random order; the order of tenses
was also randomized.

Results and Discussion
The effects of definiteness and number of the subject NP were
broadly similar to the effects found in Experiment 1. In addition, the tense manipulation greatly influenced judgments,
with present tense sentences being more likely to be judged
generic across all subject NP types (Figure 3).
We fit a logistic mixed-effects model to predict sentences’ genericity classifications from the interaction of
tense, definiteness, number, and animacy. The model revealed only two significant effects; sentences with indefinite subject NPs were more likely to be judged generic
(β = 2.81, z = 3.04, p < 0.01), as were present tense sentences
(β = 2.31, z = 3.26, p < 0.01). The effects of tense and definiteness are similar in magnitude and provide further confir-

846

guages. Some existing work supports the idea that tense and
aspect influence genericity judgments in Spanish in a similar manner as reported here (Pérez-Leroux, Munn, Schmitt,
& DeIrish, 2004). However, the role of definiteness in signaling generic and non-generic meanings is not expected to
be the same across languages. For example, Romance languages canonically express genericity with sentences whose
subjects are definite plural NPs, the subject NP type that is
least associated with generic meanings in English. The theoretical linguistics literature offers several potential explanation for this cross-linguistic difference. It has been argued
that languages that canonically express genericity with definite plural subjects do so because determiner-less NPs, like
English bare plurals, cannot occupy arguments positions in
these languages (Chierchia, 1998). Alternatively, languages
may simply differ in whether their definite determiners may
lexicalize reference to kinds or not (Dayal, 2004).
Our explanation regarding the source of generic interpretations has the potential to explain other factors that have previously been shown to serve as cues to generic meaning. For
example, although we did not find aspect to play a crucial role
in classifying sentences as generic or not, previous work has
found that both children and adults are more likely to interpret present progressive sentences as non-generic than simple
present sentences (Cimpian et al., 2011). Our failure to identify aspect as a crucial cue to generic meaning is possibly due
to the fact that only 6.8% of the sentences produced in Experiment 1 used progressive or perfect aspect. However, our
hypothesis is amenable to taking aspect to play a role in determining generic meaning. Present progressive sentences in
English refer to events that are occurring at the speech time.
A listener can infer from a sentence using the present progressive that a speaker intended to refer to a particular event.
Our proposal also straightforwardly explains previous findings that the contextual availability of a referent for the subject NP of a sentence makes it more likely that the sentence
will be judged non-generic (Gelman & Raman, 2003). The
presence of a referent for the subject NP greatly reduces the
difficulty on the part of a listener to referentially ground this
expression. We therefore predict that in such cases, listeners
will be more likely to arrive at a non-generic interpretation.
We look forward to future work that tests the extension
of the pragmatic reference failure hypothesis to explain additional factors influencing generic and non-generic interpretations and to explain cues to generic meaning in languages
other than English.

Brandone, A. C., & Gelman, S. A. (2009). Differences in
preschoolers’ and adults’ use of generics about novel animals and artifacts: A window onto a conceptual divide.
Cognition, 110(1), 1-22.
Carlson, G. N. (1977). Reference to Kinds in English. Ph.D.
dissertation. University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Chierchia, G. (1998). Reference to kinds across languages.
Natural Language Semantics, 6(4), 339–405.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. (2008). Preschool children’s
use of cues to generic meaning. Cognition, 107(1), 19–53.
Cimpian, A., Meltzer, T. J., & Markman, E. (2011).
Preschoolers’ use of morphosyntactic cues to identify
generic sentences: Indefinite singular noun phrases, tense,
and aspect. Child Development, 82(5), 1561–1578.
Dayal, V. (2004). Number marking and (in)definiteness in
kind terms. Linguistics and Philosophy, 27(4), 393–450.
Degen, J. (2015). Investigating the distribution of some (but
not all) implicatures using corpora and web-based methods. Semantics and Pragmatics, 8(11), 1–55.
Farkas, D. F., & de Swart, H. (2007). Article choice in plural
generics. Lingua, 117, 1657–1676.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science, 336(6084),
998.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of essentialism in everyday thought. Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Raman, L. (2003). Preschool children
use linguistic form class and pragmatic cues to interpret
generics. Child Development, 74(1), 308–325.
Heim, I. (1994). Comments on Abusch’s theory of tense.
Ellipsis, tense and questions, 143–170.
Krifka, M., Pelletier, F. J., Carlson, G. N., ter Meulen, A.,
Link, G., & Chierchia, G. (1995). Genericity: An introduction. In The Generic Book. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106(3), 1126–1177.
Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics: Volume 1. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Partee, B. (1973). Some structural analogies between tenses
and pronouns in English. Journal of Philosophy, 70, 601–
609.
Pérez-Leroux, A. T., Munn, A., Schmitt, C., & DeIrish, M.
(2004). Learning definite determiners: genericity and definiteness in English and Spanish. In A. Brugos, L. Micciulla, & C. E. Smith (Eds.), Supplement to the proceedings
of the 28th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development.
Prasada, S. (2000). Acquiring generic knowledge. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 4(2), 66–72.
Toutanova, K., Klein, D., Manning, C., & Singer, Y. (2003).
Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Daniel Lassiter, Rose Schneider, and the members
of the Language and Cognition Lab. We gratefully acknowledge the support of NSF BCS Grant 1456077.

References
Acton, E. (2014). Pragmatics and the social meaning of
determiners. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Stanford
University, Stanford.

847

