Investigating Rational Analogy in the Spirit of John Stuart Mill:
Bayesian Analysis of Confidence about Inferences across Aligned Simple Systems
Brad Rogers (bwrogers@indiana.edu)
David Landy (dlandy@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 East 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

induction does not distinguish relational similarity from
property similarity (Mill, 1882). Still he does discuss the
nature of their difference:

What does it mean for analogy to be rational? John Stuart
Mill described a probabilistic underpinning for analogical
inference based on the the odds of observing systemic
pairwise correspondence across otherwise independent
systems by mere chance. Although proponents and critics
have debated its validity, Mill’s approach has yet to be
implemented computationally or studied psychologically. In
this paper we examine Mill’s approach and show how it can
be instantiated using Bayes theorem. Then we describe two
experiments that present subjects with partially-revealed,
aligned binary strings with varying degrees of intra- and interstring regularity. Experimental results are compared to a
formal rational analysis of the stimuli revealing conditions
whereby participants exhibit confidence patterns consistent
and inconsistent with Mill’s rational basis of analogy.
Keywords:
Rationality

Analogy,

Bayes,

Confidence,

J.S.

“In	  the	  strictest	  induction,	  equally	  with	  the	  faintest	  
analogy,	  we	  conclude	  because	  A	  resembles	  B	  in	  one	  or	  
more	  properties,	  that	  it	  does	  so	  in	  a	  certain	  other	  
property.	  The	  difference	  is,	  that	  in	  the	  case	  of	  a	  
complete	  induction	  it	  has	  been	  previously	  shown,	  by	  due	  
comparison	  of	  instances,	  that	  there	  is	  an	  invariable	  
conjunction	  between	  the	  former	  property	  or	  properties	  
and	  the	  latter	  property;	  but	  in	  what	  is	  called	  analogical	  
reasoning,	  no	  such	  conjunction	  has	  been	  made	  out.	  
There	  have	  been	  no	  opportunities	  of	  putting	  in	  practice	  
the	  Method	  of	  Difference,	  or	  even	  the	  Method	  of	  
Agreement;	  but	  we	  conclude	  (and	  that	  is	  all	  which	  the	  
argument	  of	  analogy	  amounts	  to)	  that	  a	  fact	  m,	  known	  
to	  be	  true	  of	  A,	  is	  more	  likely	  to	  be	  true	  of	  B	  if	  B	  agrees	  
with	  A	  in	  some	  of	  its	  properties	  (even	  though	  no	  
connection	  is	  known	  to	  exist	  between	  m	  and	  those	  
properties),	  than	  if	  no	  resemblance	  at	  all	  could	  be	  
traced	  between	  B	  and	  any	  other	  thing	  known	  to	  possess	  
the	  attribute	  m.”	  	  

Mill,

Introduction
Analogy has been suggested to play central roles in human
reasoning activities such as learning facts and concepts
(Rumelhart & Norman, 1981), discovering scientific
principles (Hesse, 1966), and perceptually interpreting our
daily situations (Chalmers, French, & Hofstadter, 1991;
Goldstone, Landy, & Brunel, 2011). Previous research has
focused on identifying mechanisms of analogy making by
comparing people’s analogical preferences to predictions
made by computational models (Falkenhainer, Forbus, &
Gentner, 1989; Goldstone, 1994; Hofstadter, 1995; Holyoak
& Thagard, 1989; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997; Lu, Chen, &
Holyoak, 2012). These models propose solutions to the
problem of finding the best mapping between well described
systems based on respective theories of analogy. Inferences
have been studied in this paradigm as extensions of possible
mappings, but the rationality of such extensions has not
been investigated. Although these computational
achievements have advanced our understanding of analogy
construction, treating analogies as operations over welldefined situations has left an important context underexplored—making predictions and choices in novel and
uncertain circumstances where the relevant facts may not be
known in advance (Falkenhainer, 1990).

Mill describes a key distinction between “complete”
property induction and analogical property induction. In the
former, a statistic is developed for that specific property by
observing it in a sample of many systems thereby
establishing a probabilistic connection between instances of
that property across those systems generally. In the latter, a
statistic is developed according to the pairwise
correspondence of a sample of unique properties between
two systems thereby establishing a general probabilistic
connection between their properties within the two systems
or kinds of systems. Mill describes the pairwise
correspondence as a proportion:

Mill’s Rational Basis of Analogy
The idea that analogy has a rational underpinning is not a
recent development. In A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and
Inductive, Mill argued that the probabilistic basis of rational

1301

“where	  the	  resemblance	  is	  very	  great,	  the	  ascertained	  
difference	  very	  small,	  and	  our	  knowledge	  of	  the	  subject-­‐
matter	  tolerably	  extensive,	  the	  argument	  from	  analogy	  
may	  approach	  in	  strength	  very	  near	  to	  a	  valid	  induction.	  
If,	  after	  much	  observation	  of	  B,	  we	  find	  that	  it	  agrees	  
with	  A	  in	  nine	  out	  of	  ten	  of	  its	  known	  properties,	  we	  
may	  conclude	  with	  a	  probability	  of	  nine	  to	  one,	  that	  it	  
will	  possess	  any	  given	  derivative	  property	  of	  A.”	  

Although Mill’s extrapolation of the proportion statistic
may be mathematically simplistic, his case for a sampling
postulate is clear. It would be terribly unlucky to observe a
systemic correspondence in a large sample of pairwise
properties and relations across two systems if in fact the true
correspondences occur only at a rate of perfect chance. To
the extent that we have observed greater correspondence, we
would be more surprised to discover that an inferred
alignment is untrue.
Mill’s approach has drawn some criticism. For example,
missing in his argument is the distinction between property
and relation in as much as they influence the independence
of the sample of pairwise correspondences. Along these
lines, it seems likely that analogies that occur to us may
follow paths toward increasingly higher match rates, a
decidedly biased sampling scheme that could lead to
systematic over-confidence in analogical inferences (Bartha,
2010). But an argument about biased sampling does not
preclude the possibility of an unbiased rational sample,
rather it necessitates the existence of such a normative ideal.
Another criticism by Bartha of the sampling postulate of
analogy is directed not toward its rational basis, but rather
the difficulty and bias in representing real systems such that
the sampling postulate might be applied. Although analogy
in situ undoubtedly relies upon such representations,
proponents of this criticism should then be satisfied that a
rational solution might exist for any given representation
and that this criticism is not about the fundamental
analogical form.

Minimal Probabilistic Model of Systemic Pairwise
Correspondence
The essence of Mill’s proposal is that a proportion can be
developed that describes the rate of pairwise matches
between two systems, and that this proportion conveys
predictive value to inferences made in virtue of that sampled
correspondence. Harrod advanced Mill’s simplistic
calculation by applying the distributional property of
systems generated randomly according to a known
proportion—if p is the proportion of observable properties
of S that are actually shared with T, and n of these
properties are observed, then the probability that
exactly k of them will be shared with T is given by the
binomial distribution (Harrod, 1956):

Harrod’s formulation is a step forward in applying a
probabilistic range of a known proportion to an unobserved
sample in a system. But it does not fully capture the
description of the analogy problem, that of estimating an
unknown proportion from an observed sample. This is a
problem of inverse probability whereby we seek to
understand the probability of different possibly true pairwise
match proportions given observation. Since we know the
distribution of samples from a hypothesized model, we can

apply Bayes theorem to calculate the distribution of
hypothetical models (Bayes & Price, 1763; Laplace, 1825):
Applying the binomial distribution for the probability of the
sample given the proportion, it has been shown that the
solution is beta distributed:

The application of Bayes has brought us to an acceptable
model of pairwise correspondence. However, actual
reasoning about uncertain situations also involves reasoning
about the resulting system. Mill has proposed a basis for
reasoning across systems, but any viable approach must also
account for this intra-system reasoning. In the analogy
literature a classic example of this intra-system reasoning is
that an intelligent person who is swayed by the analogy
between the solar system and the atom does not then suspect
that the nucleus is yellow, large, or causes plants to grow on
Earth. Instead, the analogy is integrated with what one
knows about each system on its own. Approaches that deal
with these concerns have typically separated these two
forms of reasoning (Falkenhainer, 1990; Lee & Holyoak,
2008). For the purpose of this initial investigation, it is less
important which kinds of relational systems are explored
and more important that the systems have structure in some
way. In this study, we will analyze systems whose elements
also exhibit a proportion. This is admittedly a minimally
structured system, but it is adequate to demonstrate Mill’s
approach.
We apply a Bayesian mixture model that simultaneously
evaluates the inferential power of the inter-system relations
and the intra-system pairwise proportion (Wasserman,
2000). For computational efficiency, we can implement this
using a Dirichlet distribution (or an equivalent hierarchical
model) where each category comprises a unique possible
combination of paired system properties (i.e., 00,01,10,11):

*Uniform priors were used for purposes of simplicity

Approach
We investigate Mill’s proposed basis of rational analogy in
the context of the simplest relational systems and their
pairwise correspondences using randomly generated binary
strings. Although such systems lack the context and richness
often found in human analogy making, they also minimize
difficulties and potential sources of biases. This petri dish
approach to analogy is a starting place toward evaluating
probabilistic aspects of analogical reasoning in more
complex situations.
In this study we present two experiments that employ
different designs but using stimuli of a common format.

1302

Subjects are presented pairs of randomly generated strings
that are only partially revealed and that possess varying
degrees of intra- and inter-string regularities. Subjects are
given a narrative about the general meaning of the strings,
but not the meaning of individual characters. They are asked
to evaluate the string pairs, to make a prediction about a
target missing character, and to estimate the probability that
their prediction would turn out to be true.

Stimuli
Experiments 1 and 2 presented stimuli of a consistent
format—pairs of partially revealed binary strings—but
employed different designs regarding the generative
procedure of the strings. Participants were presented a
narrative that we called “Digital Matchmaker” that cast
them in the role of a data analyst at a leading online
matchmaking website. Their task is to evaluate pairs of
incomplete binary strings representing the responses to a
questionnaire of two single people who have been matched
together for a date.

Design
A large pool of stimuli were created using a script in R that
creates and combines pseudo-random strings to meet the
constraints of target sample sizes, base rates for each string,
and match rates across strings. The script then randomly
selects the precise positions of elements and matches, and
assigns ‘0’ and ‘1’ symbols for a particular stimulus. The
large pool of strings was then sampled, and the stimuli were
selected whose rational evidence strength was closest to the
target. Targets were selected at each centile on the range
from 0.50 to 0.92. In this manner, a continuum of stimuli
was randomly generated. The set of items was then divided
into two lists, by putting odd items in one list and even
items in the other.

Participants
We recruited N = 45 participants from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. Participants were paid $2.50 for an
average of under 20 minutes of work. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of two groups which determined
which stimuli they judged.

Procedure
Figure 1: Example “Digital Matchmaker” Stimulus

They are told that matched couples have been made by an
algorithm that can look for strong same alignment (“birds of
a feather”) and for strong opposite alignment (“opposites
attract”) to responses in the question. But matched couples
may also have been made by a professional matchmaker
who uses intuitions about photographs rather than survey
responses to propose matches. Participants were also told
about a study that asked people to fully complete their
questionnaires. The study claimed to find that that
regularities initially present within a single’s incomplete
responses and across matched singles’ incomplete responses
tend to mostly continue in about the same way when fully
completed.

Participants responded to 22 stimuli with varying strengths
of regularities. Each participant was randomly assigned one
of two sets of stimuli (the even list or the odd list) with
roughly equivalent rational probabilities. Participants
responded to each randomly ordered stimulus from the list
by predicting the target and estimating the probability that
their prediction was correct.

Results & Discussion
Figure 2 shows the relationship between the proportion of
unique participant predictions and the rational model.
Overall, the correlation between choice proportions and the
rational approach was fairly strong, but systematically nonlinear: as the rational probability for the stimuli increases
from 0.50 the mean choice probability quickly increases.
After that, median confidence increases slowly or not at all.
Proportion( of(Rationally(Consistent(Responses

Proportion of Responses

Each stimulus contains a target missing survey response that
is deemed “crucial to match success.” Participants must: 1)
select a radio button indicating a prediction of a 0 or a 1 for
the target, and 2) use a slider with numeric feedback
estimating the probability that their prediction is correct.

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 is to evaluate the relationship
between people’s guesses (and self-reported confidence)
and the predictions of the rational analysis. The strings were
generated to roughly evenly sample the range of rational
predictive strength, from very weak evidence to very strong
evidence.

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.50

0.60

0.70

0.80

0.90

Rational Stimulus Probability

Figure 2: Proportion of Rationally Consistent Responses
*All error bars represent +/- one standard error

1303

People did systematically deviate from the rational model
predictions for some particular stimuli. Upon examination,
it appears that the regularities in those stimuli may be more
spatially disperse with more interruptions dispersed rather
than clustered. These effects may be investigated in future
studies.
Figure 3 presents the probability estimates in light grey
made by each participant for each stimulus. The median
responses are shown by darkened black circles. The dashed
line represents the rational model predictions.

Participants
We recruited N = 52 participants from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. Participants were paid $3.00 for an
average of under 30 minutes of work. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of six groups, which determined
which stimuli they judged.

Procedure
Participants responded to three stimuli from each group for
a total of twenty-four responses per participant. Six sets of
twenty-four stimuli were created and randomly ordered to
minimize the possibility that anomalies in the stimuli or
anomalies in the order of presentation would bias results.
Participants were randomly assigned one of these six sets.
Participants responded to each stimulus by predicting the
target and estimating the probability that their prediction is
correct.

Results & Discussion

Participants confidence increased with the rational model’s
probability estimate. The median participant responses by
stimulus correlate to the rational probabilities by a factor of
0.71 (S.E.=0.03). The correlation is strongest at the
extremes of 0.50 to 0.55 and 0.75 to 0.90, while
participants’ probability estimates systemically exceed the
rational results on the interval of 0.55 to 0.75. This suggests
a non-linear relationship with the rational model, where
people may behave with overconfidence on this range.

Proportion of Responses

Figure 3: Response Probability vs. Rational Probability

We present results in for Experiment 2 that distinguish
between stimuli in which intra- and inter-string regularities
lead to predictions that “Agree” versus “Conflict.” Agree
stimuli elicited responses that are consistent with the
presented regularities indicating that participants were
mostly able to find at least some basis for their predictions,
even when regularities occurred at a low rate. For agree
stimuli, participant responses are designated as either
rationally consistent or rationally inconsistent since both
intra- and inter-string regularities compel the same
prediction. Figure 4 shows the proportion of predictions for
Agree stimuli that are rationally consistent for each other
design factor.
Agree%Stimuli

Experiment 2
The purpose of Experiment 2 is to understand how people’s
predictions are influenced by intra-string regularities versus
inter-string regularities.

Design
Experiment 2 used a 2x2x2 factorial design resulting in 8
groups of stimuli that are rationally distinct across groups
and rationally similar within groups. The three factors
examined were: 1) observed proportion of intra-string
regularities (low/high), 2) observed proportion of interstring regularities (low/high), and 3) agreement or conflict
between the rational predictions corresponding to the
observed intra- and inter-string regularities. The first two
factors vary the degree of evidence coming from within the
string, and the degree evidence coming from the analogy or
relational correspondence with the other string. The
strongest evidence holds when those two sources of
evidence point in the same direction (agree stimuli); when
they conflict rational evidential strength is reduced.

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Int-Hi

Int-Lo
Ext-Hi
Rational
Consistent

Int-Hi

Int-Lo
Ext-Lo

Rational
Inconsistent

Figure 4: Proportion of Predictions in Agree Stimuli

Participant predictions were generally consistent with the
rational predictions with a rate of 0.90 for the highest
strength regularities and a rate of 0.85 for the lowest.
Rational probability estimates for the Agree stimuli are
shown in Figure 5 below in the plots on the left and right
respectively. Participants’ self-reported probabilities were
systematically higher than the rational model to an extent
roughly consistent with the results from Experiment 1 over
this rational range. More importantly, though, the main
effects between intra-string and inter-string regularities are

1304

statistically significant and follow a relative pattern
consistent with the rational model predictions.
Agree%Stimuli% , Responses
Reported Probability

Rational Probability

Agree%Stimuli% , Rational
0.90

IntHi

0.85
0.80

IntLo

0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50

0.90

IntHi

0.85

IntLo

0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50

Ext-Hi

Ext-Lo

Ext-Hi

Ext-Lo

Figure 5: Rational & Response Probabilities in Agree Stimuli

Figure 6 shows the proportion of predictions for Conflict
stimuli that are either consistent with the intra-string
regularity (internal consistent) or the inter-string regularity
(external consistent) for each other design factor.
Conflict)Stimuli
Proportion of Responses

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Int-Hi

Int-Lo

Int-Hi

Ext-Hi

Int-Lo
Ext-Lo

Internal
Consistent

External
Consistent

Figure 6: Proportion of Predictions in Conflict Stimuli

Participant predictions are much less consistent with the
rational choices when the intra- and inter-string regularities
lead to conflicting predictions. This is consistent with the
idea that the relative strengths of intra- and inter-string
regularities influence the chance that a participant would
make a choice consistent with the rational choice.
Participant predictions exhibited quantitatively symmetric
preference patterns across these two conditions indicating
that there does not appear to be a preference for intra- versus
inter-string regularities on whole.
Participant probability estimates for Conflict stimuli
demonstrate a distinct break from the rational results. Figure
7 shows the rational and participant probability estimates for
the Conflict stimuli. Conflict stimuli results are further
distinguished by whether the participant predictions were
internal consistent or external consistent, respectively.
Conflict)Stimuli) - Responses
Internal(Consistent

IntHi

0.85
0.80

IntLo

0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50

Reported Probability

Rational Probability

Conflict)Stimuli)- Rational
0.90

External)Consistent

0.90

Int
-Hi

0.85
0.80

Int
-Lo

0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50

Ext-Hi

Ext-Lo

Ext-Hi

Ext-Lo

Ext-Hi

Ext-Lo

The rational analysis produces a substantial drop in
probability for the hi-hi case, whereby the competing
regularities are largely offsetting. Although this effect is
borne out in participant predictions, participant confidence
does not drop. Rather people indicate probabilities
consistent with only integrating the evidence for their
chosen prediction, neglecting the evidence for the other
prediction. Although some participants were consistent
across the three hi-hi stimuli choosing only inter-string or
intra-string predictions, just as many people switched the
basis of their prediction leading us to conclude that a
possible individual preference for either intra- or inter-string
regularities could not explain the effect.

General Discussion
This paper describes an initial investigation into the
rationality of analogy that relies on a probabilistic basis.
First described by Mill in 1882, this approach holds that the
odds of sampling pairwise correspondence in otherwise
independent systems is greater when a greater degree of
pairwise correspondence between those systems truly exists.
We developed a plausible minimal Bayesian model that
instantiates Mill’s proposal and applied this model to a
rational analysis of pairs of aligned simple strings.
We compared the results of the rational analysis to the
results of two psychological experiments. The first showed
that people integrate observed patterns probabilistically and
in a manner that correlates strongly with results of the
rational analysis. People appear to over-estimate probability
as the rational results increase from 0.50, but their estimates
converge with the rational model around 0.75 and above.
The second experiment found that when intra- and interstring regularities lead to the same prediction, people
integrate varying combinations of strengths of these
regularities in strong correspondence to the patterns of the
rational analysis. But when the regularities lead to
conflicting predictions, people fail to integrate across the
regularities in a manner consistent with the rational analysis,
instead only estimating probability according to the
regularity that is consistent with their chosen prediction.
Moreover, there was no statistically discernable pattern in
the choice of the prediction including differences in
individual preferences.

Implications for Mill’s Theory
Our goal was to construct the simplest possible situation
that would allow us to explore the relationship between
Mill's theory and human behavior. What we found was that
Mill's theory provides a meaningful guide, but discrepancies
also point to complexities of the human reasoning process.
The positive results for these simple tasks suggest that
Mill’s theory may provide a useful apparatus to understand
peoples’ reasoning. Still, the stimuli may be so simple that
many different strategies would yield Mill-Like response
patterns.

Figure 7: Rational & Response Probabilities in Conflict Stimuli

1305

The results of Experiment 1 and the results of Experiment 2
Agree stimuli show that participants’ behavior is correlated
with predictions based on Mill’s theory of rational analogy.
These results lend credibility to using a Millian model to
gain insight to how and why people use analogies.
The Conflict stimuli in Experiment 2, however, identified an
inconsistency between the rational model and observed
behavior. If people behave rationally, then equal evidence
for competing predictions made on the basis of opposing
regularities should effectively “cancel out,” lowering the
overall probability of a correct response. Instead we observe
that people appear to dismiss the evidence for one of the
competing theories and make their predictions and
confidence statements based largely on the other. However,
this behavior may be a more general phenomenon about
how people make inferences that is not unique to analogy.
First, we did not find any significant bias in predictions
consistent with intra- or inter-string predictions in conflict
stimuli suggesting that people are able to consider pairwise
regularities across strings in the same way they consider
regularities within strings. Second, previous research has
shown a similar non-rational behavior in a categorization
inference task where participants expressed confidence in
their categorizations consistent only with the evidence for
their chosen categories, neglecting evidence for fits in other
categories (Murphy & Ross, 1994).
Two criticisms have been made about Mill’s theory: the
“counting problem” and the “problem of bias”(Bartha,
2013). The counting problem is about the seemingly
arbitrary choices in defining the representation or schema
over which analogies can be made. The problem of bias is
one about the search and discovery of analogical mappings.
Neither criticism is about analogy fundamentally, but rather
about other process (i.e., representation and search) that are
necessarily implicated in analogical cognitive process.
These processes are independent from the basis of Mill’s
theory. Further, we do not promote Mill’s theory as
description of the analogical cognitive process. Rather, a
rational basis could help answer why analogical processes
operate as they do. Cognitive mechanisms need not have a
rational basis, and even when they do, we should not
mistake that basis as necessary but rather well adapted for
the specified task.

Future Directions
We consider Mill’s theory akin to the modern computational
theories of analogy, but oriented toward the problem of
induction with incomplete information rather than
analogical discovery in well described domains. It is not
hard to envision, for example, how pairwise probabilistic
analysis in a more complex structure might produce
qualitatively similar patterns to SMT analysis (Gentner,
1983). Binary strings are a small first step toward
integrating probability into pairwise systems, but they
minimize the core characteristic of analogy—relational
similarity. The next step is to instantiate Mill’s theory

within more general relational configurations and compare
results to people and other models.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon support of BR by the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant
No. DGE-1342962.

References
Bartha, P. (2010). By Parallel Reasoning. New York: Oxford
Uniersity Press.
Bartha, P. (2013). Analogy and Analogical Reasoning. In The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Bayes, T., & Price, R. (1763). An Essay towards solving a Problem
in the Doctrine of Chances. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, 53, 370–418.
Chalmers, D. J., French, R. M., & Hofstadter, D. R. (1991). HighLevel Perception, Representation, and Analogy: A Critique of
Artificial Intelligence Methodology. Journal of Experimental
and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, (March).
Falkenhainer, B. (1990). A unified approach to explanation and
theory formation. In J. Shrager & P. Langley (Eds.),
Computational Models of Scientific Discovery and Theory
Formation (pp. 157–196). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). Structre
Mapping Engine. Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1–63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-­‐Mapping: A Theoretical Framework
for Analogy*. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155–170.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Similarity, Interactive Activation, and
Mapping. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20(1), 3–28.
Goldstone, R. L., Landy, D., & Brunel, L. C. (2011). Improving
perception to make distant connections closer. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2(December), 385.
Harrod, R. (1956). Foundations of Inductive Logic. London:
Macmillan.
Hesse, M. (1966). Models and Analogies in Science. Notre Dame:
Notre Dame Press.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1995). Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies:
Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought.
Basic Books.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary
Journal, 13, 295–355.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access and
mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3), 427–466.
Laplace, P.-S. (1825). Philosophical Essay on Probabilities:
Springer Science & Business Media.
Lee, H. S., & Holyoak, K. J. (2008). The role of causal models in
analogical inference. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34(5), 1111–1122.
Lu, H., Chen, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Bayesian analogy with
relational transformations. Psychological Review, 119(October
2015), 617–648.
Mill, J. S. (1882). Chapter XX. Of Analogy. A System of Logic:
Ratiocinative and Inductive. 1882.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (1994). Predictions From Uncertain
Categorizations. Cognitive Psychology.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Norman, D. A. (1981). Analogical processes
in learning. In Cognitive Skills and Their Acquisition (335–359).
Wasserman, L. (2000). Bayesian Model Selection and Model
Averaging. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 44(1), 92–107.

1306

