Knowledge and use of price distributions by populations and individuals
Timothy F. Lew (tflew@ucsd.edu) and Edward Vul (evul@ucsd.edu)
University of California, San Diego
Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract

how they use that prior distributional knowledge to update
price estimates given new information (i.e. advertisements).
Although individuals appear to represent distributions of
values, different sources of errors and biases may impede
their ability to estimate the true mean and variance of values
as accurately as populations. First, individuals are likely to
experience an imperfectly representative fraction of the
world, resulting in idiosyncratic biases in their expectations.
Anchoring effects may bias individuals’ judgments, such
that hearing a high price causes people to overestimate the
prices of objects (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). People
might estimate the price of an object by comparing it to
other objects they have recently encountered (Ungemach, et
al., 2011; Vlaev, et al., 2011). Additionally, rather than
independently sample possible prices of objects, people may
be biased by their memories of previous responses (Vul &
Pashler, 2008; Hourihan & Benjamin, 2010). When
aggregating the judgments of a population of independent
individuals instead, many of these biases will wash out
allowing the population to represent the distribution more
accurately.
In turn, the limitations of people’s distributional
knowledge may determine how they infer the values of new
objects and how they integrate new sources of information.
For instance, how should a person infer the price of an
object when it is presented with an advertisement? People
may use Bayesian inference to determine how to use ads,
similar to how listeners infer the meaning of utterances in
the domain of pragmatic inference (Frank & Goodman,
2012). When referring to an object, listeners rely more
heavily on speakers’ utterances when no objects are
particularly salient (have a low prior probability of being
referred to). Similarly, people should rely on ads more
heavily when they are more uncertain about the price of an
object (i.e. when the price of a type of object varies greatly
between instances). Consequently, if people do not know
the dispersion of objects’ prices, they will be unable to
determine how much to rely on advertisements.
In the current study, we measured individuals’ and
populations’ knowledge of the prices of everyday objects. In
Experiment 1, we selected a set of object categories and
asked participants to make multiple guesses about the price
range of an object from each category. To measure
participants’ accuracy, we used Google Product search to
obtain the true prices of objects from each category. In
Experiment 2, participants performed the same price
estimation task but we presented the object categories with
positive or negative advertisement modifiers.

How much do individuals, compared to the population, know
about the distribution of values in the world? Participants
reported the prices of consumer goods such as watches and
belts and we compared how accurately individuals vs. the
overall population knew the mean and dispersion of prices.
Although individuals and the population both knew objects’
average prices and relative standard deviations, the population
was more sensitive to the absolute standard deviation of
prices. In a second experiment, we examined whether
individuals’ impoverished distribution knowledge impairs
their ability to interpret advertisements. Consistent with
people using Bayesian inference, the higher an object’s actual
price dispersion, the more participants relied on
advertisements; however, this effect is considerably smaller
than a simple proportional offset, suggesting again that
individuals underestimate dispersion. Thus, despite having a
sense of the distribution of real world quantities, individuals
tend to know only a fraction of the world distribution.
Keywords: Probabilistic inference;
behavioral economics; prior knowledge

decision-making;

Introduction
How much does a television cost? How about a television
endorsed by Quentin Tarantino? Chances are you can
accurately guess the prices of these and many other
everyday objects. People appear to use their knowledge of
how values are distributed (e.g. the mean and variance of a
value) to infer the prices of objects or other real-world
values like people’s life spans and cake baking times
(Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2006). This behavior can also arise
from people only knowing a few examples of values
(Mozer, Pashler & Homaei, 2008). For example, rather than
know the average time it takes to bake a cake and how much
baking times vary, each person may only know one or two
cake baking times. Aggregating over multiple people in a
population each with a few sample values can give the
appearance
of
individuals
representing
complex
distributions.
However, people only reporting a few car costs or baking
times may actually reflect them using knowledge of
distributions. Over multiple trials a single individual’s
responses resemble learned distributions (Lewandowsky, et
al., 2009), suggesting that people do represent the
distribution of real-world values. In fact, people appearing
to rely on only a few samples may actually reflect people
efficiently approximating complex distributions by taking a
few samples (Vul, et al., 2014). Here, we examined how
well individual people vs. populations know the distribution
of real world values—the prices of everyday objects—and

746

Participants accurately estimated the average prices of the
objects. Aggregating all of our participants’ responses
together revealed that the population was very well
calibrated to the dispersion of prices. However, while
individual participants knew which objects’ prices had
greater or lower dispersion, they severely underestimated
how much prices’ dispersions varied overall. In Experiment
2, advertisements influenced participants’ price estimates.
Participants guessed objects were cheaper when presented
with negative ads and more expensive when presented with
positive ads and weighted ads in proportion to the
dispersion of objects’ prices. But, consistent with
participants underestimating the dispersion of prices, the
interaction between advertisements and price dispersion was
relatively weak. Although people possess some
distributional knowledge, that knowledge is highly limited
compared to the knowledge of the population and falls far
short of the true distribution of values in the world.

discounting in behavior). Participants completed a varying
number of blocks, depending on how quickly they
completed each block. There were initially 29 participants;
23 returned for Session 2, 14 for Session 3 and 10 for
Sessions 4 and 5. By spacing out responses across sessions,
we hoped to decrease dependence between responses and
ascertain participants’ full distributional knowledge.
Stimuli. We selected 50 object categories (e.g. “Diamond
solitaire ring”, “Printer”), attempting to cover a wide span of
empirical log price means and variances while minimizing
the correlation between the empirical means and variances.
All of our subsequent analyses use the log prices. We
manually obtained object prices from Google Products
searches for the categories. Despite our efforts, variance in
log prices remained weakly, but significantly, correlated
with mean log price (r=.28, p=.048). Indeed, participants
appeared to expect a strong correlation, such that the means
and standard deviations of their responses were highly
correlated (r=.55, p<.001).

Experiment 1

Procedure. Each trial, participants saw the name of an
object category and a generic picture of that category
(Figure 1). We told participants that each trial we had
selected the price of a specific object from that category
using an Internet search; this discouraged subjects from
making repeated guesses or focusing on values like the
mean. Participants guessed the price of the object by
Slope = 0.82; r = 0.85; p<0.001
clicking on a log scale and then selecting a confidence
interval around their guessed price. Participants earned
points if the correct price was in the confidence interval. As
the size of the confidence interval increased, participants’
potential reward decreased and vice versa. Thus,
participants were incentivized to set a sufficiently narrow
confidence interval so that getting the correct answer was
rewarded, but a sufficiently broad confidence interval such
that they were likely to get a correct answer. To keep
participants motivated, every few trials we told participants
their current score.
Each block, participants guessed the price of objects from
a random subset containing 35 of the categories, block
randomized.

We evaluated how much individuals vs. the population
know about real-world price distributions by asking them to
guess the prices of objects multiple times.

wledge and use of price distributions Edward Vul!
Tim Lew!
Methods
opulations
and individuals!
UCSD Psychology!

estimated the price
by moving two sliders
sition and width of a
n a log scale (wider
smaller bets).!

:
w 1 of 50 product
picture.!
rials/S!

2:!
re randomly paired
descriptions”.!
rials/S!

Results

Figure 1. Example trial. Participants clicked to guess a price using
the horizontal slider and then set a confidence range using the
vertical slider. As participants adjusted the confidence slider, their
Slope
= 0.12; r = 0.51;
Slope = 0.48; r = 0.68;
p<0.001
current
bet was displayed. Here, the
participant
hasp<0.001
guessed the
ring costs $41.05 with aIndividual
range dispersion
from $10.12
toI: $166.00. If the
dispersion measure:
measure
viation (across-subjects)
of price falls in this
Meanrange,
(across-subjects)
of the within-subject
object’s
the participant
will earn 4.02
ect (across-guess) mean of
(across-guess) standard deviation of
points.
The
larger
the
range,
the
fewer
points.
Participants could
estimate.
log10 price estimates.
alternate between setting the guess and range. Exact bets and
ranges were displayed as participants made their choice.

participants
knowon
the average.!
mean price of objects? We
Population knows how much diﬀerentDid
things
cost
compared the empirical mean prices calculated from the
Google Product
search
results
to subjects’ estimated mean
Slope =
0.11; r = 0.63;
p<0.001
Individual
dispersion
II:
prices
(Figure
2).measure
Reported
mean price was strongly
Mean range of log10 price estimate interval.
correlated with the actual mean price (r=.85, p<.001),
demonstrating that subjects knew which products were more
or less expensive. To evaluate how well participants knew
the exact prices of goods, we found the best fitting linear
regression. A slope of 1 would indicate that on average
participants knew the exact prices of objects. The regression
line was close to one (m=.81, 95% confidence
interval=.67—.96), suggesting that together subjects knew
the mean prices of objects fairly accurately.

Participants. People from the Cambridge, MA community
participated as part of a paid, daylong behavioral economics
battery (the other study included in this battery is irrelevant
for the present purposes—it investigated delayed

747

Within-participant dispersion was significantly correlated
with the true dispersion (r=.51, p<.001), demonstrating that
participants knew which objects had more or less variable
prices. However, the slope of the linear regression was
much smaller (.12, 95% confidence interval=.064—.19)
than the across-participant slope, indicating that despite
knowing the relative dispersion of prices, individual
participants were not as well calibrated to the absolute
dispersion of prices as the overall population.
Did individual participants know the range of prices?
Confidence interval width was strongly correlated with the
true price variance (r=.63, p<.001) (Figure 3C) indicating
that participants possessed explicit knowledge about the
dispersion of prices. However, participants’ reported
confidence intervals and the dispersion of their responses
explained comparable amounts of the true dispersion of
prices. The 95% confidence interval of the confidence
interval regression slope (.11, 95% confidence
interval=.068—.15) overlapped with the within-participant
dispersion regression slope, indicating that they captured
similar levels of objects’ price dispersions. This suggests
that participants used the same impoverished knowledge of
price distributions when generating confidence intervals and
repeated guesses.

Figure 2. The mean reported price of objects as a function of their
true price. The grey line denotes equality. Participants possessed
very accurate knowledge of the average prices of objects.

Did the population know the dispersion of prices? We
compared the true dispersion of prices to the dispersion of
prices across all participants’ responses (Figure 3A). For
each object, we calculated the standard deviation of all the
guesses that all the participants made. The true and
estimated variances were strongly correlated (r=.68,
p<.001), demonstrating that the group knew which prices
were more or less variable. The slope of the linear
regression was .48 (95% confidence interval=.33—.63),
suggesting that the group accounted for roughly half of the
actual variability in prices.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that individuals represent the
mean and dispersion of object prices, but are not as well
calibrated on the dispersion of prices as the population. In
Experiment 2, we examined whether participants’ limited
knowledge of prices’ dispersions impaired their ability to
use advertisements to infer the prices of new objects.

Did individual participants know the dispersion of
prices? We next compared the true dispersion of prices to
the dispersion of individual participants’ responses (Figure
3B). For each participant, we calculated the standard
deviation of their responses for each object category. We
then found the average standard deviation of responses.

Figure 3. Across and within participant dispersion estimates as functions of the true price dispersions. A) The standard deviation of
responses, aggregated across participants. B) The average standard deviation of each participant’s responses. C) The average range of
participants’ confidence ranges. Grey lines indicate equality. Red lines with grey shading indicate linear regression fits with confidence
intervals. Participants were generally sensitive to the dispersion of prices, but the population was much better calibrated than individuals.

748

Figure 5. The influence of advertisement modifiers on price estimates. The percentile ranks of objects when accompanied
with each type of modifier. The centers of the red boxplots denote the average percentile ranks, the tops and bottoms of the
boxes denote ±1 SEM and the error bars indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles. The grey violin plots indicate the frequency of
different percentile ranks for a given advertisement. The effectiveness of ads greatly varied: Very negative modifiers (left
side) like “low quality” caused participants to think objects were cheaper, neutral modifiers (center) like “utilitarian” had
minimal effect and very positive modifiers (right side) like “used by Michael Jordan” caused participants to report more
expensive prices.
category, we rank ordered participants’ responses and then
converted the ranks to percentiles, such that the lowest and
highest estimates were the 0th and 100th percentiles,
respectively. We then found the average percentile for
objects that had been accompanied by each modifier.
Transforming responses into percentiles allowed us to
compare people’s price estimates despite the wide variance
in objects’ prices.
The efficacy of ads varied greatly (Figure 5). The most
negative ad, “low quality”, resulted in a mean rank of the
28th percentile (SEM=2.5) whereas the most positive ad,
“used by Michael Jordan” resulted in a mean rank of 70th
(SEM=3.0). These patterns demonstrate that participants
used advertisements to infer the price of objects.

Methods
Participants. The participant pool was identical to
Experiment 1. There were initially 25 participants; 24
returned for Session 2, 17 for Session 3 and 4 for Session 4
and 3 for more than 5 sessions (8, 14, and 24 sessions).
Stimuli. The stimuli were identical to Experiment 1.
However, each stimulus was now accompanied by one of 55
ads. 28 of the ads were positive (e.g. “award winning”,
“five-star”) and 27 were negative (e.g. “bargain”,
“overstock”). Each trial, we presented a random modifier
alongside the object category image, with the constraint that
objects in the same block could not have the same modifier.

Did uncertainty about the price of an object increase the
efficacy of advertisements? Participants may have relied
on not only the advertisements but also their own
knowledge about the distribution of objects’ prices. In
particular, we expected that participants would rely more
heavily on advertisements when objects’ prices varied more,
as a way to compensate for their uncertainty. Given that
individuals underestimated the dispersion of prices,
however, we were uncertain whether participants would be

Procedure. The procedure was identical to Experiment 1.

Results
Did the valence of ads affect participants’ judgments?
We first examined whether negative and positive
advertisements caused participants to judge objects as
cheaper and more expensive, respectively. For each object

749

able to use objects’ true price dispersions to determine how
much to rely on advertisements.
To test how people inferred the prices of objects, we used
the lme4 package for R to design a suite of mixed effects
models that utilized different types price and advertisement
information. First, participants may have solely relied on
their knowledge of objects’ average prices. We wrote an
average price model that treats objects’ true mean prices as
a fixed effect and participants and objects as random effects.
Second, to test whether participants used advertisements to
infer the prices of objects, we designed an advertisement
model that builds upon the average price model by treating
advertisements as a random effect. Finally, we evaluated
whether participants relied on ads more when the dispersion
of an objects’ prices was high. We designed an
advertisement-dispersion model that also accounts for the
standard deviation of prices by adding an interaction
between advertisements and the true price standard
deviation. Thus our full model is defined by:

negative valence ads for each object. This yielded an
average shift for positive ads and an average shift for
negative ads for each object. We then calculated the
absolute difference between the average positive ads and
average negative ads. Larger absolute differences indicate
that advertisements had a greater influence on the object’s
price (that is, the price was more malleable to the influence
of advertisements).
There was a significant positive correlation between
objects’ price dispersions and the difference between
positive and negative price estimates (r=.44, p=.0014)
(Figure 6), indicating that participants used price
distribution knowledge and advertisements to infer the
prices of novel objects. However, consistent with the small
improvement from the advertisement model to the full
model, the magnitude of the interaction between price
dispersions and ads was small. We compared the magnitude
of the ad random effects to the ad-dispersion random effects
and found that the ad-dispersion interaction accounted for
only 3% of the overall variance attributed to advertisements.
Thus, although participants relied more heavily on
advertisements when objects had highly variable prices,
participants’ impoverished knowledge limited their ability
to effectively weigh the value of ads.

log$% 𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒,,.,/ =
𝛽% + 𝛽$ 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 log$% 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒. + 𝛾, + 𝛿. +
𝜁/ +
𝜃/ 𝑆𝐷[log$% 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒. ]
log$% 𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒,,.,/ is participant p’s price estimate for
object i when it is accompanied by advertisement modifier
m. The second line corresponds to the nested average price
model. 𝛽% is the intercept and 𝛽$ is the coefficient for
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 log$% 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒. , the true mean price of the objects. 𝛾, is
the offset for each participant and 𝛿. is the offset for each
object. The third line corresponds to the additional
advertisement modifier coefficients for the advertisement
model. 𝜁/ is the offset for each ad. The fourth line
corresponds to the interaction between true price variance
and the advertisements in the advertisement-dispersion
model. 𝜃/ indicates how much each modifier affects
estimates as the standard deviation of prices,
𝑆𝐷[log$% 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒. ], changes.
Advertisements influenced participants’ responses, such
that the advertisement model fit (AIC=3757) participants’
behavior much better than the average price model
(AIC=4336, χ2(1)=580, p<.001). The advertisementdispersion model had a lower but comparable AIC
(AIC=3753) and provided a slightly better fit than the
advertisement model (χ2(2)=8.4, p=.015). This pattern is
consistent with participants using Bayesian inference to
integrate prior knowledge about the prices of objects with
new advertisements to determine value of novel objects.
Nevertheless, the small improvement from the
advertisement-dispersion interaction suggests participants’
still failed to fully account for the variability of prices.
To more directly evaluate the effect of price dispersion on
the use of ads, we used the full model to test whether the
influence of ads increased with the dispersion of prices. We
extracted the object-advertisement coefficient and then
separately averaged the coefficients for positive valence and

Figure 6. The influence of advertisements on price estimates given
the dispersion of objects’ prices. Advertisements had a larger
impact on guesses when objects had more disperse prices.

Discussion
We asked people to guess the prices of objects from
different categories and compared how well individuals vs.
the population knew the distribution of values. Although
individuals knew the mean price of objects well, they
greatly underestimated the dispersion of prices compared to
the population. Participants were also able to use their
knowledge of price distributions to determine how much to
rely on advertisements, but their behavior indicated that they
still only knew a fraction of the overall dispersion of prices.
Both individuals and the overall population exhibited
knowledge of the mean and the dispersion of prices in the
world, though our population was much better calibrated to
the absolute dispersion of prices. This deficiency may have

750

arisen from individuals being biased by their idiosyncratic
experiences and contexts. Seeing more or less expensive
objects could have resulted in participants anchoring their
responses and respectively making higher or lower guesses
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) or comparing our stimuli to
objects they had recently encountered (Ungemach, et al.,
2011; Vlaev, et al., 2011). In the future, accounting for
people’s histories, such as their socioeconomic
backgrounds, may reveal differences in their price
inferences.
Our experiments may have also been limited in their
ability to reveal people’s full knowledge of distributions.
Although we tried to increase the independence of responses
by spacing out sessions over hours, increasing delay
intervals to weeks or months could reveal more extensive
distribution knowledge. Vul & Pashler (2008), for example,
found that responses made even after 3 weeks were
relatively similar. Participants’ responses may have also
been influenced by decision biases. Participants, for
instance, might have been risk averse and reported the mean
to minimize their maximum loss or risk seeking and set
small confidence intervals. These strategies could have
limited participants’ apparent distributional knowledge.
Additionally, people most likely possess more complex
categorical knowledge about real-world values than just
individual object categories (Hemmer & Steyvers, 2009;
Hemmer & Persaud, 2014). The prices of cell phones,
televisions and computers, for instance, may all fall under
the category of electronics. People’s judgments about the
price of a new cell phone then might be constrained by both
their knowledge of how much cell phones cost and also how
much electronics in general cost. Furthermore, individual
differences in the categorization of objects (is a smartwatch
an electronic device or a fashion accessory?) may lead to
distinct biases in how people estimate prices.
People used their prior knowledge of price distributions
with advertisements to infer the prices of new objects,
relying more heavily on advertisements when objects had
highly variables prices. This behavior may reflect processes
comparable to linguistic pragmatic inference (Frank &
Goodman, 2012). In the case of pragmatic inference a
speaker’s utterance can help a listener select an object out of
a crowd. Similarly, if a person buying a car is uncertain
about the value of the car, an advertisement can help the
buyer infer whether it’s a steal or a lemon. Moving forward,
using the framework of pragmatic inference to examine the
role of advertisements in decision-making may help us learn
why the effectiveness of our modifiers varied so much and
how to craft more influential advertisements. More broadly,
this approach may give insights into questions like how ads
are interpreted in different contexts (Barner & Snedeker,
2008) and when people decide that ads are informative
(Frank & Goodman, 2014).
People have some knowledge about the distribution of
values in the world. Despite knowing the mean and the
relative dispersion of prices, they have a poor idea of how
much prices actually vary compared to the population.

Furthermore, their impoverished distribution knowledge
impairs their ability to appropriately weigh new information
like advertisements to infer the prices of novel objects. Our
future work will examine the sources of the idiosyncratic
limitations on people’s distribution knowledge.

References
Barner, D., & Snedeker, J. (2008). Compositionality and
statistics in adjective acquisition: 4-year-olds interpret tall
and short based on the size distributions of novel noun
referents. Child Development, 79(3), 594—608.
Frank, M.C., & Goodman, N.D. (2012). Predicting
pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science.
336(6084), 998-998.
Frank, M.C., & Goodman, N.D. (2014). Inferring word
meanings by assuming that speakers are informative.
Cognitive Psychology, 75, 80-96.
Griffiths, T.L., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2006). Optimal
predictions in everyday cognition. Psychological Science,
17(9), 767-773.
Hemmer, P., & Persaud, K. (2014). Interaction between
categorical knowledge and episodic memory across
domains. Frontiers in psychology, 5(584), 1-5.
Hemmer, P., & Steyvers, M. (2009). A Bayesian account of
reconstructive memory. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(1),
189-202.
Hourihan, K.L., & Benjamin, A.S. (2010). Smaller is better
(when sampling from the crowd within): Low memoryspan individuals benefit more from multiple opportunities
for estimation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(4), 1068-1074.
Lewandowsky, S., Griffiths, T.L., & Kalish, M.L. (2009).
The wisdom of individuals: Exploring people's knowledge
about everyday events using iterated learning. Cognitive
Science, 33(6), 969-998.
Mozer, M.C., Pashler, H., & Homaei, H. (2008). Optimal
predictions in everyday cognition: The wisdom of
individuals or crowds? Cognitive Science, 32(7), 11331147.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157),
1124-1131.
Ungemach, C., Stewart, N., & Reimers, S. (2011). How
incidental values from the environment affect decisions
about money, risk, and delay. Psychological Science,
22(2), 253-260.
Vlaev, I., Chater, N., Stewart, N., & Brown, G. D. (2011).
Does the brain calculate value? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 15(11), 546-554.
Vul, E., Goodman, N., Griffiths, T.L., & Tenenbaum, J.B.
(2014). One and done? Optimal decisions from very few
samples. Cognitive Science, 38(4), 599-637.
Vul, E. & Pashler, H. (2008). Measuring the crowd within:
probabilistic
representations
within
individuals.
Psychological Science, 19(7), 645-647.

751

