Language Informativity:
Is starfish more of a fish in English than in Dutch?
Farah M. Djalal (farahmutiasari.djalal@kuleuven.be)
Wouter Voorspoels (wouter.voorspoels@kuleuven.be)
Tom Heyman (tom.heyman@kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (gert.storms@kuleuven.be)
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Leuven,
Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
Two studies examined how lexical information contained in
words affects people’s category representations. Some words
are lexically suggestive regarding the taxonomic position of
their referent (e.g., bumblebee, starfish). However, this
information differs from language to language (e.g., in Dutch
the equivalent words hold no taxonomic information:
hommel, vlinder). Three language groups, Dutch, English, and
Indonesian speakers, were tested in similarity and typicality
judgment tasks. The results show that the lexical information
affects only the users of the language (e.g., Dutch speakers
rated Dutch-informative items, both in similarity and
typicality tasks, higher than English and Indonesian speakers).
Results are discussed in light of theories of concept
representation and the language relativity hypothesis.
Keywords: lexical; similarity; typicality; cognitive; concepts

Introduction
In concept research, the meaning of a word is generally
related to the properties of the (category of) objects it refers
to. These properties cover a broad range, such as physical,
contextual and taxonomic properties. This information is
activated when people have need of the word meaning, for
instance when they have to interpret the word in a sentence,
or make concept-dependent judgements, such as similarity
(how similar are salmon and trout) or categorization
decisions (is this novel object a fish?). A number of theories
propose that categorization follows a feature-based
approach, meaning that people tend to put objects in the
same category the more properties they have in common
(e.g., Clark, 1973; Nelson, 1974; Mervis, 1987). For
instance, an object that grows in soil and has branches and
leaves is called a tree. Consequently, all objects that share
the same features will be called a tree as well.
Language, however, is generally not considered merely a
system of signifiers that map on classes of objects with
certain (physical) properties. Indeed, it also entails a
particular way of carving up the world and manners of
thinking about reality, subtly encoding cultural knowledge,
and metaphors that describe ways of viewing natural
phenomena (e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). It is often
claimed that, when learning a language, one does not only
learn what the different words in a language refer to, but
also these more subtle aspects. In other words, learning a
particular language may have particular effects on thinking

about and perceiving the world (e.g., Casasanto, 2016;
Lucy, 2014).
The idea that language shapes thought and perception has
some interesting consequences, which become tangible
when considering the myriad of languages that can be found
in the world. According to language relativity, as two
languages are structurally different, their respective speakers
should differ in how they think, act and perceive in
objectively similar situations. This hypothesis has been
examined and confirmed in a number of cognitive domains.
The effects on cognition of particular manners of
classification have been documented in domains such as
color (e.g., Thierry, Athanasopoulos, Wiggett, Dering, &
Kuipers, 2009), causation (e.g., Fausey & Boroditsky 2011),
and space and motion (e.g., Slobin, 1996). Also, it has been
shown that grammatical categories such as gender and tense
have effects on cognitive tasks (e.g., Boroditsky, Schmidt,
& Phillips, 2003), and language specific metaphors that
describe abstract domains such as time, musical pitch and
mathematical and number terminology have been shown
influential in cognitive tasks in these domains (e.g.,
Casasanto, 2008; Dolscheid, Shayan, Majid, & Casasanto,
2013).
Considering the evidence available at the moment, the
question is not so much whether language can influence
thought, but how, in which domains and to what extent this
is the case. In the present study, we examine whether the
representation of categories in a taxonomically structured
domain are under influence of the vocabulary that a
language provides for the domains. In some cases, the name
that a language provides for a category of objects sometimes
holds information regarding its position in the taxonomic
structure. For example sunflower is a type of flower, a
bumblebee is closely related to bees, a goldfish is a type of
fish and a blackbird is a type of bird. Clearly, in English, the
names are more than just arbitrary signifiers, containing
what we will refer to as “lexical information”: Information
regarding the referent of a word that follows from the word
itself, generally because the name is a combination of
constituents of which at least one has a meaning in the
language. The obvious question from a language relativistic
point of view then is whether the availability of lexical
information in a name influences the representation of the
category it refers to. To the extent that languages differ in

1068

terms of lexical information, one may find representational
differences for everyday categories such as bumblebees or
cauliflowers1. From the perspective of the dominant theories
in concept representation (e.g., exemplar theory, Smith &
Medin, 1981; family resemblance, Rosch & Mervis, 1975;
prototype theory, Hampton, 1995), we do not expect
category labels to have any influence in how the category is
represented. Although some theories consider the labels to
be features that matter (e.g., the rational model of
categorization; Anderson, 1991), the labels are considered
arbitrary, and thus their meaning is not taken into account.
To examine whether a word’s lexical information influences
the representation of the object category it refers to, we look
at objects for which one language has a head noun that is
informative as to the object’s position in a broader
taxonomy, whereas the equivalent in another language does
not entail such information. The word bumblebee, for
instance, is informative in English, but not in Dutch, where
no reference to bee is made in the word (hommel) or in
Bahasa (i.e., the Indonesian language; kumbang).
Conversely, inktvis (squid) is suggestive in Dutch (i.e., the
word vis in Dutch means fish) but not in English (squid) or
Bahasa (cumi-cumi).
If the representation of object categories is influenced by
lexical information, we expect that people’s judgments
regarding the objects will subtly vary across language
groups in a systematic way, particularly when the judgments
rely on the representations of the categories. For example, as
starfish in English contains a category suggestion, but not in
Dutch, we expect English participants to judge a starfish to
be more similar to a goldfish than Dutch participants, as
starfish in Dutch does not hold the same category
suggestion (zeester). Moreover, we expect English
participants to judge starfish as more typical for the fish
category than Dutch participants. Similarity and typicality
are fundamental notions in concept representation research,
and directly related to how people represent classes of
objects. As such, they form a perfect arena to test whether
lexical information influences representation.

Study 1: Similarity
In the first study, we examined how lexical information
included in object names can influence people’s judgments
of similarity between two objects that share lexical category
information in their name (e.g., the Dutch pair walvis and
inktvis; in English, respectively, whale and squid) and
whether the three language groups, English, Dutch, and
Indonesian speakers, give higher similarity ratings for pairs
of items that are lexically informative in their own language.

Method
Participants Sixty English speakers (44 females and 16
males, mean age: 21 years and 10 months), 74 Dutch
speakers (59 females and 15 males, mean age: 18 years and
3 months), and 60 Indonesian speakers (33 females and 27
males, mean age: 24 years and 6 months) were tested. Two
Indonesian participants were excluded from the analyses as
there was no variability in their answers. The Dutch
speakers were students who got credits in exchange for
participation, the Indonesian participants were students who
live and study in Indonesia, and the English speakers were
recruited online using Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Material2 A list of 70 questions was presented in a web
survey. Each question contained a pair of words that shared
the same lexical information in one of the three languages.
In 16 word pairs the words were informative in Dutch but
not in English nor in Bahasa (e.g., wasbeer and beer
[raccoon and bear]; aardappel and sinaasappel [potato and
orange]), 16 word pairs were informative in Bahasa but not
in English nor in Dutch (e.g., ikan hiu and ikan pari [shark
and stingrays]; burung hantu and burung kakaktua [owl and
cockatoo]), and 16 word pairs were informative in English
(e.g., bumblebee and bee; catfish and jellyfish), but not in
Dutch nor Bahasa. As fillers, eight word pairs were
informative in all three languages and 14 word pairs were
uninformative in all the three languages.
Procedure Dutch and Indonesian participants were given a
link to an online survey, whereas the English speakers
participated via Mechanical Turk. In the survey, each word
pair was presented in the format: “How similar are X and
Y?”. Participants answered on a 10-point rating scale
ranging from 1 (not at all similar) to 10 (extremely similar).
The survey took about 5 to 7 minutes. All items were
translated into the three languages and all three groups of
participants received the survey in their own languages
Thus, with the exception of the filler items, items that were
informative in one language were uninformative in the other
two languages. Each participant was randomly assigned to
one of four randomized orders of the items sets.

Results and Discussion
First, the consistency of the similarity judgments within
each language group was computed using the split-half
method combined with the Spearman-Brown formula. The
reliability estimates for English, Dutch, and Indonesian
speakers were, respectively, .80, .89, and .90, indicating a
high agreement among participants of the same language
group in the similarity judgment task. Next, we computed
average similarity scores by first calculating by-participant

1

Obviously, a cauliflower is not a flower. Some names provide
useful taxonomic information, but sometimes the information can
be misleading. Another example: the word whale in Dutch (walvis)
wrongly implies that the animal belongs in the fish category. We
will consider both cases.

1069

2 In a pilot study, different participants from the three language
groups were asked to judge the familiarity of all the objects’
names on a 10-point scale. The results revealed that participants
were relatively familiar with all items.

conditional means and then collapsing across participants
(see the upper panel of Figure 1).

Figure 1: Averaged raw (upper panel) and z-transformed
(lower panel) similarity scores in each condition with 95%
confidence intervals. The z-transformed values reflect the
effect of lexical informativity, controlled for differences
between language groups and item groups.
In order to test the hypothesis that people’s similarity
judgments are influenced by the lexical information in the
objects’ names, mixed effect analyses were performed on
the similarity judgment scores. In the analyses, the language
group (English, Dutch, and Indonesian speakers) and the
language informativity were included as fixed effects,
whereas participants and items were included as random
effects such that a maximal random structure was created
(Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tilly, 2013). The crucial test of
the linguistic relativity hypothesis concerns the interaction
between language group and language informativity: If
lexical information influences the similarity judgments, we
expect that two categories are judged more similar by
speakers of the language in which the categories’ names are
informative. To test for this interaction, a model that
includes the interaction term was compared with a model
that does not. The analyses were carried out in R (version
3.1.2) using the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, &
Walker, 2014). As predicted, the analyses revealed a

significant language group × language informativity
interaction (χ²(4) = 34.49, p < .001), suggesting that
similarity judgments can be influenced by lexical
information. However, the interpretation of the interaction is
not that straightforward, because baseline similarity scores
differed in the three language groups. This is best
exemplified by a separate analyses of the filler data, which
showed a strong effect of language group (χ²(2) = 26.60, p <
.001). Remember, fillers were either uninformative or
informative in all three languages, so this finding entails that
the three language groups have diverging baselines.
To aid the interpretation of the language group × language
informativity interaction, we transformed the similarities
into z-scores for every participant separately, after which
by-participant conditional means were calculated.
Collapsing across participants then yields the average
similarity scores shown in the lower panel of Figure 1 (some
are negative as a result of the by-participant ztransformation). Figure 1 suggests that items informative in
a certain language receive relatively higher similarity ratings
from the speakers of that language. Additional contrast
analyses performed on the untransformed similarity data
confirmed this (β = 0.86, SE = 0.26, Z = 3.25, p = .001, for
Bahasa; β = 1.17, SE = 0.25, Z = 4.66, p < .001, for Dutch;
and β = 1.07, SE = 0.23, Z = 4.73, p < .001, for English)3.
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that each
language group judges similarity higher for item pairs that
are lexically informative in their own language.
In general, it is assumed that people judge similarity
based on features that objects have in common. However,
this study shows that lexical information may also affect
similarity judgments between two objects, even when it
concerns objects that are rather perceptual in nature. Note
that the participants were most likely not aware of the
purpose of the study, as nothing in the instructions hinted at
the research question of interest, and the item list contained
a relatively large number of fillers. This finding suggests
that the particular language, and the implicit cultural
knowledge it carries, can influence people’s judgments.

Study 2: Typicality
In Study 2, we examine whether lexical information that is
included in objects’ names could affect people’s typicality
judgments. Typicality refers to the graded membership
structure of concepts, and is considered a crucial variable in
natural language concept research (see, e.g., Rosch &
Mervis, 1975). Similar to Study 1, items that are informative
either in English, Dutch or Bahasa were presented in order
to investigate whether language users rate typicality higher
for words that are informative in their own language.

3 The statistical model is the same as in the previous analyses,
except that Helmert coding was used to extract the relevant
comparisons. Furthermore, to obtain p-values, we treated the tstatistic as a z-statistic following Barr and colleagues (2013, p.
266).The data and the scripts of the mixed effects analyses can be
found on osf.io/tfqhw.

1070

Method
Participants Sixty one English speakers (46 females and 15
males, mean age: 22 years and 4.5 months), 60 Dutch
speakers (48 females and 12 males, mean age: 18 years and
5 months), and 67 Indonesian speakers (41 females and 25
males, mean age: 24 years and 8 months) participated in the
second study. One participant was excluded since she was
originally from Malaysia and spoke Malay as her mother
tongue. None of them participated in Study 1, nor were they
aware of the purpose of this study. The Dutch speakers were
students who got credits in exchange for participation, the
Indonesian participants were students who live and study in
Indonesia, and the English speakers were recruited online
using Mechanical Turk.
Materials A list of 46 questions was presented to the
participants in a website survey. Six items were most
informative in English (e.g., ladybird, eggplant, jellyfish),
six items were most informative in Dutch (e.g., kikkervisje,
inktvis, stinkdier [tadpole, squid, skunk]), and another six
items were most informative in Bahasa (e.g., ikan hiu,
burung hantu, burung kakaktua [shark, owl, cockatoo]). The
remaining items were fillers, consisting of eight items that
were informative in all three languages (English, Dutch, and
Bahasa), and 20 items that were not informative in any of
the three languages.
Procedure All questions were of the following format:
“How typical is x for the category of X?”. All informative
items (x) were paired with the category name (X) that was
included in the objects’ name. For example: “How typical is
a goldfish for the category of fish?”. Participants were asked
to answer on a 10-point scale rating, ranging for 1
(extremely atypical) to 10 (extremely typical). The survey
took about 3 to 5 minutes. All participants were tested in
their own language and received one out of three sets of
questions, which only differed in the order of the items.

Figure 2: Averaged raw (upper panel) and z-transformed
(lower panel) typicality scores in each condition with 95%
confidence intervals. The z-transformed values reflect the
effect of lexical informativity, controlled for differences
between language groups and item groups.

Results and Discussion
The consistency of the typicality judgments in each
language group was computed using the same method as in
Study 1 (i.e., split-half method combined with the
Spearman-Brown formula). The results were, for English,
Dutch, and Indonesian speakers, respectively, .91, .91, and
.97. These results indicate a very high consistency between
subjects in each language group (see the upper panel of
Figure 2 for the average typicality scores in each condition).
Mixed effects analyses were then performed on the
typicality judgment scores in order to investigate whether
lexical information included in objects’ names could affect
people’s typicality judgments. The analyses were run in the
exact same manner as in Study 1. Again, the effect of
interest in this study, the interaction between language
group and language informativity, was statistically
significant (χ²(4) = 13.08, p = .011).

As in Study 1, the interpretation of the interaction gets
clouded by cross-cultural differences in baseline (typicality)
judgements. More specifically, analyses of the filler data
showed a main effect of language group once again (χ²(2) =
7.96, p = .019). Analogous to Study 1, we first transformed
the typicality judgments into z-scores per participant, then
we calculated by-participant conditional means, and finally
we collapsed across participants to obtain the average
typicality scores shown in the lower panel of Figure 2. The
pattern of results looks very similar to those displayed in
Figure 1. That is, items informative in a certain language
receive relatively higher typicality ratings from the speakers
of that language. Additional contrast analyses performed on
the untransformed typicality data are in line with this,
although the effect did not reach statistical significance for
Bahasa (β = 0.89, SE = 0.57, Z = 1.54, p = .123, for Bahasa;
β = 1.19, SE = 0.49, Z = 2.42, p = .015, for Dutch; and β =
1.52, SE = 0.43, Z = 3.57, p < .001, for English).
The results of Study 2 suggest that in all three language
groups, participants rated typicality higher for items that
were informative in their respective languages. Similar to

1071

Study 1, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that
people are influenced by lexical information in giving
typicality judgments, even if sometimes the lexical
information provided is misleading (e.g., starfish and inktvis
[squid] rated as more typical members of category fish for,
respectively, English and Dutch speakers). Again, it seems
that not only non-lexical features are considered when
making these judgments – as is the general assumption of
models of concept representation – but also suggestive
information that is available in the linguistic name of an
object.

General Discussion
Two studies were conducted to investigate the influence of
lexical information on semantic tasks related to taxonomic
concept representation. In Study 1, evidence was found that
participants rated similarity higher for item pairs that were
informative in their language, as well as in Study 2, where
the participants judged typicality higher when the items’
name was suggestive of a particular taxonomic position in
their mother tongue. Interestingly, these findings suggest
that language has some influence on how categories are
represented simply by means of the particular names that are
used. Not only does this finding have consequences for
models of concept representation and categorization, it is
also interesting to consider it in light of the discussion
concerning the influence language can have on thought.

More than features?
Both the similarity and typicality judgment task showed that
even if the information contained in the objects’ names was
misleading, people are tempted to use this information to
categorize the object. While this is an interesting finding as
such, the obvious question is which cognitive processes
underlie the observed effect of lexical information. Broadly
speaking, the effect can be driven either by the
representation that is influenced by the label, or the response
processes underlying the judgment.
At a representational level, it is possible that some
features of the informative constituent of the label are
automatically transferred to the representation of the
category the label refers to. For example, the representation
of ‘star fish’ in English speakers may automatically include
some features of fish, by virtue of the label. When making a
judgment of similarity or typicality, these features, although
not experientially acquired, will make the categories more
similar, or typical: a starfish will be considered more typical
of fish and more similar to goldfish because of these
transferred features. Alternatively, it may be merely because
of the label. According to the rational model of
categorization, labels are just another feature, without any
special status. Thus, according to this approach, a similarity
or typicality judgment also relies on the label, and shared
labels or partly shared labels are expected to influence the
judgment.
The effect could also reside at the response level. Given
that in both experiments, informative trials presented

participants with two labels that share a constituent, it is
possible that participants were influenced by the mere
commonality in the labels. This explanation would imply
that whatever the label, independent of it being informative
or not, commonality between labels will influence
judgments of typicality and similarity (for example, this
would imply that English speakers judge a beer and a
beehive more similar than Dutch speakers). While this is not
our preferred interpretation, it cannot be refuted on the basis
of the two experiments presented here.
To examine this hypothesis, an additional ongoing study
is conducted using pairs of items in which an item with
lexical information is paired with an item that is considered
to be a typical member of the category mentioned in the
name of the first item (e.g., salmon and jellyfish and
salmon). As in the present studies, critical items are only
informative in one language. In this way, the idea that
people make an inference about the likely relation between
the words (e.g., share the ending ‘-fish’) can be controlled.
Importantly, while we cannot conclude to either
explanation, our results do not in any way contradict the
basic idea that similarity drives categorization, nor that
perceptual, contextual and relational features are important.
In general, people do categorize objects based on these
features and then compare them with the other members or
the prototype of the category. However, relying on features
– in the traditional sense – may not tell the complete story.
As demonstrated in Djalal, Ameel, Heyman, and Storms
(2016), there is no clear-cut correspondence between the
generated features and the prediction of category
membership, and thus it should not come as a surprise that
sometimes information of a different nature is relied upon.

Language shapes thought?
The present study provides evidence for language specific
characteristics being influential in two fundamental
cognitive tasks that have been extensively shown to rely on
concept representation. The leap to concluding that the
labels in a language can influence meanings should not be
made without care, however. For one, as explained in the
previous section, the effect may reside at the response level.
Here, we consider another possible explanation that points
to a particularly subtle way of how language can shape
behaviour in certain tasks. Perhaps the effect of label
informativity depends on uncertainty. When people cannot
form a sufficiently detailed image of the object a word is
referring to, they may rely on other sources of information,
one of which is the knowledge encoded in the labels of the
language. For example, when people are uncertain as to
whether a squid is a fish (a boundary case at least for some
people), Dutch speakers may indeed rely on the “cultural
knowledge” present in their language (in which the word for
squid makes reference to fish) as a source of information,
whereas English and Bahasa speakers do not have this
knowledge available. While most objects used in the present
studies were relatively familiar to participants, this
interpretation requires further examination.

1072

While not a mere response effect, relying on language in
this way is presumably not what is understood when
theorizing about language and though. However, the
question is whether the potential relation with an
individual’s knowledge would make the observed effect less
interesting. Perhaps one of the most basic ways in which
culture, and language, are influential in a person’s behaviour
and thought, is the mere fact that she can rely on knowledge
that is encoded in the culture, without the need for first-hand
experience.
In sum, the present findings in the domain of concept
representation are consistent with the (abstract) hypothesis
that language shapes thought, but more importantly, they
point to a number of hypotheses as to the cognitive
processes or representational differences involved in the
behavioural effects.

Acknowledgments
Farah M. Djalal is sponsored by a graduate scholarship
financed by the ‘Bijzonder Onderzoeksfonds’ of the
University of Leuven. Tom Heyman is a research fellow of
the Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen).
Wouter Voorspoels is a post doc at KU Leuven. The data
are stored and can be accessed in Open Science Framework
(osf.io/tfqhw). Correspondence should be addressed to
Farah M. Djalal, Department of Psychology, University of
Leuven, Belgium. Email address: farahmutiasari.djalal@
kuleuven.be.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98(3), 409-429. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.98.3.409.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language,
68(3),
255-278.
doi:
10.1016/j.jml.2012.11.001.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4
(Version 1.1-7). Retrieved from: http://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=lme4.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L. A., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex,
syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner and S. GoldinMeadow (Eds.), Language in Mind: Advances in the Study
of Language and Thought (pp. 61-79). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Casasanto, D. (2008). Who’s afraid of the Big Bad Whorf?
Cross-linguistic differences in temporal language and
thought. Language Learning, 58(1), 63-79. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-9922.2008.00462.x
Casasanto, D. (2016). Linguistic relativity. In N. Riemer
(Ed.), Routledge Handbook of Semantics (pp. 158-174).
New York: Routledge.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What's in a word? On the child's
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E.

Moore (Ed.). Cognitive development and the acquisition of
language. New York: Academic Press.
Djalal, F. M., Ameel, E., Heyman, T., & Storms, G. (2016).
On the (mis)match of extension and intension in children’s
and adults’ categories: Features do not tell the whole
story. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Dolscheid, S., Shayan, S., Majid, A., & Casasanto, D.
(2013). The thickness of musical pitch: Psychophysical
evidence for linguistic relativity. Psychological Science
24(5), 613-621. doi: 10.1177/0956797612457374
Fausey, C. M. & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Who dunnit? Crosslinguistic
differences
in
eye-witness
memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 18(1), 150-157. doi:
10.3758/s13423-010-0021-5
Hampton, J. A. (1995). Testing the prototype theory of
concepts. Journal of Memory and Language, 34(5), 686708. doi: 10.1006/jmla.1995.1031.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphorical
structure of the human conceptual system. Cognitive
Science,
4(2),
195-208.
doi:
10.1207/s15516709cog0402_4
Lucy, J. A. (2014). Methodological approaches in the study
of linguistic relativity. In L. Filipović & M. Pütz (Eds.),
Multilingual Cognition and Language Use: Processing
and Typological Perspectives (pp. 17-44). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Mervis, C. B. (1987). Child-basic object categories and
early lexical development. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Concepts
and conceptual development: ecological and intellectual
factors in categorization (pp. 201-233). Cambridge
University Press.
Nelson, K. (1974). Concept, word, and sentence:
Interrelations
in
acquisition
and
development.
Psychological
Review,
81(4),
267-285.
doi:
10.1037/h0036592.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family
resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of
categories. Cognitive Psychology,
7(4),
573-605.
doi:
10.1016/0010-0285(75)90024-9.
Slobin, D. I. (1996). From “thought and language” to
“thinking for speaking.” In J. J. Gumperz and S. C.
Levinson (Eds.) Rethinking Linguistic Relativity (pp. 7096). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and
concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thierry, G., Athanasopoulos, P., Wiggett, A., Dering, B., &
Kuipers, J. R. (2009). Unconscious effects of languagespecific terminology on pre-attentive color perception.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
106(11), 4567-4570. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811155106.

1073

