Language Evolution in the Lab: The Case of Child Learners
Limor Raviv1 (limor.raviv@mail.huji.ac.il) & Inbal Arnon2 (inbal.arnon@gmail.com)
1

Department of Cognitive Science, 2Department of Psychology, Hebrew University, Jerusalem

Abstract
Recent work suggests that cultural transmission can lead to
the emergence of linguistic structure as speakers’ weak
individual biases become amplified through iterated learning.
However, to date, no published study has demonstrated a
similar emergence of linguistic structure in children. This gap
is problematic given that languages are mainly learned by
children and that adults may bring existing linguistic biases to
the task. Here, we conduct a large-scale study of iterated
language learning in both children and adults, using a novel,
child-friendly paradigm. The results show that while children
make more mistakes overall, their languages become more
learnable and show learnability biases similar to those of
adults. Child languages did not show a significant increase in
linguistic structure over time, but consistent mappings
between meanings and signals did emerge on many
occasions, as found with adults. This provides the first
demonstration that cultural transmission affects the languages
children and adults produce similarly.
Keywords: language evolution; cultural
iterated learning; developmental differences

transmission;

Introduction
Usage-based theories suggest that the kinds of structures we
observe in natural languages arise from general biases and
constraints on human capacities, such as learning, memory
and processing (Tomasello, 2009). Importantly, these weak
individual tendencies can become amplified and fixated
over time through the process of cultural transmission: the
transmission of language over generations through a
repeated cycle of use, imitation, observation and induction
(Kirby, Griffiths & Smith, 2014). Iterated learning models
(ILMs), which simulate the process of cultural transmission
of a given behavior over multiple generations, support this
theory by showing how the iterative nature of cultural
transmission can lead to the creation of strong linguistic
universals without the need to assume strong innate biases.
Mathematical and computational simulations of iterated
learning show that cultural transmission amplifies weak
cognitive biases over time by shaping structural properties
to fit agents' existing tendencies and predispositions (Reali
& Griffiths, 2009). Moreover, findings from non-linguistic
ILM studies with adult participants that examine the
transmission of various behaviors (e.g., drawings, whistles,
gestures, visual patterns) show that the learned behaviors
become significantly more predictable and more structured
over generations (Cornish, Smith & Kirby 2013; Verhoef,
Kirby & de Boer 2014). In particular, systems become
easier to learn, with participants in later generations making
considerably fewer mistakes. Notably, systems also become
less random and more structured over time, often displaying

compositional structure and consistent reuse of smaller
building blocks.
Linguistic ILM studies, which are the most relevant to
the question of language evolution, show that language
learnability increases thanks to an increase in linguistic
structure (Kirby, Cornish & Smith, 2008). The languages
produced in these studies develop consistent mappings
between meanings and signals over time, with similar
meanings expressed using similar strings. This is achieved
either by the creation of homonyms that mark a shared
dimension (e.g., color) but lead to under-specification, or by
developing morphological structure, in which different
affixes are used to encode different semantic dimensions.
While these findings support the role of cultural
transmission in language evolution, they are limited to adult
learners. Only one study has used ILM to compare children
to adults on a non-linguistic task (Kempe, Gauvrit &
Forsyth, 2015), and no published study has looked at the
emergence of linguistic structure over time in children. Yet
such findings are crucial for making inferences on how
learning biases may affect language structure. In particular,
adult participants may rely on their extensive and explicit
linguistic knowledge when learning an unfamiliar artificial
language (Cornish, Tamariz & Kirby, 2009). Consequently,
they may have a prior bias in favor of linguistic structure,
which (consciously or not) influences their performance,
causing structure to emerge. In other words, the structure
observed in adult studies may not reflect a cognitive bias
responsible for the evolution of language over time, but
rather a bias that is the result of it. If this is true, we cannot
draw strong conclusions from these findings on the
processes underlying the emergence of linguistic structure
in the first place. This criticism can be avoided by looking at
children, who have less extensive experience with language
(Ramscar & Gitcho, 2007). The lack of evidence from child
learners is also problematic because children are the most
frequent learners in the actual process of linguistic cultural
transmission. Their performance is a test case for the
verification of the hypothesis that structure can emerge over
time through cultural transmission.
Interestingly, several different predictions can be made
regarding children's possible performance in this paradigm:
On the one hand, children may be expected to perform like
adults, or even better, given their superior language learning
abilities in real-world settings (Birdsong, 1999). This
prediction is consistent with the claim that children have a
special role in the formation of linguistic structure
(Bickerton, 1984). Studies with deaf children who are born
to hearing parents (and were not exposed to a formal sign
language) suggest that children have unique abilities in
imposing structure and introducing regularities like word
1

1643

order that are not found in the gestures of their mothers
(Goldin-Meadow & Mylander, 1998). Moreover, research
on the developing Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL)
suggests that not only do younger learners reach better
fluency, but that NSL has evolved to be more learnable and
more grammatically structured in the second generation of
child learners (Senghas & Coppola, 2001). This prediction
is also supported by the single ILM study that compares
children to adults on the same non-linguistic task: Kempe et
al. (2015) found that in a visual recall task, children created
more identifiable and less complex visual patterns in
comparison to adults. They conclude that structure (or less
random patterns) emerged more readily in child chains, with
children reducing complexity to a level that allowed them to
reproduce the patterns as successfully as adults – despite
having inferior visual working memory. Taken together,
these findings suggest that children may impose more
structure compared to adults.
On the other hand, children have less mature cognitive
resources (e.g., working memory) and are generally worse
in artificial language learning tasks in laboratory settings
(Ferman & Karni, 2010; Perry, Axelsson & Horst, 2015),
suggesting they might show inferior performance overall.
There are also reasons to believe that children differ from
adults in their learning and processing skills, which may
lead to different biases, different preferences and different
trends of learning across development (Arcuili & Simpson,
2011; Hudson-Kam & Newport, 2005). Supporting this
claim, artificial language learning studies show clear agerelated differences in both learning and generalization:
children are more conservative in learning a new structures
in comparison to adults (Boyd & Goldberg, 2012), and
overgeneralize more than adults (Wonnacott, Brown &
Nation, 2013). Importantly, if children are guided by biases
that are quantitatively and/or qualitatively different than
adults', like overgeneralization and eliminating variation,
they may differ in their sensitivity to cultural transmission
effects and may exhibit different patterns entirely.

The Current Study
Our goal is to contrast these two predictions by conducting
the first large-scale study of iterated language learning in
children and adults. We use a novel, child-friendly paradigm
that closely resembles previous work with adults.
Importantly, we will use the same task with both age groups
to enable the comparison between them, as was done in
Kempe et al. (2015). We examine the changes in the
structure and learnability1 of the languages produced by
children and adults over time, with two questions in minds:
(1) Is there an overall difference in performance between
children and adults? (2) Will children, like adults, produce
more learnable and more structured languages over time?
Given that skills like statistical learning, explicit learning,
1 Thanks to Smith & Kirby, who kindly provided us with their
code for these analyses, we were able to use the same algorithms to
compute structure and learnability as used in the original paper.

attention and working memory all improve with age, we
predict some degree of difference in the overall performance
between children and adults. However, we ask whether
cultural transmission affects both age groups in a similar
way, resulting in similar trends and rate of change. As
children may have different biases for regularization,
generalization and systemization, linguistic structure may
emerge faster in one of the age groups.
Importantly, we will directly compare the performance of
children and adults by using a more sensitive statistical
analysis than used in previous studies. Unlike Kirby et al.
(2008), in which the increase in structure and learnability
was demonstrated by examining the differences between the
first and last generation only, we will examine the course of
change over all 10 generations by using regression models.
Using regression models has several advantages: we can see
changes in linguistic parameters across the course of all
generations, rather than just the first and the last; we can
examine interactions between our effects of interest, like age
group and the effect of time; and we can control for several
factors (e.g., gender) and for individual differences using
random slopes and intercepts.

Method
The experiment utilizes a diffusion chain paradigm, the
most common technique in ILM studies, in which all
learners (apart from those in the initial generation) are
trained on the output produced by previous learners in the
chain. Diffusion chains in this experiment consisted of 10
generations of single participants. Our design is based on
Experiment 1 in Kirby et al. (2008) with the following
modifications: we used alien figures instead of geometric
shapes; the number of items was reduced by half; a human
experimenter interactively accompanied the learning; and
we used a "syllable bank" instead of free typing. All other
conditions were matched to Kirby et al. (2008), including a
learning bottleneck, three dimensions of meaning, varying
length of words and multiple diffusion chains. In this
experiment, there were no limitations on the number of
repeated words participants can produce. In Kirby et al.
(2008), this design led to a decrease in the number of unique
words (improving learnability but creating ambiguities) and
to the emergence of linguistic structure, with homonyms
assigned according to some semantic dimension.

Participants
90 children (age range: 6.5-12y, mean age: 8:8y, 41 boys
and 49 girls) and 40 adults (age range: 21-68y, mean age
33y, 10 men and 30 women), comprising a total of 4 distinct
adult chains and 9 distinct child chains. All child
participants were visitors at the Bloomfield Science
Museum in Jerusalem and were recruited for this study as
part of their visit in the Israeli Living Lab in exchange for a
small reward. Of the adult participants, half were family
members visiting the Living Lab and half were
undergraduate students at the Hebrew University, recruited

2

1644

for this study for credit or a small payment. All participants
were native literate speakers of Hebrew.

Materials
At the beginning of each diffusion chain, 12 words were
randomly drawn from a closed set of 16 nonsense words2,
all of which did not contain or resemble any existing words
in Hebrew (as judged by a separate sample of native
speakers). These 12 words were then randomly assigned as
labels to 12 different items, creating the initial language on
which the first participant was trained. We used different
types of alien figures, appearing in different colors, either
alone or in a group. Thus, items varied along three semantic
dimensions: alien type (A, B or C), color (blue or red) and
plurality (single or plural). Stimuli included all possible
combinations of these three semantic dimensions. Figure 1
below shows the meaning-space structure used in this task,
with an example on either side:

Figure 1: The three semantic dimensions of items in the task

Procedure
Participants were told they are about to learn an alien
language that describes many different types of aliens, and
that they should try and learn it as best they can. The
experiment had three stages: initial exposure, practice and
test. Participants were always exposed to a random subset of
the target language (SEEN words) during initial exposure
and practice, simulating a learning bottleneck. Specifically,
participants were trained on just 9 out of 12 words in the
language, yet were tested on all items, including UNSEEN
words. Note that while adult participants in Kirby et al.
(2008) were trained for over 45 minutes, such long sessions
are impractical with children. We therefore settled on two
sets of exposure to the SEEN words, once during initial
exposure (including active verbal production) and once
during practice (including active written reconstruction).
The initial exposure phase consists of a random sequence
of items from the SEEN subset appearing on the screen
together with their label. The experimenter read the label
out loud several times and encouraged participants to
remember this pairing. Both children and adults were
required to reproduce the label aloud before moving on to
the next item. During the following practice phase,
participants were exposed again to all SEEN items and then
had to recreate the labels using a pre-given "syllable bank".
Then, participants completed a test phase: they were
2 All words in the initial and later languages were limited to the
same 8 syllables, chosen based on Hebrew phonology: "šu", "gu",
"di", "ki", "so", "mo", "bal" and "taz". We included CVC syllables
with open vowels, which are common used in Hebrew.

presented with a series of items without labels, and were
required to provide the correct labels according to what
they've learned so far, using the same "syllable bank".
Importantly, transmission was implemented in the
following way: for each participant, we took the 12 labels
produced by him/her during the test and used them as the
input language for the next participant in the chain.
Specifically, while the first participant was trained on the
random initial language drawn by the computer, the second
participant learned the language produced by the first
participant, and so on for 10 generations of participants.

Results
We examine the performance of children and adults on the
same task by looking at two parameters: (1) language
learnability, measured by transmission error (normalized
Levinstein distances between input and output strings); and
(2) linguistic structure, measured with the z-scores produced
by a Monte-Carlo algorithm with 1,000 iterations, in respect
to the degree of similarities between signals and meanings
in a given language (Pearson correlation between form and
meaning distances). For a detailed explanation regarding the
coding of these parameters, see Kirby et al. (2008).
The transmission error reflects participants’ accuracy in
reproducing the language, with easier languages eliciting
fewer mistakes. Thus, an increase in learnability should be
accompanied by a decrease in transmission error. As for
structure, the z-score (or structure score) of a given
language indicates how likely it is that its structure is
created by chance. The higher the z-score is, the smaller the
chances that the mapping between words and meanings in
this language is random. Thus, an increase in linguistic
structure should result in a significant increase in structure
score. If the structure score for a given language is higher
than 1.96, the language has significantly consistent
mappings between words and meanings which is less than
5% likely to have been created by chance.

Language Learnability
Figure 2 shows the changes in mean transmission error as a
function of time in both child and adult chains. A decrease
in error over generations indicates an increase in language
learnability. As can be seen, transmission error generally
decreased over time. Following Kirby et al. (2008), we
examined the difference in error between the first and final
generations. This analysis confirmed a significant reduction
in error for both children (mean error at generation 1 =0.75,
mean error at generation 10 =0.43, t(8.2)=3, p<0.05) and
adults (mean error at generation 1 =0.69, mean error at
generation 10 =0.15, t(5.1)=9.91, p<0.01).
We used a mixed-effect linear regression model to predict
mean transmission error in each generation (Table 1). The
fixed effects were gender, generation number, age group
and the interaction between the latter two. The model had
the maximal random effects structure justified by the data
that would converge, including random intercepts for
different chains.
3

1645

Language Structure

Figure 2: Mean transmission error by generation number
and age group.
Table 1: Learnability model
Estimate

Std. Error

z value

p-value

(Intercept)

0.35943

0.0416

8.63893

< .001 ***

Generation Number

-0.05099

0.00933

-5.46028

< .005 **

Age Group (Children vs. Adults)

0.19643

0.04973

3.94921

< .005 **

Gender (Male vs. Female)

-0.02982

0.03213

-0.92797

> .1

Age Group X Generation Number

0.00549

0.01136

0.48344

> .1

The model showed that generation number has a strong
negative effect on transmission error, with errors
significantly decreasing over generations (β=-0.05,
SE=0.009, t=-5.46, p<0.005). That is, the languages of both
children and adults become easier to learn over time. We
found a significant difference between children and adults,
with the mean transmission error being significantly higher
in children (β=0.19, SE=0.04, t=3.94, p<0.005). This
suggests that children make more mistakes than adults
overall. Crucially, the interaction between age group and
generation number was not significant (β=0.005, SE=0.01,
t=0.48, p>0.1), so though children are inferior learners, the
effect of time on learnability is similar across age groups.
But why are languages becoming more learnable over
time? Similar to Kirby et al (2008), the languages of both
children and adults in this experiment were characterized by
a rapid decrease in the number of distinct words. Here, the
number of unique words dropped to as few as only two
words in certain chains. Because there were less unique
words to memorize overall as chains progress, participants
in later generations had smaller chances to make a mistake,
which naturally increases learnability. Confirming this
claim, lower rates of transmission error were strongly
associated with a smaller number of distinct words for both
age groups (t(128)=11.2, r=0.7, p<0.01)
When participants use this strategy of underspecification,
multiple semantic dimensions are encoded using holistic
labels, losing much of their informativity. Using just a handfull of words is functionally useless and indeed varies from
natural language, which tend to be expressive. Yet while it
is underspecified, such ambiguous languages can still be
structured and systematically encode some dimensions of
meaning. We now turn to examine language structure.

Figure 3 below shows the changes in structure score as a
function of time in both child and adult chains. An increase
in structure score over generations reflects an increase in
linguistic structure. Dots that fall above the black line
represent languages that have consistent and non-random
signal-to-meaning mapping at p<0.5.
Importantly, the emergence of consistent mappings
between meanings and signals was accomplished by both
children and adults multiple times during this experiment,
with approximately 20% of languages having more structure
than randomly structured languages. Most of these
languages were produced in later generations, supporting
the role of cultural transmission in the emergence of
linguistic structure. Looking at these significantly structured
languages confirmed that homonyms were not assigned at
random: children and adults created languages in which
homonymity was structured along some sematic dimension,
closely resembling the result of Kirby et al. (2008).
For example, in one child chain the final language
converged to 3 distinct words representing each alien type
regardless of color and quantity: all aliens of type A were
called "didi", all aliens of type B were called "balgu" and all
aliens of type C were called "šuki" (Figure 4). Similar
structure emerged in adults' chains. In a different child
chain, systematic structure emerged already in generation 8,
and was transmitted flawlessly to the last two participants.
This language converged to just 2 distinct words
representing alien color, regardless of type and quantity:
"ditaz" for all red aliens and "balšu" for all blue aliens.
Like Kirby et al. (2008), we found that adult languages
did show a significant difference in structure score between
first and final generation (mean structure at generation 0
=0.6, mean score at generation 10 =1.89, t(5.3)=-3.14,
p<0.05). Interestingly, children's languages did not show
such a change (mean structure at generation 0 =0.54, mean
structure at generation 10 =1.05, t(10.7)=-0.78, p=0.45).
We used a mixed-effect linear regression model to predict
the structure score in each generation (Table 2), with similar
fixed and random effects structure as in the previous model.
The model showed a significant difference between children
and adults (β=-0.6, SE=0.2, t=-2.3, p<0.05), with adult
languages being significantly more structured than those of
children. However, though an increase in generation number
was associated with higher structure scores, this positive
effect was unfortunately not strong enough to reach
significance3 (β=0.1, SE=0.08, t=1.22, p>0.1). There was
also no significant interaction between age group and
generation number (β=0.02, SE=0.1, t=0.28, p>0.1),
indicating that though adults' languages were more
structured overall, time affects structure similarly across age
groups: both children and adults showed the same nonsignificant trend of increase in structure over generations.
3 We believe the source of this null-effect is the Monte-Carlo
algorithm's poor approximation in case the input sample is
uniformly distributed and/or has little variation, as in the case of
languages with a small number of homonyms.

4

1646

Figure 3: Mean structure score by generation number and
age group.
Table 2: Structure model
p value

Estimate

Std. Error

t value

(Intercept)

1.261367

0.229747

5.490242

Generation Number

0.106558

0.08679

1.227778

> .1

Age Group (Children vs. Adults)

-0.65355

0.273864

-2.3864

< .05 *

Gender (Male vs. Female)

0.325006

0.220094

1.47667

> .1

Age Group X Generation Number

0.029634

0.105019

0.28218

> .1

Red
Blue

Alien A

Alien B

Alien C

didi
didi
didi
didi

balgu
balgu
balgu
balgu

šuki
šuki
šuki
šuki

<.001 ***

Single
Plural
Single
Plural

Figure 4: A significantly structured child language in
generation 10

Red
Blue

Alien A

Alien B

Alien C

ditaz
ditaz
balšu
balšu

ditaz
ditaz
balšu
balšu

ditaz
ditaz
balšu
balšu

Single
Plural
Single
Plural

Figure 5: A significantly structured child language in
generations 8 through 10

Discussion
We found that when underspecification was possible,
children and adults behaved similarly: their languages
became easier to learn over time at a similar pace and by
using the same strategy of reduced words and structured
homonymity. Significantly structured languages with nonrandom signal-to-meanings mapping emerged in child and
adult chains on many occasions. However, there was no
evidence of significant increase in structure over time for
children on either analysis. Importantly, despite adults'
overall superiority in this experiment (making less mistakes
and creating more structured languages), the effects of
cultural transmission on languages' structure and learnability
were similar for both age groups. Taken together, this study
includes several novel findings: (a) Adults significantly
outperform children in this paradigm; (b) Children's

languages become significantly more learnable over time in
the same manner and pace as adult languages; (c) Children,
like adults, can create significantly structured languages. In
light of these findings, we can now discuss the questions
introduced in the beginning of this paper.
We found that adults were overall better than children on
both measured parameters (question 1): they were better
learners in general (reflected by lower transmission errors
overall) and created more structured languages from the
very beginning. This result is in line with previous artificial
language learning studies showing that children are inferior
learners in laboratory settings despite their optimal
acquisition of natural language (Ferman & Karni, 2010).
This finding may be driven by developmental differences in
key cognitive functions: children have a more limited
memory capacity, more problems in sustaining attention,
less mature problem-solving strategies and more difficulties
in making object-label associations in artificial language
tasks, all of which are relevant skills in this paradigm.
With regard to the emergence of more learnable and
structured languages (question 2), children and adults
showed a somewhat different trend. Language learnability
significantly increased over time for both children and
adults in a similar fashion, with the same reduction in error
as chains progress. Importantly, despite making more
mistakes in general, children developed easier and more
learnable languages in the same pace as adults and by using
the same strategies (i.e., introducing under-specification),
suggesting that both age groups are basically guided by the
same learnability biases. Similarly, Kempe et al. (2015)
reported no differences in the learnability biases of children
and adults. Nevertheless, we found no evidence for a
significant increase in structure over time: generation
number had the same positive (yet not significant) effect on
structure for both children and adults using mixed-effects
models. In other words, while we predicted that children's
languages would become more learnable and more
structured over repeated iterations, our results support this
prediction only partially. Note that if we examine adults'
performance using the less-subtle comparison between
initial and final generations, our results mirror Kirby et al.
(2008): adults did show a significant increase in structure
between the first and last generations, while children did
not. This discrepancy raises the question of the reliability of
comparing only the first and last generations: a different
pattern may be seen in previous studies when including
information from all 10 generations. Interestingly, both
analyses do not align with the predictions drawn from NSL
studies and Kempe et al. (2015): children did not have a
stronger bias for linguistic structure in comparison to adults.
While a number of child languages did have significant
systematic structure with non-random signal-to-meaning
mapping, such languages were only a small subset of child
languages. There are several possible interpretations of this
result: it could indicate that children are less likely to
introduce structure during cultural transmission, a finding
that is in line with accounts that view adults as the major
5

1647

agents of linguistic change (Labov, 2007). Alternatively, it
could reflect children’s difficulty with the additional
cognitive demands posed by artificial language learning
tasks. In our study, the discovery of the semantic features of
items (such as color, type and plurality) was crucial for the
emergence of linguistic structure. If children failed to
remember all the features of the aliens they saw, this would
dramatically reduce their chances of creating non-random
languages with consistent mappings between meanings and
signals. Since children have trouble in remembering all the
features of novel items presented to them (Perry et al.,
2015), this could explain why we didn't find an increase in
linguistic structure for child chains. Interestingly, the
regression analyses revealed parallels between children and
adults, with the effects of cultural transmission being similar
in pace and magnitude for both age groups.
Finally, the languages that emerged in our study were
degenerated in terms of expressivity (as in Kirby et al.,
2008). In their paper, a second experiment was conducted
where homonyms were filtered out of the language before
transmission to the next participant. Under this condition,
morphology-like structure emerged in adults. Future work
with children should also include a similar experiment in
which ambiguities are not allowed to examine whether
children also create compositional structure under such
conditions. Another option is to introduce a communicative
pressure, which serves as the natural equivalent to
disfavoring underspecification (Kirby, Tamariz, Cornish &
Smith, 2015). Such work is important for evaluating
children's ability to create compositional linguistic structure,
a crucial feature of natural languages.

Conclusions
In sum, the results of this study suggest that iterated
learning models operate in the same way on both children
and adults. This finding strengthens the claim that cultural
transmission can truly shape languages to be more
compatible with learners' limitations and needs. Yet, since
children failed to show an increase in structure, more work
is required in order to verify this theory.

References
Arciuli, J., & Simpson, I. C. (2011). Statistical learning in
typically developing children: the role of age and speed of
stimulus presentation. Developmental Science, 14(3),
464-473.
Bickerton, D. (1984). The language bioprogram hypothesis.
Behavioral and brain sciences, 7(02), 173-188.
Birdsong, D. (Ed.). (1999). Second language acquisition and
the critical period hypothesis. Routledge.
Boyd, J., & Goldberg, A. (2012). Young children fail to
fully generalize a novel argument structure construction
when exposed to the same input as older learners. Journal
of Child Language, 39, 457–481.
Cornish, H., Smith, K., & Kirby, S. (2013). Systems from
sequences: An iterated learning account of the emergence
of systematic structure in a non-linguistic task. In Proc.

35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 340-345).
Cornish, H., Tamariz, M., & Kirby, S. (2009). Complex
adaptive systems and the origins of adaptive structure:
What experiments can tell us. Language Learning, 59(s1),
187-205.
Ferman, S., & Karni, A. (2010). No childhood advantage in
the acquisition of skill in using an artificial language rule.
PloS one, 5(10).
Goldin-Meadow, S., & Mylander, C. (1998). Spontaneous
sign systems created by deaf children in two cultures.
Nature, 391(6664), 279-281.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2005). Regularizing
unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child
learners in language formation and change. Language
Learning and Development, 1(2), 151-195.
Kempe, V., Gauvrit, N., & Forsyth, D. (2015). Structure
emerges faster during cultural transmission in children
than in adults. Cognition, 136, 247-254.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(31), 10681-10686.
Kirby, S., Griffiths, T., & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated
learning and the evolution of language. Current opinion in
neurobiology, 28, 108-114.
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015).
Compression and communication in the cultural evolution
of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141, 87-102.
Labov, W. (2007). Transmission and diffusion. Language,
344-387.
Perry, L. K., Axelsson, E. L., & Horst, J. S. (2015).
Learning What to Remember: Vocabulary Knowledge
and Children's Memory for Object Names and Features.
Infant and Child Development.
Ramscar, M., & Gitcho, N. (2007). Developmental change
and the nature of learning in childhood. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 11(7), 274-279.
Reali, F., & Griffiths, T. L. (2009). The evolution of
frequency distributions: Relating regularization to
inductive biases through iterated learning. Cognition,
111(3), 317-328.
Senghas, A., & Coppola, M. (2001). Children creating
language: How Nicaraguan Sign Language acquired a
spatial grammar. Psychological Science, 12(4), 323-328.
Tomasello, M. (2009). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Harvard University
Press.
Verhoef, T., Kirby, S., & de Boer, B. (2014). Emergence of
combinatorial structure and economy through iterated
learning with continuous acoustic signals. Journal of
Phonetics, 43, 57-68.
Wonnacott, E., Brown, H. E., & Nation, K. (2013).
Comparing generalization in children and adults learning
an artificial language. Poster from Child language
seminar. Manchester, UK.
6

1648

