Lasting Political Attitude Change Induced by False Feedback About Own Survey
Responses
David Sivén (david.siven@gmail.com)
Thomas Strandberg (thomas.strandberg@lucs.lu.se)
Lars Hall (lars.hall@lucs.lu.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University, Box 192, S-221 00, Lund, Sweden.

Petter Johansson (petter.johansson@lucs.lu.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University, Box 192, S-221 00, Lund, Sweden.
Swedish Collegium for Advanced Study, Linneanum, Thunbergsvägen 2, S-752 38 Uppsala, Sweden.

Philip Pärnamets (philip.parnamets@ki.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University, Box 192, S-221 00, Lund, Sweden.
Division of Psychology, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels väg 9, S-171 77, Solna, Sweden

(Azjen et al., 2014; Bishop, 2005). So, if attitudes are
guiding action and behavior, then understanding the
functions of attitude change and contextual influence are
crucial in deeply understanding the cognition involved in
constructing political preferences and persuasive messages.

Abstract
False feedback on choices has been documented to induce
lasting preference change. Here we extend such effects to the
political domainand investigatethetemporal persistence of
induced preferences, as well as, the possible role the length of
confabulatory justifications may play. We conducted a twoday choice blindness experiment using political statements,
with sessions being roughly one week apart. Changes in
political preferences remained one week after initial
responses, and were most prominent in participants who were
allowed to confabulate freely. These findings, being the first
to demonstrate lasting preference change using choice
blindness, are discussed in light of constructivist approaches
to attitude formation through a process of self-perception.
Keywords:political attitudes; attitude
blindness; persuasion; confabulation

change;

Choice Blindness and Preference Change
Choice blindness is the finding that participants are at times
blind to false feedback about the outcome of previously
made choices. In the classical experiment participants make
binary preferential choices between pairs of faces, and,
following a covert manipulation, are subsequently presented
with the opposite face to their original choice (Johansson,
Hall, Sikström & Olsson, 2005). The key findings are that
participants only detected about 25% of the manipulations,
and that they often constructed coherent arguments
supporting the opposite of the original choice.
Choice blindness has recently been proposed as a viable
alternative to the free-choice-paradigm (Brehm, 1956) as a
method for studying the effect of choices on later
preferences. If participants are asked to make a second
round of choices, they are more likely to change their
preference following false feedback about their choice
compared to when they receive veridical feedback
(Johansson, Hall, Tärning, Sikström & Chater, 2014). This
has been interpreted as supporting self-perception view of
the mechanisms underlying preferential change (Johansson
et al., 2014). Similarly, following a choice blindness
manipulation participants‟ source memory becomes
distorted leading them to believe they have made choices in
line with the false feedback (Pärnamets, Hall & Johansson,
2015).
However, the longevity of choice-induced preferences is
uncertain. Using a choice blindness manipulation
Taya,Gupta, Farber and Mullette-Gillman, (2014),
investigated the temporal extent of choice induced
preferences over a two day experiment using photographs of
faces as stimuli. They found an indication of preference
change as a result of the false feedback in the short-term,
but no lasting effect. This could, however, be due to the fact
that the participants were made aware of the manipulation

choice

Central to human social interaction is not only to understand
the attitudes and preferences of your interlocutors, but also
how to influence and shape them.In democratic societies
this can be the difference between, successfully running for
office and affecting the future course of one‟s society, or
facing electoral defeat and slowly recede into the margins of
history.
Attitudes are most commonly defined as “psychological
tendencies that are expressed by evaluating a particular
entity with some degree of favor or disfavor” (Eagly &
Chaiken, 1993), parts of larger interrelated networks of
attitudes and values (Jost, Federico & Napier, 2009).
Apartfrom evidence indicating that attitudes are constructed
within the domain of a specific task in a specific context,
there is also evidence that preferences sometimes arise not
before an actual decision is made, but rather as a result of
the choice made or action performed (Ariely & Norton,
2008).
In the domain of public opinion, political attitudes are
often seen as deliberate mental states, central in societal life,
that are motivating important behaviors such as voting, or
donating money to charity etc. However, there is also a
perspective that political attitudes are highly flexible, often
constructed on the fly, and prone to contextual influence

301

prior to the second round of choices.By contrast, using an
alternative paradigm known as blind-choice, where
participants are led to believe they have made subliminally
guided (“blind”) choices, Sharot and colleagues found an
effect lasting 2-3 years for ratings concerning preferred
holiday destinations (Sharot, Fleming, Yu, Koster & Dolan,
2012).
Here we are concerned with investigating whether false
feedback about responses in a political survey can be used
to induce both immediate as well as lasting changes in
participants‟ political attitudes. Previous work has
demonstrated the applicability of the choice blindness
paradigm to both moral (Hall, Johansson & Strandberg
2012), as well as, political attitudes (Hall et al., 2013) using
covert manipulations of ratings on paper-based scales. In
Hall et al. (2013) participants‟ responses on a range of
salient political issues were manipulated weeks before a
general national election. The false feedback was issued so
as to go consistently against the grain of participants‟
left/right-wing orientation. Correction rates were low: 22%
of manipulated statements, 48% of participants failed to
make any corrections. More strikingly, participants were
asked pre- and post-test to rate their voting intention on a
left- to right-wing scale, with findings that almost half the
participants changed their voting intentions in the direction
of the manipulation of their underlying attitudes. However,
any effect of the false feedback on the individual political
issues was not tested.

thinking a person has spent on the object (Petty, Haugvedt,
& Smith, 1995). The ELM builds on literature concerning
attitude persistence and suggests that attitude change can be
seen as resulting from two different kinds of persuasion.
The first is persuasion by perceptual cues, not involving any
careful deliberation as to the merits of a specific argument.
The second is careful and issue-relevant consideration of a
specific argument (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).Clarkson,
Tormala, and Leone (2011) found that if participants get to
think about some object for up to 300 s, their confidence
regarding their own attitudes directed at this object will
increase, and their attitudes will become more polarized
(extreme). Shorter deliberation times (60 s) were shown to
lead to lower confidence and attitude depolarization
(Clarkson, Tormala, & Leone, 2011).
In this study we were interested if changing the amount of
confabulatory response participants were asked to give in
response to the false feedback would affect the amount of
change in their ratings following the initial manipulation.
We expected more elaborate confabulationsto enhance the
self-perception mechanisms hypothesized to underlie choice
induced preference change and increase both the size of the
attitude change as well as its longevity.

Method
Participants
We recruited 140 participants (88 female, 52 male) from the
student population at Lund University, with an average age
of 22.7 (SD = 3.0). Participants received two cinema
vouchers in exchange for their participation in two
experimental sessions, roughly one week apart.

Attitudes and Reasoning
An important aspect of the choice blindness paradigm is that
it not only involves false feedback about a previous choice
or rating, but also an element of confabulation. When
confabulating, a person is unconsciously expressing
fabricated aspects about oneself, the world, or the reasons
behind a choice, without any deceptive intentions
(Fotopoulou, Conway, & Solms, 2007). If the false feedback
in a choice blindness task is accepted, we know that
whatever reasons are given are confabulations.
The literature on confabulation in everyday discourse is
scarce, and most research has traditionally focused on
confabulation in the clinical domain (Hirstein, 2010).
Inspired by research on attitude strength and elaboration, we
wanted to investigate the effect of confabulation as a
moderator of the attitude change induced by the false
feedback. There are studies on persuasion suggesting that
elaboration is a causal mechanism responsible for attitude
strength (Barden and Tormala, 2014). Following this view,
more elaboration produces stronger judgments held with
greater confidence. In a study on the effects of elaboration
on attitude strength, Barden and Tormala (2014) found that
attitude strength largely depended on people‟s perception of
their own elaboration.
In the context of attitudes, according to the elaboration
likelihood model of persuasion (ELM) (Petty & Cacioppo,
1986; Petty, Haugtvedt, & Smith, 1995), the strength of an
attitude can be predicted by the amount of issue-relevant

Materials
For registering answers and manipulating the participants‟
ratings, we used a Self-Transforming Suvey (STS)
specifically developed for providing false feedback about
attitude responses (Strandberg et al., in prep.). The STS
presented political statements one at a time in a randomized
order. In addition to the STS, two follow-up paper-based
surveys were used for measuring any attitude change
following the manipulation.
All three surveys consisted of 12 political statements.The
political statements were very specific, and divided into the
three subcategories of healthcare, school politics, and
environmental issues. Of the statements in the STS, six were
carried forward to the two follow-up surveys. Of these six
statements, four were always the same target statements. For
each participant two of the target statements would be
manipulated. The four target statements concerned salient
political issues in Sweden at the time of the experiment
[spring 2015]. The issues were: higher gasoline taxes for
urban denizens, introducing subsidies for energy-efficient
household appliances, making the government rather than
local municipalities responsible for public schooling, and,
introducing free after-school homework programs. All
statements were constructed so as to state a proposed policy

302

Figure 1 The STS. Left: Initial rating of a target statement. The X on the upper axis corresponds with agreeing
with the statement. The X on the lower axis corresponds to neutral-to-high confidence. Right: False feedback
following the completion of the survey. The application has now moved the X to correspond with disagreeing
with the statement.
and give a brief explanation of that policy. One example full
statement from the set of targets is:
The Swedish elementary school should be re-nationalized.
Apart from the fact that local municipalities would lose
much, albeit not all, influence, a re-nationalization would
mean that the state becomes head of the school and assumes
the responsibility for resource allocation and quality
assurance.
The remaining items were considered fillers and had the
same structure as the target statements. The filler items in
each follow-up survey were unique to that survey.
Finally, an audio recorder was used to record the
explanations of responses.

First Session (T1 & T2) The first session consisted of three
subtasks: initial rating, interaction with manipulated
answers, and follow-up rating.
First the participant was asked to answer 12 statements
(T1) on a tablet, by marking an X along an axis in response
to each statement. The endpoints were anchored as
“Completely disagree” and “Completely agree”. The
experiment instructions emphasised that they were intended
to represent extremes on a possible spectrum. Following
each statement participants were asked to state their
confidence in their attitude using the same scale anchored
with “Extremely uncertain” and “Extremely certain”. The
participant was left to respond to the survey at her own
pace.
Once the participant completed, the experimenter returned
to the room and explained the interaction task. During this
subtask, unbeknownst to the participants, the choice
blindness manipulation took place. Each participant was
told that the tablet would now randomly present four of the
12 statements and also the participants‟ responses to each of
these statements. Instead the presented statements presented
were the four target statements. Participants‟ responses to
two of the presented statements had now been manipulated
by the survey application running on the tablet. Participants
were asked to read each of the presented statements and
their rating, according to which condition, Short or Long,
they had been assigned to (see above).
While performing the second subtask, all participants
were knowingly and willingly recorded by an audio
recorder. In the event of a participant in any way indicated
that the response they saw did not correspond with their
view, they were told that they could change their response if
they wanted to, after which they could base their
explanation on the position of the X in the now corrected
position.
The third subtask (T2) consisted of the participant
responding to a follow-up survey very similar to the one
they had previously responded to on the tablet; only it was
in the form of a traditional pen-and-paper survey. Six of the
12 statements were new to the participants, but the four
possible target statements as well as two statements
concerning healthcare, remained in the exact same form as
in the STS. The participants were told that the motivation
behind this additional survey was to measure if there was

Choice Blindness and Confabulation Conditions
There were two independent variables in the experiment,
one being the false feedback about responses, i.e. the choice
blindness manipulation, the second being what
confabulatory condition participants were assigned to.
The false feedback manipulation moved the participants
rating, an „X‟ they drew on the tablet across the midline of
the bidirectionalvisual-analoguescale (see Fig. 1).The X
ismoved by the STS to the other side of the axis andplaced
either somewhere between 15% and 35% or between65%
and 85%. The reason for not moving them closer to
themiddle than this is to manipulate the participants
intobelieving that they have a somewhat clear attitude for
oragainst the statement.
In addition, participants were randomly assigned to one of
two confabulatory conditions: Short or Long. In the Short
condition, when participants were confronted with their
ratings, they were asked to read aloud each statement as
they appeared on the tablet, state where on the axis they had
written their X, and if this meant that they agreed or
disagreed with the statementas well as to what extent (e.g.
whether the rating meant that they strongly agreed with the
statement). In the Long condition, the participant was asked
to, in addition to the above; also as thoroughly as possible
account for the reasons behind their answer.

Procedure
The experiment consisted of two sessions, separated by
roughly one week.

303

Figure 2 Differences in ratings during manipulated trials divided by correction and confabulatory condition.
Left: Differences between original rating (T1) and first follow-up (T2). Right: Differences between original
rating (T1) and second follow-up one week later (T3). Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.
any difference in responses if a survey was conducted
electronically or physically. Further, the participants were
told that it was likely that some of the statements that they
had responded to on the tablet also would be included in the
paper survey, since they were all randomly selected from
the same bank of statements. Upon completion, the
experimenter and the participant agreed on a time and date
for the second session.
Second Session (T3) The participants were asked to return
a week following the first session. The second session took
place on average 6.3 days (SD = 1.8) later.During this
second session (T3) participants were asked to fill out a
survey of the political attitudes, similar to the one they had
filled out the previous week. Once again, six statements
were carried forward from the original and first follow-up
survey, and six new statements were presented. Upon
completion participants were debriefed in full, signed
informed consent and data release statements and paid for
their participation.

corrections, 56 (40%) one correction and 39 (28%) two
corrections.

Overall Effect of Manipulation on Ratings
Rating differences comparing by manipulation We first
analyzed differences in ratings for T2 and T3 compared to
T1 (i.e. difference scores) based on manipulation. Time and
manipulation were dummy-coded taking T2 and nonmanipulated (NM) trials as the reference levels.
We found significant main effect of manipulation (χ2(1) =
39.23, p = 3.7*10-10) as well as a significant interaction
between time and manipulation (χ2(1) = 31.64, p = 1.9*10-8),
but no main effect of time (χ2(1) = 2.41, p = .12), with model
conditional R2 = .35. Interpreting the coefficients,
participants were somewhat accurate in restating their
original attitude in T2 during NM-trials (bintercept = 7.5mm,
SE = 0.7) and this changed little from T2 to T3 (bT3 =
2.7mm, SE = 0.9). There was a large increase in distance
from original rating for T2 manipulated (M) trials (bM =
10.9mm, SE = 1.3) which decreased during T3 (bT3_X_M = 7.6mm, SE = 1.4).
Rating differences comparing by correction To compare
the effect of correcting or failing to correct the
manipulation, we performed the same analysis as above,
subsetting the data on M-trials only. Differences scores were
here transformed to be directional, meaning that a positive
change is to be interpreted as a change in attitude in the
direction of the manipulation (compared to T1). Time and
correction were dummy-coded with T2 and corrected (C)
trials as reference levels.
We found significant main effect of correction (χ2(1) =
96.87, p = 2.2*10-16) and of time (χ2(1) = 30.85, p = 2.8*108
), as well as a significant interaction between time and
correction (χ2(1) =10.31, p = .0013), with model conditional
R2 = .47. Interpreting the coefficients, participants were
displayed virtually no directional change in attitudes in T2
during C-trials (bintercept = 2.3mm, SE = 1.3) and this
changed little from T2 to T3 (bT3 = -2.7mm, SE = 1.8).
There was a large directional change in attitudes for T2 not

Analysis
All ratings were converted to a 0-100mm scale to facilitate
comparisons between mediums (i.e. STS and paper-pen).
We analyzed our data using linear mixed-effects models
from the lme4 package in R. Random-effects were
modelled as per participant intercepts and slopes mirroring
the full fixed-effects structure, or the maximally permitted
structure that would converge. Significance of fixed-effects
was assessed with likelihood ratio tests using the car
package.

Results
Correction Rates
Of the 277 manipulated (M) trials, 134 (48.4%) were
corrected by participants. Average by participant correction
rate was 0.96 (SD = 0.78). 45 (32%) participants made no

304

interaction were not significant (χ2(1) = 0.0078, p = .93).
Model conditional R2 = .42.
Interpreting the coefficients (see also Fig 2), participants
displayed no directional attitude change in T2, C-trials for
either Short (bintercept = 2.7mm, SE = 2.3) or Long (bLONG =
0.3mm, SE = 3.2) conditions, with no changes for T3 (bT3 =
-1.9mm, SE = 2.8). Importantly, there was a large
directional attitude change for NC-trials (bNC = 16.9mm, SE
= 2.9), which was enhanced for Long condition (bNC*LONG =
8.7mm, SE = 4.1). Both directional effects due to NC-trials
and Long condition diminished during T3 (bNC*T3 = -7.8mm,
SE = 3.6; bLONG*T3 = -1.5mm, SE = 3.7; bNC*TALK*T3 = 0.5mm, SE = 5.1), though not sufficiently to remove the
lingering directional effect (see Fig. 2).

corrected (NC) trials (bNC = 21.3mm, SE = 2.2) which
decreased, but far from entirely, during T3 (bT3*NC = 7.9mm, SE = 2.5).
Qualitative shifts by correction Given the shifts in
attitudes post manipulation, we examined the proportion of
these that crossed the mid-line of the attitude spectrum –
hence implying a qualitative shift. In T2, 73% of responses
represented such a shift for NC-trials, compared to 10% for
C-trials. In T3, where the attitudinal effects of the
manipulation were weakened, 41% of responses were still
qualitatively shifted for NC-trials compared to 10% for Ctrials.

Effect of Confabulation Condition
Rating differences comparing by manipulation To
capture the effect of confabulation condition, we added
confabulation as a fixed and random effect to the model. We
analyzed all trials, with time, condition and manipulation
being dummy-coded taking T2, short and non-manipulated
(NM) trials as the reference levels.We found significant
main effects of manipulation (χ2(1) = 44.14, p = 3.1*1011
),and of condition (χ2(1) = 3.92, p = .048), but not of time
(χ2(1) = 2.91, p = .088). These were qualified by significant
interactions between manipulation and time (χ2(1) = 32.97, p
= 9.4*10-9), as well as between condition and time (χ2(1) =
4.15, p = .041). The interactions between manipulation and
condition (χ2(1) = 0.040, p = .84) and the three-way
interaction were not significant (χ2(1) = 0.21, p = .65). Model
conditional R2 = .37.
Interpreting the coefficients, participants were somewhat
accurate in restating their original attitude in T2 during NMtrials in the Short condition (bintercept = 5.6mm, SE = 0.9) and
the difference increased from T2 to T3 (bT3 = 4.3mm, SE =
1.3). There was a large increase in distance from original
rating for T2, Short, manipulated (M) trials (bM = 11.0mm,
SE = 1.8) which decreased during T3 (bT3*M = -8.2mm, SE =
1.8). The Long condition increased differences (bLONG =
3.7mm, SE = 1.5), though this effect disappeared for T3
(bLONG*T3 = -3.3mm, SE = 1.8). There was no specific effect
of confabulation length for M-trials at T2 (bLONG*M = 0.2mm, SE = 2.5) or at T3 (bLONG*M*T3 = 1.2mm, SE = 2.7).
Rating differences comparing by correction To assess the
effect of condition on directional change in ratings, we
performed the same analysis as above, subsetting the data
on M-trials only. Differences scores were here, again,
transformed to be directional, meaning that a positive
change is to be interpreted as a change in attitude in the
direction of the manipulation (compared to T1). Time,
condition and correction were dummy-coded with T2, Short
condition and corrected (C) trials as reference levels. We
found significant main effects of detection (χ2(1) = 120.51, p
= 2.2*10-16), condition (χ2(1) = 4.30, p = .038), and of time
(χ2(1) = 28.88, p = 7.7*10-8). These were qualified by
significant interactions between detection and condition
(χ2(1) = 7.32, p = .0068), as well as between detection and
time (χ2(1) = 9.80, p = .0017). The interactions between
condition and time (χ2(1) = 0.047, p = .49) and the three-way

Discussion
We investigated whether false feedback concerning specific
ratings to political statements would influence later attitudes
to the same statements. We found that participants‟ ratings,
both immediately following false feedback and one week
later, were shifted in the direction of the manipulation.
These effects were large, representing considerable shifts in
the direction away from the original attitude and towards the
opposite. Notably there were no concomitant shifts for
corrected trials, where participants had noticed the
manipulation or shift for non-manipulated trials. A large
portion of the shifts indicated qualitative shifts in attitudes.
That there are shift in ratings immediately following the
false feedback is in line with previous findings on choices
between faces (Johansson et al., 2014; Taya et al., 2014). In
those previous studies, however, the false feedback
concerned preferential binary choices between pairs of
faces. Here, in contrast, we influence political attitudes, a
domain where we would expect higher resilience of
participants underlying attitudes (cf. Druckman, 2004).
Importantly, the attitude shifts were not only present
shortly following false feedback, but also when the same
statements and rating task was administered one week later.
This is the first demonstration of lasting preference shifts
using a choice blindness paradigm (contra Taya et al.,
2014), and indicate that the effects of false feedback might
become integrated into the participants‟ set of attitudes. That
choices and feedback about choices influence future
preferences is in line with findings from other choice
paradigms (Sharot et al., 2010). In the case of political
attitudes, as studied here, the attitude shifts were obtained
absent any reinforcement of the altered position. The
participant only viewed the manipulation once, and was
given one chance to state her opinion and [in the Long
condition] give an explanation for it. After the experiment,
the participants immersed themselves in their ordinary life
for a full week, with their usual sources of information and
political biases. It is therefore remarkable to find any
lingering effect at all.
As such these findings provide support to inferential and
constructivist accounts of preference and attitude formation,
whereby the act of choosing has a determining effect on a

305

persons‟ preference set (Ariely & Norton, 2008). In
previous work we have suggested that this is consistent with
a self-perception account of preferences – i.e. that we infer
our own preferences much like how we infer others‟
preferences; by observing and interpreting overt behavior
(Johansson et al., 2014).
The change in ratings most marked in participants in the
Long conditions, who had been asked to give longer
explanatory statements concerning their manipulated
responses. This is important, as it suggests that
confabulation serves to consolidate choice induced
preference change in the same way as veridical
argumentation. The effect of the Long condition was
especially salient in the one week follow-up.This supports
theories of attitude construction involving the effects of
elaboration and information processing on attitude change,
such as the ELM (Petty, Haugtvedt, and Smith, 1995). For
example, Barden and Tormala (2014) suggested that more
elaboration produced better judgments, and that these in turn
could be held with greater confidence. It has also been
demonstrated that a person‟s attitude can strengthen if she
perceives herself successfully defending it from persuasive
attempts (Tormala and Petty, 2002; Knowles and Linn,
2004). These theories suggest that the perceived adjustment
to contextual factors generate inferences about the
metacognitive evaluation of the attitude. Following a similar
logic, we could argue that observing yourself gives coherent
arguments for a manipulated response, actually strengthens
the induced attitude in the manipulated direction. And the
more arguments supporting the induced attitude you hear
yourself expressing, the more evidence you have to feel
confident that this is what you truly believe.
In summary, our findings support constructivist accounts
of attitude formation through a process of self-perception.
Further, our findings support models predicting elaboration
as underpinning strong attitude shifts. Together these results
demonstrate a powerful influence of feedback in the
moment with self-persuasion on attitudes in a domain of
central importance to the functioning of democratic public
life.

Barden, J., & Tormala, Z. L. (2014). Elaboration and attitude
strength: The new meta-cognitive perspective. Social and
personality psychology compass, 8/1, (pp. 17-29).
Bem, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of
cognitive dissonance phenomena. Psychological Review, 74(3),
183–200.
Bishop, G. F. (2005). The illusion of public opinion: Fact and
artifact in American public opinion polls. Lanham; MD:
Rowman and Littlefield publishers inc.
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision changes in the desirability of
alternatives. The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
52(3), 384–389.
Clarkson, J. J., Tormala, Z. L., & Leone, C. (2011). A selfvalidation perspective on the mere thought effect. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 47(2), 449–454.
Druckman, J. N. (2004). Political Preference Formation:
Competition, Deliberation, and the (Ir)relevance of Framing
Effects. American Political Science Review, 98(04), 671-686.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). The psychology of attitudes.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers.
Fotopoulou, A., Conway, M. A., & Solms, M. (2007).
Confabulation: Motivated reality monitoring. Neuropsychologia,
45(10), 2180–2190.
Hall, L., Johansson, P., & Strandberg, T. (2012) Lifting the Veil of
Morality: Choice Blindness and Attitude Reversals on a SelfTransforming Survey. PLoS One, 7(9), e45457.
Hall, L., Strandberg, T., Pärnamets, P., Lind, A., Tärning, B., &
Johansson, P. (2013). How the polls can be both spot on and
dead wrong: Using choice blindness to shift political attitudes
and voter intentions. PLoS One, 8(4), e60554.
Hirstein, W. (2010). The misidentification syndromes as
mindreading disorders. Cognitive neuropsychiatry, 15(1-3), 233260.
Jost, J. T., Federico, C. M., & Napier, J. L. (2009). Political
ideology:
Its
Structure,
Functions,
and
Elective
Affinities. Annual review of psychology, 60, 307-337.
Johansson, P., Hall, L., Sikström, S., & Olsson, A. (2005). Failure
to detect mismatches between intention and outcome in a simple
decision task. Science, 310(5745), 116–119.
Johansson, P., Hall, L., Tärning, B., Sikström, S., & Chater, N.
(2014). Choice blindness and preference change. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 27(3), 281–289.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood
model of persuasion. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, 19, 123–205.
Petty, R. E., Haugtvedt, C. P., & Smith, S. M. (1995). Elaboration
as a determinant of attitude strength: Attitude strength, 4, 93–
130.
Pärnamets, P., Hall, L., & Johansson, P. (2015). Memory
distortions resulting from a choice blindness task. In
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society
Sharot, T., Fleming, SM., Yu, X., Koster, R., & Dolan, R. J.
(2012). Is choice-induced preference change long lasting?
Psychological Science 23(10), 1123–1129.
Taya, F., Gupta, S., Farber, I., & Mullette-Gillman, O. A. (2014).
Manipulation Detection and Preference Alterations in a Choice
Blindness Paradigm. PLoS One 9(9), e108515.
Tormala, Z. L., & Petty, R. E. (2002). What doesn‟t kill me only
makes me stronger: The effects of resisting persuasion on
attitude certainty. Journal of personality and social psychology,
vol. 83, no. 6, 1298-1313.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Anders Lindén at Andvision for
implementing the design of the STS. PJ was supported by
Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation and The Swedish
Research Council (2014-1371). LH was supported by Bank
of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation (P13-1059:1) and The
Swedish Research Council (2011-1795).

References
Ajzen, I., & Gilbert Cote, N. (2014). Attitudes and the prediction
of behavior. In Crano, W. D., and Prislin, R. (Eds.), Attitudes
and attitude change (pp. 289-311). New York, NY: Psychology
press.
Ariely, D., & Norton, M. I. (2008). How actions create – not just
reveal – preferences. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(1), 13–
16.

306

