Learning that numbers are the same, while learning that they are different
Jon A. Willits (jwillits@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. 10th St. Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

Michael N. Jones (mnjones@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. 10th St. Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

David Landy (dlandy@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. 10th St. Bloomington, IN 47408 USA
Abstract
It has been suggested that the way that number words are used may
play an important role in the development of number concepts.
However, little is currently known about the overall ways in which
number words are used in child-directed speech. To address this,
we performed an analysis of how number words are used in the
CHILDES database. We looked at four statistics: 1) lexical
frequency, 2) contextual diversity, 3) word co-occurrence, and 4)
distributional similarity, to see if these distributional statistics
suggest why some aspects of number acquisition are easy and
others are hard, and if these statistics are informative about specific
debates in number acquisition. We found that that are many
important differences in how small and large number words are
used (such as differences in frequency, co-occurrence patterns, and
distributional similarity), differences that may play an role in
shaping hypotheses about children’s acquisition of number
concepts. Keywords: number representation, language acquisition,
concept acquisition, statistical learning, corpus analyses

Introduction
Numbers are an odd category of things. Although often
treated as objects themselves, numbers can be observed only
as relational features—features of sets of objects. Their
structure is as regular one could hope to find in a category,
and they are extremely important in modern life. But
numbers are very challenging for children and students to
understand and use, and many simple-to-phrase questions
about the counting numbers remain unanswered even by
professional mathematicians. In short, numbers are among
the most frequent and regular, and at the same time most
abstract and difficult, of the concepts in a young child’s
environment. Here, we focus on the role of the statistics of
the child’s linguistic environment to interrogate two key
challenges for the learner of numbers: how do we learn that
number words form a category, that they are all the same
kind of thing? But in contrast, how do children also learn
how each number word is different from the others?
One important mechanism by which children can learn
about semantic categories is by learning about the
distributional patterns of the words that refer to them. Much
research has demonstrated that children can learn a lot about
a word’s semantics, based on the word’s pattern of cooccurrence. For example, toddlers can learn whether a
verb’s meaning is transitive or intransitive by counting the
number of nouns that occur in the same utterance as the verb
(Gleitman, 1990; Yuan, Fisher, & Snedeker, 2012).
Toddlers can also learn about the meaning of a novel noun if
it occurs in distributions that are informative about the

category to which it belongs (Lany & Saffran, 2011).
If children can infer semantic content from words’
lexical distributions – words’ frequencies, the words with
which they co-occur, and the words to which they are
distributionally similar, what can they learn about number
concepts based on how number words are used in childdirected speech? What might this say about the development
of children’s number concepts and number word usage?
The Conceptual Structure of Number
The cognitive structure of numbers is a matter of
intense current debate. At this point, a general consensus has
emerged that the processing of numbers under about 4 is
qualitatively different from that of numbers roughly 4 and
over (Feigenson, Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004). Numbers over
4, on this account, are processed by a general magnitude
system, which discriminates relatively numerous sets from
relatively sparse sets, but does not have distinct ways of
capturing precise numbers. This system is generally thought
to be ‘log-scaled’ in the sense that the reliability of
discrimination between two sets is a function of the ratio
between their numerosities, regardless of the absolute
numerosity. At the same time, numbers under 4 are
processed by a very different mechanism that individuates
particular objects, but may not be all that involved in
estimating magnitudes. This mechanism has been tied to
subitization (Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994; Revkin et al, 2008),
and to object tracking (e.g., Spelke & Kinzler, 2007). On
some accounts, linguistic experience is used to coordinate
these two systems, bootstrapping a new “positive whole
number” system (Carey, 2009), which combines
representation of exactness with large magnitudes,
comprising concepts like “exactly 7”.
The general dual-systems account outlined above has
been applied to several behavioral paradigms beyond
subitization. First, when asked to give an experimenter a
certain number of objects (the give-N task), children tend to
show discrete changes in capacity, from being able to give
one object only successfully, to being able to give one or
two, to being able to give up to three, before passing into a
final “four or more” stage. A common interpretation is that
the first three stages are associated with the small-number
processing system, while the final stage reflects invocation
of the full count-list and magnitude system into the task.
The Linguistic Structure of Number
Number words are an extremely common part of our

1799

language. For example, in the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000) examined below, the word one is
slightly more common than the word mom, while two is
slightly more common than dad. The words one and two
taken together comprise almost exactly 1% of all the words
in CHILDES. And while these two number words are
certainly the most common, the remaining number words [0,
3-20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90], hundred, thousand, and
million constitute about an additional 0.5% of the total
words in the corpus, a truly large amount of tokens for such
a small number of types (31).
The structure of language has been implicated in
particular aspects of number learning. For instance,
phonological irregularity has been argued to slow the
learning of teen words in English (Fuson & Kwon, 1991),
and numbers between 20 and 40 in languages where such
words are partially irregular or inverted (Brysbaert et al.,
1998). Processing of numbers in large ranges (one thousand
to one billion) may also be affected by how these words are
used (Landy et al., 2013; Landy et al., 2014).
Although number-elaboration accounts rely on
language to connect number experiences, the specific ways
that numbers are structured in language are less thoroughly
explored than number-related behaviors. In particular, the
information available in the morphemic structure of the
speech stream—though useful in distinguishing categories
in language—has to our knowledge not been systematically
explored in the case of number words. Although the
literature often refers to a “count list” (Carey, 2009), it is
unclear how much of a role this list plays in the numberrelated linguistic experience of young children, though
compelling recent work suggests that counting and labelpresent sets with children have a positive impact on number
learning (Gunderson & Levine, 2011). More generally, we
do not yet know how the striking behavioral distinctions
between numbers under and over 4 are mirrored in the
structure of child-directed language, nor how the statistics of
language differentiate numbers over and under 10.
Starting from the basis that number words are very
common, that they are unevenly distributed and structured,
and that they are implicated in number concept learning, we
ask what information about numbers exists in the statistical
structure of the speech stream, that could potentially help
children understand numbers’ complex category structure.
In particular, we see the central challenge as one of learning
that number words form a category, but at the same time
learning that and how number words differ from one
another. To the degree that number words are used
similarly, identifying them as a category should be
facilitated. At the same time, the easier it is to learn that
items belong to the same category, the harder it should be –
at least for a time – to distinguish members of the category
from one another (Rogers & McClelland, 2004).
Analysis and Data Set
To address some of these questions and provide an
introductory analysis of what children can learn about
number words based on their distributional patterns in childdirected speech, we analyzed these distributional patterns in
the CHILDES corpus, a collection of transcripts of

caregivers and family members interacting with children in
a wide range of situations and contexts (MacWhinney,
2000). For our analyses, we built a composite corpus
containing all documents involving typically developing
children from American English speaking households up to
72 months of age. This resulted in a corpus containing 4,561
documents, 32,580 word types, and 7,016,488 million word
tokens. Compared to estimates of the number of words
children typically hear (Risley & Hart, 1995), the size of
this corpus represents approximately 5-10% of the input a
typical child hears by age six, thus providing a very good
model of the available input to a child.
We performed four analyses of how number words are
used in the CHILDES corpus, to answer the following
questions: First, what is the frequency of number words,
how do frequencies between different numbers compare to
each other and to non-number words, and how do these
frequencies change over the course of development?
Second, what is the contextual diversity of number usage?
Do some numbers occur in broader or narrower ranges of
contexts? And how does this change across development?
Third, what are the other words with which number words
co-occur, and is there a difference in co-occurrence patterns
for different kinds of numbers? Finally, how do number
words vary in terms of their distributional similarity to other
number words? Which numbers can most easily be
categorized as a number word based on their distributions?
Which numbers are most prototypical? Answers to
questions like these can begin to help us understand how the
usage of number words contributes to the development of
number representations.

Number Frequency and Contextual Diversity
One of the most basic factors that may affect the
learnability of number words is how frequently they are
used, how frequency varies for different number words, and
how frequency varies across development. For an empirical
answer to these questions, we took the American English
CHILDES corpus and subdivided it into 10 sub-corpora,
designed to reflect children’s cumulative experience at
evenly divided points. Thus, we created corpus M12
composed of all corpora with target children of up to 12
months of age, M18 for all composed of all corpora with
target children of up to 18 months of age, and so on, up to
M72, composed of all corpora for children up to 72 months
of age. We then calculated the frequency of a large set of
number words, and converted this frequency count into a
“parts per million” count (i.e. divided the frequency count
by the corpus size, and then multiplied that proportion by
1,000,000) designed to control for differences in sizes of the
specific sub-corpora. The results of this analysis are shown
in Figure 1.
Figure 1 demonstrates a number of important properties
about the frequencies of number words. As noted above, the
frequency of the words one is an order of magnitude above
the other number words. This reflects the importance of the
concept of one, but also the fact that one is used in a number
of ways that aren’t explicitly numerical. However, even
these non-numerical uses of one are still informative about
numerical content (e.g. “another one”, “the one I love”,

1800

ﬁ=y"
sixty"
seventy"
eighty"

10"

ninety"
hundred"
thousand"

M72"

M60"

M54"

M48"

M42"

million"
1"

M36"

Maximum)Age)of)Child)in)Corpus)(in)months))

Maximum)Age)of)Child)in)Corpus)(in)months))

forty"
100"

M30"

1"

thirty"

M24"

nineteen"

twenty"

M18"

M72"

M60"

M54"

M48"

M42"

M36"

M30"

M24"

1"

M18"

ten"

eighteen"

1000"

M12"

nine"

Frequency)of)Word)per)Million)Words)

10"

M72"

eight"

seventeen"

M60"

seven"

sixteen"

M54"

six"

M48"

100"

ﬁ=een"

10"

M42"

ﬁve"

fourteen"

M36"

four"

thirteen"

M30"

three"

twelve"

M24"

1000"

eleven"

M18"

two"

100"

M12"

one"

Frequency)of)Word)per)Million)Words)

zero"

M12"

Frequency)of)Word)per)Million)Words)

10000"

Maximum)Age)of)Child)in)Corpus)(in)months))

0.12"

zero"
one"

0.8"

two"

0.7"

three"

0.6"

four"

0.5"

ﬁve"

0.4"

six"

0.3"

seven"
eight"

0.2"

nine"

0.1"

ten"

0"

eleven"

0.12"

twelve"
thirteen"

0.1"

fourteen"

0.08"

ﬁ?een"

0.06"

sixteen"
seventeen"

0.04"

eighteen"
nineteen"

0.02"

twenty"

0"

thirty"

Propor%on'of'Documents'in'Which'Word'
Occurs'

0.14"

1"

0.9"

Propor%on'of'Documents'in'Which'Word'
Occurs'

Propor%on'of'Documents'in'Which'Word'
Occurs'

Figure 1. Cumulative frequency per million of various number words across development, plotted on a log10 scale (e.g. M12 is in all
corpora for all kids up to 12 months of age, M72 is for all corpora for all kids up to 72 months of age). Note that across the three subfigures, the scale of the y-axis changes, reflecting the large differences between big and small numbers.
forty"

0.1"

ﬁ?y"

0.08"

sixty"
seventy"

0.06"

eighty"
ninety"

0.04"

hundred"

0.02"

thousand"
million"

0"

M12" M18" M24" M30" M36" M42" M48" M54" M60" M72"

M12" M18" M24" M30" M36" M42" M48" M54" M60" M72"

M12" M18" M24" M30" M36" M42" M48" M54" M60" M72"

Age'of'Child'in'Corpus'

Age'of'Child'in'Corpus'

Age'of'Child'in'Corpus'

Figure 2. The proportion of documents in which the word occurs, for various number words across development. Note that across the three
sub-figures, the scale of the y-axis changes, reflecting the large differences between big and small numbers.

“one of the toys”, “it is a good one”). Beyond one, the
frequency of the words are roughly in cardinal order. Of the
“small” numbers, 2 is much more frequent than 3, which is
much more frequent than 4 and 5, which are much more
frequent than everything else. The rank orderings are all
very sensible (especially when one considers usages like
dates, times, money, and other measurement contexts).
Consistent with previous cross-cultural analyses of number
word frequencies, small numbers were exponentially more
frequent than large numbers (Dahaene & Mehler, 1992).
One notable and surprising finding from these analyses
was how little the frequency ratios of the number words
changed across the different age samples in the corpus. All
numbers become slightly more frequent over time (though
for some numbers like one this difference is very small).
Words for larger numbers do make up a larger proportion of
the number words as the children in CHILDES increase in
age, although this difference is not as large as it appears
given the log-scaled differences between big numbers and
small numbers. For example, the numbers one through ten
make up 95.0% of all number word usage in the sub-corpora
from kids age 12 months and below, whereas they make up
90.7% of the usage for kids age 48 months and above.
We also investigated the contextual diversity (CD) of
number word usage, operationally defined as the proportion
of different CHILDES documents in which the number
word occurred. High CD has been found to be a strong
predictor (above and beyond word frequency) of lexical
access in adults (Adelman & Brown, 2008) and of age of
acquisition in children (Hills et al., 2013). However, lower
CD has been linked to faster learning of words in a number

of behavioral experiments (Akhtar & Tomasello, 1997).
Thus, the exact role of contextual diversity on word learning
is obviously complex and not yet well understood.
We found that contextual diversity of number words in
CHILDES was highly correlated (r = 0.867) with their
frequencies (as is always true), with words like one and two
much more diversely used than larger numbers. However, it
is also notable that CD of number words showed differences
across the corpora from children of different ages, with
trajectories that are intriguing with regard to possible
developmental trends and the role that usage diversity plays
on word learning. For almost all numbers, the contextual
diversity as relatively higher in speech to children 12
months and younger, dropped to a lower rate in corpora for
children in the middle range of the CHILDES sample, and
then rose again in corpora for older children. This is
consistent with the idea that when children are first
introduced to a word, caregivers use that word in a very
high number of contexts, then selectively use that word in a
much narrower range of contexts (facilitating the acquisition
of the word’s specific meaning and core properties), before
reverting to a more base-rate level of usage of the word, in
terms of diversity of contexts (Tomasello, 2003).

Number Word Co-occurrence
The second set of statistics we investigated were word
co-occurrence patterns of the number words, to see if these
would be helpful to kids when learning about number word
meaning. To do this, we calculated the co-occurrence of
number words with other words within a 12-word window.
The most frequently co-occurring words with various

1801

number words are shown in Table 1.
When looking at co-occurrence of number words with
all other words in the corpus, interesting patterns emerge,
which are suggestive of what children can learn about
numbers based on these co-occurrence patterns. First, one of
the most apparent facts is how similar all the number words
were in terms of the words with which they frequently cooccurred. This is a big part of why (as we show in the next
section) it would be easy to learn that number words belong
to the same category. Next, one can clearly see how
grammatical number and conceptual number are
interrelated, with the number one co-occurring with the
plural form “s” much less often than other numbers (of
which “s” would be the most frequent collocation for
many). Finally, it is apparent that many of the frequent
collocations of numbers are other numbers (and numbers
that are nearby in order), evidence of the extent to which
counting and other ordering is highly frequent in child
directed speech.
Table 1. Highest co-occurring words for various number words
within a 12-word window in CHILDES. The morpheme “_S” is
demonstrating how often the number word had the plural “s” in its
12-word window, when “s” is treated as a distinct morpheme in the
corpus (i.e. broken off of the word to which it was attached).
one
two
three
four
you
_S
one
_S
one
you
_S
three
is
one
two
one
the
two
you
you
that
is
three
two
I
I
is
is
this
the
four
four
_S
that
the
give
eight
eighteen
eighty
hundred
is
twenty
eighty
a
you
is
is
and
eight
_S
you
you
seven
eighteen
and
_S
nine
you
five
is
I
I
I
I
six
seventeen
eight
the
the
the
the
to

The relationship involving the co-occurrence of number
words with other number words is shown in for all pairs of
numbers in Figure 3. In this Figure you can see many
interesting facts about number word co-occurrence. First,
the pattern of number words being more likely to co-occur
with other number words of similar size is shown by the
brightness along the diagonal. Especially interesting is how
the breadth of this “counting: window grows as numbers get
larger. Three is very likely to co-occur with two. Four is as
well, though less so. Six and seven are barely more likely to
co-occur with two then we would expect them to based on
their baserate frequencies. However, while a simple model
based on logarithmic scaling might assume that number
words would continue to be more broadly associated as they
increased in magnitude, we find instead that particular
number ranges seem to form co-occurrence clusters. For
numbers in the teens, for example, all the teens are highly
likely to co-occur with each other, even 13 and 19. Many

other idiosyncratic (but meaningful) highly probable
collocations can be seen, including those that encode
relations due to time (such as numbers like six and twelve

Figure 3. A heat map showing the pointwise mutual information
(PMI) scores of number words with other number words at 72
months, demonstrating the degree to which they co-occur occur
with each other more or less one would expect due to their base
rate frequencies. A value of zero means the two co-occur exactly
as often was one would expect, with values > and < than one
meaning they co-occur 10 (or 100 for a score of +/- 2, or 1000 for a
score of +/-3) times more or less than one would expect them to,
given their word frequencies.

with thirty) and dates (such as nineteen and ninety).
As a final analysis of word-occurrence patterns for
numbers, and how important number words were to the
structure of child-directed speech, we performed a principal
component analysis (PCA) of the co-occurrence patterns
between the 8,000 most frequent words in the corpus. We
then looked at the extent to which number words loaded on
the 30 highest components, shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. The singular value loadings for various number words
across the first 30 singular value dimensions.

Figure 4 makes it clear just how important number
words are to the structure of child-directed speech.
Excepting principal components 1 and 2 (which tend not to
carry structural information in these kinds of analyses), at
least some number words load extremely highly on most of
the primary principal components). Though beyond the

1802

scope of this short paper, follow-up analyses of these
principal components show that many of the components
are interpretable as representing contextually different ways
in which numbers are used, such as counting, money, time,
dates, and measurement. Some of these relationships can be
identified in Figure 4 by noting which numbers do, and do
not, load on particular principle components.

Number Distributional Similarity
In our final analysis, we attempted to assess the extent
to which distributional statistics can be used to learn that
numbers belong to the same category, as well as to tell how
number words are different from one another. To do this, we
derived these similarity scores for each of the 8,000 most
frequent words in the corpus, by computing the correlation
of each word pair’s 30-element principal component vectors
(such as those shown in Figure 4). Thus, the extent to which
each pair of words was similar depended on the extent to
which the two words shared the same co-occurrence
patterns in language (Riordan & Jones, 2011).
To assess how useful these similarity scores would be

for guessing that number words belong to the same
category, we performed a discrimination analysis of using
each of the 31 number words from the above analyses, and a
set of approximately 600 other words from a collection of
30 other semantic categories (such as mammals and foods).
We took each pair of these words (both the number-number
pairs as well as the number-“not-number” pairs), and used
their similarity score to guess whether that pair should be
judged as belonging to the same category or to different
categories. We used a constant similarity threshold across
all comparisons (r = 0.30), and used the accuracy of these
judgments to compute balanced accuracy scores (i.e. we
evenly averaged the score on all trials where the correct
answer was “yes” with all trials where the correct answer
was “no”, to account for the fact that there were many more
“no” trials). We performed this discrimination analysis on
three different sub-corpora to get a sense of how the results
changed across speech to children with of different ages.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 5.

0.90
0.80

eight

five

six

ten

eleven

seven

twenty

sixteen

nineteen

three

fifteen

seventeen

two

twelve

nine

thirty

forty

thirteen

eighteen

one

fourteen

seventy

sixty

eighty

fifty

zero

ninety

hundred

0.50

thousand

0.60

four

M12
M40
M72

0.70

million

Number Classicatioln
Accuracy

1.00

Figure 5. Classification balanced accuracy for various number words using distributional similarity to predict same vs. different category
membership, for various number words at various stages of amount of input (up to 12 months, up to 40 months, up to 72 months).

This attempt to classify number words as same and
different from other words based on their distributional
statistics resulted in a number of interesting findings about
the statistical structure of number words. The first is how
remarkably successful children could be at classifying
number words based on their distributional statistics. This
was true even in the “youngest” corpus, with only the childdirected speech to children 12 months and below, with a
mean accuracy across all number words of 88.0% (SE =
1.6%). Using all speech to children up to 40 months,
accuracy rose to 95.8% (SE = 0.6%). Using all speech to
children up to 72 months, accuracy peaked at 97.6% (SE =
0.2%). Number words are used remarkably consistently (in
fact, number words can be classified better than words from
any other category, Willits & Jones, in review), and learning
they belong to the same category based on their usage
statistics would be a very easy task. Also interesting,
however, were the specific words that were more difficult,
especially for the “youngest” corpus. As expected, one was
difficult, but not the most difficult. Lower frequency (and
less consistently used) words like the decade words and
million were the words that were most difficult to classify.
To assess what children could learn about the internal
structure of the number category based on language

statistics, we performed a hierarchical cluster analysis of
words based on their co-occurrence patterns. This cluster
analysis is shown in Figure 6.
As can be seen in Figure 6, the sub-category clusters
that emerge are incredibly sensible and informative about
what children might be learning about number from number
words. The most distinctively used words are one, two, and
three, which form their own subcluster. Other small
numbers group together, as do the teens, decades, and large
numbers. One notable exception is 19, which groups with
the decade numbers, driven by the fact that most of the
CHILDES data was collected in the 1980s and 1990s.

Discussion
We find that the use of numbers in child-directed
speech bears evidence of many of the same distinctions
noted in childrens’ number-related behavior. In the
frequency analyses, the power-law nature of number words’
frequency distribution and diversity of usage (with one, two,
three, and four each being used successively and
dramatically more than the next) could be important factor
in children’s difficulty learning to properly use words for
larger numbers.
In the co-occurrence analyses, we discovered many ways in

1803

which the co-occurrence patterns varied, that could lead to
differences in learnability. Lower numbered words were
relatively less likely to co-occur with one another,
suggesting that these words are used in a number of diverse

Figure 6. Hierarchical clustering of number words based on their
co-occurrence patterns in CHILDES.

ways other than strictly counting and comparatively
quantifying, which may lead to some of the difficulty
children have at extending their ability to quantify small
numbers to larger quantities.
Likewise, the similarity analyses demonstrate a number
of facts about number word usage with implications for
number concept acquisition. In particular, the two broadest
divisions in the hierarchical cluster analysis were between
one and other numbers, and between two and three and
other numbers. One in particular seems to be used quite
differently from other numbers, which is not terribly
surprising given its less obviously cardinal roles in
language, e.g., as a specification of an agent, or in idioms
like “one time”. The typical adult number categories (4-10,
the teens, the decades, and the larger numbers) form distinct
clusters as well, while zero forms its own subcategory.
Previous behavioral evidence has indicated special
trouble understanding the computational role of the number
words million (Landy et al., 2013), zero (Evans, 1983), and
hundred and thousand (Rips, 2013; Siegler & Opfer, 2003).
Statistical analyses confirm that these are treated differently
than other number words: they are more difficult for a
statistical algorithm to categorize as numbers based on
usage (especially in early months), and form distinct subclusters in the hierarchical clustering analysis.
Just as striking is the nature of the clusters. The teen
words tend to strongly co-occur, to form a tight cluster, and
to contain strong mutual information. One plausible
interpretation is that, compared to other numbers, these
numbers appear primarily together in count lists, and appear
relatively rarely in other contexts.

References
Adelman, J. S., & Brown, G. D. A. (2008). Modeling lexical
decision: The form of frequency and diversity effects.
Psychological Review, 115, 214–229.
Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1997). Young children's
productivity with word order and verb morphology.

Developmental Psychology, 33, 952-965.
Brysbaert, M., Fias, W., & Noel, M. P. (1998). The Whorfian
hypothesis and numerical cognition: is twenty-four processed in
the same way as four-and-twenty? Cognition, 66, 51-77.
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. Oxford U. Press.
Dehaene, S., & Mehler, J. (1992). Cross-linguistic regularities in
the frequency of number words. Cognition, 43(1), 1-29.
Evans, D. W. (1983). Understanding zero and infinity in the early
school years. Doctoral Dissertation.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems of
number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 307-314.
Fuson, K. C., & Kwon, Y. (1991). Chinese-based regular and
European irregular systems of number words: The disadvantages
for English-speaking children. Language in mathematical
education: Research and Practice, 211-226.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb meaning.
Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55.
Gunderson, E. A., & Levine, S. C. (2011). Some types of parent
number talk count more than others: Relations between parents’
input and children’s cardinal number knowledge. Developmental
Science, 14, 1021-1032.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the
everyday experience of young American children. Paul H
Brookes Publishing.
Hills, T. T., Maouene, J., Riordan, B., & Smith, L. B. (2010). The
associative structure of language. Journal of Memory and
Language, 63, 259-273.
Landy, D., Silbert, N., & Goldin, A. (2013). Estimating large
numbers. Cognitive science, 37(5), 775-799.
Landy, D., Charlesworth, A., & Ottmar, E. (2014). Cutting In Line:
Discontinuities in the Use of Large Numbers by Adults. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Lany, J., & Saffran, J. R. (2010). From statistics to meaning
infants’ acquisition of lexical categories. Psychological Science,
21, 284-291.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Revkin, S. K., Piazza, M., Izard, V., Cohen, L., and Dehaene, S.
(2008). Does subitizing reflect numerical estimation?
Psychological Science, 19, 607-614.
Riordan, B., & Jones, M. N. (2011). Redundancy in perceptual and
linguistic
experience:
Comparing
feature- based
and
distributional models of semantic representation. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 303-345.
Rips, L. J. (2013). How many is a zillion? Sources of number
distortion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 39, 1257.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the
everyday experience of young American children. Paul H
Brookes Publishing.
Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical estimation evidence for multiple representations of
numerical quantity. Psychological science, 14(3), 237-250.
Spelke, E. S., & Kinzler, K. D. (2007). Core knowledge.
Developmental Science, 10, 89-96.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A Usage-based
Theory of Language Acquisition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Trick, L. M., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1994). Why are small and large
numbers enumerated differently? A limited-capacity preattentive
stage in vision. Psychological Review, 101, 80-102.
Yuan, S., Fisher, C., & Snedeker, J. (2012). Counting the nouns:
Simple structural cues to verb meaning. Child Development, 83,
1382-1399.

1804

