Learning in the wild - how labels influence what we learn
Samuel Rivera (rivera.162@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University Newark
1179 University Dr., Newark, OH 43055, USA
Abstract
Learning concepts and categories in the real world is often accompanied by verbal labels. The existing theoretical accounts
of how labels influence what we learn range from facilitation
to overshadowing, with changes occurring over development.
Studies investigating how labels influence what people learn
have typically been confined to a category learning framework,
where participants were tasked to learn how to discriminate
categories or infer missing category properties. Here, we investigate how the absence or presence of labels, both common
and unique, alter how people attend and what they remember in
a more general setting. Our results suggest that unique labels
may promote visual exploration of objects; whereas, there was
no evidence to support the claim that hearing the same label
associated with different members of a to-be-learned category
directed attention to common features.
Keywords: categorization; cross-modal processing; attention;
learning

Introduction
Every day we learn about objects in the world through experiences with our environment and communication with others.
Language, and labeling in particular, is known to have important consequences for how we interpret and perceive categories in our environment (Lupyan, 2012; Perry & Lupyan,
2014), and effects of labeling on visual attention may illuminate a mechanism underlying how language may affect
thought more generally (Whorf, 1956). The goal of this research is to understand how linguistic labels, both common
and unique, influence what we learn from our environment.
Previous research has shown that adults expertly recognizing the link between labels and concepts (Lupyan, Rakison,
& McClelland, 2007; Perry & Lupyan, 2014), and adults
appear to appreciate the symbolic nature of linguistic input
(Yamauchi & Markman, 2000). Referring to an object with
the phrase “it’s a jambo” immediately conveys what the object is, and that it belongs to a particular category of things.
The powerful effect of labels exists even in infancy, with
studies showing that linguistic labels, unlike non-linguistic
sounds, facilitate category formation in very young infants
(Althaus & Mareschal, 2014; Balaban & Waxman, 1997;
Ferry, Hespos, & Waxman, 2010; but see Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007). The mechanism underlying this ability, especially
early in life, remains an active and contentious research topic.
Improved learning has been theorized as stemming from
labels indicating category membership in a natural kind class
(Gelman & Markman, 1986), and may invite infants to form
categories by denoting category membership and highlighting object commonalities (Waxman & Booth, 2003; Waxman

& Markow, 1995). It is also possible that hearing different
words associated with different objects directs attention to
unique features. Support for this claim comes from research
examining effects of labels on individuation (Xu, 2002, but
see Robinson & Sloutsky, 2008). For example, young infants
are more likely to assume that two different objects are hidden behind an occluder if the objects were associated with
two unique labels. Infants do not make this assumption if
they hear one label associated with both objects or if both
objects are associated with two non-linguistic sounds.
The view that labels draw attention to common features and
possibly unique features has been supported by behavioral
and eye tracking experiments with young infants (Althaus &
Plunkett, 2015a; Plunkett, Hu, & Cohen, 2008). However,
it is important to note that other studies examining visual attention while learning categories have failed to find evidence
that labels direct attention to category relevant features (Best,
Robinson, & Sloutsky, 2011). Thus, it is possible that, early
in life, labels can affect category learning without being perceived as symbols that denote category membership. They
may instead be an additional perceptual cue that adds to the
perceptual similarity of objects that are labeled with the same
name (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky, 2003), but become
more like category markers over development (Sloutsky, Lo,
& Fisher, 2001).
A third proposal is that labels may actual hinder category
learning early in life, with evidence of both words and nonlinguistic sounds attenuating both categorization and individuation early in development (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007,
2008). More specifically, while both of these studies provide some evidence that labels can have facilitative effects
compared to non-linguistic sounds, this difference stemmed
from non-linguistic sounds interfering with visual processing more than words, as neither the sound nor label condition
exceeded a silent condition. This contradictory finding may
be reconciled by recent research arguing that the precise synchrony of labels with visual object presentation has important
consequences on whether or not labels will facilitate learning
(Althaus & Plunket, 2015b; see also Roberts, 1995).
In summary, it has been proposed that labels have a facilitative effect on categorization and individuation in infants
and young children by directing attention to common features and unique features, respectively (Waxman & Booth,
2003). However, most of the research supporting the facilitative effects of labels examines the outcome of learning (e.g.,

2729

Category C Category B Category A
New Items

better learning in the label condition than a non-linguistics
sound condition), and does not directly test the hypothesis
that labels affect visual attention. Moreover, the research directly examining infants’ and children’s fixations while learning categories are mixed (Althaus & Plunkett, 2015b; Best et
al., 2011). Therefore, the current study examined the effects
of common and unique labels on adults’ category learning.
Previous research suggests that for adults, labels are not
just perceptual features (Yamauchi & Markman, 2000). Furthermore, adults optimize their attention to focus on category
relevant features (Blair, Watson, & Meier, 2009; Hoffman &
Rehder, 2010). Will adults who are experts in language learning and attention optimization direct their attention to common features when the to-be-learned individuals are associated with the same labels? Will adults fixate more on unique
features when every member of the to-be-learned category is
associated with a unique label? To address these questions,
we taught adults three novel categories. One category was
presented in silence (baseline), members of a second category were always paired with the same word (common label
condition) and members of the third category were associated
with unique labels (unique label condition). If common labels
direct attention to common features, then fixating on common features in the common label condition should exceed
the silent baseline. If unique labels direct attention to unique
features, then adults in the unique label condition should look
less to the common feature and more to unique features compared to the silent baseline.

Figure 1: We show example stimuli used in the experiment.
Each category is defined by the presence of a particular feature: prongs on the shoulders for category A, a dorsal fin for
category B, and suction cup feet for category C.

Method
Participants
Nineteen adults participated in the study for course credit
after giving written consent. The study was evaluated and
approved by an institutional review board at The Ohio State
University.

Stimuli
Verbal labels were pre-recorded sound clips of count nouns
in a child directed carrier phrase like “Look, here’s a dax” or
“this is called a dax” that were spoken by a female. Sound
clips were recorded using a Yeti Pro microphone and edited
using Audacity software so that each linguistic phrase was
approximately one second in duration. Auditory stimuli were
presented via Kensington KMW33137 headphones at approximately 65 dB. Visual stimuli were artificial creatures generated with the Spore creature creation software (Electronic
Arts Inc., 2009). Creatures were from three different categories defined by the presence of a single deterministic feature. All other features varied independently of the category,
and gave no information about category membership. Category A was defined by the presence of three small prongs
on the front shoulders. Category B members has a dorsal fin,
and category C creatures had suction-cup feet. The new items
were perceptually impoverished, had fewer limbs, and were
used as catcher items on test trials to make sure participants

(a) Category A

(b) Category B

(c) Category C

Figure 2: We show examples of stimuli used in our study,
with red circles denoting the areas of interest.
were paying attention during training.
We made an effort to normalize for the overall size and
complexity of creatures within and across categories and exemplars. Examples are shown in Figure 1. On average, stimuli spanned approximately 18 by 13 degrees of visual angle
and were presented on a 1920 x 1080 Benq XL2420-B monitor. The area of interest (AOI) for each creature was fixed
size circle (or circles) enclosing the deterministic feature(s).
Some example AOIs are shown in in Figure 2.

Procedure
We conducted a within subject study with eye-tracking to
identify differential effects of labeling on attention allocation,
memory for encountered objects, and attention to novel exemplars of studied categories. The label conditions encountered during training were Common (single label for category members), Silent (no labels or carrier phrase), or Unique
(each category exemplar had a different label). Following
training, participants performed an old vs. new recognition

2730

task.
To begin, participants were told that they would see a series
of creatures from another planet, and that they would learn
some of the creatures’ names. They were asked to study the
creatures at their own pace since they would be asked questions in the second part of the study (testing phase). They
were not told about the specific recognition task, nor were
they told what they would be tested on (e.g., words, creatures, word-creature pairings), but they were informed about
a test in general. Their gaze was recorded during training and
testing at 500Hz by an Eyelink 1000 Plus Tower system (SR
Research, Ontario, Canada). Fixation information was identified on-line during the experiment by the Eyelink system,
then recorded for offline processing and analysis with custom
MATLAB and Python software.
Each trial began with a central drift correction target that
corrected for slight eye-tracker drift during the experiment.
A trained experimenter sitting at the right side of the participant initiated each trial once the participant fixated the central
cue. Stimuli were presented in a self-paced manner, in three
blocks of 15 trials consisting of 5 items from each category.
Participants pressed the 1 key on the number pad when they
were ready to move to the next stimulus. Trials within blocks
were randomized, and the same 15 items were presented in
each block. Each category was consistently presented in either silence (category A), with a unique label phrase (category
B), or with a common label phrase (category C). The auditory
and visual stimuli shared the same stimulus onset. The carrier phrase and label terminated after about 1 s and the visual
stimulus terminated when the participant pressed the 1 key.
After three training blocks, participants were presented
with an old versus new recognition task. All of these test trials
were presented in silence. Participants saw 5 exemplars from
each of the three categories that had been previously studied
(15 old items), 5 novel exemplars from the studied categories
(15 lure items that had the category defining feature), and 6
completely new trials that looked completely different from
any of the studied items. Each trial began with a drift correction target as before. Participants responded old or new to
the stimulus by pressing the 1 key for old, and the 3 key for
new. Participants were instructed to respond as fast and as
accurately as possible.
If common labels facilitate categorization by directing attention to common features, then participants in the common
label condition should focus more on the category defining
features compared to the silent condition, and thus would be
more likely to mistake critical lures as old or have worse recall in general in comparison to the unique label or silent conditions. If unique labels facilitate individuation by directing
attention away from common features and to unique features,
then participants in the unique label condition should focus
more on unique features compared to the silent condition.

Figure 3: Here we show participant mean study time across
conditions and blocks. Error bars denote standard error.
Trends show that participants spent less time studying over
the training blocks.

Figure 4: Here we show participant mean latency to fixate the
deterministic feature. Error bars denote standard error.

Results
Training Results
Training study time We plot the mean study time in Figure 3. We ran a 3 (condition: common vs. silent vs. unique) x
3 (block) repeated measures ANOVA on log(studyTime). We
found a significant effect of condition, F(2, 36) = 9.56, p <
.001, η2p = 0.35. Pairwise comparisons showed that participants viewed the images for less time in the Silent condition than the Common (p = 0.015, Bonferroni corrected) and
the Unique label conditions (p < .001). Thus, participants
were faster when only the visual information was presented.
There was also a main effect of block, F(2, 36) = 31.05, p <
0.001, η2p = 0.63. Pairwise comparison also showed that
block 1 was significantly longer than blocks 2 and 3 (ps <
0.001). Thus, participants spent less time studying the creatures after the first block.
Training latency Deterministic Looks For several participants, there were blocks where the deterministic features
were never fixated. Thus, we excluded these participants
from this analysis. We considered the averages across all
blocks such that only one participant was excluded. Averages
are shown in Figure 4. We ran a one-way repeated measures
ANOVA on latency to fixate the relevant AOI with main effect of condition (common vs. silent vs. unique). We found
a significant main effect of condition, F(2, 34) = 10.78, p <
.001, η2p = .39. Pairwise comparisons revealed that only the

2731

Figure 5: Here we show participant mean proportion of looking at the deterministic or category defining AOI. Error bars
denote standard error.

Figure 6: Here we show participant mean number of fixations
during training across conditions and blocks. Error bars denote standard error.

difference between the silent and unique conditions was statistically significant (p < 0.001, Bonferroni corrected), with
latency in the silent condition being shorter. The difference
between the silent and common was approaching significance
(p = 0.077), with latency in the silent condition being shorter
than the common label condition. Thus, participants in the
silent condition fixated the deterministic feature earlier on trials during training. Is it possible that participants were in
general fixating earlier on Silent trials? We ran a 3 (condition: common vs. silent vs. unique) x 3 (block) repeated
measures ANOVA on latency of log(first fixation) to test this
possibility. There were no significant main effects or interactions, ruling out the possibility that participants in the silent
condition may have been faster overall.
Training - deterministic looking The latency analysis
above is problematic because there were many trials where
the deterministic feature was never fixated so that latency information was missing. Such cases bias the result because if
the deterministic feature was never fixated, that trial was excluded from the analysis instead of providing a large latency
value. A better measure, if we are interested in how label
conditions contribute to deterministic looking is to consider
the proportion of looking on a trial. Thus, no fixations at the
deterministic feature would give a value of 0. We show the
averages across conditions and blocks in Figure 5. We ran
a 3 (condition: common vs. silent vs. unique) x 3 (block)
repeated measures ANOVA on proportion of fixation time at
the deterministic feature. We found a significant main effect
of condition, F(1.65, 29.78) = 21.39, p < 0.001, η2p = 0.54,
Greenhouse-Geisser corrections. Pairwise comparisons revealed that the unique condition had a significantly lower
proportion of fixation time at the deterministic feature than
the other conditions (ps < 0.003, Bonferroni corrected). No
other main effects or interactions were significant.
Training Fixation counts Given this difference in proportion of fixations at the deterministic feature, we wondered if
this could be explained by an overall increase in the exploration of the object. Such behavior would transpire in an increase in the number of overall fixations. We plot means in
Figure 6. A 3 (condition: common vs. silent vs. unique) x

Figure 7: Here we show participant mean accuracy across
conditions for both old and lure trials. Error bars denote standard error. Trends suggest that lure items were more accurately identified as new across all conditions. However the
differences were not significant.

3 (block) repeated measures ANOVA on number of fixations
revealed a statistically significant main effect of condition,
F(2, 36) = 5.66, p = 0.007, η2p = 0.24. Pairwise comparisons
showed that the effect was driven by a significant difference
between the silent and unique condition (p=0.02, Bonferroni
corrected), with more fixations in the unique condition as predicted. The number of fixations in the unique condition was
trending larger than the common label condition, but the difference was not statistically significant.
There was also a significant main effect of block,
F(1.31, 23.54) = 13.63, p = 0.001, η2p = 0.43, GreenhouseGeisser corrected for sphericity. Pairwise comparisons revealed that there were significantly more fixations in the first
block than later blocks (ps < 0.03, Bonferroni corrected). Interaction between condition and block was not significant.

Test Results
Accuracy One participant reversed the response mapping,
as indicated by 0% accuracy. We reversed their responses in
calculating the accuracy scores below. We plot the mean participant accuracy in Figure 7. Overall, participant accuracy
was near or at ceiling in the old vs. new judgement task, with
accuracy above 95% across the three conditions. A 3 (condition: common vs. silent vs. unique) x 2 (test type: Lure

2732

Figure 8: Here we show mean participant reaction times during test trials. Error bars denote standard error.

Figure 10: Here we show mean number of fixations during
testing trials. Error bars denote standard error.

A 3 (condition: common vs. silent vs. unique) x 2 (test
type: Lure vs. Old) repeated measures ANOVA on number
of fixations revealed no significant main effects or interactions. Thus, across conditions participants fixated the same
amount when making their old/new judgements. However,
the unique label condition was associated with less focus on
the deterministic feature(s).

Discussion
Figure 9: Here we show mean proportion of fixation time
at the deterministic or category defining feature. Error bars
denote standard error.

vs. Old) repeated measures ANOVA on old/new recall accuracy revealed a statistically significant main effect of test
type, F(1, 17) = 5.64, p = 0.03, η2p = 0.25, with accuracy on
lure items being higher. No other effects or interactions were
significant.
Testing RT Mean reaction times during test trials are
shown in Figure 8. We applied a 3 (condition: common vs.
silent vs. unique) x 2 (test type: Lure vs. Old) repeated measures ANOVA to log(RT) on accurate test trials. There were
no significant main effects or interactions.
Testing proportion of deterministic looking We plot the
proportion of fixation time at the deterministic AOI in Figure 9. A 3 (condition: common vs. silent vs. unique) x 2 (test
type: Lure vs. Old) repeated measures ANOVA on proportion
of deterministic looking on test trials revealed a significant
main effect of condition, F(2, 34) = 13.16, p < 0.001, η2p =
0.44. Pairwise comparisons showed that the effect was driven
by the unique condition having a significantly lower proportion than the common label condition (p = 0.031, Bonferroni
corrected) and the silent condition (p < 0.001). This result is
consistent with the gaze pattern during training.
Testing Fixation counts As with the training data, we were
interested in whether the relatively smaller proportion of fixations at the deterministic feature could be explained by an
overall increase in the number of fixations in the unique condition. We show the average number of fixations in Figure 10.

In the current study we investigated how the presence or
absence of labels affect adults’ visual attention while viewing novel visual stimuli. Previous research with infants and
young children shows that infants are more likely to learn categories when the to-be-categorized images are paired with the
same label (Balaban & Waxman, 1997) and more likely to individuate exemplars or learn two categories when the different objects are associated with different labels (Plunkett et al.,
2008; Xu, 2002). One potential mechanism that may account
for these effects is that infants understand the symbolic nature
of language, with common and unique words (but not sounds)
directing infants attention to common and unique features, respectively (Waxman & Booth, 2003). However, recent eye
tracking studies directly testing this hypothesis have yielded
mixed results (Althaus & Plunkett, 2015a; Best et al., 2011);
therefore, this study examined visual fixations in adults, who
clearly understand the symbolic nature of words and can optimize their attention (Blair et al., 2009; Lupyan et al., 2007;
Rehder & Hoffman, 2005).
Participants in the current study required less exposure to
images and were faster to make fixations to category defining features when the images were presented in silence. This
is consistent with some of the research examining auditory
dominance in a variety of cognitive tasks (see Robinson et
al. 2012 for a review). Across many different behavioral and
eye tracking variables, there was no support for the hypothesis that common labels directed attention to category relevant features; however, there was some support showing that
hearing unique labels associated with category members decreased attention to commonalities or increased attention to
unique features.
A goal of future research is to adapt this initial study to

2733

examine labeling effects in younger populations. One advantage of the study is that it mirrors situations encounter outside
the laboratory, where the way knowledge will be applied is
unknown. However, this article is limited in that stimuli are
defined by only a small subset of defining features, and the
defining features did not vary across labeling phrases. Thus,
future work should consider categories comprised of multiple defining features with proper counter-balancing of these
categories with the labeling conditions.
In summary, studies have demonstrated important influences of labeling on category learning. While many of these
studies show that labels and sounds can have different effects
on categorization and individuation, underlying mechanism
are poorly understood. The current study took a novel approach by examining fixations in real time as adults learned
about category objects. While there was some support showing that unique labels push attention to unique features or
away from category defining features, there was no support
showing that participants looked more at defining features or
made faster fixations to these defining features. These findings have implications for proposed mechanisms underlying
the effects of labels on category learning and should be further examined in younger populations.

References
Althaus, N., & Mareschal, D. (2014). Labels direct infants’
attention to commonalities during novel category learning.
PLoS ONE, 9(7).
Althaus, N., & Plunkett, K. (2015a). Categorization in infancy: Labeling induces a persisting focus on commonalities. Developmental Science.
Althaus, N., & Plunkett, K. (2015b). Timing matters: The
impact of label synchrony on infant categorisation. Cognition, 139, 1–9.
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words facilitate
object categorization in 9-month old infants? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3–26.
Best, C. A., Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2011).
The effect of labels on categorization: Is attention to relevant features a good index of infants category learning? In
L. Carlson, C. Hlscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society
(pp. 2751–2755).
Blair, M. R., Watson, M. R., & Meier, K. M. (2009). Errors,
efficiency, and the interplay between attention and category
learning.
Ferry, A., Hespos, S., & Waxman, S. (2010). Categorization
in 3- and 4-month-old infants: An advantage of words over
tones. Child Development(2), 472–479.
Gelman, S. a., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23(3), 183–209.
Hoffman, A. B., & Rehder, B. (2010). The costs of supervised classification: The effect of learning task on conceptual flexibility. Journal of experimental psychology. General, 139(2), 319–340.

Lupyan, G. (2012). Linguistically modulated perception and
cognition: the label feedback hypothesis. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 54.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007).
Language is not just for talking: Redundant labels facilitate learning of novel categories. Psychological Science,
18(12), 1077–1083.
Perry, L. K., & Lupyan, G. (2014). The role of language
in multi-dimensional categorization: Evidence from transcranial direct current stimulation and exposure to verbal
labels. Brain and Language, 135, 66 - 72.
Plunkett, K., Hu, J. F., & Cohen, L. B. (2008). Labels can
override perceptual categories in early infancy. Cognition,
106, 665–681.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005). Eyetracking and selective attention in category learning. Cognitive Psychology,
51(1), 1–41.
Roberts, K. (1995). Categorical responding in 15-montholds: Influence of the noun-category bias and the covariation between visual fixation and auditory input. Cognitive
Development, 10, 21–41.
Robinson, C. W., Best, C. A., Deng, S., & Sloutsky, V. M.
(2012). The role of words in cognitive tasks: What, when,
and how? Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 1–8.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2007). Linguistic labels and categorization in infancy: Do labels facilitate or
hinder? Infancy, 11(3), 233–253.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2008). Effects of auditory input in individuation tasks. Developmental Science,
11, 869–881.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(6),
246 –251.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and categorization in young children: a similarity-based model.
Journal of experimental psychology. General, 133(2), 166–
188.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y. F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels, similarity, and the development of inductive inference. Child Development, 72(6), 1695–1709.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. E. (2003). The origins and
evolution of links between word learning and conceptual
organization: New evidence from 11-month-olds. Developmental Science, 6, 130–137.
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as invitations to form categories: evidence from 12- to 13-monthold infants. Cognitive psychology, 29(3), 257–302.
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, thought, and reality (J. B. Carroll, Ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Xu, F. (2002). The role of language in acquiring object kind
concepts in infancy. Cognition, 85, 223–250.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (2000). Inference using
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 26, 776–795.

2734

