Leveling the Field: Talking Levels in Cognitive Science
Luke Kersten (lukekersten@cmail.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive,
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 CA

Robert West (robert_west@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive,
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 CA

Andrew Brook (andrew.brook@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 3A40 Paterson Hall,
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 CA

Abstract

little has been done to clarify the notion” (2015, p.23).
This state of affairs calls out for improvement. In what
follows, we aim to provide an analysis of the various ways
levels have been deployed within cognitive science. The
paper begins by introducing and motivating discussion via
four representative accounts of levels. It then turns to
outlining and relating the four accounts using two
dimensions of comparison. The result is the creation of a
conceptual framework that maps the logical space of levels
talk. This conceptual framework offers one important step
toward making sense of levels within cognitive science.

Talk of levels is everywhere in cognitive science. Whether it is
in terms of adjudicating longstanding debates or motivating
foundational concepts, one cannot go far without hearing
about the need to talk at different ‘levels’. Yet in spite of its
widespread application and use, the concept of levels has
received little sustained attention within cognitive science.
This paper provides an analysis of the various ways the notion
of levels has been deployed within cognitive science. The
paper begins by introducing and motivating discussion via
four representative accounts of levels. It then turns to outlining
and relating the four accounts using two dimensions of
comparison. The result is the creation of a conceptual
framework that maps the logical space of levels talk, which
offers an important step toward making sense of levels talk
within cognitive science

Talking Levels
The first account to consider is David Marr’s (1977,
1982). Marr identifies three different “levels of analysis” for
cognitive science.
First, there is the computational level. At the
computational level, investigators look at what function a
system performs, asking questions about what informationprocessing problem the system solves. Research at the
computational level aims to translate general, everyday
descriptions of cognitive phenomena into particular
information-processing problems or tasks. Second, there is
the algorithmic level. At the algorithmic level, researchers
investigate by what steps a system solves an informationprocessing problem; they ask questions about the algorithms
and representations used by the system. Research at this
level attempts to specify in detail the set of informationprocessing procedures that solve a particular informationprocessing problem. Finally, there is the implementational
level. At the implementational level, researchers attempt to
determine what physical structures instantiate the algorithms
used for solving the information-processing problem; what
physical mechanisms realize or support the cognitive system
under investigation.
For example, when investigators emphasize the
spatiotemporal properties of cognitive systems using the
techniques of neuroscience, such as neuroimaging or lesion
studies, they operate at an implementational level. When
investigators focus on how components interact so as to

Keywords: levels; analysis; explanation; organization;
cognitive science; conceptual framework

Introduction
Levels are everywhere in cognitive science. One cannot
go far without hearing about the need to talk at different
levels, whether it is in terms of levels of organization,
explanation, description or aggregation. Levels have been
called upon to do everything from adjudicate longstanding
debates in cognitive modeling (Broadbent, 1985; Dawson,
1998) to motivating computational theories of mind
(Pylyshyn, 1984).
Yet in spite of its widespread application and use, the
concept of levels has received little sustained attention in
cognitive science. Although there has been excellent wider
discussion in the philosophical literature about levels (see,
e.g., Wimsatt, 1976; 1994), little has been done to develop
the notion specifically within cognitive science – for early
attempts see Bechtel (1994) and McClamrock (1991). As
Wright and Bechtel (2007) point out: “levels-talk is virtually
threadbare from overuse yet [the] various conceptions of
levels are rarely analyzed in any sustained, substantive
detail despite there being a litany of literature on the
subject” (p.55). Or, as Craver puts it: “Despite the ubiquity
of levels talk in contemporary science and philosophy, very
1

2399

produce the operations or procedures that carry out
computations using the methods and techniques of cognitive
psychology such as randomized block designs or error rates,
they ascend to a higher, algorithmic level of analysis. Each
level of analysis has a different role to play in the cognitive
investigation, as each satisfies a different epistemic end.
The second account to consider is Zenon Pylyshyn’s.
Pylyshyn (1980, 1984) similarly identifies three “levels of
description” for cognitive science, though where Marr is
concerned with offering a unifying methodology for
cognitive investigation Pylyshyn is concerned with
articulating the foundations of cognitive science.
First, there is what Pylyshyn identifies as the “semantic”
level. At this level, psychological behaviour is described
and explained using the representational or semantic content
of an individual’s mental states; what the individual
believes, desires, etc. Second, there is the “symbolic or
syntactic” level. Behaviour at the symbolic level is
described in terms of functional properties. For example, to
explain why an individual does poorly on a memory-recall
task, the symbolic level appeals to control structures or
memory storage capacities. This is in contrast to explaining
performance by referencing what information the individual
fails to recall, for example. Third, there is the “biological
level”. At the biological level, individuals are described in
terms of the familiar vocabulary of the physical sciences,
e.g., neurology, chemistry, biology. To account for why
someone is thinking of faces rather than sounds, for
example, explanations at the biological level might appeal
to differences in brain activity or neural-chemistry.
Similar to Marr, Pylyshyn (1980, 1984) is also
impressed by the explanatory power of levels. However,
whereas Marr’s levels are concerned with answering
different types of questions, Pylyshyn’s levels are focused
on capturing distinct generalizations. For Pylyshyn,
different descriptive vocabularies capture distinct sets of
regularities. He writes, for instance: “When we have
principles of operation that cannot be stated within a certain
vocabulary – but can be captured in another, more abstract
(here, functional) vocabulary to which the terms of the first
vocabulary stand in multiple relations – we have a prima
facie case for the existence of an independent level” (1984,
p.33). Some valid generalizations are only expressible at
particular levels of description.
Newell (1980, 1990) offers a third account. Newell
defines what he calls “systems levels”. System levels are
collections of components that, in virtue of their
organization and interaction, produce particular functions or
behaviours. System levels mark functional divisions
between different sets of organized components. They
define the basic “technology” by which the human cognitive
architecture is constructed. Each system level is realized by
components at the next system level below.
Furthermore, since complicated systems are more likely
to be resistant to degradation if they are built out of
assemblies of stable subcomponents, it is more likely that
system levels will be successively layered. As Newell puts

it: “If stable subassemblies are created, layer upon layer,
then each one has a reasonable probability of being
constructed out of a few parts. Thus, there exists a general
argument that stability dictates the existence of levels”
(1990, p.117).
In terms of identifying system levels, Newell claims that
as one ascends upward from the smallest components to the
largest components, system levels are revealed by their
unique time signatures; as one moves up the hierarchy of
system levels the size of each level will increase while
speed will decrease. This follows in virtue of the
aggregative size of levels. If components of one system
level are of a characteristic size and those components are
put together to form components at the next system level
above, then it follows that the higher-level components will
take longer to operate than their constitutive elements.
Methodologically, the implication is that the time
required to perform different tasks exposes different system
levels. Different system levels are composed of increasingly
larger components that operate at successively slower
speeds. Qualitative shifts in time signatures reflect
substantive shifts between different system levels.
The final account to consider is William Bechtel’s
(1994, 2007). Bechtel’s use of levels is a bit different from
the preceding three, as it is formed within a larger
discussion of mechanistic explanation. An explanation
qualifies as mechanistic when it identifies a hierarchical
system whose components, in virtue of their organization,
produce some activity or behaviour. The goal of
mechanistic explanation is to decompose a given
mechanism, and its constitutive activities, into its
underlying component parts, showing how those
components conspire to produce the activity of the
composite whole (see, e.g., Bechtel & Richardson, 1993;
Craver, 2007). Rather than viewing levels as substantive
divisions between different systems (as Newell does, for
example), Bechtel prefers to view levels as local fields of
analysis. Levels pick out the various explanatory strategies
that can be used during mechanistic decomposition. As
Bechtel writes: “[m]ultiple cycles of analysis thus give rise
to a hierarchy of levels that is confined to a given
mechanism” (2007, p.56).
Bechtel (2007) offers the following example. Suppose a
biological mechanism involves sodium molecules crossing
over a cell membrane. On the mechanistic account, the
sodium molecules and cell membrane can be said to be at
the same level if both are implicated in the operation of the
biological mechanism in question. The status of standing at
higher or lower level depends, in part, on the explanatory
role occupied by the component within the larger
investigation – in contrast to, for example, slotting into a
global organization of size, shape or motion. If the
investigator pursues another cycle of decomposition, the
components might be further decomposed, but this will still
be local to the analysis being offered.
On Bechtel’s analysis, it is not to possible to say that one
mechanism exists at a higher or lower level than another.
2

2400

There is no a global ordering available for mechanisms.
Levels simply define the various explanatory strategies
employed at any one cycle of decomposition. The existence
of levels is mechanism dependent. As Bechtel puts it:
“[L]evels on the mechanistic account are real in that they
deal with the particularities of actual components and their
operations, but they are perspectival in that they are defined
with respect to specific foci on mechanistic activities
(Wright & Bechtel, 2007, p.57).
These four accounts should provide a flavor of the kind
of levels talk that has prevailed in much of cognitive
science. As one can see, the range is quite large. Just what a
level is, how it is to be used, and why such talk is important
varies notably from author to author. The question to
address is how to make sense of these various uses of levels.

talk to ontic relata. An account’s positioning depends on the
relata it implicates.
Notice that Bechtel’s view provides something of an
interesting middle ground, as it straddles the two poles. On
Bechtel’s view, levels of mechanisms are both ontic
structures and observer-dependent entities. Mechanistic
activities are real phenomenon in the world, but their
arrangement into different levels depends on the
explanatory goals of the investigation.
An additional implication of applying levels talk to
epistemic versus ontic relata is that it changes how levels
relate within a given account. If, on the one hand, an
account applies to ontic relata, then its levels relate via a
metaphysical realization relation. If, on the other hand, the
account applies to explanatory or theoretical entities, then
its levels relate in virtue of an explanatory realization
relation.
Metaphysical realization is the familiar notion from
philosophy of mind that says that two entities stand in a
realization relation if and only if when there is change in the
higher-level entity there is a corresponding change in the
underlying entity change, but not the reverse (Kim, 1998).
The standard example is the relation between mental and
physical states. Since there cannot be change among mental
states without a corresponding change among physical
states, physical states are said to realize mental states.
Metaphysical realization involves a determinative,
asymmetric dependence relation between different
properties, states or activities.
Explanatory realization, on the other hand, has received a
little less attention than its ontological cousin. In
explanatory realization, the dependence relation tracks items
of particular theories, languages, or models. It addresses
explanatory rather than metaphysical entities. The
realization relation holds between statements rather than
entities.
An illustrative example comes from theory reduction in
the philosophy of science. On the standard model of theory
reduction, one theory reduces to a second if and only if the
first theory is derivable from the second given certain
“bridge laws” (Nagel, 1961). Reduction occurs when all of
the items of one theory can be translated into items of the
second theory via specific law-like statements or logical
connectives. For example, the theory of thermal
conductivity reduces to electrical conductivity because
(most) of the terms in thermal conductivity can be translated
into terms of electrical conductivity via covering
generalizations such as the Wiedemann-Franz Law.
Whether or not the reduction is successful is beside the
point. The point to note is that the supportive relation holds
between different theories or linguistic items and not
ontological structures. Explanatory realization shifts
attention to how descriptions of entities within theories
sustain or determine the theoretical fruitfulness of entities
described at other levels.
On the epistemic application, hierarchies of levels stand
in similar sorts of explanatory realization relations. This is

Analyzing Levels
There are two general points of comparison or
dimensions of analysis that can be used to examine levels
talk. The first deals with the types of items that figure into
an account of levels; what ‘relata’ the view implicates. The
second deals with how an account uses levels talk; to what
end or purpose an account deploys levels. Consider each in
turn.
First, there seem to be two general types of relata used in
levels talk. The first is ontic relata. On this view, levels talk
is taken to hold of activities, structures, and properties. It
applies to cognitive entities as they appear in the world.
Newell offers something like this application with his
system levels account: “[A] system level is a property of
nature, and not just something in the head of the observer”
(1990, p.118). On the ontic application, levels are part of the
configuration of the world, picking out the various features
constitutive of cognition.
The second type of relata is epistemic relata. On this
view, levels talk is taken to hold of ‘linguistic’ or
‘theoretical’ entities. Marr is reasonably interpreted as
subscribing to something like this view. When applied to
epistemic relata, levels talk functions to provide
perspectives for understanding cognition. It offers a means
of enhancing an investigator’s epistemic situation.
When viewed as extremes, these two general
applications form a continuum on which various accounts
can be located. Figure 1 provides an illustration.
Marr

Bechtel

Pylyshyn

Newell

Epistemic vs. Ontic
Figure 1: Levels accounts arranged along a spectrum
of commitment to epistemic vs. ontic relata.

On the one hand, there are those views such as Marr’s that
apply levels talk to epistemic relata. On the other hand,
there are also those views such as Newell’s that apply levels
3

2401

why both Pylyshyn and Marr emphasis the collective use of
several levels. On Marr’s account, for example, the
computational level identifies a given input-output mapping,
while the algorithmic level describes the procedures by
which the function is computed. The algorithmic level
supplies crucial constraints on satisfying the input-output
mapping. The algorithmic level makes it possible for the
computational level to track real computations in the world.
Second, different accounts of levels can also be measured
to the extent to which they use levels talk for epistemic
versus ontic or metaphysical purposes.
On the ontic usage, levels talk attempts to provide
descriptions of how cognition is organized. Levels talk is in
the business of providing accurate descriptions of how the
world is organized. Discussion attempts to furnish
representative accounts of how cognitive systems and
capacities are structured into levels.
Consider Newell’s account, for example. On Newell’s
view, different “cognitive bands” address different sets of
“system levels” – for example, the biological band
addresses the neural circuit system level, while the cognitive
band deals with the deliberate act system level. On Newell’s
view, levels talk functions to describe the organization and
structure of cognition as described by the different system
levels. Thus, according to the ontic usage, levels talk has a
distinctly ontic role to play in discussion of cognition.
Contrast this position with a second, epistemic type of
usage. On this usage, levels talk deals with how cognitive
phenomena should be studied. Levels function to provide
perspectives or viewpoints from which to investigate
cognition. As Dawson puts it: “levels do not attempt to
explain the nature of information processing devices, but
instead provide an epistemology – a way to inquire about
the nature of the world” (2013, p.53). Levels talk acts as a
tool for inquiry rather than as an ontic description of
cognition.
Consider Marr’s account, for example. On Marr’s view,
the computational, algorithmic and implementational levels
help to organize cognitive investigation into its most
explanatory fruitful parts. The computational level deals
with function of the cognitive system, the algorithmic level
deals with the procedures used to carry out said function,
and the implementational level deals with physical material
in which the computation is instantiated. Each level
partitions investigation into distinct units of analysis such
that it structures and simplifies discussion.
When viewed as extremes, these two general usages form
a second continuum on which various accounts can be
located. Figure 2 provides an illustration.
Marr

Bechtel

Pylyshyn

On the one hand, there are those views such as Marr’s that
deploy levels talk for explanatory purposes – these accounts
view levels talk as a tool for inquiry. On the other hand,
there are those views such as Newell and Pylyshyn’s that
use levels talk for metaphysical or ontic purposes – these
accounts view levels talk as a means to describe cognitive
structures as they appear in the world. Different accounts
employ levels talk to different ends.

A Conceptual Framework for Levels
The fact that levels talk can be sorted along two
dimensions of analysis allows for the creation of a
conceptual framework that can be used to the map the
logical space of levels talk. Figure 3 provides an illustration.

Figure 3: Levels views compared along commitment
to ontic versus epistemic relata and usage.

Marr’s account occupies the bottom left corner of the
space. This is because it applies levels talk to exclusively
theoretical or linguistic entities. Both the relata and usage
are taken to be explanatory in nature. Marr’s account is
followed by Pylyshyn and Bechtel’s accounts in the middle.
These views tow a more neutral line, conceiving of levels as
at once ontic and epistemic in character to some degree –
Pylyshyn’s view, for example, applies to epistemic relata
but is used to make claims about the leveled structure of
cognition. Finally, there is Newell’s view in the top right
hand corner of the space. Newell’s position here is owed to
his adherence to almost entirely ontic application of levels
talk – levels talk applies to ontic relata (system levels) and
is used to describe the structure of cognitive architecture in
terms of the system levels.
What is interesting about this framework is that it maps
many of the possible applications of levels talk. It is both
descriptive and generative. Various accounts are positioned
with respect to how they talk about levels, but at the same
time the framework leaves it open as to how other accounts
might use levels.

Newell

Epistemic vs. Ontic Usage
Figure 2: Levels accounts arranged along a spectrum
of commitment to explanatory versus ontic usage.

4

2402

Now one might worry that the framework uses two
dimensions of analysis where only one is necessary,
particularly given that both points of comparison include an
ontic versus epistemic element. The reason two dimensions
are more effective than one is that two dimensions allow the
current framework to distinguish positions, such as Bechtel
or Pylyshyn’s, that deploy level talk both epistemically and
ontically. Using only one dimension would fail effectively
convey the difference between positions such as these, as
Pylyshyn’s view implicates epistemic relata but makes ontic
claims and Bechtel’s view implicates ontic relata but uses
levels as an epistemic tool.
One might further worry that the present analysis
focuses too much on “first generation” cognitive science.
That it does not pay sufficient attention to neurological or
biological levels. Though this objection is well motivated, it
is misplaced in present context. Nothing in the current
analysis precludes discussion of neurological or biological
levels. It is simply that neurological or biological levels
have not featured prominently in discussion of levels – for
discussion, see Craver (2015). Although it is certainly right
to say that cognitive processes, states, and systems are
abstract in the sense that they can be discussed without
reference to material form but concrete in the sense that they
are realized in a specific physical medium (Thagard, 2014),
the current analysis is neutral with respect to the importance
of this fact. The current analysis simply attempts to map the
space of levels talk as it has been most prominently
developed within cognitive science. Whether or not
neurological levels are crucial to understanding cognition is
of secondary concern to the present investigation.
The framework also reveals three more general,
orienting positions that might be held with respective to
levels. The first is what might be called the “perspectivist or
perspectival” view. On the perspectival view, levels talk
applies to the products or units of scientific investigation.
Levels deal with theories, explanations or research programs
rather than ontic structures. Different epistemic structures
are sorted according to the different questions they address.
Items on the perspectival view relate in virtue of standing in
explanatory rather than ontic relations – recall, for example,
what was said about explanatory versus metaphysical
realization. Included here are views such as Marr’s.
The second is what might be called the “realist” view.
According to this view, levels talk applies to items in the
world. This means that levels deal with entities, activities
and properties. These items exist as part of the furniture of
cognition. These structures relate via compositional
relations. Each item is constituted or realized by items
residing at lower levels. Often, a principle of prediction or
causality is used to sort items into different levels. Newell is
included under this second heading.
Finally, there is the “quasi-realist” view. On this view,
levels talk applies to the components and activities of
mechanisms. These are features of the world. However, in
contrast to realism and closer to perspectivism, levels also
have an epistemic bent. Though levels count as real parts of

cognition, they only emerge during or as part of
investigation. As Bechtel writes: “Constitutive strategies
describe the mechanism’s component parts, their operations,
and their organization, showing how the mechanism’s
constituency is responsible for its activity” (2007, p.62).
Levels are theoretical impositions, being explanatory
strategies, but they are also part of the mechanisms
constitutive of cognition. Bechtel falls under this third
category.
Note that these three views are probably best regarded as
representative positions rather than actual positions
individual authors’ hold. Each view represents a sort of
general umbrella category or idealized position that can be
used to explore different types of levels talk without getting
into all the messiness of interpreting individual authors’
viewpoints.
What is it about the realist, quasi-realist, and
perspectivist positions that make other views cluster around
them? One possibility is that the divisions reflect larger
differences in overarching conceptions of cognition or
science (see, e.g., van Fraassen, 1980). That the
realism/anti-realism split reflects a larger divide that runs
through most theoretical discussions in the sciences.
Another possibility might be that the various views are just
different sides of the same coin; that with additional work
each can be distilled into one underlying view. For example,
perhaps Marr’s more perspectivist view collapses into the
realist view if it is cashed out in specifically causal terms.
Or, perhaps the claims of the realist can be deflated and
shown to be subsumable under the quasi-realist’s account.
There are three desirable features to the present
framework. First, it helps to clarify confusions between
different accounts of levels. For example, in their review of
Marr’s tripartite account of levels, Churchland, Koch, and
Sejnowski write: “when we measure Marr’s three levels of
analysis against levels of organization in the nervous
system, the fit is poor and confusing” (1990, p.38). For
Churchland, Koch and Sejnowski, Marr’s levels are either
inadequate or patently false. They fail to offer accurate
characterizations of the organization of cognition as it
realized in the brain. Since there are a great many spatial
levels of organization in the brain, Marr’s levels makes for a
poor fit.
Understood within the context of the present analysis,
the issue is immediately clear: Churchland, Koch and
Sejnowski have mistaken the relata of Marr’s account.
Marr’s levels are not a poor fit for brain organization,
because they are not meant to fit with brain organization.
Churchland, Koch and Sejnowski have confused Marr’s
epistemological application of levels talk with an
ontological one. In cases such as these, knowing what
elements to look for can help identify key areas where
potential misunderstandings might arise. The framework
can play a therapeutic role in discussion.
Second,
the
conceptual
framework
furnishes
interpretative benefits. This is because it allows the
underlying reasoning of each account to be more easily
5

2403

understood. For example, on Newell’s view, evolution is
thought to favor systems constructed through addition of
modular parts, since it is more likely that nature will build
complex systems incrementally rather than all at once.
Understood in realist terms, this reasoning makes sense.
Attention to the spatial and temporal features of levels weds
naturally to a focus on evolutionary considerations. Once it
is clear at what end each account aims, the underlying
reasoning is more easily explicated.
Third, in the case of more substantive disagreements
over levels, the framework helps to clarify different lines of
support, and thus chart potential argumentative paths
through the levels space. For example, returning to Newell’s
account, if one is dubious of the appeal to evolution on the
grounds that such arguments are underdetermined, then one
can argue that the realist position is importantly undermotivated; that application of levels talk to cognitive
structures is too quick. Or, to take the contrary position, if
one is concerned that the perspectival view relegates levels
talk to an arbitrary status, then the current analysis provides
a direction in which to mount this challenge – for example,
that it fails to get at the real structures and organization of
cognition. The framework helps to simply discussion by
cutting to the core elements of disagreement.
For all these reasons, the present framework offers an
important tool for cognitive science. It provides a means to
thinking about and sorting through various types of levels
talk. It also reveals key elements of the various accounts
while staying neutral with respect to alternative ways of
applying levels talk.
In closing, a quick qualification needs to be made. The
preceding analysis is not meant to be the definitive guide to
conceptualizing levels. It is entirely possible that other
dimensions of analysis exist on which applications of levels
talk can be analyzed. However, the present account does
identify several important features that cut across a large
swath of levels talk. What the present discussion has
provided, we hope, is one concrete step toward making of
further sense of levels in cognitive science.

References
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. (1993). Discovering
Complexity: Decomposition and Localization as Strategies
in Scientific Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Bechtel, W. (1994). Levels of Description and Explanation in
Cognitive Science. Minds and Machines, 4, 1-25.
Broadbent, D. (1985). A question of levels: Comments on
McCelland and Rumelheart. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 114, 189-192.
Churchland, P.S., Koch, C., & Sejnowski, T.J. (1990). What
is computational neuroscience? In Schwartz, E.L. (ed.),
Computational Neuroscience. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Craver, C. (2007). Explaining the brain: Mechanisms and the
mosaic unity of neuroscience. Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press.

Craver, C. (2015). Levels. In T. Metzinger & J. M. Windt
(Eds). Open MIND: 8(T). Frankfurt am Main: MIND
Group. doi: 10.15502/9783958570498
Dawson, M. R. W. (1998). Understanding Cognitive Science.
Blackwell Publisher.
Dawson, M. R. W. (2013). Mind, Body, World: Foundations
of Cognitive Science. Alberta, Edmonton: Athabasca
Press.
Dawson, M. R. W., Boechler, P. M., & Valsangkar-Smyth, M.
(2000). Representing space in a PDP network: Coarse
allocentric coding can mediate metric and nonmetric
spatial judgements. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 2,
181–218.
Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a physical world. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
Marr, D., & Poggio, T. (1977). From understanding
computation
to
understanding
neural
circuitry.
Neurosciences Research Program Bulletin, 15, 470-488.
Mcclamrock, R. (1991). Marr’s Three Levels: A ReEvaluation. Minds and Machines, 1, 185-196.
Nagel. T. (1961). The Structure of Science. Problems in the
Logic of Explanation, New York: Harcourt, Brace &
World, Inc.
Newell, A. (1980). Physical symbol systems. Cognitive
Science, 4, 66–83.
Newell, A. (1990). Theories of Unified Cognition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press. Pinker, S. (1997). How the
Mind Works, New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1980). Cognition and computation: Issues in the
foundation of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 3(1), 154-169.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1984). Computation and Cognition: Toward a
Foundation for Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The Scientific Image. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Wimsatt, C. (1976). Reductionism, Levels of Organization,
and the Mind-Body Problem. In G. Globus, G. Maxwell &
I. Savodnik, Consciousness and the Brain (pp. 205-267),
Spring Us.
Wimsatt, C. (1994). The Ontology of Complex Systems:
Levels of Organization, Perspectives, and Causal Thickets.
Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 20, 207-274.
Wilson, R., & Craver, C. (2007). Realization: Metaphysical
and Scientific Perspectives. In P. Thagard (ed.),
Philosophy of Psychology and Cognitive Science,
Amsterdam: Elsvier, pp. 81-104.
Wright, C.D., and Bechtel, W. (2007). Mechanisms and
Psychological Explanation. In P. Thagard (ed.),
Philosophy of Psychology and Cognitive Science (pp. 3177). Amsterdam: Elsvier.

6

2404

