Longitudinal L2 Development of the English Article in Individual Learners
Akira Murakami (am933@cam.ac.uk)
Theodora Alexopoulou (ta259@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, 9 West Road,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 9DP, United Kingdom
Abstract

at various proficiency levels. In the present study, we
exploit one such resource, EFCAMDAT, as it enables
tracking the productions of sufficient numbers of individual
learners. We focus on the accuracy in the use of the English
article by learners of English as a second language (L2
learners). Accuracy is an important (though not sole)
indicator of acquisition and the article has been central to
accuracy investigations from early days (e.g., Dualy & Burt,
1973). In recent work, we show that, despite systematic
effects of the native language on the accuracy of the L2
English article, there exists significant individual variation
(Murakami, 2016). In the present study, we investigate
whether we can identify learning curves in individuals that
are absent from the aggregate analysis.

We investigate the accuracy development of the English
article by learners of English as a second language. The study
focuses on individual learners, tracking their learning
trajectories through their writings in the EF-Cambridge Open
Language Database (EFCAMDAT), an open access learner
corpus. We draw from 17,859 writings by 1,280 learners and
ask whether article accuracy in individual learners fluctuates
randomly or whether learners can be clustered according to
their developmental trajectories. In particular, we apply kmeans clustering to automatically cluster in a bottom up
fashion learners with similar learning curves. We follow
learners for a period covering one CEFR level. Given the
relatively short learning window, the majority of learners
follow a horizontal line. Nevertheless, we also identify groups
of learners showing a power-function and U-shaped curve.
Crucially, these groups are ‘hidden’ when the aggregate of
learners is considered, a finding highlighting the importance
of individual level analysis.

Method
Corpus

Keywords: learning curve; clustering; individual variation;
second language

Introduction
Since the early days of second language acquisition (SLA)
research, learner production data have been an important
empirical base for developmental research (Selinker, 1972).
Early studies revealed the non-linearity of the learning
process and, in particular, the existence of U-shaped
learning curves (Lightbown, 1983). However, despite
important insights regarding learning curves, a number of
important issues remain unaddressed. Most studies based on
production data tend to be small scale (Lightbown, 1983)
and tend to lack longitudinal information for large numbers
of individuals. As a result, developmental research has
predominately employed cross-sectional designs while it has
generally not been possible to investigate the relation
between individual learning curves and cross-sectional or
aggregate patterns. This has been an important limitation in
SLA research in view of evidence from psychology that the
averaged pattern can conceal individual developmental
trajectories (e.g., Heathcote, Brown, & Mewhort, 2000).
These limitations are acknowledged by SLA researchers
calling for a stronger focus on individual learners (e.g.,
Larsen-Freeman, 1997). However, the absence of sufficient
amounts of longitudinal data for individuals is an important
practical obstacle (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008).
Recently developed large-scale learner corpora (e.g.,
Granger, Dagneaux, Meunier, & Paquot, 2009) provide
production data rich enough to allow analysis of individuals

The empirical data for the study are drawn from the prerelease version of EF-Cambridge Open Language Database
(EFCAMDAT; Geertzen et al., 2014) The corpus contains
learners' writings submitted to Englishtown, the online
school of EF Education First. The 16 teaching levels of the
EF curriculum range from beginners to advanced
proficiency (aligned to A1-C2 in the Common European
Framework Reference (CEFR) levels). Writings are on a
variety of topics and range from 20-40 words at beginner
levels to 150-180 words each at the highest levels. The
scripts in the corpus are accompanied by error corrections
by teachers. EFCAMDAT is publicly available at
http://corpus.mml.cam.ac.uk/efcamdat/.
Each writing includes an anonymous learner ID, national
language, the topic of the writing, the date and time of
submission, the level and the unit/lesson number the writing
was submitted to and error-corrections by teachers (see
Geertzen et al, 2014 for further details on EFCAMDAT).

Target Linguistic Feature and L1 Groups
We targeted English articles, indefinite (a, an) and definite
(the), because they are highly frequent and therefore provide
us with dense longitudinal data while we could calculate
their accuracy automatically with high precision.
The effect of mother tongue/First Language/L1 is
pervasive in L2 use (Jarvis & Pavlenko, 2007) and
specifically shown for the L2 English article (e.g.,
Murakami & Alexopoulou, 2015; Snape, 2008). Our study
targeted 10 L1 groups; Brazilian-Portuguese, MandarinChinese, German, French, Italian, Japanese, Korean,

1050

Russian, Spanish, and Turkish. We used their country of
residence as the closest approximation to L1 (Murakami,
2016). L1 Spanish includes two countries of residence;
Spain and Mexico. L1 Mandarin-Chinese includes both
those living in China and those in Taiwan. L1 BrazilianPortuguese, German, French, Italian, Korean, Russian, and
Turkish learners correspond to those living in Brazil,
Germany, France, Italy, Korea, Russia, and Turkey,
respectively. This method has yielded reliable L1 effects
(Murakami, 2016).
We grouped L1s in two L1-types, PRESENT and
ABSENT, depending on whether or not they have an article.
The PRESENT group included L1 Brazilian, German,
French, Italian, and Spanish. The ABSENT group included
L1 Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Turkish.
The subcorpus used in the study included nearly 140,000
writings consisting of 10 million words. There were more
writings, and thus a larger number of words, at lower levels.
The distribution between L1 groups was skewed as well.
Over 40% of the data were contributed by L1 Chinese
learners of English, and another large portion (14%-23%
each) by L1 Brazilian and L1 Russian learners.

possible to the shape that would be generated if each essay
included a large number of obligatory contexts.
We then calculated TLU scores in a moving-window
fashion (e.g., van Geert & van Dijk, 2002). Each window
included at least 10 obligatory contexts (OCs) and could
cover multiple writings. Consider a learner who wrote five
writings with OCs as in the following example:
Writing 1; 6 OCs
Writing 2; 6 OCs
Writing 3; 3 OCs
Writing 4; 7 OCs
Writing 5; 2 OCs

Scoring Method
To investigate accuracy in use we need to identify contexts
of obligatory use and measure correct suppliance while also
capturing erroneous use of the article in contexts where it is
not needed (overgeneralization errors). We thus employed
the target-like use (TLU) score calculated by the following
formula (Pica, 1983);
TLU Score =

number of correct suppliances
number of obligatory contexts + number of overgeneralization errors

This formula assesses the proportion of correct use and at
the same time penalizes the unnecessary use of the article.

Data Extraction
To measure accuracy, we first need to obtain obligatory
contexts of article use. We retrieved error-tagged texts and
converted them to corrected texts (incorporating the
corrections). The number of article occurrences in a
corrected text was taken as the number of obligatory
contexts in the learner’s original writing. For instance, if the
phrase farmer who lived in a small village was corrected
into a farmer who lived in a small village, the two instances
of a in the latter made two obligatory contexts. R scripts
were written to automatically retrieve errors using the
teacher error tags.

Tracking Development Through Moving Windows
To track individuals over time, we consider consecutive
writings and compare TLU scores from one writing to next.
However, writings are too short to provide enough
obligatory contexts to reliably calculate the TLU score. We
thus computed TLU scores over multiple writings
constructing windows as close to a single writing with
enough obligatory contexts as possible. Our goal was to
ensure that the shape of accuracy development is as close as

Here, the first TLU score would be calculated over Writing
1 and Writing 2 because Writing 1 alone does not include 10
OCs but Writing 1 and Writing 2 combined do. The first
window would thus include 12 OCs. In computing the
second TLU score, the head of the first window shifts
forward by one, and the second window starts from Writing
2. The second window would cover Writing 2 through
Writing 4, because Writing 2 alone or Writing 2 and Writing
3 together do not include 10 OCs, but the three writings
combined do. The second window would include 16 OCs in
total. Similarly, the head of the window now shifts to
Writing 3, and the third TLU score would be calculated over
Writing 3 and Writing 4. This learner has these three TLU
scores in total, as Writing 4 alone, Writing 4 and Writing 5
combined, or Writing 5 alone does not include 10 OCs.
Once TLU scores were obtained for all the windows, we
analyzed the learners who had 10 or more windows.
Alternatively, it was also possible to construct windows
so that no writing overlaps in any window. We chose the
overlapping approach because it generally tracks more finegrained developmental patterns and finer resolution of data
is indispensable in the study in order to observe change
(Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008). See Murakami (2014)
for further discussion.
There were in total 70,879 TLU scores (windows) by
20,394 learners. Out of the 20,394 learners, 1,280 (6.3%)
had 10 or more windows. Among those with the minimum
of 10 windows, the average number of writings in a window
was 2.4 (SD = 1.2). The median number of windows was
12. The total number of writings by them was 17,859. The
mean number of unique writings over 10 windows was 11.0
(SD = 0.9). This is not 10 times as large as the average
number of writings in a window because there are overlaps
of writings over windows. The average number of Units
covered in 10 windows was 25.6 (SD = 10.1). This
corresponds to just over three EF teaching levels — if the
writings always start at levels 1, 3, 7, 10, etc., then it
corresponds to one CEFR level. Note that three levels
correspond to 24 writings (3 Levels × 8 Units), but the
average number of unique writings over 10 windows is less
than half of this (11.0). Recall that we selected only errortagged writings for analysis. As not all writings are errortagged, consecutive writings in our windows do not

1051

necessarily correspond to adjacent Englishtown tasks and,
indeed, span just over three teaching levels on average.

Longitudinal View of Development
There are multiple ways to visualize longitudinal accuracy
in use. Figure 1 lists two of them for the 1,280 learners. In
both panels, each thin line represents the accuracy
development of one learner, and thick lines are locally
weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOESS; Singer & Willett,
2003) lines showing the overall trend. Solid, dashed, and
dotted lines correspond to the development of the ABSENT,
the PRESENT, and the L1 Chinese groups respectively. L1
Chinese was separated because visual inspection (not
shown) suggested that they behave differently from the
other ABSENT groups, and there are indeed studies
claiming that Mandarin-Chinese has linguistic features that
play similar roles to English definite (Huang, 1999) and
indefinite (Chen, 2004) articles.
The left panel demonstrates the accuracy development of
individual learners across Englishtown teaching levels.
Englishtown levels 1-16 are shown on the horizontal axis
and accuracy is on the vertical axis. Each data point is
plotted according to its window proficiency, defined as the
weighted average Unit number (1 to 128) of the writings
included in the window. Each learner horizontally covers
only a short span because a learner typically covers three to
four levels. The trend line indicates that accuracy increases
as learners' proficiency rises. Individually, however, we can
observe that some learners radically go up and down in their
accuracy. Since each learner covers a short span in this
panel, it is difficult to analyze the development of individual
learners here. The trend lines are the cross-sectional trend
lines and do not represent longitudinal development.
In order to better understand longitudinal development,
the right panel visualizes the development of individual
learners so that each learner covers the entire span from left
to right. For the sake of comparability, it only targets the
first 10 windows of each learner. The horizontal axis here
represents the window number. The panel shows that the
overall pattern is relatively horizontal, which may appear to
contrast with the left panel that shows the overall accuracy
increase across Englishtown levels but is in fact consistent,
given the short span covered in the longitudinal
development in this study. The same panel also
demonstrates large individual variation in the development.
The accuracy of some learners appears to increase over
time, while the accuracy of others seems to fluctuate widely.
This suggests that there can further be a difference between
the average longitudinal pattern and the learning curves of
individual learners.

Clustering Learners According to Their
Developmental Shapes
K-Means Clustering and Number of Clusters
Now that we visually grasped the longitudinal development
of the morphemes, we will explore the learning curves that

characterize the learners we target. To obtain the groupings
that reflect the data, we employed a data-driven way of
determining developmental shapes, namely k-means
clustering.
As the input data, we used the first 10 windows of each
learner. Our interest here is the developmental trajectory.
However, if k-means clustering is run on the present data as
they are, it will take into account the absolute accuracy of
each learner and may cluster learners according to their
accuracy. To neutralize the effect of absolute accuracy, all
the data points were learner-mean-centered: The mean
accuracy value of each learner was subtracted from all the
data points of the learner within the first 10 windows.
Because the bottom-up approach is open not only to the
shape but also number of clusters, determining the shape
and number of clusters is two separate issues. The approach
we take is clustering with different numbers of clusters and
examining how emerging patterns vary across the
clustering. For instance, we can establish which k certain
patterns, such as U-shaped development, appear at. If a
certain pattern consistently appears with varying k's, it is
likely that the pattern reflects some kind of mechanism in
learners' performance development.
We chose 10 for the maximum number of clusters
because there are 10 L1 groups in total and 10 different
patterns are expected if each L1 has a distinct
developmental pattern. Figure 2 shows the LOESS of the
developmental patterns of each cluster when k varies from 2
to 10. Note that although k-means clustering was performed
on learner-mean-centered data, we show the result in the
original scale (i.e., TLU scores) for the ease of
interpretation. The horizontal axis of the figure represents
window number and the vertical axis represents TLU scores.
Each panel represents the clustering when the k is the value
stated above the panel. Each line is the LOESS of the
development of the learners in each cluster. Cluster A is
always the largest cluster in terms of the number of included
learners, followed by Cluster B, which in turn is followed
by Cluster C, and so forth.
We can make a few observations here. First, from k = 4
onwards, the accuracy of the largest cluster (Cluster A) is
relatively unchanged. Second, there is always a cluster
showing an upward trend over 10 windows (e.g., Cluster B
in k = 2) and a cluster showing decreasing accuracy over the
period (e.g., Cluster C in k = 3). Third, the U-shaped pattern
is prevalent. It first appears in k = 3 as Cluster A, and can
always be observed until k = 10 as Clusters C, H, and I.
Finally, some clusters are reminiscent of the power and the
exponential function. For instance, Cluster B in k = 3,
Cluster C in k = 4, and Cluster D in k = 5 are all more or less
similar to the concave function in that their accuracy
increase slows down as learners progress.
In sum, the patterns of (i) relatively horizontal, (ii)
increasing or decreasing accuracy including the power-law
and the exponential shape, and (iii) U-shaped curve are
robust and can be observed almost irrespective of the
number of clusters. On the other hand, increasing the

1052

number of clusters only results in finer splits of the same
patterns and hardly leads to the emergence of new patterns.
As shown in Figure 2, few new patterns emerge after k = 3.
This means that having k = 4 or more is unlikely to reveal
important longitudinal patterns. We thus assume k = 3 is
optimal for article patterns derived from k-means clustering.
The main criterion for decision here is how informative each
k is, and whether new information or pattern can be
revealed. Note that although we chose k = 3 as the number
of clusters, we repeated the procedure for k = 2 and k = 4
and confirmed that our results, including cluster validation
discussed later, remain the same. The point here is not to
argue that k = 3 is the best number of clusters, or
subpopulations, but to illustrate that there are indeed
subgroups and that they can be hidden from the aggregated
data.

Individual Developmental Patterns of Clusters
Figure 3 shows the clusters of article development when k =
3. The upper three panels present the clusters situated in the
entire Englishtown course, and the lower three panels show
the same data over 10 windows. In other words, the upper
panel corresponds to the left panel in Figure 1 divided into
the three clusters, while the lower panel corresponds to the
right panel in Figure 1, again divided into the three clusters.
As before, thin lines represent individual learners and thick
lines represent LOESS. The learners are approximately
equally spread between the three clusters. L1 type does not
affect clustering because the three LOESS lines largely
overlap. Learners in Cluster A show a smooth U-shaped
developmental curve. Their accuracy slowly decreases for
the first five or six windows, after which it slowly increases.
Their overall accuracy is high, being consistently over 0.8.
The accuracy in Cluster B gradually rises until around the
seventh window, after which it levels off possibly due to the
ceiling effect. The pattern is reminiscent of the
power/exponential developmental pattern. Learners in
Cluster C show a horizontal development until the fifth
window, after which their accuracy decreases. Significant
individual differences can be observed in each cluster, some
learners radically going down and others rapidly going up.

Cluster Validation
An important question at this point is whether the identified
clusters are ‘real’. In other words, is it the difference in the
true learning curve that the k-means clustering above
reflects or is it just the random noise? We empirically tested
the cluster validity in the following manner. The overall
idea is similar to the usual statistical testing procedure: We
compute the null distribution of the metric that measures
goodness of clustering based on random data, and if the
value of the metric in the observed data falls outside of its
95% range, we consider it as the evidence that the observed
clusters are too good to be derived from random data and
conclude that our clusters indeed reflect the difference in the
learning trajectory. The key decisions we need to make are
(i) what metric to use to measure goodness of clustering and

(ii) how to conceptualize the null hypothesis and derive the
null distribution, both of which are detailed below.
As the metric for goodness of clustering, we used a
measure called the silhouette (Rousseeuw, 1987).
Intuitively, the silhouette value is large if within-cluster
dissimilarity is small (i.e., learners within each cluster have
similar developmental trajectories) and between-cluster
dissimilarity is large (i.e., learners in different clusters have
different learning curves). The silhouette is given to each
data point, and all the silhouette values are averaged to
measure the cluster distinctiveness of a cluster analysis. Any
distance can be used to calculate dissimilarity, and squared
Euclidian distance was used in the present case. The mean
silhouette value in our clustering was 0.151. If this value is
higher than the 95% range of the null distribution of the
mean silhouette value, we conclude that there are multiple
learning curves.
The null hypothesis is that there is no systematic pattern
in intra-learner variability. We obtained the distribution of
the mean silhouette value under this null hypothesis and
tested the significance of our observed value. The idea here
is that we practically randomize the order of the writings
within individual learners and follow the same procedure as
our main analysis. Since the order of writings is random,
there should not be any systematic pattern of development
observed. The clusters obtained in this manner thus captures
noise alone. We calculate the mean silhouette value on the
noise-only, random clusters, and obtain its distribution by
repeating the whole procedure a large number of times.
More specifically, the following procedure was employed.
1. For each learner,
(a) We randomly sampled a large number (e.g.,
100) of his/her writings. Here, the same
writing could be selected multiple times.
(b) We then calculated the TLU scores of the
first 10 windows.
2. With the data obtained in 1, we ran a k-means cluster
analysis with k = 3 and calculated its mean silhouette
value.
3. 1 and 2 were repeated 1,000 times, resulting in 1,000
mean silhouette values that we consider as the null
distribution.
4. We examined whether the 95% range of 3 included
0.151, the observed mean silhouette value in the
present study.
The resulting null distribution showed that the upper
bound of its 95% range was 0.144. Therefore, our clusters
with the mean silhouette value of 0.151 is considered nonrandom, and what our clusters capture is not only noise.

Discussion
The present study investigated the longitudinal accuracy use
of the L2 English article. We observed large individual
variation in the developmental pattern. We, therefore,
investigated whether we can identify systematic learning
curves in a bottom-up manner. A cluster analysis identified

1053

three learning curves that are followed by approximately an
equal number of learners.
We demonstrated that there can be differences between
average longitudinal development of a group of learners and
the individual learning curves that constitute the group.
When we aggregated the data and looked at the
developmental trajectory of the average accuracy, it was
fairly horizontal, (falsely) implying constant accuracy over
the course of development. However, clustering
demonstrated that there are indeed subgroups hidden in the
aggregate pattern. This suggests that the two types of
learning curves can differ, and that we cannot necessarily
infer the development of individual learners based on the
longitudinal data aggregated over multiple learners.
Whereas prior research in psychology has shown the
mismatch between aggregated and individual learning
curves a number of times (Heathcote, et al., 2000), we
believe the present study is the first that empirically
demonstrated it in the field of SLA.
The obvious question now is why should learners show
these different developmental patterns, and, in particular
what is the cause of the U-shape pattern. Admittedly, we
can offer no insight at this point to this question but we can
note at least two potential sources of variation: (i) changes
in the internal knowledge of learner related to reanalysis or
increased complexity which is known to impact negatively
on accuracy accuracy (Skehan & Foster, 1997); (ii) learner
individual variation (e.g., working memory, aptitude, etc.).
The investigation of these potential sources requires
investigation of specific hypotheses (e.g., evidence for
increased complexity in the learner language coinciding
with drop in accuracy) or access to individual psychological
data (which would require investigation beyond the corpus).
Though the interpretation of such results is very
challenging, we believe that our findings show the need for
investigating individual patterns in a more comprehensive
way.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the sponsorship of EF
Education First.

References
Chen, P. (2004). Identifiability and definiteness in Chinese.
Linguistics, 42(6), 1129–1184.
Dulay, H. C., & Burt, M. K. (1973). Should we teach
children syntax? Language Learning, 23(2), 245–258.
Geertzen, J., Alexopoulou, T., & Korhonen, A. (2014).
Automatic linguistic annotation of large scale L2
database: The EF-Cambridge Open Language Database
(EFCAMDAT). In R. T. Millar et al. (Eds.), Selected
proceedings of the 2012 Second Language Research
Forum. Building bridges between disciplines (pp. 240–
254). Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
Granger, S., Dagneaux, E., Meunier, F., & Paquot, M.
(2009). International Corpus of Learner English version
2. Louvain-la-Neuve: Presses universitaires de Louvain.

Heathcote, A., Brown, S., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2000). The
power law repealed: The case for an exponential law of
practice. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7(2), 185–207.
Huang, S. (1999). The emergence of a grammatical category
definite article in spoken Chinese. Journal of Pragmatics,
31(1), 77–94.
Jarvis, S., & Pavlenko, A. (2007). Crosslinguistic influence
in language and cognition. New York: Routledge.
Larsen-Freeman, D. E. (1997). Chaos/complexity science
and second language acquisition. Applied Linguistics,
18(2), 141–165.
Larsen-Freeman, D. E., & Cameron, L. (2008). Research
methodology on language development from a complex
systems perspective. Modern Language Journal, 92(2),
200–213.
Lightbown, P. (1983). Exploring relationships between
developmental and instructional sequences in L2
acquisition. In H. Seliger & M. H. Long (Eds.),
Classroom oriented research in second language
acquisition (pp. 217–243). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Murakami, A. (2014). Individual variation and the role of
L1 in the L2 development of English grammatical
morphemes: Insights from learner corpora (Unpublished
PhD thesis). University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
Murakami, A. (2016). Modeling systematicity and
individuality in nonlinear L2 development: The case of
English grammatical morphemes. Language Learning.
Advance online publication.
Murakami, A., & Alexopoulou, T. (2015). L1 influence on
the acquisition order of English grammatical morphemes:
A learner corpus study. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition. Advance online publication.
Pica, T. (1983). Methods of morpheme quantification: Their
effect on the interpretation of second language data.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 6(1), 69–78.
Rousseeuw, P. J. (1987). Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the
interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. Journal
of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 20, 53–65.
Selinker, L. (1972). Interlanguage. International Review of
Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 10(1–4), 209232.
Singer, J. D., & Willett, J. B. (2003). Applied longitudinal
data analysis: Modeling change and event occurrence.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (1997). The influence of planning
and post-task activities on accuracy and complexity in
task-based learning. Language Teaching Research, 1(3),
185–211.
Snape, N. (2008). Resetting the nominal mapping parameter
in L2 English: Definite article use and the count-mass
distinction. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 11(1),
63–79.
van Geert, P., & van Dijk, M. (2002). Focus on variability:
New tools to study intra-individual variability in
developmental data. Infant Behavior & Development,
25(4), 340–374.

1054

Situating Learners' Development in the Entire Course

Development Over 10 Windows

1.00

1.00

0.75

TLU

0.75

0.50
0.50

0.25

0.25

n = 1,280

0.00

L1 Type
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

ABSENT
9

10

PRESENT

11

12

13

L1 Chinese

14

15

16

1

2

3

4

5

Proficiency

6

7

8

9

10

Window Number

Figure 1: Longitudinal Development of Article Accuracy
k=2

k=3

k=4

k=5

k=6

k=7

k=8

k=9

k = 10

0.9

0.8

0.7

A
B
C

Cluster
0.6

D
E
F

G
H
I

J

TLU

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Window

Figure 2: Developmental of Each Cluster in Varying Numbers of Clusters
Cluster A

Cluster B

Cluster C

1.0

0.8

Entire Course

0.6

0.4

0.2

n = 460

n = 437

n = 383

(35.9%)

(34.1%)

(29.9%)

0.0

TLU

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

4

6

8

10

5

6

12

14

16

Proficiency

1.0

0.8

Over 10 Windows

0.6

0.4

0.2

L1 Type
ABSENT
PRESENT
L1 Chinese

0.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

Window Number

Figure 3: Results of K-Means Clustering

1055

7

8

9

10

