Measuring lay theories of parenting and child development
Emily Hembacher

Michael C. Frank

ehembach@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

portant goals of parenting might have more physical contact
with their child than a parent who does not hold this theory.
Secondly, parents’ lay theories may moderate the uptake of
new information about parenting. It is well-established that
people more easily encode new information that is consistent
with an existing schema or mental model they hold (Bransford & Johnson, 1972). In addition, previous research has
found that interventions on public health beliefs are more successful when they take into account people’s existing belief
structures in the domain (Kumar et al., 2015).
There is some evidence supporting the notion that parents’
behaviors are mediated by implicit lay theories about child
development, which vary by SES and across cultures. For
example, cross-cultural studies have found profound differences in how parents interact with infants. Richman, Miller,
& LeVine (1992) found that mothers in the Gusii community of Kenya primarily engaged with their children to soothe
them when upset, but did not often speak to them with the
goal of engaging or stimulating them, as did Caucasian parents in the United States. The authors attribute this behavior
to cultural conventions stemming from the belief that there is
no purpose in speaking to infants, as they will not understand
what is being said (LeVine, 2004; Richman et al., 1992).
There are also important differences in how parents within
western cultures interact with their children. Numerous studies have identified SES disparity in the amount that parents
talk to their children, which in turn predicts children’s language and academic outcomes (Hoff, 2003; Huttenlocher,
Vasilyeva, Cymerman, & Levine, 2002). In an effort to
identify the source of this disparity, Rowe (2008) discovered
that parents’ knowledge of child development (as indexed
by their scores on the Knowledge of Infant Development Inventory; KIDI) predicted their child-directed language, with
more knowledgeable parents speaking to their children more
even when controlling for the amount of speech directed at
another adult. Although this study examined parents’ knowledge, and not their lay theories per se, it provides evidence
that people’s domain knowledge has real consequences for
their interactions with their children.
There are many other examples of parenting beliefs on
which parents differ. For example, there is a large body of
research based on Baumrind (1971)’s framework that identifies parents as authoritative, authoritarian, or permissive, according to their levels of responsiveness and control in their
interactions with their children. In sum, parents’ approaches
to parenting appear to vary in predictable ways based on their
knowledge and perceptions about children’s learning and development.

Parenting practices are known to play an important role in
shaping children’s outcomes. For example, children whose
parents engage them in high-quality conversations and who
are given opportunities for free play are at an advantage for
learning and later academic outcomes. However, communicating the results of relevant scientific findings to parents remains
a challenge. One possible moderator of uptake of parenting
information is the implicit theories parents hold with regard
to child development and parenting. As a first step in investigating this possibility, the present work establishes a new
measure of parenting attitudes including three subscales corresponding to attitudes about rules and respect, affection and
attachment, and early learning. We then examine whether subscale scores predict uptake of new information about children’s
learning. Scores on the Early Learning subscale, but not the
Rules and Respect subscale, predicted generalization from the
article, providing initial evidence of the validity of this measure.
Keywords: Parenting attitudes; implicit theories

Child development research is constantly generating information that can be brought to bear on best practices
for parenting. For example, research on children’s learning has demonstrated that pedagogy can improve learning in
some contexts and limit it in others, suggesting that allowing children to play freely and explore is critical for learning (Bonawitz et al., 2011; Buchsbaum, Gopnik, Griffiths, &
Shafto, 2011). Likewise, a great deal of research has demonstrated the importance of engaging young children in elaborative conversations for language development and future academic success (Hart & Risley, 1995; Hoff, 2003). A fundamental challenge we face is how to communicate the results
of such scientific inquiry to a diverse public in a way that
maximizes uptake and improves people’s daily and long-term
decision making.
One critical parameter that may moderate parenting behavior is parents’ lay theories about child development and parenting. Lay theories reflect the core beliefs that people hold
in different domains, which may or may not be explicitly
articulated, but organize the processing of new information
and decision-making (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Ong, Zaki, &
Goodman, 2015). For example, people with an entity theory
of personality tend to interpret people’s behaviors as stemming from fixed personality traits rather than situational factors such as needs, goals, or emotional states (Dweck, Chiu,
& Hong, 1995).
There are two reasons to focus on parents’ lay theories.
First, parents’ lay theories might be an important explanatory
factor for many of the behaviors parents engage in with their
child. For example, a parent who believes that building a
strong emotional bond with their baby is one of the most im-

354

Subscale
Rules and Respect

Affection and
Attachment

Early Learning

Full item
It is very important that children learn to respect adults, such as parents and teachers.
It is important for young children to learn to control their impulses (e.g., waiting when told to
wait).
Children should be taught to be grateful to their parents.
Children should not be punished for breaking small rules.*
Parents should follow their children’s lead rather than imposing structure in the form of rules.*
Young children should be allowed to make their own decisions, such as what to eat for dinner.*
Parents need to provide safe and loving environments for their children.
Holding and cradling babies is important for forming strong bonds between parent and child.
Children should be given comfort and understanding when they are scared or unhappy.
Parents do not need to talk to their child about his or her emotions.*
Children become spoiled if they receive too much attention from parents.*
Too much affection can make a child weak.*
Children can learn about things like good and bad behavior from a very early age.
Young children can teach themselves things by exploring and playing.
Babies repetitive behaviors (e.g., banging a cup on the table) are a way for them to explore
cause and effect.
It is not helpful for adults to explain the reasons for rules to young children because they won’t
understand.*
Children don’t need to learn about numbers and math until they go to school.*
Reading books to children is not helpful if they have not yet learned to speak.*
Table 1: Parenting Attitudes Scale items. *Indicates reverse coded items.
ferences may be detectable through self-report measures.

Although these previous studies provide preliminary evidence that parents’ beliefs about parenting and child development affect their parenting behaviors, no previous research
has attempted to identify the underlying theories that might
organize their behavior and decision-making. Previous research has generally relied on observation of parent-child interactions or self-report of specific activities and behaviors.
To our knowledge there is not an existing measure of parents’ more general attitudes about parenting and child development, which might drive behavior and predict the uptake of
interventions.
To address this gap, the present work establishes a selfreport scale that captures adults’ lay theories about child development and parenting. We generated a questionnaire measuring the degree to which parents endorse three potential lay
theories: a “Rules and Respect” theory, an “Affection and Attachment” theory, and an “Early Learning” theory. As an initial test of the external validity of the questionnaire, we conducted an experiment to investigate whether parents’ scores
on these subscales would differentially predict their uptake
of parenting information presented via a popular press article
about children’s early learning from free play (Gopnik, 2011).
Higher scores on the Early Learning subscale predicted improved uptake in terms of both recall and generalization of
information from the article about children’s learning, but not
a control article. Furthermore, the Rules and Respect subscale predicted improved uptake in terms of recall but not
generalization of the presented information, suggesting that
parents’ implicit theories do affect how they process and use
new information about child development, and that these dif-

Scale Construction
To establish a new measure of parenting attitudes, we followed a structured plan based on psychometric best practices
(Clark & Watson, 1995; Furr, 2011; Simms, 2008). We generated items corresponding to three hypothesized latent theories about parenting. The Early Learning theory corresponds
to a view of children’s early learning that is consistent with
contemporary child development research, and includes the
idea that young children can teach themselves by exploring
and playing. The Affection and Attachment theory captures
the notion that close parent-child relationships are important
for development, and includes the ideas that parents should
talk to their children about their emotions and that children
are not spoiled by too much affection. The Rules and Respect
theory corresponds to the idea that parents’ primary role is
to enforce rules and encourage behavior control. We generated hypothesized subscales and items based on a review of
the literature on parenting attitudes, and conducted psychometric analyses on iterative samples of respondents collected
on Amazon Mechanical Turk, both parents and non-parents
(seven in total).

Item construction
In an initial phase of scale construction, we generated 42
statements that described attitudes consistent with one of
three potential implicit theories about parenting: Early Learning (12 items), Affection and Attachment (10 items), and
Rules and Respect (20 items). These statements were gen-

355

loading
0.8

too much affection can make a child weak*
provide a safe and loving environment
holding and cradling babies important
do not need to talk about emotions*
children should be given comfort
become spoiled with too much attention *

0.6
AA

item

EL

repetetive behaviors to explore cause and effect
reading not helpful before they can speak*
not helpful to explain reasons for rules*
don't need to learn math before school*
can teach themselves by playing
can learn about good and bad behavior

0.4
0.2
0.0

RR

parents should follow children's lead*
not punished for breaking small rules*
learn to respect adults
learn to control impulses
be grateful to parents
allowed to make decisions*
Factor1

Factor2

Factor3

factor
Figure 1: Factor loadings for subscale items. EL = Early Learning, AA = Affection and Attachment, RR = Rules and Respect.
*Indicates reverse-coded items.
the full list of items1 . For this sample, Cronbach’s alphas
were .76 (Early Learning), .75 (Affection and Attachment),
and .69 (Rules and Respect). Because analysis of the previous sample identified 5 factors instead of the hypothesized
3, we again conducted EFA. This time, the parallel analysis identified 3 factors as predicted. We next examined the
loadings of individual items onto the three factors (Figure 1).
Items loaded onto the three factors roughly consistent with
our a priori subscales, although some items from the Affection and Attachment subscale loaded onto both the Affection
and Attachment and Early Learning factors.
Given the loadings of Early Learning and Affection and Attachment items onto a single factor, it is possible that participants’ responses on these items were driven by a more general hands-on attitude towards parenting. Interestingly, when
we conducted an exploratory analysis of factor loadings by
gender, we found that female gender loaded highly positively
onto the Affection and Attachment factor that did not include
Early Learning items (.44), while the opposite was true for
male gender (-.20). Thus, it is possible that these items reflect
a theory related to Affection and Attachment that is separable
from the hands-on approach and differentiated by gender.
As one test of the external validity of the subscales, we fit
linear mixed-effects models predicting subscale scores based
on gender and parenthood status (i.e., whether or not the participant reported having children) with participants as random
effects. The model including gender revealed that females
had higher scores on Early Learning, (β = 0.41, SE = .19, p =
.03), and marginally higher scores for Affection and Attachment (β = 0.34, SE = .23, p = .14), whereas gender had no
effect on Rules and Respect scores. The model including parenthood status revealed that parents had higher scores on the

erated based on a literature review of parenting attitudes and
behaviors. The Affection and Attachment and Rules and Respect subscales are related theoretically to the Authoritative
and Authoritarian dimensions of Baumrind (1971)’s parenting framework, as well as theories of attachment parenting
(Jones, Cassidy, & Shaver, 2014), but aim to assess beliefs
about parenting rather than overt behaviors. The Early Learning subscale aimed to assess the extent to which adults believe
that it is important to help infants and toddlers learn through
play and conversation.
The initial 42-item scale was administered to 250 adults
on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Participants used a 7-point
Likert scale to report the degree to which they agreed with
each statement from 0 (Do not Agree) to 6 (Strongly Agree).
Cronbach’s alphas for the three subscales were .86 (Early
Learning), .81 (Affection and Attachment), and .74 (Rules
and Respect). We then conducted Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) to assess the dimensionality of the scale. Based on
a parallel analysis (Horn, 1965), we retained 5 factors in this
initial model. We subsequently dropped any items that had
factor loadings less than .40 on the relevant factor, as well
as any items that had factor loadings greater than .40 onto
another factor. Items were also dropped if analyses revealed
that Cronbach’s alpha would be increased by dropping the
item. We then dropped additional items with lower loadings
until there were 6 items in each subscale. Some items were
rephrased such that half of the items in each subscale were
negatively worded to avoid response sets (Simms, 2008).

Revised questionnaire norming
The revised questionnaire was administered to a final group
of 250 adults on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Table 1 gives

1 The most recent version of the questionnaire is available at
https://github.com/langcog/parenting_proj

356

Uptake category
Control recall

Target recall

Target generalization

According to Article 2, what do the groups known for having many words for smells have in
common?
A) They train their children to be able to tell the difference between smells.
B) They are hunter-gatherers.*
C) They have unusually good hearing and vision.
According to Article 1, children were more likely to find new and better ways to make a toy
work when the experimenter:
A) Pretended to be clueless about how the toy worked when playing with it.*
B) Pretended to be an expert about the toy when playing with it.
C) Pretended not to care about the toy.
Based on Article 1, preschool directors should plan to have:
A) More structured time in which children are taught lessons and skills.
B) More time spent memorizing things that will be helpful later, such as the ABCs.
C) More time for children to play outside and with toys.*
Table 2: Examples of uptake questions. *Marks correct answer.
to read two popular press articles at their own pace. They
first read a target article about children’s early learning (“Why
Preschool Shouldn’t Be Like School,” Alison Gopnik, Slate,
2011), and then read a control article about the language
of smell (“Why Do Most Languages Have So Few Words
For Smells?”, Ed Yong, The Atlantic, 2015). After reading
both articles, they first answered five 3-alternative forcedchoice recall questions about the control article, and then answered five 3AFC generalization and five 3AFC recall questions about the target article. The recall questions assessed
participants’ memory for specific details of the text, and the
generalization questions assessed participants’ ability to generalize from the meaning of the text to new situations (Table
2). The alternative choices for recall and generalization questions were designed to reflect reasonable options that were
nonetheless inconsistent with the articles.

Affection and Attachment subscale compared to non-parents,
(β = 0.35, SE = .13, p = .006), whereas parenthood status
had no effect on Early Learning or Rules and Respect scores.
These differences provide some intuitive support for the notion that subscale scores tap meaningful constructs that vary
across groups.

Experiment
We next conducted an experiment to test whether scores on
the three subscales would predict people’s uptake of new information, as an initial test of the external validity of the
scales. For this purpose, we had participants read two popular press articles: an article arguing that free play is beneficial to children’s learning (Gopnik, 2011), and a control
article about the language of smell (Yong, 2015). We operationalized uptake as accurate recall and generalization of the
central message of the target article, and recall of the control
article. We predicted that if people’s subscale scores reflect
coherent lay theories, they should differentially moderate uptake of the two articles. Specifically, we predicted that scores
on the Early Learning subscale would be positively related to
recall and generalization of the target article, but not recall
of the control article. We predicted that scores on the Rules
and Respect subscale would not predict uptake of either article. We excluded scores on the Affection and Attachment
subscale from our analyses, since they are not orthogonal to
scores on the Early Learning subscale. A sample analysis
plan was pregistered at osf.io/6umza.

Results and discussion
As a planned exclusion criterion, we excluded 48 participants
who spent less than 30 seconds reading one or both of the
articles, based on the assumption that they had not had time
to read the whole article. Mean accuracy for the remaining
sample was 0.67 (SD = 0.24) for control recall, 0.83 (SD =
0.19) for target recall, and 0.87 (SD = 0.22) for target generalization.
Figure 2 shows proportion correct on each of the three trial
types, plotted by standardized subscale scores. Regression
lines show the relationship between subscale scores and proportion correct. Qualitatively, there was not strong evidence
of a relationship between Rules and Respect scores and performance (though target recall showed some trend). In contrast, we observed a stronger relationship between performance and Early Learning scores, especially for target generalization trials.
To quantify these trends, we fit a generalized logistic
mixed-effects model with standardized Early Learning and
Rules and Respect subscale scores, as well as interaction

Methods
Participants Participants were 250 adults recruited from
Amazon Mechanical Turk. Of these participants, 123 reported having children, 122 reported having no children, and
5 did not respond.
Procedure Participants first completed the 18-item parenting questionnaire described above. They were then instructed

357

Control recall

Target recall

Target generalization

Proportion correct

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
−2

−1

0

1

−2

−1

0

1

−2

−1

0

1

Subscale score (standardized)
Subscale

Early Learning

Rules and Respect

Figure 2: Relationship between subscale scores and uptake. Dots show individual participants. Lines show linear models and
95% CIs. Points are jittered to avoid overplotting.
Predictor
Cntl recall
Targ gen
Targ recall
Rules and Respect
Early Learning
Targ gen × R/R
Targ recall × R/R
Targ gen × EL
Targ recall × EL

Estimate
1.11
1.57
1.28
-0.10
0.27
-0.06
0.32
0.62
0.49

Std. Error
0.37
0.49
0.49
0.21
0.22
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05

z value
2.98
3.19
2.59
-0.48
1.22
-0.94
5.62
10.86
8.97

p
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.63
0.22
0.35
0.00
0.00
0.00

Table 3: Fixed-effect coefficients for linear mixed effects
model predicting task performance in Experiment 1. EL =
Early Learning; RR = Rules and Respect.

terms for the subscale scores by question type (i.e., control recall vs. target recall vs. target generalization) as fixed effects,
and participants and questions as random effects.2 Coefficient estimates are shown in Table 3. Early Learning scores
interacted positively with target recall and target generalization to predict correct performance, whereas Rules and Respect scores interacted positively with target recall but not
target generalization, and coefficient magnitudes were relatively lower. Thus, Early Learning scores differentially predicted generalization from the target passage.3 These results
suggest that people’s implicit theories about child development may organize the processing of new information in this
domain.

One possible explanation for these results is that participants who scored higher on the Early Learning subscale
would have been more likely to respond correctly to the target generalization and recall questions even without having
read the article. For example, participants with high Early
Learning scores might have pre-existing knowledge that is
consistent with the information presented in the target article, or might intuitively answer the questions based on their
implicit theories of children’s learning. To address this possibility, we conducted a second experiment in which roughly
half of the participants read the articles (n = 250), and the remaining half answered the recall and generalization questions
without having read the articles (n = 229). We found that
even among participants who had not read the articles, those
who scored higher on Early Learning also scored higher on
target recall, β = .49, SE = .04, z = 12.47, p<.001, and generalization, β = .30, SE = .04, z = 8.00, p<.001. However,
we also found a three-way interaction such that accuracy was
higher for target generalization trials for participants who had
higher Early Learning scores and were in the reading group,
β = .38, SE = .07, z = 5.61, p<.001. Thus, there is an advantage for uptake of an article about children’s learning for
participants who score higher on the Early Learning subscale
of our questionnaire. Additionally, the fact that participants
with higher Early Learning scores have higher accuracy for
the target questions even without having read the article suggests that subscale scores are predictive of how parents reason
about children’s learning in general.

General Discussion

2 This

random effects specification was the maximal convergent
random effect structure.
3 These results held when Affection and Attachment items were
included in the analysis as well. Affection and Attachment scores
also moderated generalization, though not as strongly as Early
Learning scores.

Understanding the sources of parents’ behaviors and decisions with regard to their parenting is a critical step in improving children’s welfare. There is a large literature outlining the activities and environments that can make a difference

358

in children’s development, including their language (Hart &
Risley, 1995) and executive functioning (Barker et al., 2014).
Relevant research findings can sometimes be nuanced and unintuitive for those outside of academia, however. Thus, an
important challenge is understanding the lay beliefs parents
may have about parenting, and how they relate to parenting
best practices as identified by developmental science. Interventions that aim to deliver new information may be more
likely to succeed if they take into account parents’ lay beliefs
about child development (Kumar et al., 2015).
In the present work, we established a new scale to measure
people’s attitudes about parenting and child development in
three categories: Rules and Respect, Affection and Attachment, and Early Learning. These subscales are meant to capture meaningful differences in how people view child development and the relative importance of different parenting behaviors. We subjected our new scale to psychometric testing, and found acceptably high correlations among subscale
items, as well as the predicted factor structure across subscales. In addition, subscale scores meaningfully predicted
responses to questions about children’s learning, and uptake
of new information on the topic. Specifically, participants
with high scores on the Early Learning subscale were more
likely to generalize the message of the target article about
children’s learning to new scenarios, whereas high scores on
the Rules and Respect subscale did not predict generalization
of the article.
In sum, this work provides initial evidence that meaningful differences in adults’ attitudes about child development
and parenting can be assessed by our new scale. This initial
evidence for the reliability and validity of our parenting measure must be supplemented with further evidence in both areas across a broader range of participants. In addition, future
work should target predictive validity by determining whether
subscale scores differentially predict parents observable behaviors with their children, such as the quality of conversations they engage their child in, which would provide additional support for our scale.
Implicit theories are a powerful driver of human behavior.
Sometimes, the interaction between interventions and their
subjects’ underlying beliefs can produce powerful, non-linear
results (Medin & Bang, 2014). Thus, given both the variability in attitudes towards parenting across cultures and the importance of improving parenting outcomes, it behooves us to
understand implicit theories of parenting. The current work
takes a first step in this direction.

Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority. Developmental Psychology, 4(1p2), 1–103.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D., Spelke,
E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword of pedagogy:
Instruction limits spontaneous exploration and discovery. Cognition,
120(3), 322–330.
Bransford, J. D., & Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual prerequisites for understanding: Some investigations of comprehension and
recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 717–
726.
Buchsbaum, D., Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Shafto, P. (2011).
Childrens imitation of causal action sequences is influenced by statistical and pedagogical evidence. Cognition, 120(3), 331–340.
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1995). Constructing validity: Basic
issues in objective scale development. Psychological Assessment,
7(3), 309–319.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95(2),
256–273.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C.-y., & Hong, Y.-y. (1995). Implicit Theories: Elaboration and Extension of the Model. Psychological Inquiry, 6(4), 322–333.
Furr, M. (2011). Scale Construction and Psychometrics for Social and Personality Psychology. SAGE Publications Ltd.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful Differences in the
Everyday Experience of Young American Children. Paul H Brookes
Publishing Company.
Hoff, E. (2003). The Specificity of Environmental Influence: Socioeconomic Status Affects Early Vocabulary Development Via Maternal Speech. Child Development, 74(5), 1368–1378.
Horn, J. L. (1965). A rationale and test for the number of factors
in factor analysis. Psychometrika, 30(2), 179–185.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymerman, E., & Levine, S.
(2002). Language input and child syntax. Cognitive Psychology,
45(3), 337–374.
Jones, J. D., Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (2014). Parents SelfReported Attachment Styles A Review of Links with Parenting Behaviors, Emotions, and Cognitions. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 19(1), 1088868314541858–76.
Kumar, V., Kumar, A., Ghosh, A. K., Samphel, R., Yadav, R.,
Yeung, D., & Darmstadt, G. L. (2015). Enculturating science:
Community-centric design of behavior change interactions for accelerating health impact. Seminars in Perinatology, 39, 393–415.
LeVine, R. A. (2004). Challenging Expert Knowledge: Findings
from an African Study of Infant Care and Development. Praeger
Publishers/Greenwood Publishing Group.
Medin, D. L., & Bang, M. (2014). The cultural side of science
communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
111(4), 13621–13626.
Ong, D. C., Zaki, J., & Goodman, N. D. (2015). Affective cognition: Exploring lay theories of emotion. Cognition, 143, 141–162.
Richman, A. L., Miller, P. M., & LeVine, R. A. (1992). Cultural
and educational variations in maternal responsiveness. Developmental Psychology, 28(4), 614–621.
Rowe, M. L. (2008). Child-directed speech: relation to socioeconomic status, knowledge of child development and child vocabulary
skill. Journal of Child Language, 35(01), 185–205.
Simms, L. J. (2008). Classical and Modern Methods of Psychological Scale Construction. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(1), 414–433.
Yong, E. (2015). Why do most languages have so few words for
smells? The Atlantic.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a gift from Kinedu, Inc. Thanks
to members of the Language and Cognition Lab at Stanford
for helpful discussion.

References
Barker, J. E., Semenov, A. D., Michaelson, L., Provan, L. S., Snyder,
H. R., & Munakata, Y. (2014). Less-structured time in children’s
daily lives predicts self-directed executive functioning. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 323.

359

