Measuring and modeling distraction by self-referential processing in a complex
working memory span task
Jeroen Daamen (daamenjeroen@gmail.com)
Marieke van Vugt (m.k.van.vugt@rug.nl)
Niels Taatgen (n.a.taatgen@rug.nl)
Institute of Artificial Intelligence & Cognitive Engineering, Nijenborgh 9
9747 AG, Groningen, The Netherlands
Abstract

novel experimental paradigm to measure the distracting
effects SRP on one’s ability to recall presented letters, using
a complex working memory (CWM) span task as a basis.
We hypothesized that distraction by SRP leads to worse
CWM span task performance than distraction by a non-SRP
task as SRP may lead to task-unrelated self-generated
thoughts instead of task-related maintenance rehearsal.

Two experiments using novel complex working memory span
tasks were performed, both requiring the participants to
remember a span of letters whilst being distracted by the
processing of words. Word processing could either be selfreferential (SRP) or not. In the first experiment recall
performance was compared between SRP and non-SRP
conditions using the same words. In the second experiment,
we compared SRP and non-SRP in two tasks equalized in
semantic processing but using different words. In both
experiments recall performance was significantly lower after
SRP compared to non-SRP, indicating that SRP has a
disruptive effect on the recall task. A cognitive model
implemented in PRIMs, using goal competition during SRP,
interfering with rehearsal of letters, could account for the
observed experimental results. If SRP interferes with
subsequent tasks in this manner it should also interfere with
tasks other than recall, such as SRP occurring in daily life.

Methods
Two CWM span task experiments were performed
varying only slightly in set-up. The first experiment will be
described in detail, for the second experiment only the
differences with the first will be noted.

Experiment 1

Keywords: self-referential processing, distraction, cognitive
modeling, complex working memory

Introduction
Distractions from ongoing tasks form a problem in our
day-to-day lives, it reduces our productiveness and can have
negative consequences on task performance. Distractions
can come from our perceptual inputs (external) or from our
mind (internal), the latter can be viewed as distractions by
self-generated thought, that is “mental contents that are not
derived directly from immediate perceptual input”
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). These thoughts can occur
as part of a task, for example when one needs to construct
an internal representation or mentally weigh the different
factors of a decision, or they can be task independent when
they stray from the task at hand, for example when we let
our minds wander. In demanding tasks such as driving a car
or piloting a plane the consequences of internal distractions
can be severe (Casner & Schooler, 2014; Yanko & Spalek,
2013 respectively).
Having objective measures of distractions caused by selfgenerated thought and having a better understanding of the
mental processes underlying them will allow us to better
understand and prevent undesired effects of mental
distraction during important tasks. For this reason we set out
to measure and model the distractions caused by selfgenerated thought during self-referential processing (SRP),
the processing of information in relation to the self (see
introduction Northoff et al., 2006). We therefore designed a

Participants
Subject recruitment for both experiments was done via a
Facebook post on the “Paid research participants
Groningen” group offering 10 euros for those who decided
to participate (experiment duration approximately 1 hour).
27 participants were included in the first experiment (19
female, age 22.3 ± 2.7). Only native Dutch speakers were
included in the experiment. Informed consent was obtained
from all participants.
Task
In this experiment participants were required to remember
presented letters while processing presented words (Figure
1). It was created using PsychoPy (Peirce, 2007).
The screen background was dark grey and all text was
presented in white (Gill Sans MT, font height ~1cm). The
experiment consisted of 12 blocks, with one block
containing each combination of span and condition once.
The spans used were 3, 4 and 5, as is common in CWM
span tasks (Conway et al., 2005). For the storage task,
participants needed to remember letters that were presented
one at a time on the screen for 1s, and between each
presentation there was 4s of self-paced processing of word
stimuli (SRP or neutral – see below). Before each letter
presentation the screen was blank for 1s to allow for
rehearsal. We included these delays on purpose to maximize
the potential for distraction by SRP.
Each trial started with showing the participant the current
condition. For the SRP condition this was “Does this word
describe you? (Yes/No)”, for the neutral condition this was
“Does the word contain the letter ‘a’? (Yes/No)”. The letter
‘a’ was chosen for the neutral condition because it was

2147

present in roughly half of the used word stimuli (48.0%).
Both sentences were in Dutch. Participants were able to
respond by pressing the left (labeled ‘NO’) or right ‘ctrl’
(labeled ‘YES’) buttons.
In the next phase a random letter stimuli was presented in
the center of the screen for 1.0s. Before the presentation the
screen was blank for 1.0s. Directly after the letter
presentation followed 4.0s of self-paced processing tasks
(SRP or non-SRP). As soon as a participant responded to a
word the next word would be presented. If there were less
than 700ms remaining, the screen would stay blank for the
remaining time to prevent participants being flashed by a
stimulus at the end of the phase. These phases were repeated
a number of times equal to the current span.
The recall phase was indicated by a number of
underscores equal to the current span. The underscores were
replaced by the user's input as they started typing. Error
correction was possible by using the backspace key. When
they entered the last letter the feedback was presented.
Participants were instructed to guess if they couldn’t
remember a letter. The participants were shown how well
they did on the storage task in the form of “[x] out of [span]
letters correct”. They also received their average response
time in the processing task as well as their percentage of
correctly judged processing items for the neutral condition.
Due to the subjectivity of the SRP condition there was no
score shown. A pilot study showed that participants were
consistent with their previous responses in the SRP
condition, indicating that feedback on this was not critical.
Scoring
The storage task was scored using partial-credit unit
scoring (Conway et al., 2005). That is, the score for each
trial was calculated as number of items in correct serial
position divided by the span of that trial. The processing
task was scored using the percentage of correctly processed
items. If the last processing item did not receive a response
before going to the next phase, this item wasn’t taken into
account for the final score.
Stimuli
To-be-remembered stimuli were chosen from the set of all
consonants (i.e., B, C, D, F, G, H, J, K, L, M, N, P, Q, R, S,
T, V, W, X, and Z). Within one trial no letters were
repeated. No vowels were used to prevent easy grouping of
letter stimuli by remembering them as words. The used
word stimuli were derived from the 50 item International
Personality Item Pool questionnaire (IPIP) used for

measuring the Big-Five factor markers as reported by
Goldberg (1992). These words were translated into Dutch.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 differed from Experiment 1 in one key
aspect, namely the non-SRP condition.
Participants
30 native Dutch participants (18 female, age 22.4 ± 4.0)
were included for the second experiment. Participants from
the first experiment were excluded. Written consent was
obtained from all participants.
Non-SRP condition
A potential objection to the non-SRP processing task in
Experiment 1 is that it does not involve semantic processing
of the presented word. For that reason, we repeated the
experiment with a non-SRP condition in which participants
answered the question “Does this object fit in a shoebox?”.
Another advantage of this task is that there is no confusion
possible between conditions as different word stimuli are
used for the SRP and non-SRP conditions. For the “shoebox
task”, we used translated nouns from the Toronto Word
Pool (Friendly, Franklin, Hoffman, & Rubin, 1982). 50
words were selected to which the answer was an
unambiguous yes, and another 50 to which the answer was
an unambiguous no.

Data analysis
The data of the experiments were analyzed using R (R
Core Team, 2015). Participants with 5% of response times
< 200ms were excluded from the analysis as well as
participants with a mean neutral condition processing score
over all trials < 85% as this would indicate that the subject
was not performing the tasks. The response inconsistency
for the SRP condition was also evaluated; if a participant
was equally likely to respond yes or no over multiple
repetitions of the same word, this would indicate that he is
not performing the required task. Yes responses were scored
1 and no responses -1, their inconsistency for a given
stimuli was then calculated as the variance over their
responses. This results in a value of 0 when all responses are
the same and 1 when there are as many yes as no responses.
Participants with mean inconsistency over all word stimuli >
0.5 were excluded.
This resulted in two exclusions for experiment 1, one
scored at chance in the neutral processing phase and one had

Figure 1: Overview of a single trial (SRP condition, span 5).

2148

unrealistic low response times in the SRP condition. For
experiment 2 two participants were excluded from the data
analysis because they scored below 85% in the processing
phase in the neutral condition.

response time per trial in the model there was still a
significant effect of condition on score (χ2 (1) = 6.68, p =
0.0097). Therefore, in experiment 2 the difference in
accuracy cannot be explained by the difficulty of the
processing task.

Results
To analyze the effect of distraction by SRP we looked at
the average recall score each participant attained per
condition for each span. A difference in score between the
SRP and natural condition indicates that one of type of
distraction has a larger effect on recall than the other.
Figure 2 shows the mean score per condition per span,
including 95% confidence interval bars. For all spans the
average score for the SRP condition was lower than the
neutral condition. To analyze this effect we performed a
logistic mixed effects analysis in R (LME, Bates, Maechler,
Bolker, & Walker, 2014) of the relation between condition
and partial-credit score. The span and condition were
entered as fixed effects and the intercepts for each
participant as random effect. The reported p-values result
from an ANOVA between the complete model and the
model without the effect of condition. Using this approach
we found that the score for the SRP condition was
significantly lower than for the neutral condition (χ2(1) =
6.45, p = 0.011). However, after including average response
time for each trial to the previous model we no longer found
a significant effect of condition on score (χ2(1) = 0.77, p =
0.38). This means that the difference between the conditions
can also be explained by a difference in difficulty of the
processing task.
To examine whether the observed difference between the
SRP and non-SRP was an artifact of the non-semantic
nature of the non-SRP task, we conducted experiment 2, in
which we replaced syntactic with semantic judgments. We
again found that the score for the SRP condition was
significantly lower than for the neutral condition (χ2 (1) =
27.5, p < 0.001; figure 2). After including the average

Model
The results of experiment 2 have been modeled using the
primitive elements model of skill (PRIMs; Taatgen, 2013),
which has previously been successful in modeling visual
distraction (Taatgen, Katidioti, Borst, & van Vugt, 2015).
The key component of our distraction model is the idea that
the current goals of the model activate mental operators to
achieve that goal. However, the task-related operators have
to compete with operators that are not activated by the goal,
but by other influences. These influences can be external
(e.g., a distracting visual stimulus), or internal (e.g., a taskrelevant memory trace that has an unexpected association
with a distracting train of thoughts). Experiment 2 was
chosen as a target for modeling because it had the clearest
results and didn’t allow the participant to be confused
between the SRP and neutral conditions (since each
condition used a clearly different set of words).

Design and key elements
The model of this task requires several distinct
components. It needs to store sequential information, which
are the presented letters and their order. In addition to that it
needs the ability to rehearse and the ability to report this
information. Finally it needs to be able to process and
respond to presented words, the exact mechanism of which
will need to differ for the SRP and neutral condition. We
will discuss these components in detail one by one.
The way we store sequential information is still unclear,
there is evidence that we can chunk multiple items, treating
them as one, and store positional information about each
item within that chunk (Dehaene, Meyniel, Wacongne,

Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Figure 2: Recall accuracy as a function of span, comparing SRP and non-SRP (neutral) conditions. Data are
shown for experiment 1 (left) and 2 (right), showing 95% confidence intervals.

2149

Wang, & Pallier, 2015; Ladd & Woodworth, 1911). We
modeled this by having position-specific operators. That is,
there are separate operators for storing and retrieving each
individual serial position of a letter. When storing, a chunk
is created that contains positional information about an item,
the item itself and a reference to the current goal chunk. The
positional information and the reference to the current goal
chunk is later used to try to retrieve the chunk by the
position-specific operators. This reference is needed because
otherwise chunks from previous trials will be recalled. If it
is not successfully retrieved the model moves on to the next
operator, which tries to retrieve the chunk containing the
next position.
In the design of the experiment we included a one-second
break between processing and the presentation of the next
letter stimulus, which the participants could use to rehearse.
We hypothesized that distraction caused by the processing
in the SRP condition interfered with this rehearsal process.
During this period, distraction competes with rehearsal.
Because the processing phase ended if there was less than
700ms remaining for a to be presented stimulus, this time
was added to the inter-trial interval, making this phase on
average 1.3s in duration.
Distraction was modeled as follows. During the
processing phase of the task, memory retrievals are required
to answer either the shoebox question or the self-referential
question. The assumption of the model is that selfreferential words are associated with operators that elaborate
these words. Elaboration involves additional memory
retrievals, and representing the results in working memory,
which in its turn can prime additional elaboration.
The probability that elaboration happens is much larger in
the SRP condition, which is modeled by strength of
association between the SRP words and an elaboration
operator.
Once the blank period starts, there is a chance that a
distracting fact remains in WM. This distracting fact spreads
activation to operators to further think about that fact, which
have to compete with the task-relevant operators to rehearse
the letters. A successful distraction will therefore impede
mental rehearsal, and lower the working-memory score.
Once rehearsal wins the competition, the distracting fact is
removed from WM and rehearsal continues normally. It is
worth mentioning that this implementation is thus not
strictly based on a competition between goals but between
operators. This was done mainly because distraction periods
are so short that it hard to justify it as being an active goal.
The term ‘goal competition’ was used because this is more
common in the literature.
The only difference between the models of the SRP and
non-SRP conditions is that the words in the shoebox
condition do not spread activation to the distraction
operators, while the SRP words do.
In PRIMs the speed at which operators execute is
increased over multiple runs. This means that at first the
operators execute relatively slow which is unrealistic for our
participants who already have substantial real life

experience remembering, retrieving and rehearsing items in
memory. Therefore, the model is trained for 15 trials before
the experimental run starts. The complete set of models is
available from the author on request.

Model results
The model was run 500 times and the results were
compared to the results of experiment 2. Figure 3 shows that
the partial score is matched quite nicely by the model;
showing a clear difference between the two conditions.
Figure 4 shows that the model has some trouble matching
the recall score per serial position. The primacy effect
matches reasonably well but the recency effect is too strong
in the model.

Figure 3: Comparison of partial-credit score between the
experimental data (solid lines) and the model (dashed lines).
95% confidence interval bars are plotted for the experiment
data only.

Effect of parameters
The model seems to do quite well in accounting for the
observed difference in recall score between the two
conditions. Various model parameters affect the model fits.
Increasing the noise in memory tends to make the effect of
span on score smaller, decreasing the slope between score
and span. Decreasing the multiplication factor that scales
memory retrieval time affects the difference between the
two conditions since with a lower latency, the rehearsal
process is faster allowing for more repetitions to be
squeezed into the same amount of time. This benefits the
neutral condition more than the SRP condition. Lowering
the retrieval threshold increases the partial score for each
span since with a lower threshold chunks are more easily
recalled. This effect seems to be stronger for higher spans,
most likely due to a ceiling effect at span 3.

Discussion
This study attempted to measure and model distraction
caused by SRP on a memory task. To this extent two CWM
span task experiments were conducted, comparing

2150

Figure 4: Percentage of successful recall by serial position for the experimental data (left column) and the model data (right
column), separately for the SRP (dotted lines) and neutral (solid lines) conditions.
distraction by SRP (SRP condition) to distraction by other
forms of processing (neutral condition) measured by the
recall score on the CWM span task. The neutral processing
consisted of letter recognition (experiment 1) and semantic
processing (experiment 2). We found that in both
experiments, SRP is associated with worse performance in
the recall task than the other processing task. In experiment
2 we found that after including the average response time
still a significant amount of variance in the recall score data
could be explained by the condition factor. This was not so
for experiment 1, most likely due to confusion between
conditions by participants, see below. The experiment was
modeled in PRIMs using a competitive goal approach in
which distraction caused by SRP prevented letter rehearsal
in the SRP condition. This model does quite well in
accounting for the observed difference in recall score
between the two conditions.
In the first experiment some participants reported that
they sometimes forgot the condition associated with the
current trial. This could happen due to the fact that the word
stimuli for both conditions were the same and the condition
was only indicated at the start of the trial. It is easy to detect
when participants confuse the neutral with the SRP
condition, as this means they would have scored at chance
level. To see how often this might have happened we
compared the number of neutral trials with <65% correct for
both experiments. For experiment 1 this happened in 15 of
the 900 trials (1.67%), and for experiment 2 this was 1 of
1044 trials (0.0958%). This indicates that indeed some
confusion has occurred in experiment 1 but only in a small
fraction of the trials. One can assume that these numbers are
similar for the SRP condition (i.e. participants treating the
SRP condition as the neutral condition), but this is hard to
measure due to subjectivity of the responses in the SRP
condition. Note that this doesn’t negatively affect the main
finding, if anything it only underestimates the true effects.

Further data analysis showed that the responses of the
participants in the SRP condition could explain some of the
level of distraction. The word pairs were labeled 1 and -1
for the positive and negative counterpart respectively.
Responses were labeled 1 and -1 for yes and no
respectively. Multiplying the responses by the word labels,
averaging them per word, and then averaging this value for
all words provides a basic indication about how positive a
person thinks about himself, ranging from -1 (totally
negative) to 1 (totally positive). This value was 0.6639 ±
0.224 for experiment 1 and 0.7102 ± 0.121 for experiment 2
(mean ± SD). Adding this ‘positivity value’ to the LME
provided a significantly better fit for experiment 2 (χ2 (1) =
3.9773, p = 0.04612). Further exploring the nature of this
effect—which was not found in experiment 1—is an
interesting avenue for future research.
Our model does quite well in accounting for the effect of
condition found in experiment 2, but it does have some
limitations. Firstly, the model only accounts for retrieval
errors, other types of mistakes such as transposition errors,
item confusion or protrusion are not taken into account.
Secondly, the model doesn’t account for what is happening
in the mind when it is distracted, in the current
implementation the model just ‘pauses’ for a moment. This
has the desired effect of preventing rehearsal but is not a
plausible explanation of the mental processes happening
during this time.
If the found decrease in recall performance is indeed
caused by remaining emotions and thoughts after SRP, it
gives rise to two interesting propositions. Firstly, this means
that this effect could possibly be reduced by reducing SRP,
for example, mindfulness training (Goldin, Ramel, & Gross,
2009). Secondly this means that performance in other types
of secondary tasks (for example a processing task instead of
recall) will also be affected by SRP.
In conclusion, we found that SRP has a negative effect on
recall performance in a CWM span task. These findings can

2151

be accounted for using a cognitive model made in PRIMs,
in which SRP causes a distracting fact to enter WM, which
subsequently interferes with rehearsal by activating
competing-but task unrelated-operators. If our mechanism is
correct, this implies that the disruptive effect of SRP should
also extend to other types of secondary tasks and that the
effect might be reduced by actively increasing participant’s
SRP through for example mindfulness. These results show
that CWM span tasks can be used as an objective measure
of distractions caused by self-referential thought, and that
PRIMs can increase our understanding of the mental
processes underlying them. Together these will allow us to
better understand and prevent undesired effects of mental
distraction during important tasks.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by ERC-StG grant 283597
awarded to Niels Taatgen and Marie Curie grant
ACCDECMEM to Marieke van Vugt.

References
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and
S4. R Package Version 1.1-7, 0. doi:citeulike-articleid:1080437
Casner, S. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2014). Thoughts in Flight:
Automation Use and Pilots’ Task-Related and TaskUnrelated Thought. Human Factors: The Journal of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 56(3),
433–442. doi:10.1177/0018720813501550
Conway, A. R. a, Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick, D.
Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working
memory span tasks: A methodological review and
user’s guide. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(5),
769–786. doi:10.3758/BF03196772
Dehaene, S., Meyniel, F., Wacongne, C., Wang, L., &
Pallier, C. (2015). The Neural Representation of
Sequences: From Transition Probabilities to Algebraic
Patterns and Linguistic Trees. Neuron, 88(1), 2–19.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.019
Friendly, M., Franklin, P. E., Hoffman, D., & Rubin, D. C.
(1982). The Toronto Word Pool: Norms for imagery,

concreteness, orthographic variables, and grammatical
usage for 1,080 words. Behavior Research Methods &
Instrumentation,
14(4),
375–399.
doi:10.3758/BF03203275
Goldberg, L. R. (1992). The development of markers for the
Big-Five factor structure. Psychological Assessment.
doi:10.1037/1040-3590.4.1.26
Goldin, P., Ramel, W., & Gross, J. (2009). Mindfulness
Meditation Training and Self-Referential Processing
in Social Anxiety Disorder: Behavioral and Neural
Effects. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23(3),
242–257. doi:10.1891/0889-8391.23.3.242
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greck, M., Bermpohl, F.,
Dobrowolny, H., & Panksepp, J. (2006). Selfreferential processing in our brain—A meta-analysis
of imaging studies on the self. NeuroImage, 31(1),
440–457. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.002
Peirce, J. W. (2007). PsychoPy-Psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162(1), 8–
13. doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2006.11.017
R Core Team. (2015). R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. Retrieved from
http://www.r-project.org/
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The Science of
Mind Wandering: Empirically Navigating the Stream
of Consciousness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66,
487–518. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015331
Taatgen, N. A. (2013). The nature and transfer of cognitive
skills. Psychological Review, 120(3), 439–71.
doi:10.1037/a0033138
Taatgen, N. A., Katidioti, I., Borst, J., & Vugt, M. Van.
(2015). A Model of Distraction using new
Architectural Mechanisms to Manage Multiple Goals.
ICCM Conference, 264–269.
Woodworth, R. S., & Ladd, G. T. (1911). Elements of
physiological psychology. Scribners: New York. Back
to the Top.
Yanko, M. R., & Spalek, T. M. (2013). Route familiarity
breeds inattention: A driving simulator study.
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 57, 80–86.
doi:10.1016/j.aap.2013.04.003

2152

