Memory for exemplars in category learning
C. E. R. Edmunds (ceredmunds@gmail.com)
School of Psychology, Plymouth University
Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK

Andy J. Wills (andy.wills@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Plymouth University
Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK

Fraser N. Milton (F.N.Milton@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter
Exeter, EX4 4QG, UK
Abstract
Some argue that category learning is mediated by two competing learning systems: one explicit, one implicit (Ashby et
al., 1998). These systems are hypothesised to be responsible for learning rule-based and information-integration category structures respectively. However, little experimental work
has directly investigated whether people are conscious of category knowledge supposedly learned by the implicit system.
Here we report one experiment that directly compared explicit
recognition memory for exemplars between these two category
structures. Contrary to the predictions of the dual-systems approach, we found preliminary evidence of superior exemplar
memory after information-integration category learning compared to rule-based learning. This result is consistent with the
hypothesis that participants learn information-integration category structures by using complex rules.
Keywords: category learning; memory; dual-systems; recognition;

One approach to categorization assumes that generalisation
from past experiences to novel ones is mediated by two competing systems: one explicit and one implicit. The COVIS
(COmpetition between Verbal and Implicit Systems) model
is a popular instantiation of this approach (Ashby, AlfonsoReese, Turken, & Waldron, 1998; Ashby, Paul, & Maddox,
2011). In this model, the explicit, verbal system is described
as learning by testing hypotheses using working memory.
This system is assumed to optimally learn rule-based category category structures that can be easily verbalised such as
the unidimensional structure shown in Figure 1A. In contrast,
the implicit system is described as using procedural learning
to associate areas of stimulus space with a motor response.
This system is assumed to optimally learn category structures that cannot be easily verbalised such as the informationintegration category structure shown in Figure 1B. Critically,
the implicit system is assumed to “produce category knowledge that is opaque to declarative consciousness” (p.1, Smith
et al., 2015).
Whether COVIS, and more broadly a dual-systems approach, adequately explains the processes of category learning is still a matter for debate. Proponents of COVIS argue
that the case is closed, that the evidence for dual-systems approaches is overwhelming and that the field should move on
to more interesting questions, such as those concerning the
exact nature of the systems and how they interact with each

other (Ashby & Maddox, 2011). In support of this view there
is a large quantity of evidence that has been used to support
COVIS (for a review see Ashby & Maddox, 2011). However,
much of this evidence has been questioned (Edmunds, Milton, & Wills, 2015; Newell, Dunn, & Kalish, 2011; Stanton
& Nosofsky, 2007; Zaki & Kleinschmidt, 2014). Also, despite the volume of studies, there is very little experimental
work that directly investigates the key theoretical assumption
that the learning of the implicit system is not available to consciousness. Instead, the focus has been on demonstrating that
information-integration category structures are learned procedurally or demonstrating that learning of rule-based and
information-integration categories are dissociable using experimental, neuropsychological or neuroscientific methods
(Ashby & Maddox, 2005, 2011; Price, Filoteo, & Maddox,
2009). Therefore, the claim that the case is closed may be
premature.
In the current study, we directly examine whether participants have conscious access to information about the
information-integration categories they have learned. COVIS predicts that they do not, but some recent behavioral and
neuroimaging evidence suggests otherwise. Behaviorally,
Edmunds et al. (2015) found that the vast majority of participants were able to report a clear explicit strategy after
training, regardless of whether they had been learning an
information-integration or rule-based category structure. This
was despite having met the criteria usually used in the COVIS literature to check that participants in the informationintegration category structure condition are using the implicit
system. This check uses a model-based strategy analysis inspired by General Recognition Theory (GRT; Ashby & Gott,
1988), a multidimensional version of signal detection theory.
The failure of the model-based strategy analysis here may be
because its output depends strongly on the set of strategies
the modeller chooses to use, with the estimated proportion
of “implicit” responders reducing substantially if more complex rule-based models are included (Donkin, Newell, Kalish,
Dunn, & Nosofsky, 2015).
Turning to neuroimaging evidence, in a recent study from
our lab we found greater activation of the medial temporal lobe in information-integration category learning, rela-

2243

Size

Size

Brightness

Brightness

Figure 1: a) The unidimensional category structure with a rule based on size. b) The information-integration category structure
with a positive category boundary.
tive to a well-matched rule-based category learning condition
(Carpenter, Wills, Benattayallah, & Milton, in press). The
medial temporal lobe has long been considered critical for
explicit memory. Therefore, Carpenter et al.’s results suggest that information-integration category learning involves
explicit memory processes to a greater extent than rule-based
category learning.
One hypothesis that explains these two findings is that
both rule-based and information-integration category structures are learned through the application of simple rules but
that, for information-integration ones, those rules are supplemented by explicit memory of specific examples. For example, participants may store the examples that are exceptions
to the simple rule. This hypothesis is also consistent with
other evidence that found that participants who use a ruleplus-exception strategy have greater recognition memory for
the exceptions to a simple category rule (Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995; Sakamoto & Love, 2004). As participants learning information-integration categories would have to remember more exceptions than those learning a rule-based structure, we would also expect greater recognition performance
for information-integration learners.
However, this evidence is not conclusive.
Neither
Edmunds et al. (2015) nor Carpenter et al. (in press) directly
measure explicit access to category knowledge. Further,
some of the results of Carpenter et al. are at variance with a
previous neuroimaging study of rule-based and informationintegration category learning (e.g. Nomura et al., 2007).
Carpenter et al. argue that the differences between their study
and that of Nomura et al. are due to methodological problems

with the Nomura et al. study. This argument is supported by
the fact that Carpenter et al.’s results are broadly in line with
the only other closely-related neuroimaging study (Milton &
Pothos, 2011). Nevertheless, more direct evidence is needed.
In the following experiment, we directly examined recognition memory for exemplars in rule-based and informationintegration category learning. Recognition memory is commonly assumed to be a test of explicit memory processes
(Gabrieli & Fleischman, 1995). If rule-based structures are
learned explicitly and information-integration category structures are learned implicitly, as predicted by COVIS, then one
would predict, if anything, better recognition memory performance for participants in the rule-based condition than for
participants information-integration condition.
In contrast, our hypothesis is that that participants learn
information-integration category structures explicitly using simple rules bolstered by memory for exceptions to
those rules. This strategy would allow participants in the
information-integration condition to score as highly as if they
used the optimal diagonal decision bound, however it would
also increase demands on recognition memory as participants would have to remember the exceptions. An alternative similar hypothesis is that participants in the informationintegration condition may be using complicated rule strategies such as a conjunction rule. If this is the case, participants would still have to pay more attention to stimulus features information-integration than in the unidimensional condition as they would have to compare each stimulus to multiple boundaries. Whereas, for the unidimensional condition
they only have to focus on one stimulus dimension. Either

2244

way, we would expect to see better recognition memory in
the information-integration condition than in the rule-based
condition.

screen was displayed between each trial for 500ms. Throughout the experiment, the labels “Category A” and “Category
B” were displayed on the bottom left and right of the screen
respectively. If participants took longer than 5000ms to respond, no corrective feedback was given, instead the message
“PLEASE RESPOND FASTER” was displayed for 500ms.

Method
Participants
Forty-two undergraduate psychology students were recruited
from the Plymouth University participation pool and compensated with partial course credit.

Stimuli and category structures
The stimuli were 36 grey squares that varied in brightness and
size displayed on a white background. The stimuli seen by
each participant depended on which category structure they
learned.
Half the participants were randomly assigned to learn a
unidimensional rule-based category structure and the other
half to learn an information-integration category structure
as illustrated in Figure 1. The orientation of the category boundaries in abstract stimulus space were counterbalanced within conditions resulting in two unidimensional
category structures–with a rule based solely on either the
brightness (11 participants) or size of the square stimuli
(10 participants)–and two information-integration category
structures–where the optimum boundary had either a positive
(10 participants) or negative gradient (11 participants). In addition, the stimuli were log-scaled so that all adjacent stimuli
were approximately equally perceptually discriminable.
The abstract representation of the information-integration
positive category structure is identical to that used by Spiering
and Ashby (2008) with 6 stimuli added to bring the total number of stimuli up to 36. These stimuli were added to facilitate
the random selection of a third of stimuli as “unseen” items
for the recognition task. The remaining category structures
are rotations (π/4, π/2, 3π/4 rad) of this original structure
around the origin and then translated so that ‘center of gravity’ of the points remained the same.

Procedure
The experiment was split into three phases: category training,
recognition test and finally, category test.
Category training In this phase, participants were trained
on two thirds of the available stimuli. The training stimuli
were selected randomly for each participant subject to several
constraints: 1) that those stimuli selected were symmetrical
around the category boundary and 2) that no adjacent stimuli
of similar difficulty were removed. In total there were 360
training trials, split into 3 blocks of 120 trials. In each block,
the 24 stimuli were shown 5 times in a random order. On each
trial, the participants looked at the stimulus until they made
a response using either the “Z” key for Category A or the “/”
key for Category B. Participants were unable to respond until
at least 500ms had passed. Then, either “Correct” in green or
“Incorrect!” in red was displayed for 500ms. A blank white

Recognition test In this phase participants judged whether
each stimulus was “old” and appeared in the training phase,
by pressing the “O” key, or was “new” and had not been
shown in the training phase, by pressing the “N” key. The
words “New” and “Old” were presented on the bottom left
and right of the screen respectively. After this, participants
judged the confidence they had in their old-new judgement
on a Likert scale that varied from 1 (=guessed) to 5 (=certain)
by pressing the corresponding number key. Each of the 36
stimuli were presented three times in a randomised order. No
feedback was given.
Category test In this phase, participants were asked to
judge the category membership of all 36 stimuli, not just
those they had seen in the category training phase. The procedure was identical to that of the training phase, apart from
there was no feedback. Each of the 36 stimuli were presented
three times in a random order.
Verbal report questionnaire At the end of the experiment, participants were asked to complete a questionnaire
that asked them to describe in detail the strategy that they
used. This was to determine whether the participants could
explicitly report the strategy they used and whether any participants used a rule-plus-exception strategy. The questionnaire asked them to “Imagine that another participant was
asked to complete the experiment as you did. What instructions would you give them so that they could exactly copy
your pattern of responding?”
The verbal reports were coded by CERE and AJW.

Analysis
All data analyses were conducted in R (R Core Team, 2014).
For every condition and phase of the experiment, all trials
were removed for which the reaction times were outliers in
that condition (i.e. outside 1.5 times the interquartile range
above the upper quartile and below the lower quartile).

Results
One participant was removed from the unidimensional condition because their accuracy score was consistently below
chance (i.e. 50%), resulting in 20 and 21 participants in the
unidimensional and information-integration category structure conditions respectively.

Performance
Category learning We found a statistically significant difference in categorization accuracy at test, F(1, 39) = 13.51,
p < .001. Proportion correct was higher for the unidimensional category structure, MUD = 0.87, SD = 0.07, than for

2245

the information-integration category structure, MII = 0.78,
SD = 0.11.
Recognition To determine overall memory performance,
we calculated d 0 values for each participant.
We found that there was a statistically significant difference in d 0 between the two category structure conditions,
t(39) = 2.04, p = .048. Specifically, d 0 was higher for the
information-integration category structure, d 0 = 0.01, SD =
0.02, than for the rule-based category structure, d 0 = 0.00,
SD = 0.01. Further, d 0 was significantly greater than chance
in the information-integration category structure condition,
t(20) = 2.98, p = .007, but not in the unidimensional category structure condition, t(19) = 0.67, p = .511.

Strategy analyses
The performance analyses above indicate a slight memory
advantage for stimuli in the information-integration category
structure condition compared to those in the unidimensional
category structure condition. In this section, we investigate
possible sources of this advantage.
Model-based analysis One possibility consistent with COVIS is that the category structure manipulation failed to result
in a corresponding shift in category learning system. In other
words, participants in the information-integration condition
could have been using the sub-optimum, explicit system. If
this were the case, then it would not be surprising that participants had explicit memory for category information. This
is always a concern for experiments in the COVIS literature.
The usual solution is to conduct a model-based analysis to
determine which strategies participants are using to learn the
structure. If the majority of participants in the informationintegration condition are identified by the analysis as using
the optimum diagonal strategy, then proponents of COVIS
would conclude that those participants are using the implicit
system.
In the model-based analysis typically used in the COVIS
literature (Ashby & Gott, 1988), four types of model are fitted to the data from each participant. These model types are
Table 1: Strategies identified in each condition according to
the model-based analysis.
Strategies
Condition

UD

GLC

CJ

RND

UD

14

2

3

-

II
6
10
4
1
Category structures: UD=Unidimensional, II=Informationintegration. Models: UDX=Unidimensional based on brightness, UDY=Unidimensional based on size, GLC=General
linear classifier, CJ=Conjunction RND=Random (both
types).

qualitatively different types of optimum decision boundaries
that split the stimulus space into two, with “Category A” responses on one side and “Category B” responses on the other.
The unidimensional models assume that the stimuli are categorised on the basis of a single stimulus dimension. In this
case, there are two possible unidimensional models: the stimuli can be split either on the basis of brightness or size. A
unidimensional rule based on brightness would be “Place the
light squares in Category A and the dark ones in Category B”.
This would be represented in stimulus space as a vertical or
horizontal line. This model has two parameters: the value at
which the boundary crosses the axis and perceptual noise.
The conjunction models assume that participants make
a decision for each stimulus dimension and then combines
them to determine category membership. A conjunction rule
in this case might be “Place the light, small squares in Category A. Everything else is in Category B.” This model can
have up to three parameters: a decision criterion on each dimension and a noise parameter. Four versions of the conjunction model were included corresponding to each corner of the
stimulus space.
The general linear classifier (GLC) models assume that the
decision boundary between the categories can be described
by a diagonal line between them. This is the optimum strategy for the information-integration condition. This model can
have up to three parameters: the gradient, intercept and a
noise parameter.
Two types of random models were also included: unbiased and biased. In the unbiased model, it is assumed that for
every stimulus the participant is equally likely to pick either
category. There are no parameters in this model. In the biased random model, it is assumed that for every stimulus the
participant in likely to ascribe it to Category A with a certain
probability (i.e. 30%). This model has one parameter, the
proportion of Category A responses, and is a more general
version of the unbiased random model, for which the parameter is equal to 50%.
The data from each participant was fitted to each of these
models. The degree of fit was measured by the Bayesian Information Criterion (Schwarz, 1978). The results from this
analysis, which was performed using the grt package in the R
environment Matsuki (2014), are reported in Table 1.
Here we can see that our data meets the criterion commonly used in the COVIS literature: the majority of participants in the information-integration condition have been
found to be using the optimum GLC (or diagonal) strategy.
Researchers in the COVIS framework would normally conclude from this that people in the information-integration condition were using the optimum implicit system.
Verbal reports The model-based analysis indicates that our
data meet the minimum requirements for a COVIS study:
there was an obvious effect of strategy type depending on
which category structure participants learned. However, as
mentioned in the introduction, the results of this analysis have
been found to depend on the models included in the analysis

2246

Table 2: Strategies identified in the verbal report questionnaire
Strategies
UD

UD

seqUD

CJ

CJ2

RuleX

Implicit

Other

None

15

1

1

0

0

1

0

2

II
4
4
3
5
1
0
1
4
Category structures: UD=Unidimensional, II=Information-integration. Strategies: UD=Unidimensional, seqUD=Sequential
unidimensional, CJ=Conjunction, CJ2=Double conjunction, RuleX=Rule-plus-exception.

(Donkin et al., 2015). Additionally, our previous research
found that participants identified as diagonal classifiers could
also report using complex rule-based strategies (Edmunds et
al., 2015). In this section we examine the strategies that participants report using to see if participants in the informationintegration condition report using complex rule-based strategies.
Participants reported several different types of strategy. A
report was classified as a unidimensional strategy if it described a rule based only of the stimulus dimensions such
as “the dark squares are Category A and the light ones are
Category B.”
A report was classified as a sequential unidimensional
strategy if the participants first categorised the stimuli at the
extreme ends of one stimulus dimension and then defined a
second unidimensional rule, on the other stimulus dimension,
for the stimuli in the middle of the dimension. For example,
a participant might say: “The very small stimuli were in Category A, and the very large in Category B. For the middle
sized stimuli, the light ones were in Category A and the dark
in Category B.”
A report was classified as a conjunction strategy if the participant described an AND rule on the basis of two stimulus
dimensions such as “Stimuli that are both small and dark are
in Category A; else Category B.”
A report was defined as a double conjunction strategy if
the participant described two opposing corners of the stimulus space, but failed to define the other areas of the space. For
example: “Large and dark patterns go into B. Small and light
colours into A.” As can be seen in this example, the participant fails to describe what category small dark stimuli would
be in.
A report was classified as a rule-plus-exception strategy if
the participant reported a simple rule with some exceptions.
For example, “Light stimuli were usually Category A and
dark stimuli Category B. However, one light medium sized
stimulus was in Category B.”
A report was classified as an implicit strategy if the participant recommended “not thinking too much” or to “rely on
instinct” or similar phrases.
The inter-rater reliability for whether or not a participant
reported a strategy was perfect. Similarly, both coders agreed
perfectly on the strategies participants used.

As we can see in Table 2, no participants reported using an implicit strategy in the information-integration condition. This replicates our finding that the model-based analysis does not correspond well to the strategies participants
report (Edmunds et al., 2015). Furthermore, only one participant in the information-integration condition used a ruleplus-exception strategy. This indicates that the advantage in
memory may not be due to the use of a particular strategy, but
because of the need in complex strategies to attend closely to
the stimuli in order to categorise them by comparing to multiple decision bounds.

Discussion
Summary
A key dual-system model of category learning, COVIS, predicts that categorization is mediated by two competing learning systems: one explicit and one implicit. These two systems
are hypothesised to optimally learn two different types of category structure. The explicit verbal system optimally learns
rule-based category structures, whereas the implicit system
optimally learns information-integration category structures.
A key feature of this model is that category knowledge
learned using the implicit system is unavailable to consciousness (Smith et al., 2015). In contrast, behavioral and neuroscientific work from out lab indicates that participants learning information-integration categories are aware of category
knowledge and may be using explicit memory to facilitate
categorization (Carpenter et al., in press; Edmunds et al.,
2015). This experiment aimed to directly test these possibilities by comparing participants’ performance on an old-new
recognition task after learning either a unidimensional rulebased category structure, or an information-integration one.
Contrary to the predictions of COVIS, we found superior memory for exemplars after learning an informationintegration category structure compared to a rule-based
one. This indicates that participants may learn informationintegration category structure using complex rule-based
strategies rather than implicitly. This would result in superior exemplar memory for items when learning a informationintegration category compared to a unidimensional structure
as participants would have to attend more closely to the stimuli’s features in order to compare them to multiple decision
boundaries. Previous conclusions in the COVIS literature

2247

concerning the presence of implicit-like category learning
may be due to an over-reliance on the assumption that a limited model-based analysis can provide evidence for implicit
responding (Donkin et al., 2015).
One apparent limitation of the current study is that response accuracy in the category test phase is lower in the
information-integration condition than in the rule-based condition. In an ideal comparison between rule-based and
information-integration learning, the conditions would be
matched for error rate. However, it seems likely that improving overall performance on the information-integration could
only improve memory for the exemplars as this would involve
using a more refined rule-based strategy. Thus, it seems unlikely that such a change would qualitatively alter our conclusions.
Another potential limitation is that recognition performance is poor in both conditions of the current experiment.
This may be due to the stimuli being perceptually very similar
to one another. Further work might increase discriminability
by adding additional features that were not predictive to category membership. We are currently investigating this possibility.
In conclusion, this experiment finds preliminary evidence
that participants learning the information-integration category structure do so explicitly. This conclusion is in contrast
to the prediction of the COVIS model, which assumes that the
information-integration structure is learned implicitly.

References
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., & Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of multiple systems in category learning. Psychological Review,
105(3), 442–481.
Ashby, F. G., & Gott, R. E. (1988). Decision rules in the
perception and categorization of multidimensional stimuli.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 14(1), 33–53.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Human category
learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 56(1), 149–178.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2011). Human category
learning 2.0. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
1224, 147–161.
Ashby, F. G., Paul, E. J., & Maddox, W. T. (2011). COVIS.
In E. M. Pothos & A. J. Wills (Eds.), Formal approaches in
categorization (pp. 1–13). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Carpenter, K. L., Wills, A. J., Benattayallah, A., & Milton,
F. N. (in press). A comparison of the neural correlates
that underlie rule-based and information-integration category learning. Human Brain Mapping.
Donkin, C., Newell, B. R., Kalish, M., Dunn, J. C., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2015). Identifying strategy use in category
learning tasks: A case for more diagnostic data and models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 41, 933–948.

Edmunds, C. E. R., Milton, F., & Wills, A. J. (2015). Feedback can be superior to observational training for both
rule-based and information-integration category structures
. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
68(2), 1203–1222.
Gabrieli, J. D. E., & Fleischman, D. (1995). Double dissociation between memory systems underlying explicit and
implicit memory in the human brain. Psychological Science, 6(2), 76–82.
Matsuki, K. (2014). grt: General recognition theory [Computer software manual].
Milton, F., & Pothos, E. M. (2011). Category structure and
the two learning systems of COVIS. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 34(8), 1326–1336.
Newell, B. R., Dunn, J. C., & Kalish, M. (2011). Systems
of Category Learning. Fact or Fantasy? (Vol. 54). Elsevier
Inc.
Nomura, E. M., Maddox, W. T., Filoteo, J. V., Ing, a. D.,
Gitelman, D. R., Parrish, T. B., . . . Reber, P. J. (2007).
Neural correlates of rule-based and information-integration
visual category learning. Cerebral Cortex, 17(1), 37–43.
Palmeri, T. J., & Nosofsky, R. M. (1995). Recognition memory for exceptions to the category rule. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
21(3), 548–568.
Price, A., Filoteo, J. V., & Maddox, W. T. (2009). Rule-based
category learning in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Neuropsychologia, 47(5), 1213–1226.
R Core Team. (2014). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing [Computer software manual]. Vienna,
Austria. Retrieved from http://www.R-project.org/
Sakamoto, Y., & Love, B. C. (2004). Schematic influences
on category learning and recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133(4), 534–553.
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model.
The Annals of Statistics, 6(2), 461–464.
Smith, J. D., Zakrzewski, A. C., Herberger, E. R., Boomer, J.,
Roeder, J. L., Ashby, F. G., & Church, B. A. (2015). The
time course of explicit and implicit categorization. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 77(7), 2476–2490.
Spiering, B. J., & Ashby, F. G. (2008). Initial training
with difficult items facilitates information integration, but
not rule-based category learning. Psychological Science,
19(11), 1169–1177.
Stanton, R. D., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2007). Feedback interference and dissociations of classification: evidence against
the multiple-learning-systems hypothesis. Memory & Cognition, 35(7), 1747–1758.
Zaki, S. R., & Kleinschmidt, D. F. (2014). Procedural memory effects in categorization: evidence for multiple systems
or task complexity? Memory & Cognition, 42(3), 508–24.

2248

