Mind reading: Discovering individual preferences from eye movements using
switching hidden Markov models
Tim Chuk (u3002534@connect.hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Antoni B. Chan (abchan@cityu.edu.hk)
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

Shinsuke (Shin) Shimojo (sshimojo@caltech.edu)
Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125.

Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

things that they are familiar with (Zajonc, 1968). Shimojo et
al., (2003) argued that gaze shifts are essential to shaping
preferences. In other words, it is not exposure to the stimuli
alone that shaped the mere exposure effect; gaze shifts have
to be involved (Shimojo et al., 2011).
In order to experimentally demonstrate this argument, in
one of their follow-up studies (Simion & Shimojo, 2006),
they adopted the same 2AFC settings but forced the participants to look at a fixation point located at the center of the
screen. The participants’ eye movements were therefore
constrained. The two face images were sequentially superimposed in the foveal region for different time lengths. They
found no bias that favored the longer-exposed images over
the shorter ones, which argued for the role of gaze shifts in
actively shaping one’s preferences.
Although these studies discovered the role of gaze in reflecting and shaping preferences, the finding was based on
group-level analysis and thus was not able to address individual differences in preference decision-making behavior.
Some studies have shown that participants' eye movements
in preference decision-making tasks may to some extent
reflect their traits. For instance, it was found that when
faced with happy faces and angry faces, old participants
paid more attention toward the happy faces, while young
participants paid more attention toward the angry faces
(Isaacowirz, 2006). It was also found that when participants
were shown unpleasant images, the optimistic participants
paid significantly less attention toward the images than their
pessimistic counterparts.
Studies have shown that people have substantial and persistent differences in their eye movements in cognitive
tasks. For example, Castelhano and Henderson (2008) found
that fixation durations and saccade amplitudes were highly
consistent within-individuals. Participants showed similar
fixation patterns when viewing different types of image.
Peterson and Eckstein (2013) found that when looking at
human faces, people had different preferred fixation locations and that these individual differences persisted over
time and tasks.
In our previous studies (Chuk et al., 2014; Chan et al.,
2015), we used hidden Markov models (HMMs) to address
individual differences in eye movements. We conducted
face recognition studies and found that individual differ-

Abstract
Here we used a hidden Markov model (HMM) based approach to infer individual choices from eye movements in
preference decision-making. We assumed that during a decision making process, participants may switch between exploration and decision-making periods, and this behavior can be
better captured with a Switching HMM (SHMM). Through
clustering individual eye movement patterns described in
SHMMs, we automatically discovered two groups of participants with different decision making behavior. One group
showed a strong and early bias to look more often at the to-be
chosen stimulus (i.e., the gaze cascade effect; Shimojo et al.,
2003) with a short final decision-making period. The other
group showed a weaker cascade effect with a longer final decision-making period. The SHMMs also showed capable of
inferring participants’ preference choice on each trial with
high accuracy. Thus, our SHMM approach made it possible to
reveal individual differences in decision making and discover
individual preferences from eye movement data.
Keywords: hidden Markov model; gaze preference; eye
movement; face recognition.

Introduction
Gaze plays a crucial role in our social lives because it
helps to signify the target of one’s attention and interest in a
complex environment. For example, studies have shown
that gaze is an important cue for infants to infer what adults
mean and therefore a precursor to their language development (Brunet, 1985). Gaze also has been shown to be an
indicator of people’s preferences. The phenomenon of preferential looking (Franz, 1964) suggested that the liked stimuli are usually looked at for longer time. Some researchers
argue that gaze not only reflects individual attentions and
preferences, it also helps to shape them. Shimojo et al.
(2003) conducted a two-alternative-forced-choice (2AFC)
preference task, in which participants were required to look
at two face images and then to decide which one they liked
more. The two face images were shown on the left and the
right side of the screen. Their results showed that the participants spent significantly more time on the side that they
were about to choose, starting from about 800ms before
they made and indicated their decisions. They coined the
term “gaze cascade effect” to distinguish it from the mere
exposure effect, which suggested that people tend to prefer

182

ences in eye movements were useful indicators of participants' performance. We used an HMM to summarize the
fixation locations and the scan-paths of an individual. We
then clustered the individual HMMs into groups according
to their similarities and found that while some people preferred to look at specific facial features (i.e. the analytic eye
movement pattern), others preferred to look at the center of
the faces (i.e. the holistic eye movement pattern). We found
that people who showed analytic eye movement patterns
performed significantly better than those who showed holistic eye movement patterns (Chuk et al., 2014). We also
found that old people were significantly more likely to use
holistic eye movement patterns than young people, and the
more holistic their patterns, the lower their cognitive abilities (Chan et al., 2015). These findings were not possible
with other existing methods that do not take individual differences into account.
The above findings suggested that one's eye movement
pattern could be used to infer one's recognition performance, which also implied the possibility of using one's eye
movement pattern to infer one's preference in decisionmaking tasks. Our HMM approach is more capable of capturing individual differences because it takes into account
the spatial (i.e., fixation locations) and temporal (i.e., scan
paths) information of one’s eye movement simultaneously,
when many of the alternatives only focus on the spatial information.
In this study, we try to read participants’ mind through
their eye movements. We aim to infer participants' preferences in a preference decision-making task by modeling
their eye movements using HMMs. However, the standard
HMMs may not be suitable for the purpose of this task. The
gaze cascade effect showed that in these tasks, participants
might go through at least two mental periods during a trial:
exploration and decision-making. During the exploration
period, they may switch their gaze between the two sides
equally; during the decision-making period, they may look
more often at the images to-be-chosen (Shimojo et al.,
2003). This finding suggests that participants' patterns of
switching their gazes between the two images could be different during the two periods. The standard HMM with one
set of hidden states and a transition matrix is unable to capture this. Therefore, instead of using a standard HMM, we
create a ‘switch’ for two HMMs, such that a high-level
HMM consists of two low-level HMMs, each representing
gaze patterns of a particular mental period (Figure 1).
Here we train the SHMMs on individual fixation data and
cluster the models. The analysis separates participants into
groups based on their eye movement differences. This helps
to reveal common eye movement patterns when they make
decisions, and in turn allows us to examine whether different patterns are associated with different decision-making
behavior. We then use the models to infer their preferences
on each trial and examine the models’ accuracy.

We performed our analysis using the data collected in a
preference decision-making study (Shimojo et al., 2011). A
total of 12 participants were recruited for the 2AFC task.
There were in total 60 trials. On each trial, two face images,
one on the left and one on the right, were shown on the
screen for the participants to make their choices. There was
no time limit. Participants were allowed to move their eyes
to compare the two images. They were told to press a button
to indicate which image (left or right) they preferred once
they had made their decisions. Eye movements were recorded using an Eyelink 2 eye tracker.

Switching hidden Markov model
A standard hidden Markov model (HMM) contains a vector of prior values, a transition matrix, and a Gaussian emission for each hidden state. The prior values indicate the
probabilities of the time-series data to begin with the specific hidden states; the transition matrix indicates the transition
probabilities between any two hidden states; the Gaussian
emissions indicate the probabilistic associations between the
time-series data and the hidden states. In our current context, the hidden states correspond to the regions of interest
(ROIs), which were learned from the fixation locations, and
the emissions are the fixation locations.
In contrast to a standard HMM, a switching HMM
(SHMM) contains two levels of HMMs; the high-level
HMM indicates the transitions between the low-level
HMMs (Figure 1). In our implementation, the high-level
hidden states represent the current gaze strategy (i.e., exploration or decision-making), whereas the low-level hidden
states correspond to ROIs over the stimuli. Each high-level
state has its own low-level prior values and transition matrix. The low-level states (ROIs) are shared among the high
level states (gaze strategies). The high-level HMM has its
own transition matrix, which governs the switching between
gaze strategies. The high-level state sequences and the lowlevel state sequences are both 1st-order Markov chains.
In practice, the SHMM can be turned into a standard
HMM by combining the high-level and the low-level hidden
state variables into a single hidden state variable, whose
values are the Cartesian product of the low- and high-level
state values. In the current case, since the low-level states
are shared among the high level states, the number of lowlevel states (K) is the same for each high-level state. Hence,
the equivalent HMM has S*K hidden states, where S is the
number of high-level hidden states; the transition matrix has
block structure. Because the Gaussian emissions are shared
among the high-level hidden states, they are independent
from the high-level switches and are only attached to the
low-level hidden states (Figure 1).
We performed the EM algorithm to estimate the SHMM
parameters. In the E-step, the responsibilities were calculated using the standard forward-backward algorithm with the
block transition matrix, initial state vector, and emission
densities. In the M-step, the prior and pairwise responsibilities were summed over the high-level and the low-level
states respectively to yield the parameter updates for both
the high-level states and the low-level states.

Method
Materials and Procedure

183

For instance, the prior responsibilities were summed over
the low-level hidden states for each of the high-level state in
order to yield the parameter updates for the low-level states,
and then they were summed over the high-level states to
yield the parameter updates for the high-level states. Similarly, the pairwise responsibilities were summed over the
low-level hidden states for each high-level state to yield the
transition matrix updates for each transition matrix, and then
were summed over the high-level hidden states to yield the
updates for the switching matrix.

exploration period (0.4) was slightly lower than the chance
of him or her staying in the decision-making period (0.6).
To reveal a common eye movement pattern shared by all
individuals during the exploration period, we created an
HMM using the exploration transition matrix and Gaussian
emissions for each individual, and clustered these HMMs
into a group using the VHEM algorithm (Coviello et al.,
2014). To reveal whether participants had different fixation
patterns when they were making decisions, we clustered
their HMMs for the decision-making period into two groups
and examined their differences.
To infer when the participants were in the exploration or
decision-making period, we used the Viterbi algorithm to
find the most likely hidden state sequence for each trial. In
this sequence, a change in the value of the high-level hidden
state indicated a switching point. Next, we examined whether SHMMs can be used to infer individual preferences on
each trial. We used only the fixations in the last decisionmaking period to perform our inferences. That is, the inference was performed using only the fixations after the final
switch from exploration to decision-making. We split the
trials into two sets: one for all the trials on which the left
side images were chosen, and one for all the trials on which
the right side images were chosen. For each set, we used all
but one trial to train an SHMM and used the held-out trial
for testing. If, for example, on the test trial, the participant
selected the image on the right, the SHMM trained on the
trials in which the right image was chosen should fit the trial
better than the SHMM trained on the left-selected trials. To
test this, we compared the log-likelihoods generated by the
two SHMMs (Chuk et al., 2014). We hypothesized that the
SHMM for the right-selected trials should produce a higher
log-likelihood than the SHMM for the left-selected trials.
This was repeated over all the trials and all the participants.
The accuracy of our inferences was evaluated using onesample t-tests. We hypothesized that we can infer participants' decisions at a level that is significantly above chance.

Figure 1: An illustration of the SHMM used in the current
study. The high-level HMM states consisted of two gaze
strategies: exploration and decision-making. The blue arrows indicate the transitions between them, and the numbers
indicate transition probabilities. Eye movements within each
period were modeled with a low-level HMM. The red arrows represent transitions between ROIs. The two periods
have the same ROIs but different transition probabilities.

Training and clustering individual SHMMs
For each participant, we trained an SHMM using the fixation locations collected from all trials. In order to simplify
the analysis, we used only two Gaussian emissions per
model; one on each side. This helped to focus the analyses
on the transition information between the two face stimuli
(Figure 1). The advantage of using Gaussian rather than
discrete emissions is that it can be easily extended to analyses that explore the ROIs on each face. We used two highlevel hidden states to reflect that the participants may switch
between exploration and decision-making periods during a
trial.
For SHMM estimation, we initialized the transition matrices based on the actual data. The exploration period usually
happened at the beginning of a trial and the decision-making
period usually happened at the end of a trial. Therefore, we
initialized the exploration and the decision-making transition matrices based on the first 5 and the final 5 fixations of
each trial.
Since participants’ exploration and decision-making may
influence each other during a trial (e.g., Shimojo et al.,
2003), here we assumed that participants may switch back
to exploration after decision making before they made the
final decision. To reflect this, the high-level transitions between the exploration and the decision-making periods were
set to [0.5, 0.5; 0.4, 0.6] (Figure 1). That is, once the participant had switched from the exploration period to the decision-making period, the chance of switching back to the

Results
Categorization of individual SHMMs
First, we clustered the 12 participants' exploration HMMs
into one representative HMM using the VHEM algorithm.
The output showed that participants did not look more often
at the side that they were going to choose during the exploration period. This is evident from the fact that both the notchosen images and the chosen images had a prior value of
roughly 0.5. The transition probabilities were also around
the chance level for both sides, indicating that at the exploration stage of the trials, participants paid roughly equal
attention to the two images. Table 1 below shows the transitional information of the representation HMM.
For the decision-making period, we clustered their decision-making HMMs into two groups. The two groups had
an equal number of participants. Each participant had a
probability of being associated with each group. The probabilities showed a clear-cut division between the two groups,

184

indicating that the two groups were clearly separated, t (11)
= 3.32, p = .007. Tables 2 and 3 below show the representative transition matrices of the two groups generated by the
VHEM algorithm. Participants in group A showed apparent
fixation bias toward the side that they were about to choose,
whereas those in group B showed only mild bias. Although
participants in group B also paid more attention to the images that they were about to choose, the transition matrices
suggested that their fixation pattern were not that different
from the exploration period.
Table 1: The exploration period for all the participants
to not-chosen
to chosen
Priors
.50
.50
from not-chosen
.55
.45
from chosen
.53
.47

Figure 2: The cascade plots.
Chi-square test showed that the cascade effect occurred at
around 600 ms before the end of the trials, χ 2 (1) = 6.51, p =
.01, The proportion of time on the chosen image then accumulated continuously to about 0.85, which was lower than
the general trend. Although both groups showed the gaze
cascade effect, neither their magnitudes nor their onset times
were the same. However, the observation that the two
groups did not show qualitative differences in eye movement pattern suggests that there may be a continuum between the two groups.

Table 2: The decision-making period for group A.
to not-chosen
to chosen
from not-chosen
.32
.69
from chosen
.32
.69
Table 3: The decision-making period for group B.
to not-chosen
to chosen
from not-chosen
.44
.56
from chosen
.43
.57

Inference of individual preferences
Cascade plots

We performed the inference of individual preferences
using the fixations after the last time that the participant
switched from the exploration to the decision-making period.
The inference was done on every trial for every participant.
The accuracy of the inferences is shown in Table 4 below.

In order to visually compare the two groups in terms of
the magnitude of their gaze cascade effects, we generated
the gaze cascade plots as that seen in Shimojo et al. (2003).
The plots show the proportion of time that the participants
spent on looking at the chosen images, and span 2.5 seconds
(see Figure 2). It can be seen from the plot generated from
all participants that as it got closer to the end, participants
spent more time on inspecting the side that they were about
to choose. The proportion of time spent on the chosen sides
went from about chance level (0.5) steadily up until it
reached almost 0.9. Chi-square test showed that the trend
began at around 900 ms before the end of the trials, χ 2 (1) =
3.92, p = .05. The plots of the two groups show some more
interesting differences. It can be found that although the
general trend was shared between the two groups, participants in group A showed a more stable gaze cascade effect.
Chi-square test showed that the cascade effect occurred at
around 1100 ms before the end of the trials, χ 2 (1) = 4.74, p
= .03, which was earlier than the general trend. The proportion of time on the chosen image reached about 0.95 by the
end, which was also higher than the general trend. Group B,
however, showed a decrease in the proportion of time spent
on the chosen images between 1.5 seconds and 1 second.

Table 4: Inference of participants’ preference.
participant no.
group
accuracies
01
A
.98
03
A
.94
07
A
.97
08
A
1
10
A
.98
11
A
.96
02
B
.78
04
B
.85
05
B
.93
06
B
.58
09
B
.94
12
B
.52
It can be seen that for participants in group A, the inference accuracies were both high and consistent (M = 0.97).
One sample t-test showed that the inference accuracies were
significantly above the chance level, t(5) = 56.6, p < .001.
For group B (M = 0.77), while for some of the participants
the inference accuracy was also high, there was a larger
variance within the group. For instance, for participant 6 and
participant 12, the models showed only around chance level

185

accuracies, but for participant 5 and participant 9, the models showed a high level of accuracies comparable to that of
group A. One sample t-test showed that the inference accuracies of group B were also significantly higher than chance,
t (5) = 3.66, p = .01. However, Group A's inference accuracies were significantly higher than that of group B, t(10) =
2.79, p = .02.
In addition, we examined the time length of the final decision-making period for each participant. Table 5 below
shows the average time length of the decision-making period and the average number of fixations within the period.
Table 5: Average time length of the final decision-making
period
participant group time length
number of fixa(sec)
tions
01
A
1.32
4.76
03
A
1.39
4.89
07
A
1.78
5.88
08
A
1.89
5.5
10
A
6.09
17.22
11
A
2.79
7.17
02
B
2.93
9.14
04
B
3.87
9.75
05
B
3.71
12.72
06
B
4.82
16.95
09
B
3.92
12.52
12
B
5.26
13.2
It can be seen that on average, the participants switched to
the final decision-making period at about 9.97 fixations prior to the end of the trials. The average duration of the period
was 3 seconds. This was earlier than what the cascade plots
showed, which suggested that our SHMM analysis was able
to detect participants' preferences at an earlier stage. The
final decision-making period for group B (4.09 secs) was
longer than that for group A (2.54 secs). The difference between the two groups was marginal, t(10) = 2.12, p = .06.
Note that the clustering of the two groups was completely
based on the eye movement data, and thus the group difference in inference accuracy and in length of the final decision period emerged naturally as the results of the clustering.

Discussion
In this study, we revealed individual differences in decisionmaking behavior from their eye movements and also successfully inferred participants' preferences using their eye
movements through the HMM-based approach. More specifically, by assuming a decision process involves an exploration and a decision-making period, and using SHMMs to
model these two periods, we discovered two participant
groups with different decision-making behavior automatically from the eye movement data. Although all participants
showed a tendency of looking more often at the to-bechosen images by the end of the trials, our SHMMs showed
that this tendency was obvious only among 6 of the 12 participants. As shown in Table 2, for group A, the transition

186

matrix showed a strong bias to look at the chosen images.
The cascade plot showed that the cascade effect happened
early, roughly 1.5 seconds before the end of the trials (Figure 2). They also had a stronger gaze cascade effect: and
onset time was about 600 ms before the end of the trials, and
the proportion of time spent on the chosen images reached
almost 95%. For group B (Table 3), although they also
showed the gaze cascade effect, it was both later and less
obvious. The cascade plot showed that its onset time was
about 1100 ms before the end of the trials, and the proportion of time on the chosen images was about 85%.
The fact that all the 12 participants showed the gaze cascade effect suggests its robustness. However, our SHMM
analysis revealed that the 12 participants could be separated
into two groups with substantial differences in their fixation
patterns for preference decision making. This demonstrated
the advantage of our approach: by summarizing participants’ fixation patterns using the SHMM, those who had
similar fixation patterns could be clustered together. The
grouping was done automatically based on eye movement
data alone, and participants’ differences in decision making
behavior emerged naturally as the result of the clustering.
In addition, the SHMM approach allowed us to infer individual preferences with very high accuracies. This was
made possible because the structure of the SHMM allowed
us to capture the eye movements during the final decisionmaking period, which were informative for such inferences.
Both groups' inference accuracies were significantly above
the chance level. The inference accuracy for group A was
significantly higher than group B, suggesting that eye
movement was a more accurate indicator of preference for
participants in group A than those in group B. There was
also a much larger individual difference among participants
in inference accuracy in group B. It is worth noting that the
two groups were discovered from the eye movement data
without considering the participants’ other behavioral differences. Therefore, although for some participants (e.g.,
participant 5 and 9), the inference accuracies were high,
they were nevertheless clustered into group B because of
their eye movement patterns. Having that said, the fact that
some of these participants in group B also showed a high
level of accuracies suggest that this group could be further
divided into sub-groups, so that a more fine-grained categorization should be possible. This could be done in future
studies.
The analysis of the time length of the final decisionmaking period showed a different pattern from the cascade
plots (see Tables 2-3 and Figure 2). Our analysis results
suggested that the final switch from the exploration period
to the decision-making period happened at a much earlier
time than that suggested by the cascade plots. The average
number of fixations within the period, for all the participants, was 9.97 fixations, which translated to about 3 seconds of time. In contrast, in the cascade plots, the cascade
effect emerged at around 900 ms before the trial end. The
average time length of the final decision-making period in
group B (4.09 secs) was longer than that in group A (2.54

secs; see Table 5). This is possibly because the transition
matrix of group B showed a milder tendency towards the tobe-chosen side than group A, and hence it took longer for
the gaze cascade effect to become noticeable. For group A,
the transition matrix showed a more obvious tendency, so
that the cascade effect appeared earlier even though the participants started the decision-making period later than group
B.
Note that the cascade plots did not show a turning point
which shifted a flat line to a steep slope. The accumulation
of the proportion of time on the chosen image was gradual
and slow. The accumulation only became apparent by the
end of the trials, which therefore suggested that it would be
hard to use the cascade plots to determine when the decision-making period had begun. Our analysis showed the
advantage of being able to distinguish and isolate the fixations in the final decision-making period, which allowed us
to infer participants' preferences with high accuracy using
only their eye movements. Note however that the model
assumes a separation of the two periods with the possibility
to switch between the two periods during the decisionmaking process. It remains possible that there is an additional period between these two periods, in which exploration and decision making are mixed (e.g., Shimojo et al.,
2013). This additional period could be represented by adding an additional high-level state to the SHMM. Future
work will examine this possibility.
The finding that some people have a longer final decision
period might imply some traits of these individuals. Previous studies demonstrated relationship between personality
and response time when making decisions. For instance,
extraverts were found to respond slower than introverts
(Doucet & Stelmack, 2000). Reflective people have longer
response time than impulsive people (Sternberg & Grigorenko, 1997). These findings point to the possibility that the
two groups we found might also differ in terms of their personalities. In future studies, this should be explored.
In summary, here we used SHMMs to analyze eye
movement data collected from a preference decision-making
task. The SHMM assumes an exploration period and a decision-making period during the decision making process. By
clustering individual models into groups in a data-driven
fashion, we discovered two participant groups with different
decision-making behavior: one group had a stronger and
longer-lasting gaze cascade effect and a shorter decisionmaking period than the other group. These group differences
emerged naturally as the results of the clustering based on
eye movement data alone, demonstrating the power of the
HMM approach of eye movement data analysis for the understanding of individual cognitive behavior. We also found
that participants’ preferences on each trial can be inferred
from their fixation patterns with high accuracy. This result
thus provides a strong evidence for the possibility of mind
reading from eye movement behavior.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project 17402814 to J. H. Hsiao and CityU 110513 to
A. B. Chan) and to JST.CREST (SS).

References
Bruner, J. (1985). Child's talk: Learning to use language. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 1(1), 111114.
Castelhano, M. S., & Henderson, J. M. (2008). Stable individual differences across images in human saccadic eye
movements. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology/Revue
canadienne
de
psychologie
expérimentale,62(1), 1.
Chuk, T., Chan, A. B., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014). Understanding eye movements in face recognition using hidden Markov models. Journal of vision, 14(11), 8.
Chan C. Y. H., Chan, A. B., Lee, T. M. C., & Hsiao, J. H.
(2015). Eye movement pattern in face recognition is associated with cognitive decline in the elderly. Proceedings of
the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 321-326).
Coviello, E., Chan, A. B., & Lanckriet, G. R. (2014). Clustering hidden Markov models with variational HEM. The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1), 697-747.
Doucet, C., & Stelmack, R. M. (2000). An event-related
potential analysis of extraversion and individual differences in cognitive processing speed and response execution. Journal of personality and social psychology, 78(5),
956.
Fantz, R. L. (1964). Visual experience in infants: Decreased
attention to familiar patterns relative to novel
ones. Science, 146(3644), 668-670.
Isaacowitz, D. M. (2006). Motivated gaze the view from the
gazer. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(2), 68-72.
Peterson, M. F., & Eckstein, M. P. (2013). Individual differences in eye movements during face identification reflect
observer-specific
optimal
points
of
fixation. Psychological science, 24(7), 1216-1225.
Shimojo, S., Simion, C., Shimojo, E., & Scheier, C. (2003).
Gaze bias both reflects and influences preference. Nature
neuroscience, 6(12), 1317-1322.
Shimojo, S., Simion, C., & Changizi, M. A. (2011). Gaze
and preference-orienting behavior as a somatic precursor
of preference decision. In R, B, Adams (Ed.), The science
of social vision (pp. 151-163). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Simion, C., & Shimojo, S. (2006). Early interactions between orienting, visual sampling and decision making in
facial preference. Vision research, 46(20), 3331-3335.
Sternberg, R. J., & Grigorenko, E. L. (1997). Are cognitive
styles still in style?. American psychologist, 52(7), 700.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of personality and social psychology, 9(2p2), 1.

187

