Modeling Impairments in Lexical Development
Michael Vinos (michael.vinos@gmail.com)
Graduate Program in Basic and Applied Cognitive Science, University of Athens, Greece

Angeliki Andrikopoulou (ang.andrikopoulou@gmail.com)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, University of Athens, Greece

Christina F. Papaeliou (papailiou@rhodes.aegean.gr)
Department of Preschool Education and Educational Planning, University of the Aegean, Rhodes, Greece

Athanassios Protopapas (aprotopapas@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, University of Athens, Greece
Abstract

The situation for SLI is less clear and there are relatively
few studies comparing this population with children with
ASD or typically developing (TD) children. There is some
evidence to suggest that the frequency dependence and poor
retention noted in children with SLI may particularly affect
verb learning (Rice et al., 1994; Windfuhr et al., 2002).
Weismer et al. (2011) found no significant differences
between ASD and SLI in the number of action words, while
other studies found significant differences between the two
groups in the use of verbs describing cognitive and mental
states (Ziatas et al., 1998).
In an attempt to provide a unified explanation of word
learning, Hollich et al. (2000) proposed the Emergentist
Coalition Model. This hybrid theory holds that children rely
differentially on multiple cues over developmental time to
map words onto referents – whether they are nouns or verbs.
At first, infants are sensitive to perceptual cues, mapping a
word to the referent that is most interesting or salient. They
then use the social intent of a speaker, along with linguistic
cues, to home in on word reference.
The ability to understand the intentions of others develops
at the end of the first year and seems to constitute a crucial
prerequisite for language development (Tomasello &
Carpenter, 2007; Trevarthen, 1994). Consistent with this
approach, over 50% of the variance in language production
and comprehension can be attributed to factors such as the
amount of time in joint attention between infant and mother
(Carpenter et al., 1998). Deficits in joint attention have been
implicated in ASD as predictors of “concurrent language
ability” (Dawson et al., 2004). Moreover, recent studies
suggest that language problems in SLI may be partially
explained by observed deficits in joint attention (Papakalodouka & Papaeliou, 2016). Nevertheless, different processes
are involved in acquiring nouns and verbs in joint attention
episodes. For example, unlike what is the case with nouns,
children benefit from hearing verbs if a verb is heard either
before or after an event, and do not show a similar benefit if
a new verb and event occur simultaneously (Tomasello &
Kruger, 1992; Childers et al., 2007).
Yu and Ballard (2007) modeled social-pragmatic word
learning by exploiting social cues such as joint attention and
the prosody of the maternal speech. Despite excluding

We implemented the connectionist model of social-pragmatic
word learning (Caza & Knott, 2012) to test the hypothesis that
reduced joint attention between infant and mother would
increase the difference in acquisition between nouns and
verbs as observed in Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD). The
ratio of objects to actions in the observed event stream was
manipulated to create an original noun-verb asymmetry. Ten
simulations were run for each of the combinations of three
conditions of communicative reliability and two conditions of
unfiltered random associative learning, which is regarded by
some researchers as the primary mechanism of language
learning in ASD. The simulations indicated that the reduction
in the reliability of communicative actions does not lead to
increased noun-verb asymmetry within the originally planned
training epochs. A trend in the predicted direction appeared
toward the end of training, suggesting that further simulations
may help resolve the issue within the current architecture.
Keywords: connectionist model; lexical development; socialpragmatic approach; joint attention; bootstrapping; ASD; SLI;
noun-verb asymmetry; associative learning

Introduction
The pronounced rate of vocabulary acquisition during the
second year of life constitutes a major milestone in
cognitive development (Ganger & Brent, 2004). Laboratory
research as well as cross–linguistic studies of natural
vocabulary acquisition demonstrate that verbs often lag
behind nouns (Gentner, 2006; Bornstein et al., 2004;
Childers & Tomasello, 2006). The differentiated learning
rate may be attributed to conceptual differences, as verbs are
considered less stable and their meaning depends on nouns
(Waxman et al., 2013). Alternatively, input distributions
may account for the discrepancy, as nouns typically
predominate in infant-directed speech (Sandhofer, Smith, &
Luo, 2000). It is also proposed that other factors may be
involved, such as shape, individuation, concreteness and
imageability (Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001).
This pattern of differentiated acquisition is also observed
in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and
Specific Language Impairment (SLI). However, the
categorical asymmetry is greatly exaggerated in ASD (Blach
& Chiat, 2003; Marshall, 2003; Ellis Weismer et al., 2011).

87

“theory of mind” skills and prior knowledge of the
characteristics of the language, their model outperformed
mere statistical associative learning. To model simultaneous
learning of individual word meanings and inferring the
speaker’s communicative intentions—the “chicken and egg”
problem of child’s early vocabulary acquisition—Frank et
al. (2009) posited a computational structure of variables
representing the task of word-learning linked together by a
set of probabilistic dependencies corresponding to task
assumptions. This intentional model outperformed several
cross-situational word learning models (including the one
by Yu & Ballard, 2007) in both aspects of the vocabulary
acquisition process.
More recently, a connectionist model of the socialpragmatic approach to word learning (Tomasello, 2000)
was proposed by Caza and Knott (2012; Knott, 2014). In
this comprehensive approach, two subsystems bootstrap
each other: One subsystem learns to identify favorable
learning opportunities, that is, communicative events that
involve reliable mappings between concepts and words. The
other subsystem learns to associate words with observed
concepts. This model implements the intuition that although
plain co-occurrence of word forms and objects may be too
noisy to permit successful learning, the reliability of cooccurrences is far from uniform across time. Specifically, in
a social-pragmatic framework, co-occurrences are likely to
be more reliable when an intent to communicate can be
identified. However, in this model events do not come
initially flagged as conducive to word learning or not.
Rather, the reliability of learning itself is used to tune the
network to the appropriate types of events. Therefore, as the
model gradually learns that certain events, namely
communicative actions of the mother, present favorable
learning opportunities, communicative actions and
intentions are increasingly recognized and vocabulary

acquisition is accelerated, in a mutually beneficial and
reinforcing circle. In this way, development of joint
attention enables and underlies efficient word learning.

Method
The separation between object and action words in the
model of Caza and Knott (2012) makes it suitable for
investigating the differential learning of nouns and verbs. In
the present study we were interested in the effects of
impaired joint attention on the noun-verb asymmetry. We
developed our version of the model on the Emergent
platform (Aisa, Mingus, & O’Reilly, 2008) using the Leabra
algorithm for training the connection weights, which is
more biologically plausible than backpropagation (O’Reilly
& Munakata, 2000). The architecture of the model, depicted
in Figure 1, consists of (a) a “filter” subnetwork, (b) two
word learning subnetworks working in parallel to associate
pairs of perceived object and action concepts to concurrent
phonological representations of a word, and (c) a reward
system, which updates the connections of the filter
depending on whether a concept-word mapping has been
determined by the model to be successful or not. The model
assumes that reliable perception and identification of
objects, actions, and phonological word forms is in place
prior to the modeled process of lexical learning, that is, of
the associations between these types of representations.
In this model, an action, an object, and a word form are
perceived at each time frame. The word-learning
subnetworks predict word forms based on the observed
action and object, generating error signals by comparison to
the word form that is actually perceived. At the same time,
the action-object pair constitute an observed event, which is
used by the filter subnetwork to gate a learning signal
governing learning in the two word learning subnetworks.
In this way, the filter subnetwork controls the extent to
which each event leads to modification of the connection
weights in the word learning subnetworks. In other words, it
modulates the extent to which the current action/objectword pairings are allowed to affect current word knowledge.
Conversely, successful word learning rewards the filter,
leading to learning of events that reliably predict correct
concept-word pairs. That is, when an action/object-word
pairing is predicted correctly by the model, the event
preceding it is tagged as informative by a modification of
the corresponding weight in the filter subnetwork. In this
way, events (i.e., action-object pairings) that are followed
by correct word predictions gradually become more
influential in word learning. The activation threshold of the
gate is set to 0.55 for all the simulations described below.
The coordinated actions of these subsystems lead the model
to recognize maternal communicative actions as ideal
candidates for successful concept-word mapping.
Updates of the weights in the filter subnetwork were
gradually disengaged from randomly occurring associative
learning. Departing somewhat from the original simulations
of Caza and Knott (2012), who let the probability of
unfiltered associative learning diminish to zero, we retained

Figure 1: Network architecture of our version of the Caza &
Knott (2012) model as implemented in Emergent.

88

it minimally operative throughout the simulations as a more
plausible approach to normal and impaired word
acquisition. This is consistent with the literature showing
that typically developing children as well as children with
ASD do not rely solely on intention monitoring and
pragmatic cues for mapping words to objects but also on an
associative infrastructure as well (Preissler, 2008; Preissler
& Carey, 2005). This particular feature of the model also
permitted us to examine the effect of residual plain
associative learning. Two settings were used for this
minimal residual associative learning (RAL), one with
probability of 0.001 in each trial (low RAL) and one with
probability of 0.005 (high RAL). These values were reached
in a designated number of trials from an initial value of 0.5
set at the onset of training. This manipulation goes beyond
the demonstrations of Caza and Knott (2012) that
bootstrapping is effective in getting the filter subnetwork to
efficiently gate relevant training signals to the word learning
subnetworks, and was aimed at testing the extent to which
unfiltered training, which would likely include a large
proportion of incorrect concept-word pairings, might be
supportive or disruptive of overall word learning.
In the context of ASD, excessive associative learning is
considered by some researchers to constitute the primary
foundation of language learning (Luyster & Lord, 2009), not
gated by the detection of communicative intent. When
combined with an overall reduced rate of communicative
event detection, as appropriate for ASD, an abnormally high
rate of associative learning—compared to the baseline
provided by the simulations of Caza and Knott (2012)—
would be expected to track more closely the rate of
occurrence of particular word types in the input. Therefore,
it might interact with word class frequency in a way that can
provide useful clues for understanding lexical development

under such abnormal circumstances.
A mixture of training patterns constitutes the input
stream. A baseline difference in noun-verb learning was
modeled by setting the ratio of reliable object to action
concepts to 4:3 in all simulations. Successful joint attention
in this model amounts to correct identification of the actionobject pair that is attended by the mother. In a
communicative context, it is assumed for present purposes
that the mother mostly speaks about the event that is
currently in her attention. Following Caza and Knott (2012),
a communicative action was represented as an event (objectaction pair) composed of MOTHER (object) and TALK
(action). Joint attention was modeled by the proportion of
maternal communicative actions that were reliable, i.e.,
followed by a valid word-concept pair. Thus, successful
joint attention naturally leads to more successful learning
opportunities. Simulations tested the hypothesis that a
decrease of communicative reliability would exaggerate the
noun-verb asymmetry, approaching an ASD profile, rather
than simply delay acquisition, resulting in an SLI profile.
There were three levels of joint attention, modeled as the
ratio of reliable to nonreliable communicative events: high
reliability (500:300), medium reliability (400:400), and low
reliability (300:500). The latter condition amounts to
inappropriate or unsuccessful detection of communicative
intent. The two levels of RAL (low and high) were modeled
as the probability of a currently observed action/object-word
pairing to affect the word learning subnetworks regardless
of the filter subnetwork gate. Ten simulations of 120 epochs
were conducted for each combination of joint attention and
RAL. Modules were created within Emergent to produce
training sequences with the appropriate constraints, and to
track the progress of training and network performance. An
endogenous criterion of learning evaluated word prediction

Figure 2: Number of correctly learned nouns and verbs (left) and difference between the number of correctly learned nouns
and verbs (right) at the end of each epoch of training in the low-RAL condition.

89

success in every trial, causing a reward or punishment
signal to the gating component regarding the previous event.

the model behavior. This choice (and other parameters) was
found necessary for the bootstrapping process to kick in.
Under low-RAL, gating filter efficiency reached 100% at
a mean number of 147k trials (SD = 23k) in the 300:500
condition, at 113k trials (SD = 19k) in the 400:400
condition, and at 114k trials (SD = 20k) in the 500:300
condition. Under high-RAL, 100% filter efficiency was
reached at 130k (SD = 21k), 121k (SD = 26k), and 120k (SD
= 18k) trials in the three conditions, respectively. Despite
the high variability, the model seems to struggle more to
overcome the low reliability burden (300:500 ratio) in the
low-RAL condition compared to high-RAL, suggesting a
contribution from the residual associative mechanism.
To further study the full extent of the model’s range of
behaviors, in a second set of simulations a (less plausible)
exogenous criterion of learning was implemented, in which
the reward signal was hardcoded into the training sequences,
to closely track actual communicative reliability rather than
correct word prediction. The resulting difference between
object and action word learning in the two RAL conditions
is displayed in Figure 4. Again, failure of joint attention did
not produce an ASD profile, leading instead to a protracted
rate of acquisition, with decreased difference between nouns
and verbs, consistent with SLI. A possible exception may be
noted under high RAL past the initial one-third of training.

Results and Discussion
Results are displayed in Figures 2 (for low RAL) and 3 (for
high RAL). In both RAL conditions the decrease in the
reliability of maternal communicative events did not
markedly increase the difference between nouns and verbs.
Therefore, failure of joint attention did not produce an ASD
profile. A tendency toward increased divergence between
object and action words at the end of the training was noted
but the situation is far from clear within the implemented
training epochs. As this pattern of slightly differentiated
asymmetry occurred far from ceiling, it invites further study
adopting a more protracted training scheme.
Another effect seen mainly in the high-RAL condition
(Figure 3) was an increase of the noun-verb asymmetry in
the high reliability condition around the middle of training.
It unclear whether this is amenable to a developmental
interpretation or due to a ceiling effect. Additionally, in both
RAL conditions a symmetry in learning action and object
words was noted in the initial one-third of training epochs in
the low and medium reliability conditions, despite their
differential frequency of encounter in the training trials,
suggesting perhaps that the associative learning mechanism,
mostly activated in the beginning of training, made up for
the frequency difference. Note that in the entire set of 60
simulations a low baseline gating threshold was adopted,
corresponding to the mimimum gate unit activation required
for gating the word learning subnetworks. This led to a large
number of events other than MOTHER-TALK activating
the word learning system throughout training , essentially
constituting a noise-adding mechanism, possibly obscuring

Future Work
Following up on these observations, further simulations
(currently in progress) can help us shed light on the role of
social-pragmatic factors in learning word meanings. In
addition to thorough exploration of the dynamic interplay
between the ratio of communicative event types, the residual
amount of associative learning, and the gating activation

Figure 3: Number of correctly learned nouns and verbs (left) and difference between the number of correctly learned nouns
and verbs (right) at the end of each epoch of training in the high-RAL condition.

90

Figure 4: Difference between the number of correctly learned nouns and verbs at the end of each epoch of training in the lowRAL condition (left) and in the high-RAL condition (right) for the exogenous rewarding approach.

Acknowledgments
This research has been co-financed by the European Union
(European Social Fund) and Greek national funds through
the Operational Program “Education and Lifelong
Difference between object and action words (extended low−RAL)
6

Rel/Un: 500/300
Rel/Un: 400/400
Rel/Un: 300/500

5

4

Number of words

threshold, future simulations will address the role of specific
network parameters on the function of the gating network
and the resulting word learning efficiency. A parameter of
interest concerns the amount of time for the associative
learning mechanism to reach its designated residual value.
In the simulations described above this was set to 5000
trials. However, a slower rate of decrease–accompanied by a
higher baseline gating threshold—seems promising in the
context of ASD (see Figure 5), consistent with the presumed
abnormally increased importance of associative learning and
reduced communicative reliability in this population.
Moreover, in a future revision of the model, the number of
nouns and verbs could be increased substantially, to permit
observation of their relative learning rate free from limiting
ceiling effects. The small number in the current model may
obscure patterns of differential acquisition, as the possibility
for further improvement is rapidly curtailed.
In future work we also plan to incorporate additional types
of communicative events into the training pattern sequences,
as well as carefully studied chains of events abiding to
specific constraints, in order to investigate the prospects of
certain methods of interventions for impaired language
learning, such as parental “synchronous undemanding
talking” about the child’s focus of attention (Yoder &
McDuffie, 2006) and their interaction with the other
modeled language acquisition parameters. Further follow-up
work can enrich the lexical learning network with
conceptual learning components in order to examine the
combined effects of category learning and social interaction
impairments typical of ASD.

3

2

1

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Epoch

Figure 5: Difference between the number of correctly learned
nouns and verbs at the end of each epoch of training in the
low-RAL condition with a higher gating threshold and the
time for RAL to reach its final value extended to 50000 trials.

91

Learning” of the National Strategic Reference Framework –
Research Funding Programs: THALIS–UOA–COGMEK–
375737 and ARISTEIA–BabyAffect–GSRT–3610.

O’Reilly, R. C., & Munakata, Y. (2000). Computational
explorations in cognitive neuroscience: Understanding
the mind by simulating the brain. MIT press.
Papakalodouka, P., & Papaeliou, C. F. (2016). The Theory
of Intersubjectivity may explain aspects of Specific
Language Impairment. Eleftherna, 7. University of Crete.
Preissler, M. A. (2008). Associative learning of pictures and
words by low-functioning children with autism. Autism:
The International Journal of Research and Practice,
12(3), 231–248.
Preissler, M. A., & Carey, S. (2005). The role of inferences
about referential intent in word learning: Evidence from
autism. Cognition, 97(1), B13–B23.
Rice, M. L., Oetting, J. B., Marquis, J., Bode, J., & Pae, S.
(1994). Frequency of input effects on word
comprehension of children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
37(1), 106–122.
Sandhofer, C. M., Smith, L. B., & Luo, J. (2000). Counting
nouns and verbs in the input: differential frequencies,
different kinds of learning? Journal of Child Language,
27(03), 561–585.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The social-pragmatic theory of word
learning. Pragmatics, 10(4), 401–414.
Tomasello, M., & Carpenter, M. (2007). Shared
intentionality. Developmental Science, 10(1), 121–125.
Tomasello, M., & Kruger, A. C. (1992). Joint attention on
actions: acquiring verbs in ostensive and non-ostensive
contexts. Journal of Child Language, 19(2), 311–333.
Trevarthen, C. (1994). Infant semiosis. In W. Nöth (Ed.),
Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and
Culture. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Waxman, S., Fu, X., Arunachalam, S., Leddon, E.,
Geraghty, K., & Song, H. (2013). Are nouns learned
before verbs? Infants provide insight into a long-standing
debate. Child Development Perspectives, 7(3), 155–159.
Weismer, S. E., Gernsbacher, M. A., Stronach, S.,
Karasinski, C., Eernisse, E. R., Venker, C. E., &
Sindberg, H. (2011). Lexical and grammatical skills in
toddlers on the autism spectrum compared to late talking
toddlers. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 41(8), 1065–1075.
Windfuhr, K., Faragher, B., & Conti-Ramsden, G. (2002).
Lexical learning skills in young children with specific
language impairment (SLI). International Journal of
Language & Communication Disorders, 37(4), 415–432.
Yoder, P., & McDuffie, A. (2006). Teaching young children
with autism to talk. In Seminars in speech and language
(Vol. 27, p. 161). Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.
Yu, C., & Ballard, D. H. (2007). A unified model of early
word learning: Integrating statistical and social cues.
Neurocomputing, 70(13), 2149–2165.
Ziatas, K., Durkin, K., & Pratt, C. (1998). Belief term
development in children with autism, Asperger syndrome,
specific language impairment, and normal development:
Links to theory of mind development. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 39(05), 755–763.

References
Aisa, B., Mingus, B., & O’Reilly, R. (2008). The emergent
neural modeling system. Neural Networks, 21, 1146-1152
Bornstein, M. H., Cote, L. R., Maital, S., Painter, K., Park,
S.-Y., Pascual, L., … Vyt, A. (2004). Cross-linguistic
analysis of vocabulary in young children: spanish, dutch,
French, hebrew, italian, korean, and american english.
Child Development, 75(4), 1115–1139.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., Tomasello, M., Butterworth, G.,
& Moore, C. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and
communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, i–174.
Caza, G. A., & Knott, A. (2012). Pragmatic bootstrapping:
A neural network model of vocabulary acquisition.
Language Learning and Development, 8(2), 113–135.
Childers, J. B., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Are Nouns Easier
to Learn Than Verbs? Three Experimental Studies. In K.
Hirsh-Pasek & R. M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action meets
word: How children learn verbs (pp. 311–335). New
York, NY, US: Oxford University Press.
Childers, J. B., Vaughan, J., & Burquest, D. A. (2007). Joint
attention and word learning in Ngas-speaking toddlers in
Nigeria. Journal of Child Language, 34(2), 199–225.
Dawson, G., Toth, K., Abbott, R., Osterling, J., Munson, J.,
… & Liaw, J. (2004). Early social attention impairments
in autism: social orienting, joint attention, and attention to
distress. Developmental Psychology, 40(2), 271.
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009).
Using speakers’ referential intentions to model early
cross-situational word learning. Psychological Science,
20(5), 578–585.
Ganger, J., & Brent, M. R. (2004). Reexamining the
vocabulary spurt. Developmental Psychology, 40(4), 621.
Gentner, D. (2006). Why Verbs Are Hard to Learn. In K.
Hirsh-Pasek & R. M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action meets
word: How children learn verbs (pp. 544–564). New
York, NY, US: Oxford University Press.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity, and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. Cambridge University Press.
Hollich, G. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., Brand, R.
J., Brown, E., Chung, H. L., … Rocroi, C. (2000).
Breaking the language barrier: an emergentist coalition
model for the origins of word learning. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 65, 1–123
Knott, A. (2014). How infants learn word meanings and
propositional attitudes: a neural network model. In
Communicative Action (pp. 107–124). Springer.
Luyster, R., & Lord, C. (2009). Word learning in children
with autism spectrum disorders. Developmental
Psychology, 45(6), 1774.

92

