N400 amplitudes reflect change in a probabilistic representation of meaning:
Evidence from a connectionist model
Milena Rabovsky (rabovsky@stanford.edu)
Steven S. Hansen (sshansen@stanford.edu)
James L. McClelland (mcclelland@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University

Abstract
The N400 component of the event-related brain potential is
widely used in research on language and semantic memory,
but the cognitive functions underlying N400 amplitudes are
still unclear and actively debated. Recent simulations with a
neural network model of word meaning suggest that N400
amplitudes might reflect implicit semantic prediction error.
Here, we extend these simulations to sentence
comprehension, using a neural network model of sentence
processing to simulate a number of N400 effects obtained in
empirical research. In the model, sequentially incoming words
update a representation capturing probabilities of elements of
sentence meaning, not only reflecting the constituents
presented so far, but also the model’s best guess at all features
of the sentence meaning based on the statistical regularities in
the model’s environment internalized in its connection
weights. Simulating influences of semantic congruity, cloze
probability, a word’s position in the sentence, reversal
anomalies, semantic and associative priming, categorically
related incongruities, lexical frequency, repetition, and
interactions between repetition and semantic congruity, we
found that the update of the predictive representation of
sentence meaning consistently patterned with N400
amplitudes. These results are in line with the idea that N400
amplitudes reflect semantic surprise, defined as the change in
the probability distribution over semantic features in an
integrated representation of meaning occasioned by the arrival
of each successive constituent of a sentence.
Keywords: neural network model; sentence comprehension;
language; event-related potentials; N400; semantic surprise

Introduction
Language and meaning processing have been investigated
with event-related brain potentials (ERPs), providing
continuous time-resolved measures of electrical brain
activity, and with models that characterize the processing of
language and meaning, either in terms of the principles that
govern these processes or the processes that implement
them. Integration of these approaches could constrain
selection among alternative models of the computations and
the processes that implement them, while also providing for
a possible integrated explanation of the diverse set of
empirical phenomena that have been discovered through
ERP research. In this spirit, the current work builds on other
work described below, aiming to contribute to a better
understanding of the computational principles and
functional processes underlying the N400 ERP component,
an electrophysiological indicator of meaning processing (see
Kutas & Federmeier, 2011, for review).

The N400 is a negative deflection at centro-parietal
electrode sites peaking around 400 ms after the presentation
of a meaningful stimulus. N400 amplitudes have been
shown to be modulated by a wide variety of variables. For
example, the N400 is modulated by contextual fit, with
larger amplitudes to incongruent as compared to congruent
sentence continuations, such as when the sentence “He
spread the warm bread with…” is completed by the word
“socks” instead of “butter”. The N400 also shows larger
amplitudes to congruent continuations with lower as
compared to higher cloze probability; decreasing amplitudes
over the course of a sentence; smaller amplitudes for targets
after semantically or associatively related as compared to
unrelated primes; smaller amplitudes for repeated words as
compared to a first presentation; and smaller amplitudes for
words of high as compared to low lexical frequency.
Despite the large body of data on N400 amplitude
modulations and widespread agreement that the N400 is
related to semantic processing, the computational principles
and processing mechanisms underlying N400 amplitude
generation are as yet unclear. Various verbally-formulated
theories are currently under active debate proposing, e.g.,
that N400 amplitudes reflect lexical and/or semantic access,
semantic integration/ unification, semantic binding, or
semantic inhibition (reviewed by Kutas & Federmeier,
2011). The development of an explicit computational
account that addresses this diverse range of phenomena
would thus appear to be a worthwhile goal.
There are at least two ways in which one could seek to
better understand the N400 component by means of
computational modeling. First, one might try to implement a
neurobiologically realistic model of the brain processes
underlying the N400 component, an approach that makes it
possible to also model the morphology of the ERP
waveform (Laszlo & Plaut, 2012; Laszlo & Armstrong,
2014). Another approach is to directly relate variations in
N400 amplitudes to measures obtained from functionallevel models of cognitive processes. While this approach
may entail losing some possibly interesting information
with respect to neural realization, it allows the modeling
process to focus on the goal of better understanding the
cognitive functions underlying N400 amplitudes. Many
neural network models are of this functional type, in that the
model is viewed as conforming to a computational principle
characterized at the functional level. The principle is often
articulated in terms of the goal to maximize consistency

2045

with information in the environment which can then be
formalized in terms of the more specific goal of minimizing
prediction error (Hinton, 1987; Rumelhart et al., 1995).
Focusing on this functional level, Rabovsky & McRae
(2014) used an attractor network model of word meaning to
investigate which measure in the model covaries with N400
amplitudes over a series of typical N400 word processing
paradigms. They consistently observed a close
correspondence between N400 amplitudes and network
error at the semantic layer of representation, and took this
correspondence to suggest that N400 amplitudes reflect
implicit semantic prediction error. Here we extend this
approach to the processing of words in sentences.
What kind of model would be most appropriate to
simulate N400 amplitudes in sentences? Simple recurrent
network models (SRNs; Elman, 1990) are typically trained
to predict the next word in sentences based on the preceding
context so that network error in these models reflects an
implicit prediction error which could correlate with N400
amplitudes. Indeed, such a correlation was recently reported
by Frank et al. (2015) who used four information measures
derived from three probabilistic language models as
predictors for six ERP deflections (including the N400).
However, the prediction error in SRNs trained to predict the
next input based on the preceding context is not specific to
semantics but rather reflects word surprisal (the negative
log of the probability of a word in a specific context) and is
affected by both syntactic and semantic expectation
violations (Levy, 2008). As the N400 is a functionally
specific indicator of meaning processing (Kutas &
Federmeier, 2011) while syntactic violations typically
modulate different ERP components, we therefore decided
against using such an SRN, and instead simulated N400
amplitudes using a model that is specifically trained to
understand and predict sentence meaning, the Sentence
Gestalt (SG) model (McClelland et al., 1989).
The SG model minimizes the mismatch between its
estimates of the probability of semantic features of events
given the words presented so far in a sentence and the
observed probabilities of these features in the meanings of
sentences, such that, once it has learned, its estimates after
each new word encountered as a sentence unfolds should
come close to matching the true probabilities. Thus the
model can be characterized as an implicit probabilistic
model of sentence comprehension: The model’s outputs can
be seen as representing conditional probability distributions
over possible semantic features of the events described by
the sentence up to and including the latest word.
Furthermore, the magnitude of the update of the hidden unit
state produced by the presentation of the latest word can be
characterized as reflecting the change in this probability
distribution produced by the word. We use a measure of this
update we call semantic surprise, based on a measure that
has been called Bayesian surprise (Itti & Baldi, 2005).
Formally, the semantic surprise (SemS) produced by the nth
word in a sentence is defined as the difference between the
probability
distribution
over
semantic
feature

representations consistent with the sentence through the nth
word and the distribution consistent with the sentence
through the preceding word, as measured by the KullbachLeibler divergence:
𝑆𝑒𝑚𝑆! =

𝑝(𝑟|𝑛) log ! 𝑝(𝑟|𝑛) 𝑝(𝑟|𝑛 − 1)
!

Here r indexes alternative possible patterns of semantic
features of the event being described by the sentence and
p(r|n) and p(r|n-1) denotes the probability of that pattern
given the sentence up through word n and n-1 respectively.
The change in activation at the hidden (SG) layer of the
model reflects this semantic surprise, and, as shown in a
series of simulations of empirical N400 effects described
below, models the N400, suggesting that the N400 is itself a
measure of semantic surprise.

The Sentence Gestalt model
The SG model does not assume that sentences are
represented in a specific propositional format. Instead, it is
based on the idea that the task of sentence processing
consists in processing sequences of incoming words to build
representations enabling correct responses to various probes,
and the model is allowed to find the best way to build these
representations in order to meet the imposed demands
through adjustments of connections between simple
processing units organized in layers. A detailed description
of the model is provided elsewhere (McClelland et al.,
1989); we briefly sketch it here. For the current simulations,
the model was re-implemented in the PDPTool software, V3
(http://web.stanford.edu/group/pdplab/pdphandbookV3/).
Architecture. The model can be conceptualized as
consisting of two parts (see Fig. 1). The first part
sequentially processes each incoming word (presented at the
input layer) to update activation in the SG layer which
represents the model’s best guess interpretation of the
meaning of the sentence as a whole, using the previous
activation of the SG layer together with the activation
induced by the new incoming word to produce the updated
SG layer activation. The second part of the model is used
primarily for performance assessment and training,
decoding the content from the SG layer by probing it
concerning the event described by the sentence.
Environment and training. It is important to note that the
statistical regularities underlying the model’s best guess
interpretation of the meaning of the sentence at a given
point in its presentation are determined by the training set so
that the effects on semantic surprise depend on the training
set as well. There are two different approaches to training
which are complementary in that they each have strengths
and weaknesses. First, models can be trained on large-scale
training corpora approximating real life language
environments of human participants. While this approach
allows for simulation of empirical experiments with the
exact same stimuli on a single-trial basis, the factors

2046

responsible for the effects produced by the model may
remain somewhat opaque. A second possible approach is to
train models on a synthetic training set which implements
variation among certain dimensions considered to be
relevant for the target empirical phenomenon (the N400, in
our case) and/or the theory advanced to explain the
empirical phenomenon (semantic surprise, in our case).
While this approach is limited in its capacity to fully explain
specific empirical data points, it is more transparent
concerning the general factors and principles responsible for
the effects produced by the model. Because the main aim of
the current study is to advance a theory concerning the
functional basis of N400 amplitudes by highlighting the
common core shared by the different dimensions that have
been shown to modulate them, this transparency concerning
the responsible factors is of primary importance to our
goals. Thus, we trained our model on a small synthetic
training set, aiming to create statistical regularities in the
training set that allowed us to run simulation experiments
containing manipulations corresponding to manipulations in
empirical N400 experiments. We observe, based on these
simulation experiments, that variables or dimensions that
influence N400 amplitudes in the world influence semantic
surprise in our model in the same way, suggesting that N400
amplitudes reflect semantic surprise.

Fig. 1: The Sentence Gestalt (SG) model.
The model environment consists of sentences (presented
word by word at the input layer) such as ‘At breakfast, the
man eats eggs’ each paired with a corresponding event (a set
of role-filler pairs, e.g., agent – the man), probabilistically
generated online during training according to pre-specified
constraints. After each presented word (represented by a
word-specific unit at the input layer), the model is probed
concerning the event described by the sentence. Responding
to a probe consists in completing a role-filler pair when
probed with either a thematic role (i.e., agent, action,
patient, location, or situation; each represented by an
individual unit at the probe and output layer) or a filler of a
thematic role (e.g., the man, to eat, the eggs, etc.). For the
filler concepts, we used feature-based semantic
representations that were handcrafted so that members of
the same semantic category shared some semantic features.
For example, somewhat similar to the representations used
by Rogers and McClelland (2008), all living things shared a
semantic feature (‘can grow’), all animals shared an
additional semantic feature (‘can move’), all birds shared

one more semantic feature (‘can fly’) and then the canary
had two individuating features (‘can sing’ and an itemunique individuating feature) so that the robin and the
canary shared three of their five semantic features while the
salmon and the canary shared two features, the rose and the
canary shared only one feature, and the jeans and the canary
did not share any features. While the labels for the features
are irrelevant for model behavior, the aim in constructing
the representations was to create graded similarities between
concepts roughly corresponding to real world similarities. A
comparison between a similarity matrix of the concepts
based on the hand-crafted semantic representations and
representations based on semantic word vectors derived
from co-occurrences in large text corpora (Pennington,
Socher, & Manning, 2014) suggested a reasonable
correspondence (r = .73). Such feature-based semantic
representations were also employed in the original version
of the model; this allows us to capture the influence of
semantic similarity over and above the influence of cooccurrence in language as implemented via the presented
sentences (enabling simulation of categorically related
semantic incongruities; Sim. 1).
After each presented word, the model is probed for each
thematic role and each filler of each role-filler pair involved
in the described event, and the model’s activation at the
output layer is compared with the correct output. Error is
then back-propagated through the entire network and
connections are adjusted to minimize the difference between
model-generated and correct output (we used cross-entropy
error, a learning rate of 0.00005 and momentum of 0.9).
Because the model is probed concerning the described event
after every single presented word, it anticipates the meaning
of each sentence as early as possible, so that the activation
at the SG layer (and accordingly at the output layer in
response to the presented probes) becomes tuned to the
regularities in the corpus. For example, the model learns that
a sentence beginning “The woman writes…” more often
describes the woman writing an email than an sms, and
encodes this regularity in the connection weights, resulting
in probabilistic pre-activations of units in the SG layer
before email or sms appear in the sentence. Indeed the
model’s connection weights capture the base-rate
probabilities of the semantic features of each of the roles in
the sentence, so that when probed with a role prior to the
presentation of the first word of a sentence the pattern over
the filler units corresponds approximately to the overall
probability across the entire environment that the feature
will be present in the filler of the probed-for role.
Since the minimum of the cross-entropy error is reached
when the network’s estimates of feature probabilities match
the actual probabilities of those features, the change in the
network’s estimates occasioned by each successive word
should match the change in these actual probabilities
(Rumelhart et al., 1995). Treating the semantic feature
probabilities as conditionally independent given the words
seen so far, this change in estimates of feature probabilities

2047

can be shown to correspond to the SemSn measure defined in
the introduction.
Thus far we have described how changes in the activation
of semantic features in the model’s output layer should
correspond to the semantic surprise. However, we do not
assume that these semantic feature activations are actually
computed during sentence processing. Instead, we propose
that the pattern of activation over the SG layer (together
with the connection weights in Part 2 of the model)
implicitly represent this probability distribution in such a
way that the update at the SG layer mirrors the update in the
actual probability distribution over features. We use the
following cross-entropy measure to characterize this update:
𝑎! 𝑛 log
!

𝑎! 𝑛
𝑎! 𝑛 − 1

+ 1 − 𝑎! 𝑛 log  

congruent continuations, t(9) = 6.30, p < .0001, in line with
N400 amplitudes.
The model also successfully captures other typical N400
effects in sentences such as cloze probability effects, with
larger N400 for low cloze as compared to high cloze
probability sentence continuations (Sim. 2; Kutas &
Hillyard, 1984), sentence position effects with decreased
N400 amplitudes over the course of a sentence (Sim. 3; Van
Petten & Kutas, 1990), and influences of so-called semantic
illusions or reversal anomalies, i.e. only a very slight
increase of N400 amplitudes in sentences such as ‘For
breakfast, the eggs eat…’ as compared to ‘For breakfast, the
boys eat…’ while the increase in ‘For breakfast, the boys
plant…’ is much larger (Sim. 4; Kuperberg et al., 2003; also
simulated by Brouwer, 2014, PhD thesis, see below). Even
though the SG model is designed as a model of sentence
processing, word pairs and isolated words should be
processed by the same system so that we also used the
model to simulate N400 effects outside of sentence context.
We describe the simulation of semantic priming in detail.

1 − 𝑎! 𝑛
  1 − 𝑎! 𝑛 − 1

Here i ranges over all of the SG layer units, ai(n)
represents the activation of unit i based on the current word
and ai(n-1) represents the activation of unit i based on the
previous word. Similar results are obtained using the sum
over SG units of the absolute value of the difference
between ai(n) and ai(n-1).

Simulations
Sim. 1: Categorically related semantic incongruities.
Federmeier and Kutas (1999) presented sentence pairs such
as “They wanted to make the hotel look more like a tropical
resort. So along the driveway they planted rows of…” and
observed gradually increasing N400 amplitudes from
congruent sentence continuations (“palms”) to unexpected
continuations which were members of the same semantic
category as the expected continuation and thus shared
semantic features (“pines”) to incongruent continuations.
To simulate these data, we trained the model such that
one member of each semantic category (i.e., trees, drinks,
etc.) was never presented in the same sentence context (i.e.,
as a patient of the same action) as the other category
members so that it was completely unexpected in that
context. For the simulation experiment, we presented the
model with 10 such unexpected sentence continuations
which were categorically related to the congruent
continuations, as well as 10 congruent continuations,
presented with a probability of .8 during training when the
specific combination of agent and action had been
presented, and 10 incongruent sentence continuations which
were never presented as patients of the specific action
during training and did not share any semantic features with
the congruent continuations.
As shown in Fig. 2A, semantic surprise induced by the
critical words gradually increased from congruent
continuations to unexpected continuations categorically
related to the congruent continuations, t(9) = 5.23, p < .0001,
and from those to unexpected continuations unrelated to the

Sim. 5: Semantic priming. Bentin et al. (1985) observed
smaller N400 amplitudes to target words presented after
semantically related primes (i.e., primes from the same
semantic category as the targets) as compared to unrelated
primes. To simulate these data, we presented the model with
10 word pairs where the referenced concepts were members
of the same semantic category and thus shared semantic
features at the output layer (e.g., monopoly – chess) and 10
word pairs where the primes and targets from the related
pairs were re-assigned such that there was no semantic
similarity between prime and target. As shown in Fig. 2B,
semantic surprise was smaller for targets after semantically
related as compared to unrelated primes, t(9) = 5.14, p <
.0001, in line with N400 amplitudes (Bentin et al., 1985).
The SG model additionally captures several other N400
effects in word processing such as associative priming, with
smaller amplitudes to targets after associatively related (e.g.,
play – chess) as compared to unrelated primes (Sim. 6;
Kutas & Hillyard, 1989), repetition priming, i.e. smaller
N400 amplitudes to immediately repeated words as
compared to target words presented after unrelated primes
(Sim. 7; Nagy & Rugg, 1989), and smaller amplitudes to
words of high as compared to low lexical frequency (Sim. 8;
Van Petten & Kutas, 1990), captured through the encoding
of base rate probabilities of features in the model’s
connection weights.
Finally, probability distributions can change and
anticipatory preparedness to likely upcoming features
depends on constant adaptation of represented probabilities
based on new experiences. In neural network models, this
adaptation is driven by the difference between expected and
observed outcomes. Thus, if N400 amplitudes reflect this
difference then larger N400 amplitudes should entail
enhanced adaptation. Simulation 9 focuses on this relation.

2048

Fig. 2: Influences of (A) categorically related semantic incongruities, (B) semantic priming, and (C) repetition X congruity.
Sim. 9: Semantic incongruity and repetition. The
influence of semantic incongruity on N400 amplitudes is
reduced by repetition due to a stronger repetition-induced
reduction of amplitudes for incongruent continuations
(Besson et al., 1992). Repetition effects have been simulated
as consequences of connection adjustments induced by the
prior presentations of the item within the experiment. We
thus presented the 10 congruent and 10 incongruent
sentences from Sim. 1 twice while learning was operative
(learning rate = 0.0005) so that the first presentation served
not only as an experimental condition but also produced
connection adjustments.
As shown in Fig. 2C, the difference in semantic surprise
between the critical congruent vs. incongruent words was
smaller during repetition. A rmANOVA confirmed a
significant interaction between repetition and congruity,
F(1,9) = 87.18, p < .0001, reflecting a stronger influence of
repetition for incongruent, F(1,9) = 82.35, p < .0001, ηp² =
.90, as compared to congruent, F(1,9) = 16.47, p = .003, ηp²
= .65, sentence continuations, in line with N400 data.
These results nicely illustrate the intrinsic relationship
between semantic surprise and adaptation. However, there is
a subtle issue with this simulation, namely that the output
layer which drives learning represents the events described
by the sentences such that the simulation assumes these
events to be observed while processing the sentences. This
is not true for the empirical experiment. Thus, in a
prospective version of this simulation the error signal that
drives learning should be derived from the difference
between SG activation before and after the critical words.

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to investigate the
functional basis of the N400 ERP component by relating
N400 amplitudes to a computational model of sentence
comprehension, the Sentence Gestalt (SG) model. Across a
series of simulations of N400 effects, we consistently
observed a correspondence between N400 amplitudes and
semantic surprise as represented by the magnitude of the
update of hidden unit activations that implicitly represent
probability distributions over semantic features.
N400 amplitudes have been previously linked to changes
in lexical activation (Brouwer, 2014, PhD thesis; see also
Rabovsky & McRae, 2014, for discussion, and Crocker et
al., 2010, for a model of the P600 component). Brouwer
(2014) focused on reversal anomalies and took the very

small increase of N400 amplitudes in sentences such as ‘For
breakfast, the eggs eat…’ (Kuperberg et al., 2003) to
indicate that the N400 component does not reflect semantic
integration but the retrieval of lexical information. He
further suggests that semantic integration is linked to the
P600 component (which is increased in reversal anomalies).
Our account differs from Brouwer’s in that it specifies a
single integrated representation of meaning which is
updated whenever a word is presented, with the extent of
this update reflected in N400 amplitudes. When the word is
presented in a sentence, the update is seen as an update of an
integrated representation of the meaning of the sentence.
The integration process is relatively heuristic and may not
accord with syntactic constraints in constructions such as
reversal anomalies. Indeed, analysis of our model’s output
layer suggests that it experiences a ‘semantic illusion’ in
that it continues to assign the eggs to the patient instead of
the agent role even after the word ‘eat’, in line with the
suggestion that language processing can be shallow
(Ferreira et al., 2002). Our model does not address the P600.
It is possible that the P600 effect in reversal anomalies
reflects a re-assignment of the eggs to an agent role.
Alternatively, the comprehender may continue to see the
eggs as being eaten, with the P600 reflecting detection of a
syntax error. As a third possibility, the P600 may reflect
conflict monitoring triggered by competing interpretations,
one arising from a heuristic process and the other arising
from a controlled process (van Herten et al., 2006). Further
research seems required to better understand the P600.
As noted above, the SG representation together with the
model’s weights latently predict the semantic features of
each role filler in the sentence based on prior constituents,
and the update of the SG due to the next constituent adjusts
these latent predictions. Latent prediction in that sense
means that the SG model (and presumably the brain)
becomes tuned through experience to be prepared to
respond to likely upcoming semantic features with little
additional effort. This kind of latent prediction seems to
range from the pre-activation of specific semantic features
in sentence context (e.g., for the categorically related
incongruities, where less semantic update is necessary when
an unexpected sentence continuation shares semantic
features with an expected continuation; Sim. 1) to the latent
structure in connection strengths and default activation that
leads to less semantic update when processing a high
frequent as compared to a low frequent word in isolation

2049

(Sim. 8). This characterization should make clear that
prediction in that sense does not refer to explicit intentional
prediction of specific items but rather to a general
configuration of the system optimized for upcoming
semantic information. This entails that semantic activation
changes induced by new incoming input primarily reflect
the discrepancy between probabilistically anticipated and
encountered features, i.e. semantic surprise, in accordance
with predictive coding (Friston, 2005). In line with this
view, N400 amplitudes in many paradigms appear to have
one thing in common, namely that they seem to be a
function of the fit between the semantic features that are
implicitly expected based on previously experienced
regularities and those activated by the current stimulus.
In sum, the present study aimed to contribute to a better
understanding of the functional basis of the N400 ERP
component by relating N400 amplitudes to an implemented
model of sentence comprehension. Across a series of
simulations of N400 effects, we consistently observed a
correspondence between N400 amplitudes and the update of
conditional probability distributions over semantic features.
Besides demonstrating that the SG model naturally captures
electrophysiological indicators of internal cognitive
dynamics during language comprehension, these results are
in line with the idea that N400 amplitudes reflect semantic
surprise as the extent of change induced by an incoming
stimulus in a probabilistic representation of meaning.

Acknowledgments
Funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 programme,
Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant 658999 to Milena Rabovsky.

References
Bentin, S., McCarthy, G., & Wood, C.C. (1985). Eventrelated potentials, lexical decision and semantic priming.
Electroen Clin Neuro, 60, 343-355.
Besson, M., Kutas, M., & Van Petten, C. (1992). An eventrelated potential (ERP) analysis of semantic congruity and
repetition effects in sentences. JoCN, 4, 132-149.
Brouwer, H. (2014). The electrophysiology of language
comprehension: A neurocomputational model. PhD
thesis.
Crocker, M.W., Knoeferle, P., & Mayberry, M.R. (2010).
Situated sentence processing: The coordinated interplay
account and a neurobehavioral model. Brain Lang, 112,
189-201.
Elman, J.L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 170-211.
Federmeier, K. & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other
name: Long-term memory structure and sentence
processing. J Mem Lang, 41, 469-495.
Ferreira, F., Bailey, K.G.B., & Ferraro, V. (2002). Goodenough representations in language comprehension.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 11-15.
Frank. S.L., Otten, L.J., Galli, G., & Vigliocco, G. (2015).
The ERP response to the amount of information conveyed
by words in sentences. Brain Lang, 140, 1-11.

Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philos T
R Soc B, 360, 815-836.
Hinton, G. E. (1989). Connectionist learning procedures.
Artif Intell, 40(1), 185-234.
Itti, L. & Baldi, P. F. (2005). Bayesian surprise attracts
human attention. In NIPS (Vol. 19), 547-554, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kuperberg, G.R., Sitnikova, T., Caplan, D., & Holcomb,
P.J. (2003). Electrophysiological distinctions in
processing conceptual relationships within simple
sentences. Cogn Brain Res, 17, 117-129.
Kutas, M. & Federmeier, K. (2011). Thirty years and
counting: Finding meaning in the N400 component of the
event-related brain potential (ERP). Annu Rev Psychol,
62, 621-647.
Kutas, M. & Hillyard, S.A. (1980). Reading senseless
sentences: Brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity.
Science, 207, 203-205.
Kutas, M. & Hillyard, S.A. (1984). Brain potentials during
reading reflect word expectancy and semantic association.
Nature, 307, 161-163.
Kutas, M. & Hillyard, S.A. (1989). An electrophysiological
probe of incidental semantic association. JoCN, 1, 38-49.
Laszlo, S. & Armstrong, B. (2014). PSPs and ERPs:
Applying the dynamics of post-synaptic potentials to
individual units in simulation of ERP reading data. Brain
Lang, 132, 22-27.
Laszlo, S. & Plaut, D. (2012). A neurally plausible parallel
distributed processing model of event-related potential
word reading data. Brain Lang, 120, 271-281.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126–1177.
McClelland, J.L., St. John, M., & Taraban, R. (1989).
Sentence comprehension: A parallel distributed
processing approach. Lang Cognitive Proc, 4, 287-335.
Nagy, M.E. & Rugg, M.D. (1989). Modulation of eventrelated potentials by word repetition: The effects of interitem lag. Psychophysiology, 26, 431-436.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C.D. (2014). GloVe:
Global vectors for Word Representation. EMNLP.
Rabovsky, M. & McRae, K. (2014). Simulating N400
amplitudes as semantic network error: Insights from a
feature-based connectionist attractor model of word
meaning. Cognition, 132, 68-89.
Rumelhart, D. E., Durbin, R., Golden, R., & Chauvin, Y.
(1995). Backpropagation: The basic theory. Backpropagation: Theory, Architectures and Applications, 1-34.
Van Herten, M., Chwilla, D.J., & Kolk, H.H.J. (2006).
When heuristics clash with parsing routines: ERP
evidence for conflict monitoring in sentence perception.
JoCN, 18, 1181- 1197.
Rogers, T.T. & McClelland, J.L. (2008). Précis of semantic
cognition: A parallel distributed processing approach.
Behav Brain Sci, 31, 689-749.
Van Petten, C. & Kutas, M. (1990). Interactions between
sentence context and word frequency in event-related
brain potentials. Mem Cognition, 18, 380-393.

2050

