No Effect of Verbal Labels for the Shapes on Type II Categorization Tasks
Fotis A. Fotiadis (f_fotis@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy & History of Science, University of Athens, Ano Ilissia Campus
GR-157 71, Athens, GREECE

Athanassios Protopapas (aprotopapas@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy & History of Science, University of Athens, Ano Ilissia Campus
GR-157 71, Athens, GREECE

learning mechanism suffices to account for behavioral data
(e.g., Newell, Dunn, & Kalish, 2011).
In the context of this debate, growing empirical evidence
suggests that verbal processes are important in the learning
of rule-described categories. Ashby and colleagues (Ashby,
Alonso-Reese, Turken, & Waldron, 1998) developed a
computational theory suggesting that the verbal system
mediates rule-based category learning. Verbal working
memory interference has been found to impair the learning
of rule-described categories (Miles & Minda, 2011),
whereas experimental manipulations, such as using difficultto-name stimuli (Kurtz, Levering, Stanton, Romero, &
Morris, 2013), or verbal rehearsal of stimulus dimensions
prior to learning (Minda, Desroches, & Church, 2008), have
been shown to affect category learning.

Abstract
Category learning is thought to be mediated—in at least some
category structures—by hypothesis-testing processes. Verbal
labels for the stimuli and stimulus individuation have been
shown to facilitate the formation, testing, and application of
rules of category membership (Fotiadis & Protopapas, 2014).
We sought to replicate the phenomenon of facilitation due to
verbal names for the stimuli by training participants for two
consecutive days to either learn new names for abstract
shapes, or learn shape-ideogram pairings; a third group was
unexposed to the shapes. After training, participants were
given a Type II categorization task—thought to be mediated
by verbal processes of rule discovery—utilizing the trained
shapes. We hypothesized that verbal labels for the shapes and
shape individuation would provide facilitative effects in
learning to categorize. Results revealed no effect of training
on categorization performance. This study suggests that
caution should be taken when generalizing findings across
perceptual modalities or different experimental paradigms.

Verbal Labels in Hypothesis Testing
Recently, Fotiadis and Protopapas (2014) provided evidence
in favor of the hypothesis that verbal labels for the to-becategorized stimuli facilitate hypothesis-testing processes
underlying category learning. The authors utilized hard-toname auditory stimuli and manipulated the availability of
stimulus names by training separate groups of participants
for three consecutive days to associate the auditory tones
with pseudowords (label training condition) or with hard-toname ideograms (ideogram training condition); or to
associate tone intensity with colors (intensity training
condition); a fourth group remained unexposed to the tones
(no-training condition). On the fourth day all participants
were administered the same auditory version of the Weather
Prediction Task (Knowlton, Squire, & Gluck, 1994)
utilizing the trained tones as cues. Results revealed a
gradation in categorization performance in the order: label >
ideogram > intensity > no-training. Thus, it was concluded
that verbal labels, cue individuation, and exposure to the
stimulus set each facilitated explicit hypothesis-testing
processes underlying category learning.

Keywords: Verbal labels; hypothesis testing; categorization;
learning

Introduction
The ability to categorize spans a broad range of human
capacities and behaviors. Researchers have examined the
cognitive processes (Ashby & Maddox, 2005) and neural
substrates (Poldrack et al., 2001) of category learning and
have utilized computational modeling techniques in an
effort to shed light on the nature of the underlying
representations (Anderson, 1991).
The Multiple Memory Systems (MMS) hypothesis argues
that human category learning is mediated by distinct
learning systems (Ashby & Maddox, 2005; Poldrack &
Foerde, 2008). A declarative, explicit, or verbal system is
thought to be engaged in the learning of categories that can
be characterized by a verbal rule. Hypothesis testing
processes are thought to be recruited, and the knowledge
acquired is thought to be available to consciousness. On the
other hand, the learning of categories that defy a simple
verbal description is thought to be accomplished through a
procedural, implicit, or non-verbal system. Pre-decisional
perceptual processes underlie learning, and the learned
material is thought to be unavailable to consciousness. An
on-going debate exists between the MMS theorists and
single-system theorists arguing that a single, general

The Shepard et al. (1961) Tasks
In their seminal paper, Shepard, Hovland and Jenkins
(1961) revolutionized the study of category learning. They
created six category tasks (Type I to Type VI) by
manipulating category structure (categorization rule) while
utilizing the same stimuli in each task and the same number

277

of exemplars in each category. In the most common
implementation of the paradigm (Minda & Miles, 2010)
categorization stimuli are comprised of three binary valued
dimensions: Shape (square vs. triangle), color (black vs.
white), and size (big vs. small).
The basic finding of the Shepard et al. (1961) study was
that the order of difficulty of the six types (as assessed by
participants' performance) cannot be accounted for by a
simple stimulus-generalization theory. The key finding was
that participants found it easier to learn Type II categories
compared to Type IV categories, despite the reduced withincategory similarity of the former (compared to the latter)
category structure. The authors suggested that this Type II
over Type IV advantage necessitates considering the
mediation of executive attention mechanisms and the
formulation and application of rules during category
learning.
Figure 1: Design of the present study.

The Type II Task and Rule-Discovery Learning
in the Type II category task is mediated by hypothesis
testing processes of verbal rules.

The Type II task has a two-dimensional rule structure. Two
out of the three dimensions are diagnostic of category
membership1, in an exclusive-or fashion. A simple verbal
rule seems to be able to define category membership (e.g.,
“black triangles and white squares are category A”). Thus,
the structures' processing demands are thought to be best
met by explicit rule-learning processes (Minda & Miles,
2010).
This claim seems to be supported by empirical evidence.
Minda et al. (2008) utilized the first four prototypical
Shepard et al. (1961) category structures in an effort to
examine rule-selection executive functions of children and
adults. In their Experiment 2, Minda et al. assessed the
effect of a concurrent verbal and a concurrent non-verbal
task on categorization performance. The verbal secondary
task—thought to occupy resources recruited by verbal
processes of rule discovery—did impair performance in the
Type II structure (compared to a control, no-task condition,
and also compared to the non-verbal task condition). These
results suggest that the Type II structure recruited the
explicit system. Smith, Minda and Washburn (2004) studied
category learning processes of human and non-human
animals using the Shepard et al. tasks. Their results
provided evidence in favor of the engagement of rulediscovery mechanisms in learning the Type II category
structure. The evidence (“all-or-none learning”) was only
present for human subjects, whereas for non-human
animals, lacking the faculty of language, there was no sign
of rule discovery. This may be considered as evidence in
favor of the engagement of rule-learning mechanisms in the
Type II task.
Thus, theoretical reasons (Minda & Miles, 2010; Shepard
et al., 1961) as well as empirical evidence (Minda et al.,
2008; Smith et al., 2004) suggest that learning to categorize

Rationale of the Present Study
The purpose of the present study was to further test the
hypothesis that verbal labels for the to-be-categorized
stimuli facilitate hypothesis testing processes recruited
during category learning (Fotiadis & Protopapas, 2014). We
specifically wanted to test our training manipulation in the
visual modality, since there are reasons to suggest that
learning across modalities is not governed by the same
mechanisms (Conway & Christiansen, 2005). Moreover,
given that in the Weather Prediction Task category
membership is probabilistically defined (Knowlton et al.,
1994) we sought to examine the effect of names for the
stimuli in a task with a deterministic structure.
To manipulate the availability of names, separate groups
of participants were trained for two consecutive days to
associate abstract shapes with pseudowords (label training
condition) or with hard-to-name ideograms (ideogram
training). A third—control—group of participants remained
unexposed to the shapes, and was trained to associate
ideograms with pseudowords (mock training condition). On
the second day, all participants were given the Type II
categorization task. In this task, the two values in the shape
dimension were the same shapes that were used in the
training procedure. The category-diagnostic dimensions
were shape and color, whereas size was non-diagnostic (see
Fig. 1).
We reasoned that verbal labels for the shapes would
facilitate verbal hypothesis-testing processes of rule
formation, testing, and application. Therefore we predicted
that participants in the label training condition would find it
easier to discover the categorization rule, compared to the
ideogram training group. We also hypothesized that
familiarity with the stimuli and learning to associate the
shapes to visual stimuli (ideograms) would help create
individuated perceptual representations of the shapes and

1
Depending on which dimensions are diagnostic, there can be
three Type II subtypes: Shape-irrelevant, size-irrelevant, and colorirrelevant. See Love and Markman (2003) for evidence suggesting
that performance varies systematically across these subtypes.

278

therefore facilitate categorization. We therefore predicted
that the ideogram training group would have an advantage
in rule discovery compared to the mock training group.

Procedure
Training comprised two sessions, administered on two
consecutive days. On the second day, following training, the
categorization task was administered. All following
procedures were implemented in the DMDX display
software (Forster & Forster, 2003).

Methods
Participants
Seventy-two students (16 male) of the University of Athens
took part in the study and were randomly assigned (in
groups of 24) to each training condition. Their mean age
was 25.8 years (SD = 7.0). All were native speakers of
Greek, reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision, no
history of neurological illness, and no diagnosis of dyslexia.

Training
There were two training sessions, administered on
consecutive days, aimed to allow overnight consolidation.
Participants were given 160 trials in each training session,
arranged in four blocks of 40 trials. At the beginning of a
Label Training trial a fixation cross was presented for 500
ms at the center of the screen. Following that, one of the two
shapes was randomly selected and presented for 2000 ms,
and then the two pseudowords appeared in a vertical
configuration. Participants were asked to respond by
clicking on one of the two alternative responses
(pseudowords). Upon response, feedback was provided (the
word “Correct” or “Wrong”) for 500 ms. The permutation
of the two pseudowords was counterbalanced across trials,
and each shape was presented equally often within a block
of trials. On the first day of training, participants in the
Label training condition were asked to read aloud the
pseudoword of their choice before clicking on it, because
we reasoned that learning a name necessitates the formation
of an effective phonological component. This reading-aloud
instruction was omitted on the second day, to equate task
demands across training conditions as much as possible.
For the Ideogram Training condition pseudowords were
replaced with ideograms. In the Mock Training condition
participants were asked to learn to associate ideograms to
pseudowords, so shapes were replaced by ideograms. No
reading aloud took place in either the Ideogram or the Mock
training conditions. Stimulus-response pairings (e.g., shapepseudoword
or
shape-ideogram
pairings)
were
counterbalanced across participants within a training
condition. Each training session lasted approximately 20
minutes.

Materials
Shapes. Two abstract shapes of low association value were
selected from the collection of Vanderplas and Garvin
(1959). The shapes have been previously used in
experimental research and are considered to be hard to name
(e.g., Hulme, Goetz, Gooch, Adams, & Snowling, 2007).
The shapes were equated in size in a pilot experiment using
the method of adjustment. Twelve participants took part in
this psychophysical procedure, which was implemented in
PsychoPy (Peirce, 2007), and the results provided the Points
of Subjective Equality (P.S.E.s). For the training session,
empty shapes with a black margin were created, with size
corresponding to 75% of the P.S.E.s, whereas for the
categorization session the shapes were filled with red or
blue color. The categorization stimuli necessitated two
levels of size for the stimuli, so for the “big” shapes the size
corresponded to the P.S.E.s, and the “small” shapes were
created by a 50% reduction in size.
Pseudowords. Ten pseudowords were created, equated in
number of letters, syllables, phonemes, and stress position.
They were also roughly equated in orthographic and
phonological typicality using Levenstein distance of the 20
nearest neighbors (Protopapas, Tzakosta, Chalamandaris, &
Tsiakoulis, 2012; Yarkoni, Balota, & Yap, 2008). To avoid
name assignment biasing toward particular shapes, we
administered an online questionnaire to 107 native speakers
of Greek showing randomly one of the two abstract shapes
along with the ten candidate pseudowords. Participants were
simply asked to “choose a name” for the shape. We selected
the two pseudowords that were selected as names for both
shapes with roughly equal frequency, namely δέκλαμο
(/'ðεklamo) and κίμνελο (/'kimnεlo).

Categorization
In the Categorization session, which followed immediately
after the second training session, participants were told that
they would learn to classify stimuli into two categories,
namely X and Y. They received a maximum number of 28
blocks of eight trials. In a categorization block each of the
eight categorization stimuli was presented once. The
beginning of a trial was signaled by the presentation of the
stimulus at the center of the screen along with the category
labels X and Y. The category labels were presented around
the stimulus either horizontally or vertically in both
permutations (i.e., X - Y or Y - X), providing four possible
configurations. Participants responded by clicking on a
category label. Following each response a smiling face was
presented if correct or a frowning face if incorrect, for 1500
ms. If a participant did not respond within 10000 ms the

Ideograms. Two Chinese characters were selected. These
ideograms have been previously used and have been shown
to resist a simple verbal description (Fotiadis & Protopapas,
2014): 辛 (U+8F9B), and 辰 (U+8FB0). To equate for
number of strokes (and, thus, for perceptual complexity), a
stroke was erased from the second character.

279

Figure 2: Learning curves in the three training conditions in
blocks of 40 trials

Figure 3: Number of blocks to reach learning criterion in the
categorization task, per training condition. Data from
learner participants only. Boxes denote interquartile range;
thick lines mark the median; error bars extend to the full
range; N denotes sample size.

trial was terminated and a prompt appeared on screen. The
training session ended upon completion of all blocks, or
upon two consecutive errorless blocks (following Mathy,
Haladjian, Laurent, & Goldstone, 2013). The order of trials
was pseudorandomized with MIX (VanCasteren & Davis,
2006) and was identical for all participants. Randomization
constraints precluded (a) presentation of the same
categorization stimulus on two consecutive trials, and (b) a
lag between trials with the same configuration of category
labels less than two. The assignment of category label (X-Y)
to values of the diagnostic dimensions was counterbalanced
across participants. A short break was provided every 56
trials. The maximum duration of the categorization session
was 25 minutes.

of trial were included to model participants’ individual
learning rates (Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). In R
notation, the model was specified as
accuracy ~ trial*condition+(1+trial|participant).

There was no simple effect of trial (β = .387, ɀ = 1.317, p
= .188), a result consistent with participants' ceiling
performance on Day 2. There was also no interaction of trial
by condition (β = −.031, ɀ = −.113, p = .910) and—most
importantly—no effect of condition (β = .369, ɀ = .692, p =
.489).

Categorization

Results

Out of 72 participants in all training conditions, 44
(61.11%) managed to achieve two consecutive errorless
blocks of trials, thus providing unequivocal evidence of
having discovered the categorization rule. We refer to these
participants as “learners.” There were 14 learners (58.33%)
in the label training condition, 14 learners (58.33%) in the
ideogram training conditions, and 16 learners (66.67%) in
the mock training condition. A chi square test revealed that
the percentage of learners in the categorization task did not
differ significantly between training conditions (χ2 = .468,
df = 2, N = 72, p = .792).
However, using the percentage of participants reaching
the learning criterion as a dependent variable has the
disadvantage of disregarding the ease or difficulty with
which participants in each training condition learned the
rule. We therefore analyzed the number of blocks to reach
criterion, for learner participants only2 (see Fig. 3). An one-

Training
Participants in all three training conditions mastered the
training task by the third block of Day 1 and exhibited
ceiling performance on Day 2. Across both training
sessions, participants averaged 98.33% correct responses
(SD = 1.16) in the label training condition, 97.33% (SD =
2.64) in the ideogram training condition, and 97.87% (SD=
2.29) in the mock training condition. The average
performance per training condition and day, in blocks of 40
trials, is shown in Fig. 2.
The purpose of the analysis was to test if participants
were equally successful in learning the shape-label and
shape-ideogram pairings. Therefore, we only analyzed data
from the label and ideogram training conditions on the
second day of training. Participants’ responses were
analyzed in R (R Development Core Team, 2014) with a
linear mixed-effects model including fixed effects of trial
and training condition, as well as their interaction, and
random effects of participants. By-participant random slopes

2

The exclusion of “non-learner” data is common practice in the
categorization literature when analyzing number of blocks to reach
criterion (e.g., Mathy & Feldman, 2009). The rationale is that a

280

way analysis of variance revealed that there was no effect of
training condition on the number of blocks to reach the
learning criterion, F(2, 42) = 1.777, η2 = .080, p = .182.
Alternatively, categorization performance can be analyzed
using accuracy as the dependent variable. This allows
inclusion of all participants, under the assumption of
errorless performance after the learning criterion is reached
(e.g., Kurtz et al., 2013). A linear mixed-effects model with
the same formula as above revealed an effect of trial (β =
4.878, ɀ = 5.33, p < .001), reflecting an increase in accuracy
as trials progressed, comparable learning rates among
conditions (all βs < 1.35, p > .14), and—most importantly—
no effect of condition on categorization accuracy (all βs <
.13, p > .32).

Alternatively, the lack of an effect of verbal labels in
category learning may stem from methodological
discrepancies between the present and our previous study,
such as the structure of the categorization task used to reveal
hypothesis learning processes. The Weather Prediction
Task, previously shown to be affected by names for the
stimuli, has a probabilistic structure, whereas the Type II
task used in the present study has a deterministic structure.
It remains to be investigated whether performance in a
probabilistic category structure may be more easily affected
by experimental manipulations, perhaps due to the
uncertainty that is inherent in the task.
Further concerns stemming from the results of the present
study are related to whether changing the surface structure
of a paradigm affects the processing demands of a task. The
result of no difference in categorization performance
between the label and ideogram training groups might
suggest that names for the stimuli do not facilitate rule
discovery. An alternative explanation, however, may be
related to the fact that our implementation of the Type II
task utilized two abstract shapes whereas the canonical
version uses two geometric shapes. It may be that the Type
II task is learned through verbal processes of rule discovery
only when the values of the diagnostic dimensions are
highly familiar to participants. Mathy et al. (2013), who also
used abstract shapes in implementing the Type II task,
provided evidence in favor of the engagement of similaritybased processes (thought to reflect learning mediated by the
implicit rather than the rule-based system) in learning to
categorize. Thus, although the Type II task has been used to
examine explicit processes (e.g., Minda & Miles, 2010), our
version of the task may have recruited implicit processes
that are not affected by verbal labels for the stimuli.
A final concern may be of representational nature. The
finding that familiarity with the stimuli also failed to affect
performance in the categorization task seems rather
puzzling, given previous findings and current understanding
in the field. For example, Folstein, Gaultier, and Palmeri
(2010) provided evidence suggesting that mere exposure to
the stimulus configuration may facilitate subsequent
categorization performance. Our finding of no significant
difference in performance between the ideogram and mock
training conditions may be taken to indicate that learning
processes involved in learning to categorize our version of
the Type II task did not recruit the representations of the
shapes that were presumably acquired during training.
Indeed, informal reports of participants' strategies in
debriefing revealed that participants mainly paid attention to
the corners of the shapes and not to the shape forms in their
entirety. Therefore, a plausible explanation for our findings
is that the participants learned names for the entire shapes
and formed individuated representations of them but then
only used parts of the shapes in the categorization task. The
representational mismatch undermined the potential of the
verbal labels and the familiarity with the shapes to facilitate
learning in the categorization task.
To conclude, we sought to replicate the effect of

Discussion
In this study we trained participants for two consecutive
days to learn new names for shapes, or learn to associate
shapes with hard-to-name ideograms. A third group of
participants remained unexposed to the shapes. In a
categorization task, administered immediately after training,
we used the trained shapes to create the categorization
stimuli. We predicted that names and familiarity with the
shapes would each facilitate rule discovery in the
categorization task. Our results revealed no effect of training
condition of categorization, in contrast to previous findings
(Fotiadis & Protopapas, 2014).
This discrepancy raises concerns about assuming that an
effect manifesting itself in one modality would also be
present in another modality. One purpose of the experiment
was to replicate the effect of facilitation in learning to
categorize due to names for the stimuli in the visual
modality. The lack of an effect may be attributed to the
change in modality per se, since there is reason to assume
that learning processes may differ between modalities.
Saffran (2002) showed that, for learning to take place, the
temporal mode of presentation of stimuli in the visual and
auditory modality should be different (concurrent vs.
sequential respectively). Also, Conway and Christiansen
(2005) implemented the same learning paradigm in different
modalities and provided evidence in favor of a learning
advantage in the auditory modality compared to the visual
modality. Further empirical investigation is needed to assess
whether learning to categorize in the auditory and the visual
modality is mediated by the same processes.
Participants’ ceiling performance during training
complicates interpretation, insofar as potential differences
between learning the shape-label and shape-ideogram
pairings may be masked by the ease of the task. Thus, we
cannot preclude the possibility that performance in the
categorization task is affected by differences in training.

value of 28 corresponding to a non-learner, perhaps responding at
chance, and a value of 28 corresponding to a participant mastering
the task at the last two blocks reflect qualitatively different
behaviors that should not be aggregated.

281

facilitation in learning a verbal rule of category membership
caused by having names for the stimuli. The results suggest
that learning processes may operate differently across
modalities or across categorization paradigms and that task
processing demands may be significantly altered if the
surface structure of a categorization paradigm is modified.

order facilitates category learning. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 16(6), 1050–1057.
Miles, S. J., & Minda, J. P. (2011). The effect of concurrent
verbal and visual tasks on category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37(3), 588–607.
Minda, J. P., Desroches, A. S., & Church, B. A. (2008).
Learning rule-described and nonrule- described
categories: A comparison of children and adults. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34(6), 1518–1533.
Minda, J. P., & Miles, S. J. (2010). The influence of verbal
and nonverbal processing on category learning. In B. H.
Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of learning and motivation:
Advances in research and theory, 52, 117–162. San
Diego: Academic Press.
Newell, B. R., Dunn, J. C., & Kalish, M. (2011). Systems of
category learning: Fact or fantasy? In B. H. Ross (Ed.),
The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 54, pp.
167–215). San Diego: Academic Press.
Peirce, JW (2007) PsychoPy - Psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162(1-2), 8–13
Poldrack, R. A., Clark, J., Paré-Blagoev, E. J., Shohamy, D.,
Creso, J., Myers, C. E., & Gluck, M. A. (2001).
Interactive memory systems in the human brain. Nature,
414, 546–550.
Poldrack, R. A., & Foerde, K. (2008). Category learning and
the memory system debate. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 32, 197–205.
Protopapas, A., Tzakosta, M., Chalamandaris, A., &
Tsiakoulis, P. (2012). IPLR: An online resource for Greek
word-level and sublexical information. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 46(3), 449–459.
R Development Core Team. (2014). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from
http://www.R-project.org
Saffran, J. R. (2002). Constraints on statistical language
learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 172–196.
Shepard, R. N., Hovland, C. I., & Jenkins, H. M. (1961).
Learning
and
memorization
of
classifications.
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied,
75(13), 1–42.
Smith, J. D., Minda, J. P., & Washburn, D. A. (2004).
Category learning in Rhesus Monkeys: A study of the
Shepard, Hovland, and Jenkins (1961) tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133(3), 398–414.
Van Casteren, M., & Davis, M. H. (2006). Mix, a program
for pseudorandomization. Behavior Research Methods,
38(4), 584–589.
Vanderplas, J. M., & Garvin, E. A. (1959). The association
value of random shapes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57, 147–154.
Yarkoni, T., Balota, D. A., & Yap, M. J. (2008). Moving
beyond Coltheart’s N: A new measure of orthographic
similarity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(5), 971–
979.

Acknowledgments
We thank Laoura Ziaka for help with collecting data.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98(3), 409–429.
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., &
Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of
multiple systems in category learning. Psychological
Review, 105(3), 442–481.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Human category
learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 149–178.
Baayen, R. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical
introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge University
Press.
Conway, C. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Modalityconstrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and
auditory sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(1), 24–39.
Folstein, J., Gauthier, I, & Palmeri, T. J. (2010). Mere
exposure alters category learning of novel objects.
Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 1–6.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1),
116–124
Fotiadis, F. A., & Protopapas, A. (2014). The effect of
newly trained verbal and nonverbal labels for the cues in
probabilistic category learning. Memory & Cognition,
42(1), 112–125.
Hulme, C., Goetz, K., Gooch, D., Adams, J., & Snowling,
M. J. (2007). Paired-associate learning, phoneme
awareness, and learning to read. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 96(2), 150–166.
Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R., & Gluck, M. A. (1994).
Probabilistic classification learning in amnesia. Learning
& Memory, 1(2), 106–120.
Kurtz, K. J., Levering, K., Romero, J., Stanton, R. D., &
Morris, S. N. (2013). Human learning of elemental
category structures: Revising the classic result of Shepard,
Hovland, and Jenkins (1961). Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(2),
552–572.
Love, B. C., & Markman, A. B. (2003). The
nonindependence of stimulus properties in human
category learning. Memory & Cognition, 31(5), 790–799.
Mathy, F., Haladjian, H. H., Laurent, E., & Goldstone, R. L.
(2013). Similarity-dissimilarity competition in disjunctive
classification tasks. Frontiers in Psychology, 4(26), 1–14.
Mathy, F., & Feldman, J. (2009). A rule-based presentation

282

