On the adaptive nature of memory-based false belief
Hidehito Honda (hitohonda.02@gmail.com)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902

Toshihiko Matsuka (matsukat@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive and Information Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan

Kazuhiro Ueda (ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902

answer this question, people who know both Tokyo and
Chiba or people who know only Tokyo? Intuitively, the
amount of knowledge should correlate with the correctness
of inferences. Thus, the more knowledge people have, the
more accurate inferences people should make based on their
knowledge. Thus, our intuition is that people who know
both Tokyo and Chiba can make more accurate inferences
than people who know only Tokyo. However, studies have
shown that this is not always true: people who know only
Tokyo can make more accurate inferences in this situation
(e.g., Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002; Schooler & Hertwig, 2005). This
superficially counter-intuitive phenomenon occurs because
people have systematic cognitive limitations. For example,
imagine the limitation in the amount of knowledge such that
people do not know about some cities in Japan. Generally,
missing knowledge about Japanese cities is systematic. For
example, people are more likely to recognize cities that have
larger populations than smaller ones. Thus, systematic
limitations in the amount of knowledge do not always result
in maladaptive inferences about cities’ population sizes.
Previous studies have mainly examined how the amount
of knowledge affects adaptive inferences. In other words,
previous studies have focused on the limitation of quantity
in memory. However, people have another limitation in
memory; the quality of memory. Studies on human memory
have shown that a simple experimental manipulation can
make people have false memories (e.g., Roediger, &
McDermott, 1995). The formation of false memories is not
limited to experimental manipulations, and false memories
can be generated in the real world (Loftus, 2005; Roediger
& DeSoto, 2016). Based on these considerations, we predict
that people have incorrect beliefs about real world
information. We refer to such incorrect belief as memorybased false belief. Then, how do false beliefs affect
inferences? Few previous studies have examined this issue.
We conducted behavioral and simulation studies to examine
this issue. In the following sections, we first introduce our
hypotheses about memory-based false belief. Then, we
report our behavioral and simulation studies for examining
our hypotheses.

Abstract
Previous studies have shown that people’s memories are
changeable, and systematic incorrect memories (e.g., false
memory) can be created. We hypothesize that people’s beliefs
about the real world can be changed similarly to the way
systematic incorrect memories and systematic incorrect
beliefs (which we call memory-based false belief) are
generated. We also predict that since memory-based false
beliefs are consistent with abstract knowledge that is
consisted with prototypical patterns and organization found in
the real world, false beliefs work adaptively in making
inferences about environmental information in the real world.
We conducted behavioral and simulation studies in order to
examine our hypotheses on people’s beliefs and inferences
about the real world. The results showed that participants had
systematic false beliefs about cities’ attributes (e.g., whether
they have a professional baseball team), and that such false
beliefs worked adaptively in making inferences about
population size.
Keywords: memory-based false belief; inference about real
world; ecological rationality

Introduction
One of the most studied topics in human decision making
has been how human cognitive characteristics affect
adaptive decisions. Many studies have shown that people
rely on heuristics, which result in various cognitive biases
(Kahneman, Tversky, & Slovic, 1982; Kahneman, 2011).
Contrarily, other studies have shown that human cognitive
limitations do not necessarily lead to maladaptive decisions
because people’s cognitive limitations are systematic and
people can take advantage of such systematic limitations
(Gigerenzer, Todd, & The ABC Research Group, 1999;
Todd, Gigerenzer, & The ABC Research Group, 2012). In
the present study, we provide new evidence that systematic
cognitive limitations work adaptively in making inferences.
One interesting finding on the relationship between
cognitive limitations and adaptive inferences is that
limitations of human memory do not always result in
maladaptive inferences. For example, consider the following
question: “Which city has a larger population, Tokyo or
Chiba?” Who can make the most accurate inference to

223

(e.g., whether it has a professional football team) and
criterion for inferences (e.g., population size), inferences
based on the attribute are generally accurate (e.g., when
there is a professional football team in city X, but not in city
Y, this implies that the population of city X is larger than
city Y; e.g., Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). Therefore, if
false belief is systematically generated by prototypical
knowledge about the real world, the false belief will
function adaptively in making inferences.
In sum, our hypotheses about false belief are the
followings:
Hypothesis 1: People have false belief consistent with
prototypical knowledge. For the attributes associated with
big cities, people have more FPB for cities with large
populations than those with small populations. In contrast,
people have more FNB for cities with small populations
than for those with large populations.
Hypothesis 2: Systematic false belief functions adaptively
in making inferences, although non-systematic false
knowledge deteriorates accuracies of inferences. Thus,
inferences about cities’ population sizes based on systematic
false beliefs (i.e., the belief people tend to possess) are more
accurate than those based on non-systematic false beliefs.

Memory-based false belief
Findings in memory research indicate that people can have
false belief about the real world. There are noteworthy
findings about false memories. One of the most
straightforward manipulations for generating false
memories (DRM paradigm, Roediger, & McDermott, 1995)
is as follows. (1) Participants hear a list of words such as
“table,” “sit,” “legs,” “seat,” “desk,” “arm,” “sofa,” and so
on. (2) After a short interval, the participants complete a
recognition task where they are presented with a list of
words. The list comprises “old” words that participants
heard in (1) and some “new” words that participants did not
hear in (1). The most typical results are that participants
answer “old” for semantically associated new words (e.g.,
“chair”) and seldom answer “old” for unrelated new words
(e.g., “cat”). Although some factors are involved in the
processes of generating a false memory, the findings
suggest that false memory is generated with a systematic
way (e.g., Roediger, Watson, McDermott, & Gallo, 2001).
Specifically, the false recognition for the related new words
occurs by means of a strong association between the
memory for the old words and the related new words that
were not actually presented in (1). According to these
findings, we predict that people have false beliefs about the
real world and that such false beliefs are systematic like
false memory.
People are predicted to form abstract knowledge that is
consisted with prototypical patterns and organization found
in the real world (Rosch, & Mervis, 1975). Hereafter, we
refer to this type of knowledge as the prototypical
knowledge. For example, people may have prototypical
knowledge about characteristics of big cities, such as “there
is a professional football team,” “there is an international
airport,” “it’s a state capital,” and so on. Imagine that there
is no professional football team in city “X” which happens
to have a large population. People may have a false belief
such that there is a professional football team in city X
based on prototypical knowledge. That is, a strong
association between professional football teams and big
cities may produce a false belief. Hereafter, we call this
false belief false positive belief (FPB). In contrast, imagine a
small city “Y” where there is a professional football team.
For city Y, people may have a false belief such that there is
no professional football team since the association between
professional football teams and small cities is weak.
Hereafter, we call this false belief false negative belief
(FNB). We predict that people have two kinds of systematic
false belief, which are generated by the associations
between prototypical knowledge and the target object (in
this case, a city).
How does systematic false belief affect inferences about
the real world? Intuitively, false belief seems to deteriorate
inferences about the real world. We predict that false belief
deteriorates inferences if it is generated in a non-systematic
way. However, the systematic nature of false belief
described above may work adaptively in making inferences.
When there is a correlation between an attribute of a city

Behavioral study:
Examination of Hypothesis 1
In order to examine Hypotheses 1, we conducted a
behavioral study about people’s knowledge about cities, and
examined the nature of false beliefs in the real world.

Method
Participants Japanese undergraduates (N = 25) from
Aoyamagakuin University participated as part of course
work.
Tasks, materials, and procedure Participants performed a
knowledge task about Japanese cities. In this task,
participants were presented with one city name and an
attribute such as “professional baseball team.” The question
is “Is there a professional baseball team in this city?” The
participants were asked to answer “yes,” “no,” or “I don’t
know” depending on their subjective knowledge.
We selected the top 100 Japanese cities (“shi”) based on
population size in 2011. The top five cities are
“Yokohama,” “Osaka,” Nagoya,” “Sapporo,” and “Kobe”
(see the Appendix for examples). We asked about five
attributes of a city; “professional baseball team,”
“prefectural capital,” “high court,” “station of bullet train,”
and “capital area.” We selected these attributes based on the
following procedure. First, we conducted a pilot study about
the cues used in making inferences about population size. In
this study, 37 participants were asked “What is a valid cue
when making an inference about which city has a larger
population size for the presented two cities.” Based upon the
answers in this pilot study, we selected the five attributes
showing actual validity for inferring population size. We
examined the validity of the attributes in making inferences
based on Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1999). Here, validity

224

Figure 1. Relationship between population size and proportion of missing knowledge or FPB and FNB for five attributes.
Table 1. Correlation coefficients between proportion of missing knowledge, FPB, or FNB and population size.
Missing knowledge
False knowledge
Attribute
Attribute: +
Attribute: FPB
FNB
Baseball team
-0.378
-0.012
0.444 ***
-0.733 *
Prefectural capital
-0.345 *
-0.030
0.137
-0.372 *
High court
-0.981 ***
-0.210 *
0.482 ***
-0.642
Station of bullet train
-0.718 ***
-0.045
0.013
-0.488 **
Capital area
-0.445 *
-0.354 **
0.477 ***
-0.354 **
* p < .05, **p <.01, ***p <.001

reflects how often a cue leads to correct inferences. Using
the 4950 pairs (100 * 99 / 2) for the 100 cities used in the
behavioral experiment, the validity of the attributes for
inferences was calculated by Ac / (Ac + Ai). Ac denotes the
number of pairs for which an attribute could discriminate
between two cities (e.g., in a pair of cities X-Y, X has the
attribute and Y does not) and the use of the attribute
information resulted in the correct inference (i.e., X actually
has a larger population). Ai denotes the number of pairs for
which the attribute could discriminate the two cities but the
use of attribute information resulted in an incorrect
inference (i.e., Y actually has larger population). The

validities for the five attributes were 0.902 (professional
baseball team), 0.671 (prefectural capital), 0.923 (high
court), 0.710 (station of bullet train), and 0.503 (capital
area). Thus, although people tend to believe that all these
attributes are valid cues for making inferences, their actual
validities vary from high to low.
Participants were tested individually using a computer.
They were asked to answer the questions for all 500
attributes (5 attributes * 100 city names).

225

relationship between log-transformed population size and
proportions of FPB or FNB, and the right panel of Table 1
shows the correlation coefficients. Although the results
varied among the attributes, as was also the case for missing
knowledge, we found apparent tendencies. The proportion
of FPB increases as the population size increases. In
contrast, the proportion of FNB decreases as the population
size increases. These results corroborated our Hypothesis 1.
Figure 2 denotes the individual data on false beliefs and
missing knowledge (proportion out of 500 attributions). We
found that there were large individual differences.
Taken together, people’s knowledge about real world
cities is correlated with their population sizes. The
proportion of missing knowledge decreases as the
population size increases. For false beliefs, the proportion of
FPB (FNB) increases (decreases) as the population size
increases. These results are consistent with Hypothesis 1.

Results and discussion
We analyzed participants’ subjective knowledge about the
100 cities from the relationship between the cities’
population sizes and (1) missing knowledge (i.e., the
response of “I don’t know”), or (2) the FPB and FNB.
First, we examined the relationship between missing
knowledge and population size, although this analysis was
not our focus. Previous studies have shown that a city’s
population size is correlated with the number of times the
city is referenced in media such as newspapers, and that the
number of the city’s references is correlated with
recognition rate and familiarity (Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
2002; Honda, Matsuka, & Ueda, accepted). Thus, we
predicted that the proportion of missing knowledge
decreases as population sizes increase. In order to examine
this prediction, we calculated the proportion of missing
knowledge for every city and attribute, and conducted
correlation analyses for every attribute. In particular, we
calculated correlation coefficients between proportions of
missing knowledge and log-transformed population sizes.
Since an attribute is categorized into “+” (the city actually
has the attribute) or “-” (the city does not actually have the
attribute) and missing knowledge may differ between these
attributes, we conducted a correlation analysis for each
attribute. The upper panel of Figure 1 denotes the
relationships between log-transformed population size and
proportion of missing knowledge, and the left panel of
Table 1 shows the correlation coefficients. Although the
results depend on the attributes, there was a general
relationship between the proportion of missing knowledge
and population size: As population size becomes larger, the
proportion of missing knowledge decreases. This result
supports our prediction.
Next, we analyzed the relationship between FPB (or
FNB) and population size in order to evaluate Hypotheses 1.
As in the analysis of missing knowledge, we calculated the
proportions of FPB and FNB for every city and attribute,
and conducted correlation analyses for every attribute. In
particular, we calculated correlation coefficients between
proportions of FPB (or FNB) and log-transformed
population sizes. The lower panel of Figure 1 denotes the

Simulation study:
Examination of Hypothesis 2
The results of our behavioral study showed that people have
systematic false beliefs, which is consistent with Hypothesis
1. Hypothesis 2 predicts that such systematic false beliefs
will function adaptively in making inferences in the real
world. We examined this hypothesis by using computer
simulations.

Method
We conducted computer simulations of binary choice
population inference tasks based on the empirical data
collected in our behavioral study. There were a total of 50
simulated participants. Among the 50 simulated participants,
half of Systematic condition (hereafter Syst condition; Syst1,
Syst2, …, and Syst25) was designed to possess exactly the
same knowledge as the 25 participants in the behavioral
study. That is, for example, simulated participant Syst1’s
knowledge about the five attributes for 100 cities was
identical to that of empirical participant 1. The remaining 25
simulated participants in Non-Systematic condition
(hereafter, Non-Syst condition; Non-Syst1, Non-Syst2, …,
and Non-Syst25) possessed the same amounts of FPB, FNB,
and missing knowledge as the empirical participants but the
patterns were randomly reconstructed. Thus simulated
participants in the Syst condition were assumed to possess
systematic false beliefs while those in the Non-Syst
condition were assumed to possess non-systematic false
beliefs. The simulated participants were presented with two
cities and asked to infer which city has a larger population.
They answered all of the 4950 pairs (100 * 99 / 2) of the
cities used in the behavioral study. They were set up to
make inferences based on their knowledge. In the present
simulation, we compared three inference strategies in order
to examine the efficacy of systematic false beliefs regardless
of what strategy was used (specific algorithms of inference
strategies are shown in Table 2). Among the three strategies,
two were knowledge-integration strategies and the third was
a heuristic-based strategy. For the heuristic strategy, we

Figure 2. Individual differences in false belief and missing
knowledge.

226

Strategy
Take-the-best
Tally 1

Table 2. Simulated inference strategies.
Content of inference: Which city has a larger population, city A or B?
Consider attributes in the order of their validities. Participant makes an inference based on the first attribute where
one city has a positive value and the other has unknown or negative value.
Add up the number of positive cue values and subtract the number of negative values for Cities A and B. A
participant makes an inference such that the city with the higher summation has a larger population.

Add up the number of positive cue values for Cities A and B. A participant makes an inference that the city with the
higher summation has a larger population.
Note. Here, “positive (negative) value” means that a participant thinks a city has (does not have) the attribute. “Unknown” means that
the participant does not have knowledge about the attribute (i.e., missing knowledge).
Tally 2

used “Take-the-best” (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). As
integration models, we used Tally 1 and 2 (Marewski, &
Schooler, 2011).
The correctness of an inference was defined as follows.
We assigned 1 (or 0) to a pair where an inference strategy
led to a correct (or incorrect) inference. When an inference
strategy could not discriminate a pair, 0.5 was assigned to
the pair. We calculated the mean correctness of inferences
for 4950 pairs and regarded this value as the proportion of
correct inferences.
For the simulated participants in the Syst condition, we
calculated the proportion of correct inferences for each of
the three inference strategies. For the Non-Syst condition,
we made 100 sets of randomly reconstructed knowledge for
every 25 participant, and we calculated the proportions of
correct inferences using the three inference strategies for
every 100 sets. We regarded the average proportion of
correct inferences for the 100 sets as the proportion of
correct inferences for each strategy.

participants in the Syst condition showed higher
performance. Using the Tally 1 strategy, 23 of the 25
participants in the Syst condition did better. These results
indicate that the systematic nature of human false beliefs
about cities functioned adaptively in making inferences
about cities’ population sizes regardless of inference
strategies. Furthermore, given that there were large
individual differences in false beliefs and missing
knowledge (see Figure 2), the effect of memory-based false
belief on inferences is robust regardless of individual
differences.
Taken together, the results of computer simulations for
binary choice inference task show that the systematic nature
of memory-based false beliefs functioned adaptively in
making inferences, corroborating Hypothesis 2.

General discussion
In the present study, we examined the nature of people’s
false beliefs about the real world. The results of a behavioral
study showed that participants had systematic false beliefs.
In particular, the nature of their false beliefs correlated with
environmental structure (i.e., cities’ population sizes). For
large cities, people tend to falsely recognize that there is an
attribute which is associated with large cities (e.g., there is a
professional baseball team). In contrast, for small cities,
people tend to falsely recognize that there is no such an
attribute. We also conducted a simulation study and
examined how the memory-based false belief affected
inferences about the real world. We found that the
systematic nature of false beliefs functioned adaptively in
making inferences.
Previous studies have discussed how limitations in the
amount of knowledge affect adaptive inferences. For
example, Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) examined two
forms of limited knowledge. One was inability to recognize
objects and the other was inability to recognize attributes of
recognized objects. Schooler and Hertwig (2005) examined
how forgetting aids inferences based on the recognition
heuristic. These studies both showed that a limited amount
of knowledge (i.e., the number of recognized objects or
cues) does not necessarily lead to maladaptive inferences.
Rather, a limited amount of knowledge can enhance
adaptive inferences. In the present study, we examined the
effect of limitations of memory in terms of systematic
incorrectness. We found that the systematic nature of
memory-based false belief can enhance accuracies of

Results and discussion
Figure 3 shows the performance on the inference task. As is
apparent, the proportion of correct inferences was higher for
the simulated participants in the Syst condition than for
those in the Non-Syst condition for all of the three inference
strategies. Since the amounts of missing knowledge, FPB,
and FNB for Syst1, Syst2, …, and Syst25 corresponded to
those for Non-Syst1, Non-Syst2, …, and Non-Syst25, we
compared the proportion of correct inferences for each pair.
Using the Take-the-best and Tally 2 strategies, 24 of the 25

Figure 3. Proportion of correct inferences in the simulation task.
Error bars denote standard deviation.

227

inferences. This provides new evidence about the
relationship between cognitive limitations and adaptive
inferences.
Pleskac (2007) theoretically examined the recognition
heuristic in terms of signal detection theory. He showed that
false alarms and misses in recognition processes affected the
performance of the recognition heuristic. Thus, he examined
the relationship between accuracy of recognition and
adaptive inferences. Here, we note two differences between
Pleskac (2007) and our present study. First, Pleskac focused
on recognition of objects and examined how false
recognition affected the usage of the recognition heuristic.
The present study focused on the nature of memory-based
false belief (i.e., cities’ attributes) and how false belief
affected knowledge-based inferences. Hence, Pleskac and
the present study examined basically different domains.
Second and more importantly, we conducted not only a
theoretical study (i.e., computer simulation), but also a
behavioral study. In particular, we clarified the nature of
false beliefs about the real world. We provided evidence
that people had systematic false beliefs about the real world
using a behavioral study, and showed how such memorybased false beliefs affected inferences by using computer
simulations. Therefore, although our study and Pleskac were
analogous in that they both examined how accuracy of
memory affected adaptive inferences, our findings provide
new insights about the relationship between limitations of
memory and adaptive inferences.
In sum, we provided new evidence that limitations in
human memory can enhance adaptive inferences. We
believe that the present findings make a substantial
contribution toward understanding the relationship between
adaptive inferences and cognitive limitations.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (A, 16H01725; B, 25280049; C, 25330167) and
Young Scientists (B, 16K16070).

References
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650–669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1999). Betting on one
good reason: The take-the-best heuristic. In G. Gigerenzer,
P. M. Todd, & The ABC Research Group (Eds.), Simple

heuristics that make us smart (pp. 75–95). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P.M., & The ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of
ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109, 75–90.
Honda, H., Matsuka, T., & Ueda, K. (accepted). Memorybased simple heuristics as attribute substitution:
Competitive tests of binary choice inference models.
Cognitive Science.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan
Magazines Ltd.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment
under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Loftus, E. F. (2005). Planting misinformation in the human
mind: A 30-year investigation of the malleability of
memory. Learning & Memory, 12, 361–366.
Marewski, J. N., & Schooler, L. J. (2011). Cognitive niches:
An ecological model of strategy selection. Psychological
Review, 118, 393–437.
Pleskac, T. J. (2007). A signal detection analysis of the
recognition heuristic. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
14, 379–391.
Roediger, H. L., & DeSoto, K. A. (2016). Recognizing the
presidents: Was Alexander Hamilton president?
Psychological Science, 27, 644–650.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 803–814.
Roediger, H., Watson, J., McDermott, K., & Gallo, D.
(2001). Factors that determine false recall: A multiple
regression analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8,
385–407.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573–605.
Schooler, L. J., & Hertwig, R. (2005). How forgetting aids
heuristic inference. Psychological Review, 112, 610–628.
Todd, P. M., Gigerenzer, G., & The ABC Group. (2012).
Ecological rationality: Intelligence in the world. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Appendix. List of city names and attributes used in the present study (Four examples).

1
2
…
99
100

City name
(shi)
Yokohama
Osaka
…
Chigasaki
Yamato

“+ (-)” indicates that there is (is not) the attribute in that city.
Prefectural
Station of bullet
Population size
Baseball team
High court
capital
train
3,689,603
+
+
+
2,666,371
+
+
+
+
…
…
…
…
…
235,140
228,180
-

228

Capital area
+
…
+
+

