Perceived Momentum Influences Responsibility Judgments
Jeffrey R. Parker (jeffparker@gsu.edu)
Marketing Department, Georgia State University
PO Box 3991, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA

Iman Paul (iman.paul@scheller.gatech.edu)
Marketing Department, Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree NW, Office 4000, Atlanta, GA 30308 USA

Nicholas Reinholtz (nicholas.s.reinholtz@colorado.edu)
Marketing Department, University of Colorado Boulder
419 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309 USA

after the other). If a certain percentage of the group guesses
correctly (incorrectly) then the group will win (lose) the
game. Consequently, if the game outcome is a win (loss),
the aligned events would be the correct (incorrect) guesses.
Taking the loss outcome as an example, our research is
interested in the amount of responsibility for the group’s
loss that is assigned to each incorrect guess (or, equally, to
each player who gave an incorrect guess).
Responsibility judgments are at least partially derived
from causal inferences (Chockler & Halpern, 2004): It is
unlikely that one will be held responsible for an outcome if
one’s actions did not make some difference to that outcome
(Gerstenberg, Halpern, & Tenenbaum, 2015). Further, the
closer a given individual’s actions are to being pivotal to
the outcome, the more responsible the individual will be
held for the outcome (Bartling, Fischbacher, & Schudy,
2015; Chockler & Halpern, 2004; Lagnado, Gerstenberg,
& Zultan 2013). However, both causal and responsibility
judgments are highly nuanced, drawing on many inputs, as
exemplified by the counterfactual simulation model (CSM;
Gerstenberg, Goodman, Lagnado, & Tenenbaum, 2015).
Using the current context of events and outcomes, the
CSM distinguishes between four different counterfactual
contrasts. Whether-causation refers to the perceived
probability that the outcome would have been different had
a specific event been altered or removed. In contrast, howcausation pertains to the perceived probability that the
outcome would have occurred in exactly the same
manner—not whether it would have occurred or not—had
a specific event been altered or removed. Sufficiency is the
perceived probability that the same outcome would have
been reached if all candidate causes other than the target
event were removed. Finally, robustness is the perceived
probability that a causal relationship between a specific
event and the outcome would remain unchanged were the
circumstances (i.e., the nature of the alternative candidate
causes) altered in some small way.
The current research examines contexts like the guessing
game described above in which the outcome would change
if any one of the aligned events had a different result.

Abstract
This work examines the extent to which people hold
independent sequential events (e.g., players making
correct/incorrect guesses) responsible for overall outcomes
(e.g., the team winning/losing the game). Two types of
events are found to garner the majority of responsibility for
overall outcomes: (1) final events and (2) events that are
perceived to disrupt momentum (e.g., an incorrect guess
after a sequence of correct guesses). While previous research
has shown that final events tend to be perceived as more
responsible for overall outcomes, the current experiments
are the first to document the role of perceived momentum on
responsibility judgments. Specifically, we demonstrate that
the effect is mediated by perceived momentum changes after
the time of the event and moderated when exogenous factors
(e.g., a delay between events) disrupt perceived momentum.
We discuss how these findings relate to pivotality, the
counterfactual simulation model, and the role of
unexpectedness in responsibility judgments.
Keywords:
perceived
momentum;
judgments; perceived causality

responsibility

Introduction
Many outcomes are the result of a collection of sequential
events: Sports championships are determined by the results
of games played during the regular and playoff seasons, the
success or failure of parlay bets depends on the results of
multiple independent events (games, races, or the like),
final grades are a function of the student’s performance on
multiple assignments and exams, and the winners of games
such as chess are determined by the set of moves each
player has made during the match.
We examine how people assign responsibility for a given
outcome to the events (which occurred sequentially) that
resulted in that outcome. Of particular interest is how
people assign responsibility to aligned events. Aligned
events are those events whose valence corresponds with
that of the outcome. For instance, imagine a group of
people playing a guessing game in which each player must
guess which of two options is the “correct” option. The
players make their guesses in secret and sequentially (one

2225

Consequently, the aligned events are all equally pivotal to
the outcome and are all whether-causes. Moreover, all of
the aligned events are necessarily how-causes as each
influences the manner by which the outcome is reached.
Lastly, none of the aligned events is a sufficient or robust
cause of the outcome as changing any other aligned event
would change the outcome.
Importantly, the equivalence of the aligned events in
terms of pivotality and the CSM’s counterfactual contrasts
does not depend on the timing of the events in the sequence
leading to the outcome. More concretely, a given event’s
pivotality, whether-causation, how-causation, sufficiency,
and robustness will be the same whether that event was the
first or last event in the sequence. Yet, as is argued and
demonstrated below, responsibility judgments are
impacted by the sequence in which events occur.

Although rooted in physics, the concept of momentum also
holds a place in social cognition and refers to the tendency
of, or expectation for, a person or group to repeat recent
success or failure. In other words, repeated success (or
failure) is expected to beget a higher likelihood of
subsequent success (failure).
When sequential events are not independent (e.g., the
same sports team playing repeated games) perceptions of
momentum may be grounded in rational reasoning. Indeed,
in such contexts, it is reasonable to predict that earlier
success will increase the likelihood of subsequent success
via the boosted confidence or increased learning and ability
of the individual or group. Empirical support for actual
momentum in such contexts is still a matter of debate
(Gilovich, Vallone, and Tversky, 1985; Green and
Zweibel, 2013; Miller and Sanjurjo, 2015), but perceptions
of momentum persist nonetheless.
We contend that people overgeneralize their beliefs and
perceptions of momentum from contexts where it could
reasonably exist (i.e., when events are not independent) to
contexts where it cannot (i.e., when events are objectively
and explicitly independent). We return to our guessing
game example in which players make guesses sequentially
and in secret. A series of repeated correct guesses in this
game may be the result of many factors (e.g., obvious
answers or talented players), but it cannot be the result of
the players or the team gaining momentum via confidence
or increasing ability since each player’s guess is
objectively independent of those of the other players. Yet,
this series of repeated correct guesses can easily be mapped
onto contexts in which people normally (and, perhaps,
normatively) perceive momentum. Hence, observing
repeated successes (or failures) may result in perceptions
that the team of players, despite making objectively
independent guesses, does have momentum.
Perceiving momentum, even when events are
objectively independent, would in turn lead to the inference
that succeeding events are more likely to stay the course
(e.g., success following repeated successes) than to deviate
from it (e.g., failure following repeated successes). Thus,
deviations from the direction of perceived momentum
should be considered more unexpected. Since aligned
events that are more unexpected tend to be held more
responsible for outcomes (Gerstenberg, Halpern, &
Tenenbaum, 2015), aligned events that deviate from
perceived momentum should be considered more
responsible for the outcome.
This reasoning suggests that the degree of responsibility
assigned to aligned events may differ between the all-late
and one-late sequences described above. Previous research
suggests that the last aligned event (I4) is
disproportionately likely to be assigned blame in both
conditions. However, if people’s responsibility judgments
are influenced by the perception of momentum, and
consequent relative unexpectedness of the aligned events,
the tendency to assign blame to the last event should be

The Sequence of Events
Taking the loss outcome in the guessing game described
above as an example once more, we contrast two specific
sequences of events for a game in which the team is
allowed no more than three incorrect guesses. The aligned
events (guesses) for this example are bolded in each
sequence (“I” = incorrect, “C” = correct).
1. All-Late: C1-C2-C3-C4-C5-C6-I1-I2-I3-I4
2. One-Late: I1-I2-I3-C1-C2-C3-C4-C5-C6-I4
There are three things to note about the above sequences.
First, four events (incorrect guesses) align with the overall
outcome of the game (loss) in both sequences: Had there
only been three incorrect guesses, the team would have
won in either case. Second, the players made their guesses
in secrecy and, therefore, could not know the other players’
guesses or how the group was performing until the
conclusion of the game (i.e., the guesses were explicitly
independent). Third, since the players’ guesses were
collected sequentially, the outcome (loss) was not
determined until the tenth player made his guess.
Given this context, prior research would suggest that the
final aligned event (I4) will tend to be judged more
responsible for the outcome of the game (Miller &
Gunasegaram, 1990) in both sequences. Yet, no research to
date would predict that responsibility judgments for the
aligned events will differ between the all-late and one-late
sequences. In fact, since changing the result of any aligned
event would change the game’s outcome, models of
responsibility judgments relying on pure pivotality
(Chockler & Halpern, 2004), counterfactual pivotality
(Zultan, Gerstenberg, & Lagnado, 2012), or the CSM
would predict no differences in responsibility judgments
across the two sequences of events. However, we contend
that differences in the timing of the aligned events between
the two sequences can meaningfully impact causal
responsibility judgments via perceptions of momentum.

Perceived Momentum

2226

stronger in the one-late sequence than in the all-late
sequence. In the one-late sequence, the result of the final
event terminates a series of six favorable results that
preceded it. Conversely, perceived momentum should lead
to a higher likelihood of assigning responsibility to the first
aligned event (I1) in the all-late sequence (in which its
result deviates from the results of the previous six events)
than in the one-late sequence (in which it is not preceded
by any events). The interim aligned events (I2 and I3)
should be relatively uninfluenced by the sequence as they
are always preceded by at least one other aligned event.

late or all-late sequence described above. To reiterate, (1)
the first three guesses and the final guess were incorrect
(i.e., were aligned with the outcome) in the one-late
sequence, while (2) the final four guesses were incorrect
(aligned with the outcome) in the all-late sequence.
Participants were shown the complete set of results
(correct/incorrect guesses) in a table ostensibly organized
in the order in which players had made their guesses. They
were then asked which of the four players who had guessed
incorrectly was the most to blame (i.e., was most
responsible) for the team’s loss. Participants could indicate
that either all four players were equally to blame or that no
player was to blame if they desired. (In all experiments, the
percent of participants indicating equal/no blame did not
significantly differ between the one-late and all-late
sequences. Thus, although these equal/no-blame responses
are retained and included in the data analyzed in each
experiment, they are not discussed further.)

Summary
We examined whether people perceive momentum in a
series of events where the results were sequential and
objectively independent. We predicted an event aligned
with the overall outcome (e.g., an incorrect guess in a game
whose outcome was a loss) would be assigned greater
responsibility if that aligned event directly followed a
series of unaligned events (e.g., an incorrect guess after a
series of repeated correct guesses).
The experiments that follow support this prediction.
Experiments 1 and 2 show that aligned events were
assigned significantly greater responsibility when directly
preceded by a series of unaligned events. Experiment 3
finds that judgments of perceived momentum mediate this
effect. Experiment 4 finds the effect can be moderated by
disrupting perceived momentum. Finally, Experiment 5
finds that the expectation of success for a given event is
higher, all else being equal, when that event is preceded by
successes versus failures.

Results. As expected, the percentage of participants
indicating that the player making the final incorrect guess
(i.e., the final aligned event) was the most to blame for the
team’s outcome was significantly lower in the all-late
(44%) versus the one-late (66%) sequence (χ2(1) = 7.97, p
< .005). Conversely, a larger proportion of participants felt
the player making the first incorrect guess (i.e., the first
aligned event) was the most to blame in the all-late (25%)
versus the one-late (1%) sequence (χ2(1) = 26.10, p < .001).
These results are consistent with our contention that people
(1) perceive momentum in contexts where sequential
events are objectively independent and (2) use this
perceived momentum in forming responsibility judgments
for the overall outcome.

Experiments
Experiments 1 and 2 tested the proposition that
(1) the tendency to hold the final aligned event
responsible for the overall outcome would be higher
in the one-late (vs. all-late) sequence (both described
above) and
(2) the opposite would hold for the first aligned event.

Experiment 2: The Influence of Event Sequence on
Responsibility Judgments (Wins)
Method. One hundred ninety-nine paid AMT participants
participated in Experiment 2, which was identical to
Experiment 1 except the following: (1) the team needed at
least four correct answers to win, (2) the team’s outcome
was a win, and (3) the correct and incorrect responses were
switched in the two sequences (e.g., the all-late sequence
featured six incorrect guesses before concluding with four
correct guesses). Thus, the aligned events in Experiment 2
were the four players that had guessed correctly. After
viewing the results table, participants were asked which of
the four players that had guessed correctly deserved the
most credit (i.e., was most responsible) for the team’s win.

Experiment 1: The Influence of Event Sequence on
Responsibility Judgments (Losses)
Method. One hundred eighty-eight paid Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT) participants were told of a
hypothetical team of 10 players playing a guessing game in
which each player guessed which of two colors a computer
had randomly chosen before the game began. The players
were indicated to have made their guesses sequentially and
in secret, such that no player knew what previous players
had guessed or how the team was doing at the time they
made their guess. If the team had three or fewer incorrect
guesses it would win. Otherwise, it would lose. All
participants were told that four players had made incorrect
guesses and that the team had lost the game.
Participants were randomly assigned to either the one-

Results. Replicating Experiment 1 in the domain of wins,
the percentage of participants indicating that the player
making the final correct guess (i.e., the final aligned event)
deserved the most credit for the team’s outcome was
significantly lower in the all-late (68%) versus the one-late
(84%) sequence (χ2(1) = 6.82, p < .02). Conversely, a larger
proportion of participants felt the player making the first

2227

correct guess (i.e., the first aligned event) was the most to
credit in the all-late (16%) versus the one-late (0%)
sequence (χ2(1) = 17.23 p < .001). Again, it seems that
participants perceived momentum in the described game
and used this in forming their responsibility judgments.
Experiment 2 also demonstrated that this result is not
limited to contexts with negative outcomes.

We conducted a series of regressions to examine the
mediating role of perceived momentum on the likelihood
of assigning blame to the fourth aligned event (which was
the tenth event in both sequences). First, a logistic
regression with sequence (one-late vs. all-late; effect coded
1 and -1 respectively) as the sole predictor showed a
significant effect on assigned blame (sequence = .46, z =
3.83, p < .001; this mirrors the results from the previously
described chi-square test). Second, a regression with
sequence (effect coded as before) as the sole predictor
showed a significant effect on the change in perceived
momentum associated with the final aligned event (sequence
= -1.84, t = -13.57, p < .001). Finally, when both sequence
(effect coded as before) and change-in-momentum were
used as predictors in a logistic regression, change-inmomentum was a significant predictor of blame (change-inmomentum = -.18, z = -3.41, p < .001) while sequence no
longer held significant predictive power (sequence = .14, z =
.91, p = .36). This suggests perceived momentum may play
a mediating role in the formation of responsibility
judgments.

Experiment 3: Testing the Role of Perceived
Momentum via Mediation
While the results of the first two experiments are consistent
with our contention that people perceive momentum in
contexts where sequential events are objectively
independent and use this perceived momentum in forming
responsibility judgments, they do not provide any direct
evidence of this process. Accordingly, Experiment 3 was
designed to explicitly measure perceptions of momentum
in the sequences examined in Experiment 1.
Method. Two hundred ninety-four paid AMT participants
participated in Experiment 3, which used the same
sequences (one-late vs. all-late), team outcome (loss), and
dependent variable (most to blame) as Experiment 1.
However, prior to indicating which aligned event (incorrect
guess) was the most to blame for the outcome, participants
first indicated how much momentum they felt the team had
after each player’s guess (-5 = strongly negative
momentum, 0 = no momentum, +5 = strongly positive
momentum). This measure of perceived momentum was
collected to test whether changes in perceived momentum
mediated the influence of sequence (one-late vs. all-late)
on responsibility judgments.
Results. As in Experiments 1 and 2, a smaller proportion
of participants felt the player making the final incorrect
guess (i.e., the final aligned event) was the most blame in
the all-late (37%) versus the one-late (60%) sequence
(χ2(1) = 14.93, p < .001). Conversely, a larger proportion
of participants felt the player making the first incorrect
guess (i.e., the first aligned event) was the most to blame
in the all-late (38%) versus the one-late (12%) sequence
(χ2(1) = 27.22, p < .001).
We further explored the role of perceived momentum in
forming responsibility judgments. For both sequences,
perceived momentum peaked after the sixth consecutive
success (see Figure 1). Examining the individual responses
of the 83% of participants who indicated that a specific
event (i.e., player) was most to blame, 60% assigned blame
to the event that corresponded with the biggest drop in
perceived momentum. Of the 17% of participants
indicating equal/no blame, 39% also reported no changes
in perceived momentum over the course of the events,
further suggesting a link between perceived momentum
and assigned blame. Notably, only 7% of the total number
of participants indicated no changes in perceived
momentum across the sequences of events.

Figure 1. Perceived momentum in Experiment 3. Nonsolid circles indicate incorrect guesses (aligned events).

Experiment 4: Testing the Role of Perceived
Momentum via Moderation
If responsibility judgments are partially derived from
perceptions of momentum, then disrupting the momentum
perceived to exist in a series of events should mitigate its
impact on responsibility judgments. Experiment 4 tested
this prediction.
Method. One hundred ninety-five paid AMT participants
participated in Experiment 4, which used the same
sequences (one-late vs. all-late), team outcome (loss), and
dependent variable (most to blame) as Experiment 1.
However, Experiment 4 added a second factor that was
crossed with the sequence factor: whether or not
participants were told the game was unexpectedly delayed
immediately prior to the 10th player’s guess (i.e., the final
aligned outcome in both sequences). It was expected that
an unexpected delay in the game would disrupt the
perceived momentum occurring the in the game at that

2228

point. Accordingly, the sequence of events should be less
informative for responsibility judgments for the final
aligned event when it is known that this event was preceded
by an unexpected delay in the game.
To summarize, Experiment 4 used a 2 (sequence: onelate vs. all-late) x 2 (game delay: yes vs. no) betweensubjects design. We predicted a significant effect of
sequence on blame assigned to the final player when there
was no game delay (as in previous studies), but not when
there was a game delay.

variable in this experiment asked participants which of the
two hidden results they believed was the incorrect guess
(participants had to choose one or the other).
Results. We analyzed the percentage of participants
choosing event 10 as the incorrect response across
sequences (one-late vs. all-late). Since perceived
momentum would lead one to believe a correct guess is
more likely after a series or correct answers, we expected
and found that a smaller proportion of participants chose
event 10 as being the incorrect response in the one-late
(40%) versus the all-late (57%) sequence (χ2(1) = 4.93, p <
.03). Thus, it would appear that people perceive
momentum in contexts where sequential events are
objectively independent.

Results. As expected, there was a significant interaction
between the sequence (dummy-coded; 1 = one-late, 0 = alllate) and game-delay factors (dummy-coded; 1 = no delay,
0 = delay;  = 1.85, p < .002). When there was no game
delay, a smaller proportion of participants felt the player
making the final incorrect guess (i.e., the final aligned
event) was the most blame in the all-late (47%) versus the
one-late (76%) sequence (χ2(1) = 9.16, p < .002). However,
when there was a game delay, the influence of sequence on
responsibility judgments for the final player was muted and
even slightly reversed (all-late = 60% vs. one-late = 48%;
χ2(1) = 1.44, p < .08). We contend that the unexpected
game delay disrupted perceived momentum and,
necessarily, mitigated the influence of event sequence on
responsibility judgments.

Table 1: Sequence Stimuli for Experiment 5

Event (Guess)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Experiment 5: Evidence of Perceived Momentum
via Expectations of Success versus Failure
We have argued that perceiving momentum in a sequence
of events leads to the inference that success is more likely
after a series of repeated successes and vice versa.
Consequently a failure after multiple successes is more
unexpected and assigned greater responsibility for the
outcome (Gerstenberg, Halpern, & Tenenbaum, 2015).
While the results of the preceding experiments have
supported this contention indirectly, Experiment 5
explicitly tested whether people are biased towards
expecting a success (failure) to follow a series of successes
(failures).

Event Results
One-Late
All-Late
C1
I1
C2
I2
C3
I3
?
?
C1
C4
C2
C5
C3
I1
C4
I2
C5
I3
?
?

General Discussion
Responsibility and causality judgments have received a lot
of attention within the cognitive science field (e.g., Halpern
& Pearl, 2005; Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990). The results
presented here add to that literature. Two main findings
expand the current understanding of causal responsibility
judgments. First, people often perceive momentum where
it cannot exist. We show this in a context where sequential
events are explicitly and objectively independent. Second,
since perceived momentum implies that it should be more
likely for an event to stay the course (i.e., have the same
result as a preceding series of repeated results), aligned
events whose results deviate from the previous course are
more unexpected and, therefore, tend to be attributed more
responsibility for the overall outcome.
The role of perceived momentum in responsibility
judgments was empirically supported in three ways: (1) via
mediation analysis (Experiment 3), (2) via moderation of
perceived momentum (Experiment 4), and (3) via
measured expectations of success/failure as a function of
the results of the series of events preceding the target event
(Experiment 5).
These results add an important level of nuance to
responsibility judgments not captured by the counterfactual

Method. One hundred sixty-nine paid AMT participants
participated in Experiment 5, which used the same
sequences (one-late vs. all-late) and team outcome (loss) as
Experiment 1. However, although participants were told of
the team’s loss, they were not given all of the events’
results. Instead, participants (randomly assigned to either
the one-late or all-late sequence) were shown the results of
eight events, while the results of the other two events were
hidden. See Table 1 (“I” = incorrect, “C” = correct; bolded
events = aligned events).
After seeing the table of event results, participants were
told that the team had lost by exactly one incorrect guess.
Thus, one of the hidden results was necessarily an incorrect
guess and the other a correct guess. The primary dependent

2229

Green. B. S., J. Zwiebel (2013), “The Hot Hand Fallacy:
Cognitive Mistakes or Equilibrium Adjustments?
Evidence from Baseball. working paper.
Halpern, J. Y., & J. Pearl (2005). Causes and
Explanations: A Structural-Model Approach. Part 1:
Causes. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
56 (4), 843-887.
Lagnado, D. A., T. Gerstenberg, & R. Zultan (2013).
Causal responsibility and counterfactuals. Cognitive
Science, 37, 1036-1073.
Miller, D. T., & S. Gunasegaram (1990). Temporal order
and the perceived mutability of events: Implications for
blame assignment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59(6), 1111-1118.
Miller, J. B., & A. Sanjurjo (2015). Surprised by the
Gambler’s and Hot Hand Fallacies? A Truth in the Law
of Small Numbers. working paper.
Zultan, R., T. Gerstenberg, & D. A. Lagnado (2012).
Finding fault; Causality and counterfactuals in group
attributions. Cognition, 125 (3), 429-440.

simulation model (Gerstenberg, Goodman, Lagnado, &
Tenenbaum, 2015) or models relying on perceived
pivotality (Chockler and Halpern 2004). The aligned
events in the sequences examined in these studies were
equally pivotal to the outcome and were all whether- and
how-causes that were equally (in)sufficient and (not)
robust causes. Yet, the degree of responsibility each was
assigned varied as a function of where it appeared in the
overall sequence of events.
This work also extends that of Gerstenberg, Halpern, &
Tenenbaum (2015) by demonstrating that the
unexpectedness of a given event can be influenced by an
implicit, inference-based cue: perceived momentum.
In future work, we will more explicitly examine
counterfactual reasoning in the contexts examined here.
Specifically, while most factors associated with
counterfactual reasoning (e.g., pivotality) were held
constant in the above studies, it is possible that an
unexpected result is one that is associated with more
plausible counterfactuals, which should increase the
perceived responsibility of that event (consistent with our
findings). Additionally, sequences other than those used in
the current set of studies will be examined to further
understand the role of perceived momentum in
responsibility judgments.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the participants in the CB
Group at Georgia Tech University for their invaluable
feedback on this project.

References
Bartling, B., U. Fischbacher, &. S. Schudy (2015).
Pivotality and responsibility attribution in sequential
voting. Journal of Public Economics, 128, 133-139.
Chockler, H., & J. Y. Halpern (2004). Responsibility and
Blame: A Structural-Model Approach. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 22, 93-115.
Gerstenberg, T., J. Y. Halpern, & J. B. Tenenbaum
(2015). Responsibility judgments in voting scenarios.
In D. C. Noelle, R. Dale, A. S. Warlaumont, J.
Yoshimi, T. Matlock, C. D. Jennings, & P. P. Maglio
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 788-793). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Gerstenberg, T., N. D. Goodman, D. A. Lagnado, & J. B.
Tenenbaum (2015). How, whether, why: Causal
judgments as counterfactual contrasts. In D. C. Noelle,
R. Dale, A. S. Warlaumont, J. Yoshimi, T. Matlock, C.
D. Jennings, & P. P. Maglio (Eds.), Proceedings of the
37th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 782-787). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Gilovich, T., R. Vallone, & A. Tversky (1985). The hot
hand in basketball: On the misperception of random
sequences. Cognitive Psychology, 17 (3), 295-314.

2230

