Performance Pressure and Comparison in Relational Category Learning
John D. Patterson (jpatter4@binghamton.edu)
Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4400 Vestal Parkway East
Binghamton, NY 13905 USA
Abstract
An important objective in higher-order cognition research is
to understand how relational categories are acquired and
applied. Much of the research on relational category learning
has investigated the role of within-category comparison
opportunities in category acquisition and transfer – guided by
predictions from structure mapping theory that alignment
leads to highlighting and abstraction of shared relational
structure (Gentner, 1983). Recent research has yielded a
within-category comparison advantage under the supervised
observational learning mode (relative to twice as many singleitem trials), but not under the supervised classification mode
(Patterson & Kurtz, 2015). In the present study we investigate
the role that pressure to succeed at the training task – a critical
difference between the two learning modes – plays in the
apparent ineffectiveness of learning by comparison within the
classification mode. In a 2x2 between-subjects design we
crossed two levels of performance pressure (elevated and
standard) with two presentation formats (single-item and
within-category pairs). The main findings are: (1) a
significant interaction showing a negative impact of increased
performance pressure for single-item learners, but not for
comparison learners; and (2) a theoretically predicted, but
empirically elusive effect of comparison over single-item in
the classification mode. We conclude that: (1) performance
pressure exerts a deleterious effect on relational category
learning (in accord with findings in the attribute category
literature) that opportunities to compare may compensate for;
and (2) pressure to perform does not appear to underlie
lackluster comparison + classification performance (relative
to observational learning). Further, we offer new evidence on
the role that within-category comparison plays in relational
category learning.
Keywords: relational categories; structural alignment;
comparison; classification learning; transfer; performance
pressure

Introduction
Categorization and comparison are two mechanisms that
play a central role in human learning, comprehension, and
knowledge use. The study of categorization has largely
focused on attribute-based categories, or categories whose
members belong based on a shared set of intrinsic features.
Attribute categories have been studied under a diverse set of
circumstances ranging from inference of missing features
(Markman & Ross, 2003) to category construction (Ahn &
Medin, 1992). By far however, the most prevalent paradigm
of study has been the traditional artificial classification
learning (TACL) paradigm. In its most common form, the
paradigm operates as follows: a single stimulus is presented,
the participant is asked to classify the item into one of two
category options, a response is selected, and corrective

feedback is given. The study of attribute categories has led
to a considerable body of knowledge and has provided a
viable testing ground to evaluate formal models of
categorization (e.g., ALCOVE, Kruschke, 1992; DIVA,
Kurtz, 2007; SUSTAIN, Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004).
However, attribute-based understandings alone cannot
adequately characterize the richness of human category
knowledge. Beyond our attribute-based understanding, we
are sensitive to, and knowledgeable about, the ways in
which objects and attributes in the world relate to one
another. Accordingly, the categorization literature has
placed increasing emphasis on the study of relational
categories (Gentner & Kurtz, 2005; Markman & Stilwell,
2001). Members belong to relational categories, not based
on their attributes, but instead based on shared relational
structure. For example, consider the relational noun barrier.
A thunderstorm, for instance, might be a barrier to a
baseball game. Just the same, a sick child could be a barrier
to you going to work. Considering the attributes of these
two instances of barrier reveals that they are greatly
disparate; they would be poor candidates for shared
membership based on their attributes. However, their
overlapping relational structure – that they both occupy an
obstructing role between two other things – grants them
membership in a shared relational category.
A key question in the study of relational categories is how
we come to learn them. A strong candidate mechanism is
comparison. A substantial body of evidence from the
relational reasoning literature has found that comparison
promotes learning and transfer of shared relational structure
(Alfieri, Nokes-Malach, & Schunn, 2013, Gick & Holyoak,
1983; Kurtz, Miao, & Gentner, 2001; Loewenstein,
Thompson, & Gentner, 1999; see Loewenstein, 2010 for a
review). The benefits of comparison can be explained
through the process of structural alignment (Markman &
Gentner, 1993). Comparison encourages the alignment of
instances’ relational predicates, serving to preferentially
highlight shared relational structure that is not readily
salient when considering either instance alone. Importantly,
comparison fosters abstraction of shared relational structure,
thereby promoting later transfer. Thus, it is predicted that
comparison of instances belonging to the same relational
category should produce greater highlighting and learning of
shared relations than sequential presentations. Indeed, the
study of relational categories has shown same-category
comparison to produce these effects in children (Gentner &
Namy, 1999; Son, Smith, & Goldstone, 2011) and in adults
(Kurtz, Boukrina, & Gentner, 2013; Patterson & Kurtz,
2015).

2333

Though the support for comparison’s central role in
relational learning is extensive, research in relational
category learning has exposed possible boundary conditions
of its potency. Borrowing from the tradition of the attribute
category literature, the study of relational categories has
frequently used the TACL paradigm. However, when a
straightforward pairing of pure within-category comparison
with TACL has been used, it has failed to produce the
predicted comparison advantage. An attempt by Kurtz and
Gentner (1998) found that a straightforward merging of
same-category comparison with classification required twice
as many stimulus exposures to produce an effect of
comparison over sequential presentations. Moreover, we
conducted a series of follow-up attempts that failed to find
an effect of comparison when exposure was equated –
despite efforts to enhance the invitation to compare by
eliciting similarity ratings or correspondences between
elements.
Recent research, however, has shown that learning mode
can influence the impact of comparison. Patterson and Kurtz
(2015) found robust comparison advantages relative to
equivalent single-item presentation on within- and acrossdomain tests of knowledge when learning under a
supervised observational mode (passive study of labeled
examples). However, no effect was found in the supervised
classification mode – suggesting that some facet(s) of the
classification mode attenuates the power of comparison. A
key difference between the two modes is that task
performance – tied to the guess-and-correct cycle of TACL
– is emphasized in the classification mode. When combining
comparison and classification, this may elicit competition
for resources or a strategic element that favors one
component or the other. By receiving accuracy feedback on
each trial, it is possible that participants’ theory of task
shifts relative importance to the guess-and-correct cycle
over comparison. We can refer to this as a weighting effect.
Alternatively, the apparent incompatibility between
classification and comparison may be explained by a
distraction effect (Beilock & Carr, 2005; Markman,
Maddox, & Worthy, 2006). According to the distraction
hypothesis, peoples’ available cognitive resources decline as
pressure to perform increases – a ‘choking effect’ that is
accredited to the occupation of executive attention with
task-irrelevant thoughts and performance-related worries.
Given the greater performance demands of the classification
mode, it is possible that the pressure to perform results in
the occupation of cognitive resources needed for
comparison. Indeed, working memory resources have been
marked as important to the structural alignment process
(Waltz, Lau, Grewal, & Holyoak, 2000). Waltz et al. (2000)
found that when participants were under load that occupied
either phonological or executive working memory, noticing
of relational correspondences was significantly attenuated
and noticing of simpler-to-detect attribute correspondences
increased.
In the present study, we sought to determine whether the
ineffectuality of comparison in the classification mode can

be traced to weighting or distraction effects by varying the
degree of performance pressure in the classification task.
The global factor, termed ‘performance pressure’, was
manipulated by testing an elevated pressure condition
operationalized by: (1) an instruction asserting that
achieving the highest possible performance was the goal, (2)
trial feedback in red/green colors (incorrect/correct) to
underscore evaluation, and (3) presentation of a running
accuracy percentage at the end of each trial. The standard
pressure group did not receive (1) or (3) and received
feedback in black text. The manipulation was intended to
further accentuate the guess-and-correct cycle and increase
perceived pressure to perform. It would also be helpful to
make the classification task less performance-centric, but
reducing pressure would seem to require changing the
essential nature of the task or employing a relatively weak
manipulation. If comparison in the classification mode is
ineffective due to either a weighting or distraction effect
elevated performance pressure should lead to poorer
learning outcomes than standard pressure. To be clear, both
possible effects would be predicted to result in the same
performance outcome – differentiating between the two is
not of immediate concern.
In addition to exploring the comparison + classification
incompatibility, the present study addresses the influence of
performance pressure on relational category learning more
generally by looking at its effect on single-item learning.
Though addressed in the attribute category literature, this
issue has not been studied in the relational category realm.
Markman, Maddox, and Worthy (2006) showed that
participants under very high pressure to perform (i.e.,
contingent monetary incentives) were hindered, by a posited
distraction effect, in their ability to learn sequentially
presented rule-based attribute categories, but were
facilitated in learning information integration categories.
Relational categories are generally considered to be
verbalizable and rule-like in nature (Gentner & Kurtz,
2005). To the extent that the rule-like nature of attribute and
relational categories is similar, a distraction effect marked
by reduced learning outcomes should be expected for
single-item relational category learning under elevated
pressure.
In a 2x2 design, the effect of performance pressure
(standard, elevated) on relational category learning was
assessed across two presentation formats (single-item,
within-category comparison). Additionally, we measured
participants’ regulatory focus – their degree of approach
(promotion) and avoid (prevention) motivation using
Higgins, Friedman, Harlow, Idson, Ayduk, and Taylor’s
(2001) regulatory focus questionnaire (RFQ). The match
between a person’s regulatory focus and their perceived
nature of the reward structure has been shown to be
important to cognitive tasks, including category learning
(see Maddox, Baldwin, & Markman, 2006). To control for
how individual differences in participants’ regulatory focus
might interact with the pressure manipulation, we
incorporated their RFQ data into our statistical models.

2334

Method
Participants
93 undergraduates from Binghamton University participated
toward partial fulfillment of a course requirement.

Materials
The RFQ contained 11 questions, six measuring
participants’ level of promotion focus and five measuring
their level of prevention focus. A five-point Likert scale was
used to collect participants’ RFQ responses. The training
and within-domain test phase stimuli consisted of 36
unique, Stonehenge-like rock arrangements (see Figure 1).
Rocks varied in their size, shape, color, and spatial location.
The stimuli comprised three relational categories:
monotonicity – defined by a monotonic decrease in height of
the arrangement from left to right, support – characterized
by the presence of one rock being supported by two other
rocks, and mirrored stack – consisting of two same color
rocks of similar size and shape arranged in a stack. Each
arrangement belonged to only one of the three categories. A
24 item subset of 36 stimuli was used for training and 12
were reserved for use at test; subsets were balanced by
category. The subsets matched those used in Kurtz,
Boukrina, and Gentner (2013) and the subset was held
constant across participants. For comparison conditions,
training stimuli were presented in same-category pairs. Pairs
were randomly generated for each participant on each pass
through the training set.
To evaluate participants’ ability to transfer category
knowledge to a novel domain, 15 mobile-like stimuli were
used (see Figure 1). Each mobile conformed to one of the
three categories from training, five per category. The
mobiles differed considerably from the training/test stimuli
in their surface characteristics (color/shape of objects) as
well as in the spatial orientation of the category-defining
core which was reflected over the X-axis.

be helpful for learning. A further instruction was given to
the elevated performance pressure groups, indicating (1)
that a performance tracker would show them the percentage
of trials they had gotten correct after each trial, and (2) that
their job was to achieve the highest percentage they could.
Training – Comparison Conditions Training consisted of
two passes through 12 paired stimulus trials, totaling 48
stimulus exposures. Each trial showed two stimuli, side-byside, that remained visible until the trial was complete.
Participants were asked to make a joint category decision
for the presented items and selected their response with the
mouse. The joint decision represents a deviation from
Patterson and Kurtz (2015), however preliminary work
showed performance under joint and independent responses
to be nearly identical. Time was unconstrained for the
category decision. Following the response, participants were
given feedback for two seconds indicating: (1) whether they
were correct and (2) the correct category of the items. In the
elevated performance pressure condition, participants
received feedback in either green (correct) or red (incorrect)
and at the end of the trial participants saw a screen for two
seconds showing the percentage of trials correct to that point
before advancing to the next trial.
Training – Single-item Conditions Training consisted of
two passes through 24 randomized, single-item trials,
totaling 48 stimulus exposures. Outside of the number of
trials and language adjusted to accommodate single, instead
of paired, items in the decision query, the single-item
conditions were conducted identically to the comparison
conditions.

Design and Procedure
In a between-subjects design, participants were randomly
assigned to one of four training conditions using the
supervised classification task. Two conditions presented
pairs of items for same-category comparison: elevated
performance pressure comparison (n = 23) and standard
performance pressure comparison (n = 23). The other two
conditions trained with twice as many single-item trials:
elevated performance pressure single-item (n = 24) and
standard performance pressure single-item (n = 23). Prior to
the training instructions, all participants completed the RFQ
(Higgins et al., 2001). Following the RFQ, all participants
received an archeological cover story and instructions
indicating that their goal was to figure out what makes a
rock arrangement belong to a particular type and that they
would be tested on their knowledge later. Participants in
comparison conditions received an additional instruction
indicating that looking at the two arrangements together can

Figure 1: Sample stimuli for each category in
each phase.
Assessment After the training, all conditions performed an
identical assessment sequence. Participants first received a
within-domain test consisting of the 24 ‘old’ rock
arrangements from training and 12 previously unseen

2335

arrangements. Old and new items were interspersed
randomly. The transfer assessment, consisting of 15
randomly ordered mobile stimuli, was presented after the
within-domain test. Both the within-domain and transfer
assessments were conducted using a category endorsement
task: on each trial an item was presented along with a query
asking whether the item belonged to a given category and
participants responded with either “yes” or “no.” Given our
primary interest in how well acquired category knowledge
could be extended to new cases, old test items were
presented once each while the new within-domain and far
transfer items were each presented twice – once with an
accurate category label and once with an incorrect label.

Results
The trial-wise accuracy data were modeled using binomial
generalized linear mixed effect regressions via the lme4
(Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015) and lmerTest
(Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, & Christensen, 2015) packages for
the R environment (R Core Team, 2015). Models examining
main effects included trial number and the effect of interest
as fixed effects. Models examining interactions included
trial number, presentation condition, performance pressure
condition, and the presentation condition by performance
pressure interaction as fixed effects. All models controlled
for participants’ regulatory focus in the random effects
structure by including random intercepts for the 16 levels of
prevention focus and 15 levels of promotion focus that
resulted from the sample’s RFQ data. In the interest of
brevity, results of the RFQ will not be discussed. Adjusted
means and standard errors for accuracy data can be seen in
Table 1.

Training
Modeling of the performance data revealed three effects in
the training phase. First, trial number was found to be
significantly predictive of accuracy (β = 0.04, SE = 0.003,
Wald Z = 11.86, p < .0001), indicating that participants’
accuracy increased as they progressed through training.
Second, a main effect of presentation condition was
observed (β = 0.53, SE = 0.14, Wald Z = 3.84, p = .0001),
showing that comparison learners were more accurate than
their single-item counterparts. Third, the analysis revealed a
marginal presentation condition by performance pressure
interaction (β = 0.34, SE = 0.18, Wald Z = 1.90, p = .057).
The interaction was driven by an effect of performance
pressure for the single-item condition (standard pressure >
elevated pressure; β = -0.22, SE = 0.11, Wald Z = -2.06, p =
.04), but not for the comparison condition (β = -0.11, SE =
0.14, Wald Z = -0.77, p = .44). In a follow-up test to the
interaction, both comparison conditions outperformed their
single-item counterparts (elevated pressure: β = 0.87, SE =
0.14, Wald Z = 6.20, p < .0001; standard pressure: β = 0.53,
SE = 0.14, Wald Z = 3.84, p < .001).

Old Within-domain Items
Modeling of the old-item accuracy data revealed only a
significant effect of trial number (β = -0.01, SE = 0.01,
Wald Z = -2.76, p = .006), indicating that participants’
accuracy was slightly lower for items encountered later in
the queue compared to those encountered earlier. This effect
may be associated with old items being interspersed with
new ones. There was also a marginal main effect of
performance pressure (β = -0.22, SE = 0.13, Wald Z = -1.80,
p = .07), marking higher accuracy for the standard pressure
group compared to the elevated pressure group. In addition,
there was a marginal interaction mirroring that in the
training phase (β = 0.41, SE = 0.24, Wald Z = 1.69, p = .09)
– showing a significant difference between levels of
performance pressure for the single-item condition (standard
pressure > elevated pressure; β = -0.43, SE = 0.17, Wald Z
= -2.44, p = .01), but not for the comparison condition (β =
0.02, SE = 0.17, Wald Z = 0.10, p = .92).

Novel Within-domain Items
Analyses of the new, within-domain items yielded one
reliable effect: a presentation condition by performance
focus condition interaction (β = 0.73, SE = 0.22, Wald Z =
3.40, p = .001). Again, the interaction was characterized by
a reliable difference between levels of performance pressure
for the single-item presentation group (standard pressure >
elevated pressure; β = -0.52, SE = 0.15, Wald Z = -3.41, p =
.001), but not for the comparison group (β = 0.21, SE =
0.15, Wald Z = 1.34, p = .18). Examining the interaction
further, a comparison advantage was found for the elevated
pressure group (β = 0.56, SE = 0.18, Wald Z = 3.11, p =
.002), but not the standard pressure group (β = -0.17, SE =
0.18, Wald Z = -0.98, p = .33). Since the comparison
conditions did not differ, it suggests that the interaction and
comparison advantage were driven by poor performance
among elevated pressure single-item learners, rather than
exceptional performance among elevated pressure
comparison learners.
Table 1: Adjusted condition means and standard
errors across all performance phases.

Transfer
The transfer results are visualized in Figure 2. Three reliable
effects emerged in the analysis of the transfer data. First, an
effect of trial number (β = 0.02, SE = 0.005, Wald Z = 4.73,
p < .0001) demonstrated that participants’ accuracy
increased slightly over the course of the transfer assessment.
The effect suggests that domain experience helped

2336

participants to recognize the deep similarity between the
two domains and apply their category knowledge.

Figure 2: Transfer accuracy by condition. Error
bars show +/- 1 SE.
Second, a highly reliable main effect of presentation
condition was observed (β = 0.99, SE = 0.16, Wald Z = 6.08,
p < .00001), indicating that participants in the comparison
group were better at extending their knowledge to a novel
domain than those in the single-item group. Third, a
significant presentation condition by performance pressure
interaction was observed (β = 0.50, SE = 0.19, Wald Z =
2.63, p = .01). The interaction was characterized by
pressure-related decrements for the single-item group
(standard pressure > elevated pressure; β = -0.29, SE = 0.14,
Wald Z = -2.19, p = .03), but not the comparison group (β =
0.20, SE = 0.14, Wald Z = 1.46, p = .14). Critically, followup tests examining the effect of comparison revealed that
both standard (β = 0.74, SE = 0.19, Wald Z = 3.94, p =
.0001) and elevated pressure (β = 1.24, SE = 0.19, Wald Z =
6.56, p < .0001) comparison led to highly reliable
advantages over their single-item counterparts.

Discussion
The goal of this study was to evaluate the effect that
performance pressure exerts on relational category learning.
The results convincingly show that performance pressure
has a deleterious effect on relational category learning –
leading to learning decrements that were realized across
training, within-domain test (both old and new items), and
at transfer. However, the pressure-related deficits were
restricted to learners who trained via sequential
presentations. The effect of performance pressure on singleitem learning shows a consistency between the domains of
attribute and relational category learning. The similarity
between pressure effects for relational and attribute category

learning (Markman, Maddox, & Worthy, 2006) suggests
that similar systems and/or resources are employed for
learning the both category types – perhaps mutually
depending on an explicit, verbal system like that posited by
the COVIS model (Ashby, Alfonso-Reese, Turken, &
Waldron, 1998). Future research should further explore the
conditions under which the behavior of attribute and
relational categories converges and diverges.
A specific interest embedded in our broader goal was to
investigate if weighting or distraction effects might underlie
the ineffectuality of comparison in the classification mode
as seen by Patterson and Kurtz (2015). If cognitive
resources that are necessary for comparison are retrained on
the guess-and-correct cycle of classification or if they
become occupied with worry under pressure to perform,
then our performance pressure manipulation ought to have
led to poorer comparisons and poorer learning. However,
accentuating performance and increasing pressure was
found to have no effect on the learning outcomes of
comparison learners; this finding casts tentative doubt on
the weighting and distraction accounts of lackluster
comparison performance in the classification mode (relative
to observational).
One possible rationale for why pressure did not affect
comparison learning is that the manipulation was not
sufficiently strong to elicit an effect. Other studies (e.g.,
Markman, Maddox, & Worthy, 2006) have employed
stronger manipulations, such as contingent monetary
incentives, to achieve high levels of pressure. It seems likely
that, at greater levels of pressure, a distraction effect would
occur, and learning outcomes under comparison would
suffer. However, it is clear that our manipulation was
sufficiently strong to elicit consistent performance pressure
deficits for the single-item group. This suggests that
comparison served a compensatory role to the otherwise
negative effects of pressure. By this account, elevated
pressure learners may have faced a weighting or distraction
effect, but the resources allocated to the alignment process
were sufficient to avoid performance decrements. To further
elaborate on this effect, future studies should evaluate how
differing levels of performance pressure affect alignmentbased relational category learning.
Of considerable note, this study also showed a reliable
effect of same-category comparison in the supervised
classification mode (under standard pressure) at training and
transfer over its single-item counterpart. To our knowledge,
this is unprecedented. Finding a comparison effect at
training and transfer was puzzling, since comparison
advantages were not found in Patterson and Kurtz (2015).
One notable difference is that the two studies utilized
different analysis techniques. Follow-up analyses revealed
that the effects from the present study remained after
dropping the random effects structure; this prompted us to
reanalyze Patterson and Kurtz (2015) using a logistic
regression framework as in the present study. Though
comparison in the observational mode was the clear winner,
showing advantages over single-item at every phase, the

2337

results showed a reliable comparison effect in the
classification mode over single-item at training and a
marginal effect (p = .09) at transfer. This finding provides
further evidence that comparison is an effective means to
promote relational category learning. In addition, it echoes
the need for researchers to utilize analysis techniques that
adequately reflect the richness of the data. For category
learning research, analyzing the data trial-wise using logistic
regression increases the number of observations available
for model fitting, thereby increasing sensitivity over
analysis methods that aggregate across trials.

References
Ahn, W., & Medin, D. L. (1992). A two-stage model of
category construction. Cognitive Science, 16(1), 81-121.
Alfieri, L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Schunn, C. D. (2013).
Learning through case comparisons: a meta-analytic
review. Educational Psychologist, 48(2), 87-113.
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A., &
Waldron, E. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of
multiple systems in category learning. Psychological
Review, 105(3), 442.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., Walker, S., (2015).
Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48.
Beilock, S. L., & Carr, T. H. (2005). When high-powered
people fail working memory and “choking under
pressure” in math. Psychological Science, 16(2), 101-105.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman,
& P. W. Wolff Categorization inside and outside the
laboratory: Essays in honor of Douglas L. Medin.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14(4),
487-513.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15(1), 138.
Higgins, E. T., Friedman, R. S., Harlow, R. E., Idson, L. C.,
Ayduk, O. N., Taylor, A. (2001). Achievement
orientations from subjective histories of success:
Promotion pride versus prevention pride. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 31, 3-23.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 22-44.
Kurtz, K. J. (2007). The divergent autoencoder (DIVA)
model of category learning. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14, 560–576.
Kurtz, K. J., Boukrina, O., & Gentner, D. (2013).
Comparison promotes learning and transfer of relational
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(4), 1303–1310.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). Category learning and

comparison in the evolution of similarity structure. In
Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Kurtz, K. J., Miao, C. H., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning
by analogical bootstrapping. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 10(4), 417-446.
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., & Christensen, R. H. B.
(2015). lmerTest: Tests for random and fixed effects for
linear mixed effect models.
Loewenstein, J. (2010). How one's hook is baited matters
for catching an analogy. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 53, 149-182.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(4), 586597.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN:
A
Network
Model
of
Category
Learning. Psychological Review, 111(2), 309-332.
Maddox, W. T., Baldwin, G. C., & Markman, A. B. (2006).
A test of the regulatory fit hypothesis in perceptual
classification learning. Memory & Cognition, 34(7),
1377-1397.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
psychology, 25(4), 431-467.
Markman, A. B., Maddox, W. T., & Worthy, D. A. (2006).
Choking and excelling under pressure. Psychological
Science, 17(11), 944-948.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4), 592613.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 13, 329– 358.
Patterson, J.D., & Kurtz, K.J. (2015). Learning mode and
comparison in relational category learning. Proceedings
of the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
R Core Team (2015). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Son, J. Y., Smith, L. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2011).
Connecting instances to promote children’s relational
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 108(2), 260-277.
Waltz, J. A., Lau, A., Grewal, S. K., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2000). The role of working memory in analogical
mapping. Memory & Cognition, 28(7), 1205-1212.

2338

