Putting the “th” in Tenths: The Role of Labeling Decimals in Revealing Place Value
Structure
Abbey M. Loehr (Abbey.Loehr@Vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, 230 Appleton Pl #552
Nashville, TN 37206 USA

Bethany Rittle-Johnson (Bethany.Rittle-Johnson@Vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, 230 Appleton Pl #552
Nashville, TN 37206 USA
Abstract
Language is a powerful cognitive tool. For example, labeling
objects or features of problems can support categorization and
relational thinking. Less is known about their role in making
inferences about the structure of mathematics problems. We
test the impact of labeling decimals such as 0.25 using formal
place value labels (“two tenths and five hundredths”)
compared to informal labels (“point two five”) or no labels on
children’s problem-solving performance. Third- and fourthgraders (N = 104) were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions (formal labels, informal labels, or no labels) and
labeled decimals while playing a magnitude comparison game
and number line estimation task. Formal labels facilitated
performance on comparison problems that required
understanding the role of zero, which highlighted place value
structure. However, formal labels hindered performance when
explicit understanding of place value magnitudes was
required. Findings highlight how the language teachers and
students use can impact problem-solving success.
Keywords: mathematics; problem solving; labels; decimals

Introduction
Previous research suggests language may play a critical role
in learning and understanding across a variety of domains
(Fyfe, McNeil, & Rittle-Johnson, 2015; Miura, Okamoto,
Vlahovic-Stetic, Kim, & Han, 1999; Paik & Mix, 2003).
Labels in particular have been shown to act as a powerful
cognitive tool, recruiting processes that support
categorization and relational thinking. For example,
providing shared labels encourages children to treat objects
similarly and categorize (e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986;
Graham, Kilbreath, & Welder, 2004). Further, children
attribute characteristics of ambiguous objects based on their
categorical label, rather than relying on perceptual features
of the objects (Gelman & Markman, 1986). In addition to
supporting categorization, providing shared labels that have
a relational meaning enables children to map related sets of
objects (Waxman & Gelman, 1986).
Much less is known about the role of shared labels in
making inferences about the structure of mathematics
problems. Looking for and making use of structure is one of
eight mathematical practice standards outlined by the
Common Core State Mathematics Standards (2010). For
example, mathematically proficient students are able to
recognize the relationship between place value location and

the value of a digit (e.g., place values decrease from left to
right).
Several indirect pieces of evidence suggest that labels
may play a role in children’s mathematics understanding.
First, shared labels facilitated performance on a repeating
patterns task (Fyfe et al., 2015). Four- to five-year-olds
solved repeating pattern problems and were exposed to
either shared, generic labels (e.g., A-B-B-A-B-B) or
unshared, specific labels (e.g., blue-red-red-blue-red-red).
Children in the formal labels condition solved more pattern
problems correctly compared to children in the informal
labels condition. The abstract pattern problems required
children to make the same kind of pattern as a model pattern
by recreating the part that repeats using new materials. The
shared labels were generic and arbitrary, which may have
helped reveal the structure in the model pattern and
generalize it using new materials.
Second, cross-cultural studies suggest differences in
number names used in different languages impact
mathematics performance. English fraction labels lack
information related to the relational magnitudes they
represent. In comparison, East Asian languages use verbal
names for fractions that explicitly represent part-whole
relations. Cross-cultural research compared how Korean,
Croatian, and U. S. children performed on a fractionidentification task prior to receiving formal instruction on
fractions (Miura et al., 1999). Korean children significantly
outperformed Croatian and U.S. children, suggesting
differences in fraction labels impacted performance.
Additionally, when English-speaking children were
provided with fraction names that revealed part-whole
relations in a similar way as Korean fraction labels, they
outperformed Korean children on a similar fractionidentification task (Paik & Mix, 2003).
Thus, providing children with language that carries
meaningful information and can be shared across multiple
instances may be one way to support thinking that reveals
the mathematical structure of problems. The current study
tested how providing different labels for symbolic decimals
helps children make inferences about place value structure.

Labels and Decimal Knowledge
How would you say the decimal 0.25? Most adults would
name this decimal using informal “point” language (i.e.,

1739

point two five or point twenty five). In contrast, when
children learn to name decimals they are taught to use
formal place value labels (i.e., twenty five hundredths).
Teachers might also use decomposed place value labels by
naming each place value separately (i.e., two tenths and five
hundredths). The way we describe or label decimals may
impact how children make sense of these numbers. The
fractional amounts decimals represent are non-intuitive, and
as a result, these symbols are often difficult to interpret. In
an effort to understand, children often treat decimals like
numbers they have lots of experience with – whole numbers
(e.g., Stafylidou & Vosniadou, 2004). For example, when
children are asked to compare decimal magnitudes they
often think 0.25 is greater than 0.9 because of a whole
number bias (25 is greater than 9; Resnick et al.,1998).
Labeling decimals using formal, decomposed place value
labels might help children understand decimal magnitudes
for at least two reasons. First, these labels could help reveal
place value structure. Decomposed place value labels assign
each digit with an associated value or magnitude, which
may encourage children to make place value comparisons
by providing a shared place value label. For example, when
comparing 0.25 and 0.9, distinct place value labels may
encourage children to compare 2 and 9 instead of comparing
25 and 9. Further, providing shared labels promotes
relational thinking potentially by revealing the mathematical
structure of problems (Fyfe et al., 2015). Second, these
labels may help children distinguish decimals from whole
numbers by reducing a whole number bias.
There are also compelling reasons to predict that informal
point labels will aid or harm thinking. In comparison to
formal place value labels, informal “point” labels that reflect
familiar language adults use may activate partial
understanding of decimal magnitudes children acquire
during everyday experiences. Children are exposed to these
labels for decimals in everyday environments in which we
often label decimal amounts, such as reading thermometers
and discussing weight. Mix et al. (2014) found that children
as young as 3 years showed surprising understandings of
multidigit place values on simple tasks focusing on
mappings between spoken number names to written
numerals, dots, or block representations. The authors argued
that these partial understandings were likely acquired
through statistical learning processes that occur in everyday
environments rich with multidigit numerals and verbal
number names. If children develop these partial
understandings in a similar way with decimal magnitudes,
labeling decimals using informal, familiar labels could
activate this knowledge.
However, using informal labels may harm thinking by
activating whole number misconceptions. Labeling digits
using only their number names may encourage children to
treat decimals like whole numbers. Activating
misconceptions has been shown to hinder problem-solving
performance (McNeil & Alibali, 2005), in part because
children perseverate on using incorrect strategies (Fyfe,
Rittle-Johnson & DeCaro, 2012). Thus, informal labels may

encourage a whole number bias that interferes with
children’s problem-solving success.

Current Study
We examined the influence of naming decimals using
formal, decomposed place value labels compared to
informal, everyday labels or no labels on children’s decimal
magnitude problem-solving performance. Decimal
magnitude knowledge was examined using two main
performance measures (i.e., magnitude comparison and
number line estimation) and several follow-up transfer
tasks. When comparing symbolic decimals, children’s
success rates and the types of errors they make vary
depending on features of the symbolic decimals they are
comparing (e.g., Desmet, Grégoire, & Mussolin, 2010;
Durkin & Rittle-Johnson, 2015; Resnick et al., 1998). For
example, children are influenced by the length or number of
digits (using whole number logic, assume decimals with
more digits are greater than decimals with fewer digits) and
the value of the digits (decimals that include zeros as
placeholders are misunderstood).
We hypothesized that formal labels would facilitate
performance on magnitude comparison problems that
highlight place value structure by including zeros as
placeholders and problems that require ignoring a whole
number response. Additionally, we predicted that the
advantages of informal labels would be counteracted by the
activation of whole number misconceptions that interfere
with problem solving. Therefore, we predicted children in
the informal labels condition would perform similarly to the
no labels condition.
Number line estimation was included as a more general
measure of symbolic mapping knowledge for decimals. We
hypothesized the same pattern of results for this task as the
magnitude comparison task but expected effects to be
weaker given that symbolic mapping knowledge requires
additional knowledge of the specific quantity represented by
a given written numeral that may draw more on children’s
prior knowledge.

Method
Participants
Participants were 121 third- and fourth-grade children. A
pretest was given to identify children who did not already
demonstrate a high level of decimal magnitude knowledge
and thus would perform near ceiling regardless of label
condition. Thirteen were excluded from participation
because they scored above 75% on the pretest measure.
Four additional children were excluded from analysis
because they had diagnosed learning disabilities. The final
sample included 104 children (M age = 9 yrs, 7 mos; 56%
female; 26% ethnic minorities).

Design and Procedure
Children completed a brief pretest in their classrooms and
participated in a single individual session lasting

1740

approximately 40 minutes. Children were randomly
assigned to one of three conditions: formal labels (n = 56),
informal labels (n = 55), or control (n = 56). The only
difference between conditions was the labels the
experimenter and children used to name decimals during the
decimal comparison game and number line task. The
remaining transfer tasks were administered without using
any labels. All tasks were presented on a laptop computer
with the exception of the decimal comparison card game.
The experimenter read aloud each question and recorded the
child’s verbal response.

Materials
Pretest An abbreviated version of a validated assessment
measured children’s decimal magnitude knowledge (Durkin
& Rittle-Johnson, 2015). Sample items included comparing
decimal magnitudes (e.g., circle the decimal that is greater),
identifying decimals worth the same amount (e.g., 0.5 and
0.50), writing a decimal that comes between two decimals
(e.g., 0.4 and 0.5), and locating decimals on number lines.
Decimal Comparison Game The decimal labels
manipulation occurred while children played a decimal
magnitude comparison game (e.g., which decimal is
greater?). The game had the same rules as the card game
War. Children played the game with the experimenter using
a deck of decimal cards, and the player with the greater
decimal won each round. Children read aloud the decimal
labels printed on the cards before choosing the greater
decimal. The printed labels were removed halfway through
game play to give children an opportunity to practice
generating the decimal labels on their own with feedback
from the experimenter. During game play, children
compared the magnitudes of 40 pairs of decimals. Pairs
were designed to reveal different levels of understanding
based on previous research that has identified common
errors children make when comparing decimal magnitudes
(Desmet, Grégoire, & Mussolin, 2010; Durkin & RittleJohnson, 2015; Resnick et al., 1998). Comparisons fell into
three different categories. On benchmark comparisons (n =
5), children compared a decimal to a familiar 0 or 1
benchmark. The second comparison type included
congruent and incongruent pairs (n = 17). Congruent
comparisons can be solved correctly by comparing decimals
as whole numbers (e.g., 0.68 and 0.2; n = 7), whereas
incongruent comparisons cannot be solved correctly using
whole number rules (e.g., 0.51 and 0.8; n = 10). Finally, role
of zero comparisons included decimals with a zero in either
the tenths or hundredths place. Children often apply rules
for the role of zero in whole numbers to decimals. For
example, children ignore a leading zero (e.g., 0.04 is the
same amount as 0.4) and think a trailing zero increases a
decimal’s magnitude (e.g., 0.40 is greater than 0.4). Eleven
of these pairs had identical non-zero digits (e.g., 0.40 and
0.4 or 0.09 and 0.9). The remaining 7 pairs had different
non-zero digits and a zero in the tenths place only (e.g., 0.07
and 0.1 or 0.8 and 0.02), so competing strategies of either

comparing the digit values or comparing the length of the
decimals could be used.
Decimal Number Line Estimation To measure magnitude
knowledge, a 0-1 decimal number line task was created (18
trials; adapted from Siegler, Thompson, & Schneider,
2011). Children were instructed to name each decimal
according to their assigned label condition before placing
the decimal on the number line. The decimals were taken
from previous work and included decimals with one or two
digits (Rittle-Johnson, Siegler, & Alibali, 2001). Percent
absolute errors (PAE) were calculated reflecting the
absolute difference between the student’s estimate and the
correct location. Lower PAEs indicate more accurate
estimates. Each child received an average PAE score across
all 18 trials. Because children are often influenced by the
number of digits a decimal has, we calculated an average
PAE score for hundredths trials (e.g., 0.46; n = 5) and for
tenths trials (e.g., 0.2; n = 5). An average PAE score was
also calculated for the remaining 8 trials that included
decimals with a zero in the tenths or hundredths place (e.g.,
0.40 and 0.09) because children often experience confusion
about the role of zero.
Decimal Comparison Transfer Decimal comparison
transfer items (n = 10; adapted from Durkin & RittleJohnson, 2015; Rittle-Johnson, Siegler, & Alibali, 2001)
included problems with decimals that included digits in
either the thousandths or ones places, which children were
not exposed to during the comparison game. Half of the
problems were comparisons involving the role of zero (e.g.,
3.3 and 3.300).
Place Value Two items assessed children’s place value
knowledge as used in Rittle-Johnson et al. (2001). These
items were administered after the labels manipulation had
occurred to determine if using formal labels helped children
understand place value concepts. One item presented the
number 413.728 and asked how much the 2 was worth from
a list of 5 choices: 0.2, 2 tenths, 2 hundredths, 2 tens, or 2
hundreds. The second item asked how many tenths were in
30 hundredths.
Additional Measures Several additional items (n = 13)
were included for exploratory purposes. Due to poor
reliability and few condition differences, results are not
reported for these measures.

Analysis and Results
To examine children’s performance on the primary outcome
measures (performance on decimal comparison game,
decimal number line estimation accuracy, and decimal
comparison transfer), a series of ANCOVAs with condition
as a between-subject variable were performed. Specifically,
condition was dummy coded with formal labels and
informal labels entered into the models, and no labels as the
reference group. In all models, children’s age, grade, and

1741

their score on the pretest were included as covariates.
Preliminary analyses revealed no interactions with age,
grade, or pretest scores so these interaction terms were not
retained in the final models.

Pretest
On the pretest, children answered a minority of problems
correctly (M = 32% correct, SD = 14%). Importantly, there
were no differences by condition at pretest, F < 1.

Decimal Comparison Game Performance
Across conditions children solved about half of the decimal
magnitude comparison problems correctly (see Table 1).
There were no significant effects between any of the label
type conditions for overall performance, F’s < 2.5. Children
performed above chance (33%), t(103) = 7.05, p < .001, but
condition differences were not reliable. Comparison types
were designed with common errors and misunderstandings
in mind, and some comparisons could be solved correctly
using whole number rules. Thus, we compared performance
on the three comparison types.
Table 1: Summary of Performance by Condition
Task
Comparison Game
Accuracy
Benchmark
Congruent
Incongruent
Role of zero
Same digits
Different digits
Number Line Est. PAE
Tenths
Hundredths
Role of zero
Comparison Transfer
Accuracy
Congruent & Incong.
Role of zero

Formal
M (SD)

Informal
M (SD)

Control
M (SD)

.53 (.25)

.44 (.18)

.47 (.20)

.74 (.28)
.91 (.26)
.31 (.43)

.71 (.27)
.96 (.18)
.14 (.31)

.71 (.28)
.94 (.21)
.16 (.35)

.43 (.38)*
.45 (.38)*
20 (12)*
30 (16)
13 (10)
18 (17)*

.20 (.34)
.53 (.28)
18 (6)
36 (13)
10 (8)
11 (11)

.24 (.39)
.62 (.21)
16 (4)
35 (13)
9 (5)
8 (5)

.48 (.16)*

.39 (.13)

.43 (.12)

.42 (.19)
.54 (.18)*

.39 (.13)
.39 (.18)

.38 (.12)
.47 (.21)

As expected, children’s percent correct on benchmark
comparisons was high and similar across conditions (F’s <
1; see Table 1). Children across all three conditions were
also successful on congruent comparisons that could be
solved correctly using a whole number rule (e.g., 0.62 and
0.2; F’s < 1; see Table 1). However, for incongruent
comparisons in which a whole number rule produced an
incorrect answer (e.g., 0.51 and 0.8), children’s percent
correct with formal labels was highest and lower with
informal and no labels (see Table 1). These condition
differences were not reliable, though. Children in the formal
labels condition performed at chance (33%), t(34) = -.26, p
= .80, but children in the informal labels and no labels

conditions performed significantly below chance, t(33) = 3.56, p = .001 and t(34) = -2.91, p = .006, respectively.
Children’s percent correct on role of zero comparisons
with identical non-zero digit values (e.g., 0.40 and 0.4) was
highest with formal labels and lower with informal and no
labels (see Table 1). There was a significant effect of formal
labels relative to no labels, F(1, 98) = 4.94, p = .03, ηp2 =
.05, and no effect of informal labels relative to no labels, p =
.72. A follow-up analysis revealed a significant effect of
formal labels relative to informal labels, F(1, 98) = 6.55, p =
.01, ηp2 = .06. Children’s accuracy on role of zero
comparisons with different non-zero digits (e.g., 0.07 and
0.1) was highest with no labels, lower with informal labels,
and lowest with formal labels (see Table 1). There was a
significant, negative effect of formal labels relative to no
labels, F(1, 98) = 7.50, p = .01, ηp2 = .07. There was no
significant effect of informal labels relative to no labels, p =
.21, or between the two label types, p = .15.
To understand the negative effect of formal labels relative
to no labels, we examined performance on problems where
the correct answer can be achieved using whole number
rules. On 4 of these 7 problems, ignoring a zero and
choosing the decimal with the greater digit results in the
correct answer (e.g. 0.03 and 0.4). Children’s percent
correct on these 4 problems was highest in the control
condition (M = 91%, SD = 38%), lower in the informal
labels condition (M = 79%, SD = 37%), and lowest in the
formal labels condition (M = 55%, SD = 42%). There was a
significant, negative effect of formal labels relative to no
labels, F(1, 98) = 17.64, p < .01, ηp2 = .15. There was no
significant effect of informal labels relative to no labels, p =
.20. A follow-up analysis revealed a significant, negative
effect of formal labels relative to informal labels, F(1, 98) =
8.25, p = .01, ηp2 = .08. On the remaining 3 problems, the
correct answer could not be obtained by ignoring a zero and
using whole number rules (e.g., 0.07 and 0.1). Children’s
percent correct on these problems was highest in the formal
labels condition (M = 31%, SD = 41%), lower in the control
condition (M = 24%, SD = 38%), and lowest in the informal
labels condition (M = 18%, SD = 34%), but condition
differences were not reliable, F’s <1.64.
Comparison Game Performance Summary Performance
on difficult incongruent and role of zero comparisons
revealed some positive but mixed effects of providing
formal labels. Formal labels led to higher performance on
role of zero comparisons that isolate place value, but only
when there was no competing digit value information (i.e.,
only for problems that had identical non-zero digits). For
role of zero comparisons that had different non-zero digits,
formal labels led to lower performance, potentially by
reducing a whole number bias that led to the correct answer.

Number Line Estimation Accuracy
Overall, children’s estimations of decimal locations on the
number line were inaccurate (see Table 1). There was an
unexpected significant, negative effect of formal labels

1742

relative to no labels, F(1, 98) = 5.22, p = .03, ηp2 = .05.
There was no significant effect of informal labels relative to
no labels and no significant effect between the two label
types, p’s > .21. To understand the negative effect of formal
labels relative to no labels, we examined performance on
trials in which children may have been influenced by the
number of digits in a decimal and could have experienced
confusion about the role of zero.
Children’s estimates were least accurate for one-digit
decimals that only included tenths, suggesting these were
the most difficult trials (see Table 1). There were no
significant effects between any of the three label type
conditions, p’s > .10. Children’s estimates for two-digit
decimal hundredths trials were more accurate than estimates
for tenths trials (see Table 1), but condition differences were
not reliable for these trials. Children’s PAE for two-digit
decimal role of zero trials were similar to hundredths trials
(see Table 1). There was a significant, negative effect of
formal labels relative to no labels, F(1, 98) = 12.56, p < .01,
ηp2 = .11. There was no significant effect of informal labels
relative to no labels, p = .22. A follow-up analysis revealed
a significant, negative effect of formal labels relative to
informal labels, F(1, 98) = 5.16, p = .03, ηp2 = .05.
In general, formal labels impeded children’s ability to
accurately estimate the location of decimals on a 0-1
number line. This negative effect of formal labels was
strongest for role of zero trials and was not present for the
most difficult tenths trials.

Decimal Comparison Transfer
Performance across conditions was low on transfer
magnitude comparison problems, although performance was
significantly above chance (33%), t(103) = 7.43, p < .001
(see Table 1). There was no significant effect of either label
type relative to no labels, p’s > .14. A follow-up analysis
revealed a significant effect of formal labels relative to
informal labels, F(1, 98) = 5.16, p = .03, ηp2 = .05.
We also examined performance on congruent and
incongruent comparisons and role of zero comparisons. For
congruent and incongruent comparisons, there were no
effects between any conditions, p’s < .31. For role of zero
comparisons, there was no significant effect of either label
type relative to no labels. A follow-up analysis revealed a
significant effect of formal labels relative to informal labels,
F(1, 98) = 9.60, p < .01, ηp2 = .09.

Place Value Knowledge
Despite exposure to formal place value labels, only a quarter
of the children in the formal labels condition were able to
use the learned labels to correctly identify the hundredths
place value (26%). A similar percentage of children in the
informal labels condition (18%) and the no labels condition
(6%) were successful on this item, χ2 (2, N = 104) = 5.18, p
= .08.
Children were much more successful at determining how
many tenths were in 30 hundredths. More children in the
formal labels condition answered this item correctly (69%)

compared to children in the informal labels condition (38%)
and no labels condition (43%), χ2 (2, N = 104) = 7.43, p =
.02. Thus, formal labels seemed to reveal place value
structure, as evidenced by understanding the relationship
between tenths and hundredths.

Discussion
While shared labels have been shown to support
categorization and relational thinking (e.g., Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Waxman & Gelman, 1986), less is known
about their role in making inferences about the structure of
mathematics problems. Several indirect pieces of evidence
suggest that labels play a role in mathematics understanding
(e.g., Fyfe et al, 2015; Miura et al., 1999; Paik & Mix,
2003).
We found that naming decimals using formal,
decomposed place value labels had mixed effects on
decimal magnitude problem solving performance. Children
who learned to name decimals using formal labels (e.g.,
“two tenths and five hundredths”) compared to informal
labels (e.g., “point two five”) or no labels were better able to
solve decimal magnitude problems that required
understanding the role of zero. In particular, they solved
slightly more incongruent magnitude comparison problems
correctly (e.g., Which decimal is greater, 0.51 or 0.8?),
solved more role of zero comparison problems correctly
with decimals that had identical non-zero digits (e.g., Which
decimal is greater, 0.4 or 0.40? 0.09 or 0.9?), and were
better able to determine the relationship between tenths and
hundredths. In part, they may have been less likely to treat
decimals as whole numbers compared to children in the
informal and no labels conditions.
However, there were unexpected negative effects of
formal labels compared to informal and no labels. Their
performance was lower on role of zero magnitude
comparison problems and number line estimation problems
that required explicit knowledge of how much tenths and
hundredths are worth. This decrement in performance
compared to the informal and/or no labels conditions on
some tasks may reflect a transitional phase when children’s
performance becomes worse before it becomes better (e.g.,
“U-shaped development”; McNeil, 2007; Namy et al., 2004;
Siegler, 2005). As children learn that their way of thinking
only sometimes leads to correct solutions, they begin to
reject that way of thinking; however, rejecting an old way of
thinking and generating new, correct ways of thinking are
separate processes that develop over time (Siegler, 2005), so
children’s performance can get worse before it gets better.
Noticing place value structure seems to reflect a kind of
transitional knowledge important for developing decimal
magnitude knowledge. Indeed, understanding the role of
zero as a placeholder was found to reflect an intermediate
level of decimal magnitude knowledge (Resnick et al.,
2016). Further, correctly naming decimals using place value
language is predictive of symbolic-mapping knowledge for
decimals two years later (Mazzacco & Delvin, 2008).

1743

Compared to formal place value labels, using informal
labels could have activated contextual knowledge children
acquire through everyday experiences (e.g., Mix et al.,
2014). Unfortunately, the tasks used in the current study
may not have been suitable for revealing this type of
knowledge. In general, children in the informal labels
condition performed similarly to those in the control
condition. There was some concern that informal labels
might activate whole number misconceptions. Children in
the informal labels condition performed somewhat worse
than children in the no labels condition on transfer role of
zero magnitude comparisons. However, in general informal
language did not seem to activate misconceptions more so
than no labels.
In conclusion, findings from the current study extend
previous research on the role of language in mathematics
learning, and more specifically the use of labels to reveal the
mathematical structure of problems (Fyfe et al., 2015).
Identifying mathematically meaningful labels may be a
powerful first step in the process of impacting students’
problem-solving behavior and understanding.

Acknowledgments
Overall group comparisons on two outcomes were briefly
described at the 2016 American Educational Research
Association meeting.

References
Desmet, L., Grégoire, J., & Mussolin, C. (2010).
Developmental changes in the comparison of decimal
fractions. Learning and Instruction, 20(6), 521–532.
Durkin, K., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2015). Diagnosing
misconceptions: Revealing changing decimal fraction
knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 37, 21-29.
Fyfe, E. R., McNeil, N. M., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2015).
Easy as ABCABC: Abstract language facilitates
performance on a concrete patterning task. Child
Development, 86(3), 927-935.
Fyfe, E. R., Rittle-Johnson, B., & DeCaro, M. S. (2012).
The effects of feedback during exploratory mathematics
problem solving: Prior knowledge matters. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 104(4), 1094–1108.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Graham, S. A., Kilbreath, C. S., & Welder, A. N. (2004).
Thirteen‐month‐olds rely on shared labels and shape
similarity for inductive inferences. Child
Development, 75(2), 409-427.
McNeil, N. M. (2007). U-shaped development in math:
Seven year olds outperform nine year olds on
mathematical equivalence problems. Developmental
Psychology, 43, 687-695.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2005). Why won’t you
change your mind? Knowledge of operational patterns
hinders learning and performance on equations. Child
Development, 76(4), 883–899.

Mazzocco, M. M. M., & Devlin, K. T. (2008). Parts and
“holes”: Gaps in rational number sense among children
with vs. without mathematical learning disabilities.
Developmental Science, 11(5), 681–691.
Miura, I. T., Okamoto, Y., Vlahovic-Stetic, V., Kim, C. C.,
& Han, J. H. (1999). Language supports for children's
understanding of numerical fractions: Cross-national
comparisons. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
74(4), 356-365.
Mix, K. S., Prather, R. W., Smith, L. B., & Stockton, J. D.
(2014). Young children's interpretation of multidigit
number names: From emerging competence to mastery.
Child Development, 85(3), 1306-1319.
Namy, L. L., Campbell, A. L., & Tomasello, M. (2004). The
changing role of iconicity in non-verbal symbol learning:
A U-shaped trajectory in the acquisition of arbitrary
gestures. Journal of Cognition and Development, 5, 37–
57.
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices,
Council of Chief State School Officers (2010). Common
Core State Mathematics Standards. Washington, D.C.:
Authors.
Paik, J. H., & Mix, K. S. (2003). U.S. and Korean children’s
comprehension of fraction names: a reexamination of
cross-national differences. Child Development, 74(1),
144–154.
Resnick, I., Barbieri, C., Rinne, L., Hurwitz, A., & Jordan,
N. C. (2016, April). The role of decimal understanding in
fractions understanding and overall mathematics
achievement. Poster presented at the 2016 Applying
Cognitive Science Research in the Classroom – A Math
Center Conference, Arlington, VA.
Resnick, L. B., Nesher, P., Leonard, F., Magone, M.,
Omanson, S., & Peled, I. (1989). Conceptual bases of
arithmetic errors: The case of decimal fractions. Journal
for Research in Mathematics Education, 20(1), 8–27.
Rittle-Johnson, B., Siegler, R. S., & Alibali, M. W. (2001).
Developing conceptual understanding and procedural skill
in mathematics: An iterative process. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93, 346–362.
Siegler, R. S. (2005). Children’s learning. American
Psychologist, 60, 8, 769-778.
Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. A., & Schneider, M. (2011).
An integrated theory of whole number and fractions
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62(4), 273–96.
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). The development of
students’ understanding of the numerical value of
fractions. Learning and Instruction, 14(5), 503–518.
Waxman, S.R., & Gelman, R., 1986. Preschoolers’ use of
superordinate relations in classification and language.
Cognitive Development, 1, 139–156.

1744

