Quantifying Joint Activities using Cross-Recurrence Block Representation
Tian Xu (txu@indiana.edu)
Computer Science and Cognitive Science Department, 1101 East 10th Street Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, 47405

Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)
Psychological & Brain Sciences, Cognitive Sciences, and informatics Department, 1101 East 10th Street Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, 47405
Abstract
Humans, as social beings, are capable of employing various
behavioral cues, such as gaze, speech, manual action, and body
posture, in everyday communication. However, to extract finegrained interaction patterns in social contexts has been
presented with methodological challenges. Cross-Recurrence
Plot Quantification Analysis (CRQA) is an analysis method
invented in theoretical physics and recently applied to
cognitive science to study interpersonal coordination. In this
paper, we extend this approach to analyzing joint activities in
child-parent interaction. We define a new representation as
Cross Recurrence Block based on CRQA. With this
representation, we are able to capture interpersonal dynamics
from more than two behavioral streams in one Cross
Recurrence Plot and derive a suite of measures to quantify
detailed characteristics of coordination. Using a dataset
collected from a child-parent interaction study, we show that
these quantitative measures of joint activities reveal
developmental changes in coordinative behavioral patterns
between children and parents.
Keywords: cross-recurrence quantification analysis; child
parent interaction; multimodal behavioral data; interpersonal
interaction; hand coordination; statistical methods

Introduction
Humans are social animals and coordination is the foundation
of everyday social interactions (Kendon, 1970). We exhibit a
remarkable ability to coordinate our behaviors with our social
partners to achieve common goals at different cognitive
levels and time scales, from motor physiological
coordination, such as dancing (Kimmel, 2012), to goaloriented dialogue and collective task completion (Fusaroli
and Tylén, 2015). During social interaction, the dynamics
between interactors evolves and escalates over time in a
complex way. To understand how information is exchanged
and communication is unfolded through behavioral cues, we
need to examine the characteristics of coordination in great
details.
Recently, technological advances in sensing and
computing devices allow us to collect high-density and largevolume behavioral data to study interpersonal coordination
(Dale et al., 2011). However, due to the complexities and
stochastic nature of human behaviors, new ways in data
collection have also presented data-mining challenges to
cognitive scientists (Fusaroli et al., 2014) – with a large
amount of data collected, how we can effectively discover
novel and reliable patterns to advance our understanding of
human coordinated behaviors. For example, in a dyadic

interaction, two social partners most often communicate via
several expressive channels, such as language, facial
expression, body movements, and manual actions. Those
intrapersonal and interpersonal behaviors happen in fractions
of a second, and together form a dynamically interactive loop
to continuously influence each other at every moment
(Louwerse et al., 2012).
The primary goal of the present study is to introduce a new
method to quantify engagement and joint activities in social
interaction. The method is built upon Cross Recurrence Plot
Quantification Analysis (CRQA), which has been introduced
in cognitive science to analyze synchronization and
alignment in interpersonal coordination (Riley et al., 2011).
The proposed method extends classic CRQA approaches by
using a new representation of joint events: Cross Recurrence
Block. Multiple behavioral measures can be derived from this
new representation, revealing fine-grained quantitative
patterns that cannot be detected with standard statistical
measures of individual and joint behaviors.

Cross Recurrence Plot Analysis
Recurrence plot Quantification Analysis (RQA) and CrossRecurrence plot based Quantification Analysis (CRQA) have
been proposed as nonlinear methods that provide informative
data visualization and rigorous quantification of dynamical
systems and their trajectories with which many properties
would otherwise be lost due to averaging with traditional
correlation analysis (Zbilut et al., 1998; Marwan et al., 2007).
In particular, CRQA is able to reveal and describe the shared
dynamic trajectory between two different data series by
constructing the states that both systems visit over time.
While first introduced as a form of generalized crosscorrelation between two continuous data streams, CRQA has
been extended to nominal time series with categorical values
using a radius of zero in computing state matches between
two systems (Coco and Dale, 2014). These methods have
been widely used in many areas, such as the analysis of
pattern and rhythm in sound and music (Cooper and Foote,
2002), visual search scan pattern analysis (Anderson et al.,
2012) and discourse conceptual structure analysis in doctorpatient conversations (Angus et al., 2012). Despite the
analytical power of CRQA as a non-linear method for
extracting inter-system dynamics, the process of constructing
Cross Recurrence Plot (CRP) can be relatively simple and
straightforward. In the next section, we will introduce the plot

1997

construction process and CRQA with the empirical dataset
from a parent-child toy play interaction study.

Generating Cross-Recurrence Plots from Data
Figure 1 shows both the experimental setup and multimodal
data streams collected in our study. We invited 24 dyads of
children and their parents to the lab (12 children at 12 months
old age, 12 children at 24 months old age). During the
experiment, parents and children played with two sets of toys
in free-flowing interaction for about 6 minutes (Yu, Smith,
2013). The toys were painted into single colors (blue, green
or red) to facilitate automatic image processing. We recorded
the entire interaction from multiple cameras, including both
the child’s and parent’s first-person viewpoints, a thirdperson view, and a bird-eye view. The present study focuses
on manual activities generated by parents and children in toy
play. Human coders went through the videos from multiple
viewpoints and manually annotated frame-by-frame about
which object was held by the child and the parent with each
of their hands. As shown in Figure 1(b), holding actions of
both the child and parent were represented as four categorical
temporal data streams with different color indicating
different Region-Of-Interest (ROI) in each moment. The

sampling rate of all four time series was 30Hz. Each data
point in a time series has been assigned with one of the four
possible ROI values: 1-3 (blue, green, red) indicating the
target object held by one of the interactors, and 0 (white)
meaning empty hand.
Figure 1(c) shows a Cross Recurrence Plot (CRP)
constructed with the child’s left hand holding data stream on
the x-axis and the child’s right hand holding data stream on
y-axis. A CRP is basically a M×N matrix, in which N is the
number of data points of the temporal stream on x-axis and
M is the number of data points on y-axis. For any cell in the
matrix at row i column j, that point Ri,j in CRP is assigned to
1 if the child’s right hand at time ti and the child’s left hand
at time tj were both holding the same object; Ri,j will be 0
otherwise (Marwan et al., 2007).
With standard CRQA, we can calculate various
measurements such as recurrence rate, determinism, etc.
(Zbilut et al., 1998). For example, recurrence rate calculates
the density of recurrence plots that reflects the degree of
coordination and coupling between the behavioral streams on
x-axis and y-axis. In Richardson and Dale (2005), the authors
calculated the recurrence rate within a 30-second temporal
window to reflect the coordinated gaze behaviors between the
speaker and listener; In Yu and Smith (2013), the authors
calculated correlation scores with different time delays and
recurrence rates within multiple temporal windows to reveal
how eye-hand coordination between child and parent
influences the child’s visual attention towards objects.

Cross Recurrence Block Representation

Figure 1: (a) Our multisensory experimental set-up wherein the
child and parent engaged in free object-play interaction. Both
child’s and parent’s gaze, holding action and speech events
were coded into nominal temporal data streams; (b) Coded
manual holding action behavioral streams during one
experimental trial; (c) A Cross Recurrence Plots constructed
using a child’s two hand action streams with the data shown in
(b).

In standard CRP, Ri,j can be either 1 (the behavior of the
interactor on x-axis at time ti and his partner on y-axis at time
tj fall in the same category), or 0 (no match in their
behaviors). In such cases, a plot is usually visualized using
two colors, black and white (Marwan et al., 2007). The first
contribution of our new method here is to extend the value
range of Ri,j to include the different behavioral categories;
and as a result, the CRP becomes colorful – each color depicts
not only a match between two data points from two time
series at a certain point in time but also the exact behavioral
category that is matched. Figure 2 shows the colored version
of CRP constructed with child’s holding data shown in Figure
1(c). In this plot, we used held objects as behavioral
categories.
Traditionally, the data structure of Cross Recurrence Plot
is represented as a matrix composed of individual points and
continuous lines. Therefore, quantitative measurements
derived are based on those two representations. As illustrated
in Figure 2, a set of temporally adjacent recurrence points
form a block (labeled as BlockA with green color). When we
look back to the original data streams recording the held
objects in the child’s two hands (shown at the bottom of
Figure 2), one can easily see that BlockA is the product of a
sequence of two individual holding events: the child was
holding the green object from 276s to 280.5s in his left hand,
and his right hand also grabbed the same object at 276.8s and
continued to hold it much longer until 312.2s. One can

1998

behavioral data; and 3) it is an efficient data structure to
represent and store the entire plot for any further
computation.

CRP with more than two data streams

Figure 2: Cross Recurrence Plot with added color information
indicating the target object of each joint activity sequence.

intuitively see that BlockA captures a sequential pattern of two
manual actions. Similarly, BlockB represents another pair of
sequential holding events: the child was playing with the red
object using their left hand first from 324.3s to 340.8s, then
their right hand let go of the blue object to jointly hold the
same red object from 335.1s to 343.6s.
As illustrated by the two examples above, we propose a
new representation based on CRP, viewing and grouping
temporally adjacent points as blocks with width and height.
Such blocks represent joint activities that can be directly
mapped back to temporal events in the behavioral data
streams used to construct a cross recurrence plot. Formally,
we define such blocks as Cross Recurrence Block (CRB)
that are made of a set of points in a CRP sharing the same
categorical value and being temporally adjacent to each other.
As shown in Figure 2, a CRB can vary in size and shape; if
the height of one CRB is just one data point, this CRB is
equivalent to a horizontal line; if, in an extreme case, both the
height and width of one CRB is equal to one data point, this
CRB is in fact just one single point. With this general
representation, the same criterion and measurements can be
applied to all CRBs, in contrast to point and line
representations which always require different sets of
parameters.
In implementation, every CRB can be simply represented
as a vector <xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax, cv> describing the location
of this CRB on the cross recurrence plot and its categorical
value. Thus, any recurrence matrix/plot can be economically
stored as a list of CRBs: {CRB1, CRB2 … CRBx}. This
method dramatically reduces both storage and computation
costs, compared with the traditional way of saving the entire
M×N matrix.
To summarize, the new representation CRB has three
advantages: 1) it contains the information about categorical
values in two data streams, not just whether it is a match or
not; 2) it can be directly linked to joint action sequences in

An additional advantage of CRB is to capture complex joint
activities. Due to the data structure of a single matrix used in
standard CRQA, each plot can only be constructed to reflect
the interaction dynamics between two data streams (Marwan
et al., 2007; Fusaroli et al., 2014). With CRB representation,
blocks can overlap with each other. Therefore, multiple data
streams can be used in either x-axis or y-axis. Figure 3(a)
shows a CRP constructed with two holding action streams
from child on the x-axis and two holding action streams from
parent on the y-axis. For any point at (rowi, columnj) in the
current CRP, we compare the ith data points in all the data
streams on y-axis at time ti with all the jth data points in
temporal streams on x-axis at tj. The categorical value of that
point can be a list if there are more than one match.
cvi1 is the categorical value of ith data point in the first data stream
on y-axis; cvj1 is the categorical value of jth data point in the first
data stream on x-axis.

For example, point p’ in Figure 3(a) has two categorical
value matches (blue and green) because the child and parent
were engaged in playing both the green and blue objects
intermittently. More specifically, such joint play activities
were usually formed because both partners played with one
object at the beginning, then jointly switched to another
object, and then jointly switched back to the one they played
previously. In this case, the engagement between the first
period and the third period on the original object form a large
cross recurrent block which is overlapped with the cross
recurrent block of the second in-between object. In
implementation, after obtaining the two matching categorical
values of p’, we group them into the existing CRBs. In this
example, point p’ belongs to two blocks: a part of green
CRB1, and also a part of blue CRB2. In this way, point p’
contributed to the overlapping portion between CRB1 and
CRB2. The overlapping situation between two CRBs with
multiple categorical value assignments of point p’ is
illustrated in Figure 3(b) with each layer consisting of one
CRP with one different categorical value.
As shown in Figure 3(b), the recurrence matrix could also
be stored in 3 dimensions – one for each categorical value.
However, in practice, using M×N×C as the recurrence data
structure (C is the total number of categorical values in
behavioral data streams) would require a large storage space.
In addition, this 3D matrix can be sparse, and therefore both
storage and computing costs can be high when operated on a
3D sparse matrix representation. Instead, using CRBs as the
basic building component to represent a cross recurrence plot
has two advantages: 1) completeness: it allows multiple
categorical value assignments of any point in a recurrence
matrix because it can handle overlaps between different

1999

Figure 3: (a) A Cross Recurrence Plot constructed with two hand action streams from the child on the x-axis and two hand action streams
from the parent on the y-axis. Cross Recurrence Block (CRB) representation allows a single plot to capture the dynamics from more
than two behavioral modules. (b) Point p’ has two matching categorical values and constitute one overlap point between two CRBs.

blocks, and 2) efficiency: it avoids unnecessary storage and
computing costs.
With our new representation, Cross Recurrence Block, a
variety of measurements can be extracted to reflect detailed
interaction patterns. Next, we will introduce a suite of
quantitative engagement measurements derived from CRBs.

Coordination beyond Synchronization
Interpersonal coordination is conducted in many complex
forms that goes beyond synchronized behaviors wherein two
partners were engaged in the same object/task at the exactly
same time. In daily conversations and joint activities, we lead
and follow each other’s behavioral cues, take turns, diverge
and converge from one target onto another. In this section,
we will show that the CRB representation can be used to
reveal fine-grained patterns of real-time coordination.

Width and Height

longer than the parent, then the formed CRB appears wider,
as horizontally shaped, such as BlockB in Figure 4; instead, if
the parent was holding the object longer, the corresponding
CRB will be more vertically shaped, such as BlockA and
BlockC. The frequencies of horizontally and vertically shaped
CRBs show the overall influence of each agent in joint
activities throughout the whole interaction.

Time lag
The relative position of each CRB respect to the diagonal line
reflects the leading and following relationship between the
two participants. For each CRB, the lower left corner
indicates the starting point of this joint activity sequence and
the upper right corner reflects the ending point where both
agents exit the joint action episode one after another (see
BlockC in Figure 4). Thus, the start time lag is calculated by
subtracting timex from timey of the lower left corner of the

For each block, the width equates the horizontal length of
each CRB and reflects how long the behavioral module(s) of
agentx on the x-axis has participated in this joint action
episode. Similarly, the height measure states how long the
behavioral module(s) of agenty on the y-axis contributed to
the same joint activity.
For example, in Figure 4, BlockB is formed by the child’s
holding the blue object from 285.9s to 318.6s and then the
parent’s holding the same object from 280.5s to 286.3s. Thus,
BlockB’s width is 32.7s and its height is 5.8s. Similarly, the
sequence of holding events that formed BlockC is that the
child was holding the red object first from 307.1s to 310.2s,
then the parent picked up the same red object and held it from
292.1s to 304.6s. As a result, BlockC’s width is 3.1s and its
height is 12.5s.

Shape
For every joint action, if the child was holding the object

Figure 4: Illustration of Cross Recurrence Block based
quantitative measurements

2000

block: start_time_lag = timey - timex. If the time lag is
positive, then it means that for this action sequence, agentx
acts earlier than agenty, who is the initiator of this activity
episode. For the end time lag, similarly we calculate it by
subtracting timex from timey of the CRB’s upper right corner.
With visualization, one can see the leading and following
relationship simply by judging the positions of the start and
ending points relative to the diagonal line in the plot.
With highlighted synchronized diagonal line and time
shifted diagonal lines in Figure 4, we can intuitively identify
the leading and following agent of each joint activity episode.
For example, in BlockA, most part of which is above the
diagonal line, was formed by the sequence of events that the
child held the blue object first, then passed the object onto the
parent’s hand. In contrast, in BlockB, the parent was playing
with the blue object first at 280.8s, then the child joined the
object play at 285.8s, and continued playing with the same
object until 318s, long after the parent switched to play with
other objects at 286.3s. The start time lag of BlockB is -5.0s,
meaning the parent’s action preceded the child’s by 5
seconds; and the end time lag is -31.7s, meaning the parent
switched to other objects first.
In addition, the numerical value of this measure and CRB’s
relative position to the diagonal line directly display the
temporal relevancy of the event sequence that constitutes
each individual CRB. The CRBs in upper left and lower right
corners of the plot are formed by events far away in time. In
this paper, we mainly focused on CRBs that overlapped with
the diagonal line and calculated their CRB based quantitative
measurements, which will be shown in the next section.

Results
With the holding action dataset collected from our childparent toy play study in two different age groups (12 and 24
month), our main goal here is to demonstrate that standard
measures of individual and joint behaviors didn’t reflect
different coordinative patterns between the two age groups,
while the measures based on CRB representation revealed
fine-grained patterns showing different interaction dynamics
in child-parent play.
To compare with CRB-based measures, we first computed
standard behavioral statistics, such as the mean duration and
frequency of the child’s and parent’s holding events, mean
duration and proportion of time of joint holding events
wherein the child and the parent were holding the same object
with either or both of their hands. The mean results and
standard errors are listed in Table 1. None of those measures
is statistically significant.
Next, we applied Cross Recurrence Block based
Quantification Analysis (CRBQA) to the dataset, constructed
CRP with four holding action data streams for each individual
trial based on CRB data structure, and calculated quantitative
measures including width, height, start and ending time
differences, frequency of vertical and horizontally shaped
CRBs overlapped with the diagonal line.

Table 1. List of behavioral measures of the child’s and
parent’s holding events between two age groups
Behavioral
measure
Duration of
child holding
(seconds)
Duration of
parent holding
(seconds)
Frequency of
child holding
(per minute)
Frequency of
parent holding
(per minute)
Duration of
joint holding
(seconds)
Joint holding
Proportion of
time

12 month

24 month

stats

4.67±0.51

3.42±0.43

t(23)=1.87
p=0.07

1.91±0.14

2.40±0.21

t(23)=-1.90
p=0.07

15.49±1.98

15.26±1.30

t(23)=0.09
p=0.93

22.42±1.56

22.39±1.90

t(23)=0.01
p=0.99

0.82±0.07

10.71±0.05

t(23)=1.23
p=0.23

11.27±1.65

11.24±1.22

t(23)=0.01
p=0.99

The CRB based results are shown in Table 2. Width
indicates the duration of child’s participation in forming
CRBs, while height states for the parent’s holding duration.
Horizontal CRBs are blocks wherein the child’s holding
lasted longer than the parent, and vice versa for the vertical
CRBs. With start time lag, positive values indicate that the
joint holding sequences were initiated by the child and how
many seconds afterwards the parent followed up by holding
the same object; for ending time difference, positive values
show that the child stopped holding the object first and
negative values show that the parent switched to a new target
object first when the child was still holding the same object.
Table 2. List of measures extracted with Cross
Recurrence Block based Quantification Analysis of the
child’s and parent’s holding events between two age groups
CRBQA
Width
(seconds)
Height
(seconds)
Frequency of
horizontal
CRBs
(per minute)
Frequency of
vertical CRBs
(per minute)
Start time lag
(in seconds)
End time lag
(in seconds)

2001

12 month

24 month

stats
t(23)=1.43
p=0.17
t(23)=-2.80
p<0.01

11.89±2.34

7.96±1.45

3.25±0.30

7.33±1.43

4.51±0.56

3.82±0.33

t(23)=1.05
p=0.30

2.22±0.54

4.57±0.91

t(23)=-2.23
p<0.05

4.55±1.75

-0.01±1.32

-4.09±0.93

-0.63±1.26

t(23)=2.08
p<0.05
t(23)=-2.21
p<0.05

Among 6 measures based on CRB representation, four of
them show significant differences between the two groups.
12-month-old infants seem to hold objects much longer in
joint activities compared with their parents (11.89 vs. 3.25
seconds). At the 24 month, they seemed to more or less
become equal partners (7.96 vs. 7.33 seconds). For the
measure of start time lag, positive values indicate that the
joint holding sequences were initiated by the child. In the 12month-old group, after the child started playing with a target
object with their hands, on average, 4.55 seconds later, the
parent followed up by holding the same object. For end time
lag, the negative values for 12 month old group meant that
the parent switched to a new target object first 4.09 seconds
on average before the child terminated his manual actions on
the current object. For the 24-month-old group, there was not
much difference on temporal leading and following
relationships between the dyad. This suggested that in the 12month-old group, the parent was mainly following the child’s
lead, and in most joint plays, the child started holding a target
object first and continued to play with it even after the parent
switched to hold another object. These examples here show
promise that the CRB-based approach can reveal fine-grained
patterns of joint activities that we may not be able to obtain
otherwise.

Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced a novel method to analyze
coordinated behaviors between two social partners. This
approach is built upon Cross Recurrence Quantification
Analysis. The three key contributions here are: 1) to encode
state matches between two agents in different categorical
values and colors in a Cross Recurrence Plot (CRP); 2) to use
a block representation to capture interaction with more than
two data streams in one plot; 3) to derive a suite of measures
based on CRB representation. We used holding action dataset
from a child-parent interaction toy play study to demonstrate
that this method can capture characteristics and dynamics
beyond two temporal streams, revealing developmental
changes of coordinated behaviors between 12 month and 24
month. One future direction in this particular application is to
show coordinated patterns extracted based on CRB
representation play a critical role in child development. For
example, if better coordination leads to better development,
then we should be able to use some derived measures to
predict later development outcome. Moreover, this method
can be applied to basically all interaction contexts with
categorical behavioral data on various time scales. Any form
of interpersonal or intrapersonal engagement shared between
different behavioral models can be easily visualized and
quantified with our method, such as gaze, speech data,
pointing gestures, etc. As we move toward data-intensive
science to understand human cognition, we will rely more
heavily on developing and utilizing data analysis methods,
such as the one presented here, to look for findings that may
be undiscovered but highly robust. We envision that this
method to be a useful and intuitive analytical tool for
interaction study community.

Acknowledgments
We thank Steven Elmlinger, Melissa Elston, Charlotte Wozniak
and Seth Foster for collection of the data. This work was funded
by the National Institutes of Health Grants R01 HD074601 and
R21 EY017843.

References
Anderson, N. C., Bischof, W. F., Laidlaw, K. E., Risko, E. F., &
Kingstone, A. (2013). Recurrence quantification analysis of
eye movements. Behavior research methods, 45(3), 842-856.
Angus, D., Smith, A., & Wiles, J. (2012). Conceptual recurrence
plots: Revealing patterns in human discourse. Visualization
and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 18(6), 988997.
Coco, M. I., & Dale, R. (2014). Cross-Recurrence Quantification
Analysis of Behavioral Streams: An R Package. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5.
Cooper, M. L., & Foote, J. (2002). Automatic Music
Summarization via Similarity Analysis. In ISMIR.
Dale, R., Warlaumont, A. S., & Richardson, D. C. (2011).
Nominal cross recurrence as a generalized lag sequential
analysis for behavioral streams. International Journal of
Bifurcation and Chaos, 21(04), 1153-1161.
Fusaroli, R., Konvalinka, I., & Wallot, S. (2014). Analyzing
social interactions: the promises and challenges of using cross
recurrence quantification analysis. In Translational
Recurrences, 137-155. Springer International Publishing.
Fusaroli, R., & Tylén, K. (2015). Investigating conversational
dynamics: Interactive alignment, Interpersonal synergy, and
collective task performance. Cognitive science.
Kendon, A. (1970). Movement coordination in social
interaction: Some examples described. Acta psychologica, 32,
101-125.
Kimmel, M. (2009). Intersubjectivity at close quarters: how
dancers of Tango Argentino use imagery for interaction and
improvisation. Cognitive Semiotics, 4(1), 76-124.
Louwerse, M. M., Dale, R., Bard, E. G., & Jeuniaux, P. (2012).
Behavior matching in multimodal communication is
synchronized. Cognitive Science, 36(8), 1404-1426.
Marwan, N., Romano, M. C., Thiel, M., & Kurths, J. (2007).
Recurrence plots for the analysis of complex systems. Physics
reports, 438(5), 237-329.
Richardson, D. C., & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to understand:
The coupling between speakers' and listeners' eye movements
and its relationship to discourse comprehension. Cognitive
science, 29(6), 1045-1060.
Riley, M. A., Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K., & Ramenzoni, V.
C. (2011). Interpersonal synergies. Frontiers in psychology, 2,
38.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied attention and word
learning by toddlers. Cognition, 125(2), 244-262.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2013). Joint attention without gaze
following: Human infants and their parents coordinate visual
attention to objects through eye-hand coordination. PloS one,
8(11).
Zbilut, J. P., Giuliani, A., & Webber, C. L. (1998). Detecting
deterministic signals in exceptionally noisy environments
using cross-recurrence quantification. Physics Letters A,
246(1), 122-128.

2002

