Questions in informal teaching: A study of mother-child conversations
Yue Yu12 (yue.yu@rutgers.edu), Elizabeth Bonawitz2 (elizabeth.bonawitz@rutgers.edu),
Patrick Shafto1 (patrick.shafto@gmail.com)
Department of 1Math and Computer Science & 2Psychology, Rutgers University - Newark
Newark, NJ 07102 USA
Abstract
Questioning is a core component of formal pedagogy. Parents
commonly question children, but do they use questions to teach?
Research has shown that informal pedagogical situations elicit
stronger inferences than the same evidence observed in nonpedagogical situations. Certain questions (“pedagogical questions”)
have similar features. We investigate the frequency and distribution
of pedagogical questions from mother-child conversations
documented in the CHILDES database. We show that pedagogical
questions are commonplace, are more frequent for middle-class
mothers compared to working-class mothers, are more frequent
during free play than during daily routines, and are more frequent in
mothers who ask more questions. The results serve as a first step
towards understanding the role of questions in informal pedagogy.
Keywords: informal pedagogy; mother-child conversation;
individual differences; socioeconomic status; CHILDES.

Introduction
To question well is to teach well.
- Henry Barnard, 1860, American Journal of Education
Asking and answering questions has been seen as a core
component of teaching and learning at least since the days of
Socrates. Research in education suggests that, as a teaching
technique, questioning leads to improvements in learning
outcomes (Shymansky, Hedges, & Woodworth, 1990; Wise
& Okey, 1983), and preliminary research in cognitive
development suggests that question asking may support rapid
and effective learning (Blewitt, Rump, Shealy, & Cook,
2009). However, not all questions are created equal. We
suggest that questions by a knowledgeable informant in the
service of teaching (“pedagogical questions”) are a special
class of questions separate from other information-seeking or
rhetorical questions (unlike previous approaches; cf. OlsenFulero & Conforti, 1983). We explore whether and how
parent-child conversations include pedagogical questions in
everyday interactions.
Questioning plays an important role in formal pedagogy:
Teachers ask ~400 questions per day in a typical classroom
setting (Gall, 1970), and these questions serve various
functions from checking class work to motivate thinking
(Black, 2001). The effect of questioning on students’ learning
has been summarized in a meta-analysis demonstrating that
questioning has the largest impact on cognitive outcomes
(such as general achievement, specific learning outcomes,
and problem solving) as compared to the other dozen teaching
techniques surveyed (Wise & Okey, 1983).

However, learning begins well before formal classroom
experiences. Theory in cognitive development emphasizes
the importance of everyday interactions in which adults help
children learn—informal pedagogy (Csibra & Gergely, 2009;
Tomasello, 1999). Recent advances in developmental
psychology have shown that infants and young children are
sensitive to adults’ cues that suggest an intention to teach,
such as joint attention, child-directed speech, name-calling,
etc. (Csibra & Gergely, 2009) These “pedagogical cues” lead
to strong inferences that the adult is showing important
information, and they facilitate learning in various domains
(Bonawitz et al., 2011; Butler & Markman, 2014; Sage &
Baldwin, 2010; Topál, Gergely, Miklósi, Erdőhegyi, &
Csibra, 2008; Vredenburgh, Kushnir, & Casasola, 2014).
One key factor for the effect of informal pedagogy on
learning is whether an adult appears to be knowledgeable
about what she is doing (Harris & Corriveau, 2011; Koenig,
Clément, & Harris, 2004; Shafto, Goodman, & Frank, 2012).
In
particular,
pedagogical
demonstrations
from
knowledgeable others justify drawing stronger inferences
than would otherwise be licensed by the data. Given the huge
space of possibilities for any problem, being able to harness
pedagogical inferences may bolster learning. For instance,
Bonawitz, et al (2011) investigated how children explore a
novel toy with multiple functions after watching an adult
demonstrating one target function. Two conditions, among
others, manipulated the knowledge state of the demonstrator:
she either appeared to be knowledgeable and helpful when
demonstrating the target function (pedagogical condition), or
she appeared to be ignorant about the toy and activated the
function by accident (accidental condition). Children were
more likely to learn the target function in the pedagogical
condition than in the accidental condition (similar examples
in other domains of learning see Buchsbaum, Gopnik,
Griffiths, & Shafto, 2011; Butler & Markman, 2014).
If a critical aspect of pedagogical demonstrations is to
facilitate learning about the correct hypothesis (or set of
hypotheses), then perhaps questions that are asked by one
who already knows the answer will have similar functions. A
learner who infers that the question asker already knows the
answer, may thus infer that the goal of the question is to teach
the askee rather than acquire information for the asker. As in
the case of pedagogical demonstration, we suggest the
questioner’s knowledge state play an important role in
learning. Do parents, like teachers, use questions for which
they already know the answers to facilitate learning?

1086

As a first step towards a broader goal of understanding the
role of pedagogical questions in learning, we explore whether
parents use pedagogical questions, and if so, how common
they are. We do so by analyzing parent-child conversations
from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney & Snow, 1990).
We coded mothers’ questions to their children into three
categories: Pedagogical questions are those for which
mothers know the answer; information-seeking questions are
those for which mothers do not know the answer; and
rhetorical questions are those not intend to be answered
verbally. Analyzing parents’ questions with regard to these
categories will provide information about whether questions
are used to guide learning in informal pedagogy. Additionally,
we characterize cross-individual, cross-situational, and
developmental variation in their use, and review relevant
prior work briefly in the following sections, before presenting
our results and discussion.

Contextual differences in questioning
Context plays an important role in guiding parent-child
interactions. Research has identified general differences in
conversations, as well as specific differences in questioning,
across different contexts such as book reading, free play,
mealtime conversations, caretaking interactions, and
household routines (Dunn, Wooding, & Hermann, 1977;
Goddard, Durkin, & Rutter, 1985; Snow et al., 1976). The
general function and pace of the activities are likely causes of
these different interactions by context. Snow, Dubber, and De
Blauw (1982) have likewise suggested that contexts that are
typically low-stress and non-goal-directed (e.g., free play) are
more likely to elicit conversational interactions; whereas
contexts that are typically high-stress and goal-directed (e.g.,
daily routines) are more likely to elicit directive interactions.
Intuitively, a parent who is interested in engaging in
conversation with their child is more likely to choose the
relaxed moments of dyadic free-play, than instances in which
daily routines must be quickly accomplished.
We investigate whether types of questions may also differ
across these contexts: One possibility is that non-goaldirected activities like free play provide more opportunities
for teaching, so that mothers would ask more pedagogical
questions. On the other hand, it is also possible that non-goaldirected activities provide more opportunities for
conversation, so that mothers would simply ask more
questions of all kinds.

Individual differences in questioning
Might questioning differ across mothers and across families
from different socioeconomic status (SES)? Research has
identified both quantitative and qualitative differences in
parent-child conversations across SES, and these differences
are predictive of the “achievement gap” in children’s learning
outcomes (Hoff-Ginsberg, 1991; Hoff, 2013; Snow et al.,
1976). Questioning has been shown to be an important part
of the difference: One study (Snow et al., 1976) showed that
mothers from academic middle-class families posed more

wh-questions (“who”, “what”, “where”, “when”, “why”,
“how”) and less yes-no questions than mothers from
working-class and lower middle-class families. Indeed, one
way mother-child conversation may relate directly to learning
is through the use of questioning strategies common in formal
pedagogy. We investigate this possibility by analyzing the
distribution of pedagogical questions for mothers from
different SES, as well as for mothers who ask many versus
few questions.

Developmental changes in questioning
Developmental changes can be important in revealing the
cognitive mechanisms that drive learning. Considerable
evidence suggests that the types of questions children are
asked changes with development (Levelt, 1975). Infants
frequently hear “contingent queries” which ask them to repeat
or clarify their utterances (Garvey, 1977; Wilcox & Webster,
1980), whereas toddlers and preschoolers hear more yes/no
questions and wh- questions (Snow, et al., 1976).
The types of questions posed to children may also vary
with development, especially in terms of the knowledge
states of the questioner. Evidence suggests developmental
changes in children’s understanding and inferences about
other people’s knowledge states (Wellman & Liu, 2004).
Similarly, research has shown that whereas 4-year-olds
consistently mistrusted informants who were ignorant or
inaccurate, 3-year-olds were less discriminating about who
they trust for information (Clement, Koenig, & Harris, 2004).
Do the types of questions parents ask change with their
children’s age? Evidence suggests that older children would
be better prepared to correctly interpret pedagogical
questions; however, it is possible that parents’ use of
questions may not reflect the changing cognitive capabilities
of their children.

Method
Sample
We searched the CHILDES database (MacWhinney & Snow,
1990) for transcripts that meet the following eight criteria: 1)
The transcript was in English; 2) The conversation took place
at home; 3) The conversation partners included a mother and
a child, and did not include anyone outside the immediate
family (interviewer, grandparents, relatives, friends, etc.); 4)
The target child was between 3 and 6 years of age; 5) The
conversation represented everyday talk, and was not a
purposeful conversation such as an interview; 6) The
transcripts for mother’s and child’s speech were not separated;
7) The transcript used punctuation marks, and had at least
three question marks in it; 8) If there were multiple transcripts
for a same child (such as in longitudinal studies), we only
used the first (earliest) transcript that meets all other criteria.
The final sample was 94 transcripts from 14 studies (online
supplementary material for a summary of the sample is
provided at: http://shaftolab.com/YuCogsci16Sup.docx).
Fifty-eight of the 94 transcripts came from one study

1087

Table 1: Coding scheme for questions. Note that the subcategories of pedagogical questions and information-seeking questions are
by nature asymmetrical: For example, mothers did not ask children generic questions for which they do not know the answer, so only
pedagogical questions contain a “generic” subcategory; On the other hand, mothers always asked about children’s needs, opinions,
and status as information-seeking questions.

Category /
Description
subcategory
Pedagogical Asker knows the answer of the question
Generic
Testing child’s knowledge about kinds,
concepts, rules, or scripts
Specific
Testing child’s knowledge about a specific
object, event, or person
Information- Asker does not know the answer of the question
seeking
Specific
Asking about a specific object, event, or person
Check status
Asking about the child’s needs, opinions, or
physical/emotional/epistemic status
Clarification
Asking the child to repeat what he/she just said
Permission
Asking for permission
Rhetorical
No verbal answer is expected for the question
Commands
Giving commands in a question form
Attention
Raising child’s attention with a question
(Dickinson & Tabors, 2001) which recorded mealtime
conversations in low-income, racially diverse families.

Coding Procedures
For each transcript, one coder first recorded the target child’s
gender, age, and the conversation partners from the heading
of the transcript. The coder also recorded the social economic
status (SES) of the family and the context of conversation if
that information was available. Next the coder derived the
total number of the mother’s statements and questions in the
transcript using tools provided by the database. The
frequency of questioning (per 100 statements) was calculated
by dividing the number of questions by the total number of
statements, and then multiplying by 100.
Questions. For each transcript, two coders blind of the
hypotheses independently coded the first 10 questions that 1)
ended with a question mark; 2) was asked by the mother; 3)
was directed towards the target child; and 4) did not contain
missing words (“xxx”). Eight transcripts contained less than
10 such questions (with a minimum of 3 questions), and for
those transcripts all questions were coded.
Each question was assigned into one of eight subcategories
under one of three major categories (Table 1). The coders first
determined whether the question was a pedagogical,
information-seeking, or rhetorical question, and then
determined their subcategories. Context before and after the
question were used to help determine whether the mother
knew the answer of the question. Since transcripts do not fully
capture the history and details in mother-child interactions,
this sometimes required an inference on the part of the coder.
However, the inter-rater reliability was acceptable, which
shows the majority of questions can be reliably categorized

Examples

Proportion (SD)

—
23.8% (22.7%)
“What’s ‘A’ stand for?”; “What’d
2.6% (9.0%)
you say [in this situation]?”
“Who came for your birthday
21.1% (22.3%)
party?”; “What does this button do?”
—
61.1% (23.6%)
“What did you do at school?”
28.1% (22.0%)
“Are you hungry?”; “Do you
22.9% (19.4%)
remember?”
“You what?”; “Huh?”
9.2% (11.2%)
“Can I get you changed?”
0.9% (2.8%)
—
15.2% (15.9%)
“Can you help clean up?”
10.3% (13.0%)
“Well?”; “Jack?”; “Be good, hear?”
4.8% (7.7%)

based on our coding scheme. When only the three major
categories were considered, Cohen’s κ = .80; When all eight
subcategories were considered, Cohen’s κ = .78. Inconsistent
codes were reviewed and resolved by a third coder.
Context. After coding all 10 questions and answers for a
transcript, one coder determined whether the main context of
the conversation was 1) over meal, 2) during free play, or 3)
during daily routines (e.g., dressing/bathing the child,
preparing to leave). The other coder checked the code and
discussed with the first coder if she did not agree.

Data analysis
All data was entered and analyzed in IBM SPSS 22. Twotailed tests were used for all between-group comparisons, and
an α level of .05 was used for all tests.

Results
A total of 907 questions were coded. Table 1 shows the
proportion of each type of questions averaged across all
transcripts.

Contextual differences in questioning
Seventy-two out of the 94 transcripts were coded as
conversation over meal (687 total questions); 17 were during
free play (170 total questions); and 5 were during daily
routines (50 total questions). Overall frequency of
questioning did not differ across contexts: average number of
questions per 100 statements was 34 for meal, 37 for free play,
and 32 for daily routines, F(2, 91) = 0.50, p = .61, η2 = .01.
However, the composition of questions did differ (Figure 1).
The proportion of pedagogical question was significantly

1088

100%

100%

80%

80%

SES

60%

Percentage

Percentage

Context
Meal
Free play

40%

Daily routine

Middle-class

40%

20%

20%

0%

0%
Pedagogical
question

Informationseeking

Pedagogical
question

Rhetorical
question

Informationseeking

Rhetorical
question

Type of questions

Type of questions

Figure 1. Proportion of pedagogical, information-seeking, and
rhetorical questions across contexts. Pedagogical questions were
more commonly asked during free play than during daily routine.
Information-seeking and rhetorical questions did not differ
significantly across contexts. Error bars denote SE.

different between contexts, F(2, 91) = 3.52, p = .03, η2 = .07,
with Post-hoc Bonferroni corrected test showing that mothers
were more likely to ask pedagogical questions during free
play (34.7%) than during daily routines (8.0%), p = .05, d =
1.0. Given the small sample size, we confirmed this
difference with a nonparametric Mann-Whitney U Test, and
the result was marginally significant: z = 1.80, p = .07. The
proportion of pedagogical questions during meal time (22.2%)
was not significantly different from the other two contexts,
ps > .2. Unlike pedagogical questions, the proportion of
information-seeking and rhetorical questions were not
significantly different between contexts, Fs < 2.1, ps > .14.

Individual differences in questioning
Out of the 94 transcripts, 62 were documented as from
working-class1 (592 total questions), 9 were documented as
from middle-class families (90 total questions), none were
from upper-class families, and 23 were not specified (225
total questions). Overall frequency of questions was not
different between working-class and middle-class mothers:
average number of questions per 100 statements was 35 for
working class and 37 for middle class, t(69) = 0.56, p = 0.58.
However, the composition of questions differed by SES
(Figure 2). On average pedagogical questions consisted a
smaller proportion of questions in working-class families
(20.0%) than in middle-class families (53.3%), t(69) = 4.41,
p < .001, d = 1.57. In contrast, the proportion of informationseeking questions was higher in working-class families
1

Working-class

60%

As described in the CHLDES corpus: The majority of workingclass samples (58/62) were from a study of low-income families (70%
of the sample had 1987 annual household income of < $25,000). The
other transcripts came from studies describing their sample as
"working-class" and "upper-working-class."

Figure 2. Proportion of pedagogical, information-seeking, and
rhetorical questions for working- and middle-class SES. Higher
SES asked more pedagogical questions and fewer informationseeking and rhetorical questions. Error bars denote SE.

(62.0%) than in middle-class families (41.1%), t(69) = 2.52,
p = .01 , d = 0.90. The proportion of rhetorical questions was
also higher in working-class families (18.2%) than in middleclass families (5.6%), t(69) = 2.13, p =.04, d = 0.76. These
results held with nonparametric Mann-Whitney U Test:
Pedagogical questions: z = 3.45, p < .001; informationseeking questions: z = 2.18, p = .03; rhetorical questions: z =
2.39, p = .02.
To separate the effect of context and SES, we performed
three stepwise regression analyses, one each for the
proportion of pedagogical, information-seeking, and
rhetorical questions, with context entered in the first layer and
SES entered in the second layer (context was dummy-coded;
for SES working-class = 0; middle-class = 1; unspecified
cases were excluded). Results showed that SES had an effect
in addition to context for pedagogical and informationseeking questions but not for rhetorical questions,
pedagogical question: ΔF(1, 67) = 10.88, p = .002;
information-seeking question: ΔF(1, 67) = 6.33, p = .01;
rhetorical question: ΔF(1, 67) = 0.48, p = .5. After controlling
for context, higher SES predicted more pedagogical questions,
β = .65, p = .002; less information-seeking questions, β = -.54,
p = .01, and did not predict rhetorical questions, β = -.15, p
= .5.
The composition of questions was also related to the
frequency of questioning. The frequency of questioning was
positively correlated with the proportion of pedagogical
questions, r(92) = .26, p = .01.2 That is, the more questions
were asked, the more likely those questions would be
2

Because the proportion of the three types of questions were not
normally distributed, we confirmed these correlations using Kendall
rank test. Results were similar: between frequency of questioning
and pedagogical questions, rτ = .17, p = .02; information-seeking
questions, rτ = -.08, p = .27; rhetorical questions, rτ = -.18, p = .02.

1089

100%
would

Discussion

Percentage of pedagogical questions

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
0

20

40

60

80

Frequency of questions (per 100 statements)

Figure 3. Percentage of pedagogical questions is positively
correlated with the overall frequency of questions—pedagogical
questions made up a larger proportion for mothers who asked
many questions compared to those who asked few.

pedagogical (Figure 3). Frequency was not correlated with
the proportion of information-seeking question, r(92) = -.04,
p = .7, and was negatively correlated with the proportion of
rhetorical question, r(92) = -.30, p = .003.2 The correlation
coefficient for pedagogical question was significantly greater
than that for both information-seeking and rhetorical
questions (pedagogical question vs. information-seeking
question: Fisher’s z = 2.03, p = .04; pedagogical question vs.
rhetorical question: Fisher’s z = 3.85, p < .001). The same
results were found when context was controlled for, with
pedagogical questions being more prevalent in proportion as
the overall frequency of questions increased r(91) = .25, p
= .01. But, no effect of frequency on proportion of
information-seeking questions, r(91) = -.04, p = .7, and a
negative effect of frequency on rhetorical questions, r(91) =
-.30, p = .003. The differences between correlation
coefficients also held up when controlling for context
(pedagogical question vs. information-seeking question:
Fisher’s z = 2.01, p = .04; pedagogical question vs. rhetorical
question: Fisher’s z = 3.83, p < .001). These results suggest
that the frequency of questioning is differently related to the
proportion of each type of question—pedagogical questions
made up a greater proportion as the total number of questions
increased.

Age changes in questioning
The sample consisted of 42 3-year-olds, 41 4-year-olds, and
11 5-year-olds. The three age groups did not differ on any
measurement of questioning behavior, Fs < 1.4, ps > .2.
When treated as a continuous variable, age did not correlate
with of any measurement of questioning behavior, rs < .16,
ps > .13.

Educators use questions for which they already know the
answer to guide students’ learning. Our results suggest that
parents do as well. Consistent with research in language
learning and academic achievement, we found the
composition of mothers’ questions differs by context and SES.
The proportion of pedagogical questions were higher during
free play than during daily routines. Mothers from workingclass families asked fewer pedagogical questions than
mothers from middle-class families, even though the overall
frequency of questioning did not differ. Furthermore,
pedagogical questions were more prominent among mothers
who asked more questions overall.
We did not observe any developmental changes in the type
of questions mothers ask their children. It is possible that this
was due to the narrow age range we focused on (3-6 y), and
the developmental changes occur either before or after that
age range. This would be somewhat surprising given the
developmental changes that are going on during this period.
In particular, pedagogical questions depend on children’s
understanding of other people’s knowledge states, and 3-5
years of age may be a period of rapid change in children’s
(explicit) understanding of other’s beliefs (Wellman & Liu,
2004). Research on epistemic trust, however, does suggest
that children’s understanding of ignorance versus knowledge
arises somewhat earlier (Nurmsoo & Robinson, 2009), which
would be sufficient to differentiate pedagogical from
information-seeking questions.
The contextual, individual, and SES differences found in
this study may serve as a starting point for investigating the
mechanisms behind sociocultural influences on parents’
questioning behavior, and their implications on children’s
learning. The lower proportion of pedagogical questions in
low SES settings is surprising. Given that free play was more
likely to be associated with pedagogical questions, it is
possible that lower SES families do not have as many free
play opportunities in their regular daily routines (Snow et al.,
1976). However even after controlling for context, we found
an effect of SES, suggesting that this difference may be
rooted in something deeper than varying degrees of free play
in these populations. This points to the importance of
investigating the origins and methods of minimizing these
differences. Indeed, recent interventions involving parentchild question asking have been shown to significantly
influence conversation in low SES families (Ridge, Weisberg,
Ilgaz, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2015). The majority of
questions used in Ridge et al’s intervention appear to be
pedagogical queries, suggesting an important positive route
for these kinds of questions in future research.
This study builds upon and extends an accumulating
literature on the role of informal pedagogy in children’s
learning. The results indicate that parents may teach not only
through direct instruction, but also through asking questions
for which they know the answer. A critical next step, then, is
to evaluate children’s inferences from these pedagogical
questions, and relate that to their learning outcomes. Doing

1090

so will help bridge theories of pedagogy and active learning
by considering cases where teaching happens not by giving
the evidence itself, but by giving the place to look for
evidence.
The sample for our study comes from the CHILDES
database, so the scope is limited to information made
available, and for the available variables the data were not
balanced. Random-assignment experimental work is needed
to confirm these results, and to extend them to cover other
important factors such as culture. Regardless, these results
demonstrate that pedagogical questioning is common in
informal pedagogy, and that it varies across individuals and
contexts. Thus, we have provided solid evidence that future
controlled studies will be investigating questions that are not
only of theoretical interest, but are also relevant to
understanding children’s learning in everyday life.

Acknowledgments
This study is supported by NSF CAREER, DRL-1149116 to
P.S. We thank Victoria Golinski & Reham Bader for coding.

References
Black, S. (2001). Ask me a question: How teachers use
inquiry in a classroom. American School Board Journal,
188(5), 43-45.
Blewitt, P., Rump, K. M., Shealy, S. E., & Cook, S. A. (2009).
Shared book reading: When and how questions affect
young children's word learning. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 101(2), 294-304.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D., Spelke,
E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword of
pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration and
discovery. Cognition, 120(3), 322-330.
Buchsbaum, D., Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Shafto, P.
(2011). Children’s imitation of causal action sequences is
influenced by statistical and pedagogical evidence.
Cognition, 120(3), 331-340.
Butler, L. P., & Markman, E. M. (2014). Preschoolers use
pedagogical cues to guide radical reorganization of
category knowledge. Cognition, 130(1), 116-127.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 148-153.
Dunn, J., Wooding, C., & Hermann, J. (1977). Mothers'
speech to young children: variation in context.
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 19(5), 629638.
Gall, M. D. (1970). The use of questions in teaching. Review
of educational research, 707-721.
Garvey, C. (1977). The contingent query: A dependent act in
conversation. In M. Lewis & L. A. Rosenblum (Eds.),
Interaction, conversation, and the development of
language (pp. 63-94). New York: Wiley.
Goddard, M., Durkin, K., & Rutter, D. (1985). The semantic
focus of maternal speech: A comment on Ninio & Bruner
(1978). Journal of Child Language, 12(01), 209-213.

Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1991). Mother-child conversation in
different social classes and communicative settings. Child
Development, 62(4), 782-796.
Hoff, E. (2013). Interpreting the early language trajectories of
children from low-SES and language minority homes:
Implications for closing achievement gaps. Developmental
Psychology, 49(1), 4.
Levelt, W. (1975). What became of LAD. In W. Abraham
(Ed.), Ut videam: contributions to an understanding of
linguistics, for Pieter Verburg on the occasion of his 70th
birthday (pp. 171). Lisse: Peter de Ridder Press.
Nurmsoo, E., & Robinson, E. J. (2009). Children’s trust in
previously inaccurate informants who were well or poorly
informed: When past errors can be excused. Child
Development, 80(1), 23-27.
Olsen-Fulero, L., & Conforti, J. (1983). Child responsiveness
to mother questions of varying type and presentation.
Journal of Child Language, 10(03), 495-520.
Ridge, K. E., Weisberg, D. S., Ilgaz, H., Hirsh-Pasek, K. A.,
& Golinkoff, R. M. (2015). Supermarket Speak: Increasing
Talk Among Low‐Socioeconomic Status Families. Mind,
Brain, and Education, 9(3), 127-135.
Sage, K. D., & Baldwin, D. (2010). Social gating and
pedagogy: Mechanisms for learning and implications for
robotics. Neural Networks, 23(8), 1091-1098.
Shymansky, J. A., Hedges, L. V., & Woodworth, G. (1990).
A reassessment of the effects of inquiry-based science
curricula of the 60's on student performance. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 27(2), 127-144.
Snow, C. E., Arlman-Rupp, A., Hassing, Y., Jobse, J., Joosten,
J., & Vorster, J. (1976). Mothers' speech in three social
classes. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 5(1), 1-20.
Snow, C. E., Dubber, C., & De Blauw, A. (1982). Routines
in mother-child interaction. In L. Feagans & D. C. Farran
(Eds.), The language of children reared in poverty (pp. 5372). New York: Academic Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition: Harvard University Press.
Topál, J., Gergely, G., Miklósi, Á., Erdőhegyi, Á., & Csibra,
G. (2008). Infants' perseverative search errors are induced
by pragmatic misinterpretation. Science, 321(5897), 18311834.
Vredenburgh, C., Kushnir, T., & Casasola, M. (2014).
Pedagogical cues encourage toddlers' transmission of
recently demonstrated functions to unfamiliar adults.
Developmental Science.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of Theory-ofMind Tasks. Child Development, 75(2), 523-541.
Wilcox, M. J., & Webster, E. J. (1980). Early discourse
behavior: An analysis of children's responses to listener
feedback. Child Development, 51(4), 1120-1125.
Wise, K. C., & Okey, J. R. (1983). A meta-analysis of the
effects of various science teaching strategies on
achievement. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
20(5), 419-435.

1091

