Racial Essentialism is Associated with Prejudice Towards Blacks in 5- and 6-YearOld White Children
Tara Mandalaywala (tmandalaywala@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, New York University

Marjorie Rhodes (marjorie.rhodes@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, New York University

Abstract
Psychological essentialism is a cognitive bias that leads people
to view members of a category as sharing a deep, underlying,
inherent nature that causes them to be fundamentally similar to
one another in non-obvious ways. Although essentialist beliefs
can be beneficial, allowing people to view the social world as
stable and predictable, essentialist beliefs about social
categories such as race or ethnicity are also thought to underlie
the development of stereotyping and prejudice. Whereas
recent studies in adults have found that racial essentialism is
associated with increased prejudice, the development of this
relationship has rarely been examined. The present research
examined the implications of essentialism for prejudice in a
population of white five- and six-year old children in the
United States, and revealed that essentialist beliefs about race
are associated with increased implicit and explicit prejudice
towards members of a minority racial group.
Keywords: essentialism; social; race; prejudice; cognitive
development

Introduction
Humans form categories based on a wide range of features
(e.g., color, size, shape), yet in some conceptual domains—
particularly for biological and social thought—certain
categories take on particularly central roles in cognition and
behavior because they are embedded in essentialist beliefs
about the structure of the world (Gelman, 2003).
Psychological essentialism is a pervasive cognitive bias that
leads people to view members of a category as sharing a deep,
underlying, inherent nature (a category “essence”), which
causes them to be fundamentally similar to one another in
non-obvious ways (Medin & Ortony, 1989). In humans,
essentialist beliefs about social categories allow people to
view the social world as stable and predictable, yet these
beliefs might also carry with them deleterious consequences.
By emphasizing the distinctiveness of group boundaries,
leading people to see social group membership as discrete
and immutable, and reifying the idea that social groups are
objectively constructed and naturally occurring, essentialist
beliefs about social categories have been theorized as a basic
cognitive bias that underlies the development of stereotyping
and prejudice (e.g., Haslam, Rothschild, & Ernst, 2002;
Yzerbyt, Corneille, & Estrada, 2001; Allport, 1954).
Indeed, Mandalaywala, Amodio, and Rhodes (in prep)
found that essentialist beliefs about race were associated with

increased implicit and explicit prejudice in a sample of white
American adults, suggesting that essentialist beliefs provide
the cognitive basis for prejudicial attitudes. These findings
were consistent with studies that documented a link between
the belief that race has a biological basis and increased
prejudice towards black individuals (Williams & Eberhardt,
2008; Jayaratne et al., 2006). However, the association
between essentialism and prejudice has not been found across
the board (e.g., Bastian, Loughnan & Koval, 2011; Bastian &
Haslam, 2006; Haslam, Rothschild & Ernst, 2002). These
inconsistencies in previous work with adult populations
suggest the need for a more precise framework and better
understanding of how and why essentialist beliefs relate to
prejudiced attitudes.
One of the primary points of
clarification necessary is whether essentialist beliefs underlie
the development of prejudice, or whether essentialist beliefs
are invoked as justification for prejudiced attitudes that
people might already hold.
There are several mechanisms by which essentialist beliefs
could foster the development of prejudice. As essentialism
leads individuals to believe that group differences arise from
stable and inherent factors, essentialism could lead
individuals to view all members of an out-group as more
different from themselves than all members of the in-group
(No et al., 2008). Similarly, essentialism could lead
individuals to believe that social groups demarcate
fundamentally distinct kinds of entities, perhaps even leading
them to dehumanize members of essentialized out-groups.
Both of the above processes have been shown to contribute
to prejudice in adults (Haslam, Bastian, Bain, & Kashima,
2006; Brewer, 1999). Additionally, essentialism could lead
to prejudice by influencing how people respond to negative
information about individual group members. For example,
because essentialism promotes category-wide generalizations
and emphasizes within group similarity, essentialism could
make people more likely to draw conclusions about the nature
of an entire group based on the negative actions of single
individuals (Andreychik & Gill, 2014; Prentice & Miller,
2007).
In light of the mixed patterns of data found in adult
populations, however, some theorists have proposed that
essentialist beliefs do not lead to the development of
prejudice. Instead, these theorists have suggested that
essentialism and prejudice are sometimes related to one

1319

another because essentialist beliefs are purposefully adopted
in order to justify already held social attitudes or practices.
For example, Morton, Hornsey, and Postmes (2009) found
that endorsement of certain social essentialist beliefs
depended on whether essentialism was being used as a
justification for excluding an in-group member or an outgroup member, and Mahalingam (2003) found that higher
caste Indians were more likely to endorse essentialist
interpretations of caste than were lower caste Indians. These
findings suggest that people might use essentialism in a posthoc manner to justify their already held beliefs and, in certain
circumstances, to justify their advantaged position in the
social hierarchy.
One way to clarify the way in which essentialism is related
to prejudice is to consider how this relationship unfolds in
early development. Children begin to show race-based social
preferences and in-group biases in the preschool years (e.g.,
Shutts, 2015; Baron & Banaji, 2006), but no prior work has
tested whether such prejudiced beliefs and behaviors are
related to essentialist beliefs in early childhood. If
essentialism underlies the development of prejudice—by
accentuating group boundaries, for example—then we might
expect that essentialism and racial prejudice will be related to
one another as soon as both of these phenomena begin to
emerge. Alternately, if essentialist beliefs are adopted
strategically to justify already held prejudices and practices,
then we might expect essentialist beliefs and racial attitudes
to remain distinct in early childhood, and only begin to relate
to each other after children gain more experience with the
structure of their social world. Thus, examining the relation
of essentialism to prejudice in early childhood can provide an
initial way to begin to distinguish how these critical cognitive
and social phenomena relate to one another.
Like adults, children are prolific essentializers, holding
essentialist beliefs about biological and social categories
(Taylor, Rhodes, & Gelman, 2009; Waxman, Medin, & Ross,
2007; Gelman, 2003). Social essentialist beliefs emerge in
early childhood (by at least age four), but with substantial
individual and cultural variation in both the ages at which
social essentialist beliefs are acquired (Pauker, Xu, Williams,
& Biddle, in press; Kinzler & Dautel, 2012; Rhodes &
Gelman, 2009) and in the precise social categories that are
essentialized (Diesendruck et al., 2013; Waxman, 2012; Deeb
et al., 2011). In the United States, where race is a salient
category, children between four- and nine- years of age
develop essentialist beliefs about race—coming to view
racial categories as stable and determined by birth
(Hirschfeld, 1995), as marking similarities within members
and differences between groups (Waxman, 2010), and as an
objectively accurate way of classifying people (Rhodes &
Gelman, 2009), with these beliefs typically emerging at the
higher end of this age range in white children (Rhodes &
Gelman, 2009).
The implications of essentialist beliefs for other aspects of
children’s cognitive and social development have rarely been
examined. In a notable exception (Pauker, Ambady, &
Apfelbaum, 2010), children who believed that skin color is

constant over time (e.g., “when you grow up, will you be a
white man/woman or a black man/woman?”) were also more
likely to endorse stereotypes about out-group members (e.g.,
when asked which of two children would be good at playing
basketball, these children were more likely to select the
picture of the black child than the picture of the white child).
Similarly, at older ages, children who believed that traits are
stable over time were more likely to form stereotypes about
novel groups (Levy & Dweck, 1999).
The present research goes beyond these previous studies
by: (1) directly measuring category essentialism (instead of
beliefs about the stability and constancy of individual traits),
and (2) examining the relation of essentialism to implicit and
explicit prejudicial attitudes (i.e. social partner preferences
and feelings of warmth towards majority and minority race
individuals). Although stereotypes and prejudicial attitudes
often co-occur, they are distinct in that prejudicial attitudes
are evaluative and rely less strongly on cognitive constructs
and explicit knowledge than stereotypes do. Thus, the current
study examines the relationship between essentialist beliefs
and implicit and explicit prejudice towards blacks in a sample
of five- and six-year-old white children who are in the
process of developing essentialist beliefs about race.
Examination of the ontological timeline of the emergence
of essentialist beliefs and prejudice will shed light onto
whether essentialism underlies the development of prejudice,
or whether it is invoked as a justification for prejudice after
these attitudes are already formed. If essentialism is
necessary for the formation of prejudice, then we should find
evidence of a relationship in children who have recently
acquired both essentialist beliefs and prejudice towards outgroup members. However, if essentialism is applied as a
justification or rationalization of prejudice, then we might not
see a relationship early in development, with a relationship
only emerging once more sophisticated knowledge and
experience about the structure of the social world is acquired.

Methods
Participants
Participants were 72 five- and six-year-old white children (30
male, Mage = 5.88 years, range = 5.00-6.92 years). Child
ethnicity was determined by parental report. Participants
were recruited from and tested at the Children’s Museum of
Manhattan. Written parental consent was obtained for all
participants and children provided oral assent. All study
procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board
of New York University.

Procedure
Participants completed multiple tasks to assess the extent of their
essentialist beliefs about race, as well as both their implicit and
explicit racial prejudice towards blacks during a single 20 minute
testing session. All participants completed the tasks in the same
order.
Participant’s levels of essentialist beliefs about race were
assessed with the visitor task, a commonly used measure of

1320

category essentialism (e.g., Rhodes & Gelman, 2009). This
measure of essentialism goes beyond racial constancy, tapping
into the beliefs that there are objectively correct ways of
classifying people, and that members of the same group are more
similar to each other and more dissimilar to members of other
groups. In the visitor task, participants were shown a pair of
images, consisting of photographs of two children, and were
asked to evaluate whether it could be acceptable for a “visitor
from some place far away” to group that pair together as the
“same kind”. If participants view race as an objective and
natural way to classify people, consistent with an essentialist
view of race, they should reject the pairing of a white and black
child together and accept only those pairings that follow their
expected racial boundaries (i.e. white with white, or black with
black). Each child saw four “mismatched” pairs and the total
number of times they rejected these pairs was counted and
divided by four to obtain an essentialism score in which a value
closer to one indicates greater racial essentialism and a value
closer to zero indicates less racial essentialism.
To measure participants implicit prejudice towards blacks,
we used an evaluative version of the Implicit Association
Test (IAT: Greenwald, McGhee & Schwartz, 1998) which is
a dual categorization, reaction time test that measures the
relative strength of association between compatible pairings
(i.e. white faces with positive words and black faces with
negative words) as compared to incompatible pairings (i.e.
white faces with negative words and black faces with positive
words). As not all participants were able to read at the time
of testing, we utilized a child appropriate version of the IAT
(chIAT) that replaces positive and negative words with
smiley and frowny cartoon faces, respectively (Baron &
Banaji, 2006).
The chIAT consisted of 5 blocks of trials, during which
stimuli were presented in the middle of the computer screen
in a randomized order. In Block 1 (10 trials), participants
were shown a computer screen on which a cartoon smiley
face was presented on the far left side of the screen in front
of a yellow background, and a cartoon frowny face was
presented on the far right side of the screen in front of a blue
background. The participant was first oriented to the picture
of the smiley face and told to “press the yellow button
anytime you see a smiley face in the middle of the screen”,
and was then oriented to the picture of the frowny face and
was told to “press the blue button anytime you see a frowny
face in the middle of the screen”. The participant was told to
press the buttons as quickly as possible, but without making
too many mistakes. After checking for comprehension, the
child was randomly and sequentially shown the faces of 10
cartoon smiley or frowny faces (5 smiley and 5 frowny) while
pressing the yellow or blue button. Across all Blocks,
incorrect responses (e.g., pressing the incorrect button for the
face being presented) were marked with a large red “X” and
children had to press the correct button before the next face
would be presented. In order to avoid excessive memory
demands, the reference cartoon smiley and frowny faces in
front of the yellow or blue background, respectively,
remained on the screen at all times. Block 2 (10 trials) utilized

the same training and testing as in Block 1, but with the faces
of white and black children in place of smiley and frowny
faces, respectively. Racial labels (i.e. black or white) were
never used in the instructions, or at any point during the
study. Block 3 (30 trials) was the first set of critical trials in
which participants viewed the “compatible” pairing (white
faces/smiley faces; black faces/frowny faces), Block 4 (20
trials) was used to train the participant on the black and white
faces new, switched, locations, and Block 5 (30 trials) was
the critical trial for the “incompatible” pairing (white
faces/frowny faces; black faces/smiley faces). The block
order in which the compatible and incompatible pairings
were presented was counterbalanced across participants, with
half receiving the compatible pairing first, and half the
incompatible pairing first. An IAT D score was calculated
following the scoring procedure in Greenwald, Nosek &
Banaji (2003), excluding any participant who made incorrect
responses on more than 20% of trials (excluded n = 11). A
positive IAT D score indicates a stronger association for
compatible pairings, and thus greater implicit prejudice
towards blacks, whereas a negative score indicates greater
implicit prejudice towards whites, and a score of zero
indicates no implicit prejudice.
Finally, to assess explicit prejudice towards blacks,
participants completed two tasks of their racial attitudes: a
social preference task and a feelings thermometer task. In the
social preference task, participants were shown three sets of
pictures, each consisting of one white child and one black
child, and for each set they were asked who they would prefer
to associate with (e.g., “Here are two kids. Who would you
like to invite to your birthday party/to the zoo/to the
movies?”). The number of times each participant selected the
white child was divided by three (the total number of
questions), so that a higher percentage score indicates greater
social preference for whites.
In the feelings thermometer task, adapted from the adult
version (Amodio & Devine, 2006), each participant was
shown six children (3 white and 3 black) one at a time, and
asked about each child, “Do you like this kid, or do you not
like this kid?” and “How much do you like/not like this kid?
Do you sort of like/not like them, like/not like them, or really
like/not like them?” Each participant then received an
average score for the warmth of their feelings towards all
three white children (white composite score) and all three
black children (black composite score) separately, to
determine the warmth of their feelings towards white and
black individuals. As the feelings thermometer measure was
incorporated after data collection for this study had already
begun, there are fewer participants who completed this
measure (n = 22).
Data were analyzed in SPSS 22.0. There was no effect of
whether the participant received the compatible or
incompatible pairing first on the chIAT, so Block order was
not taken into account in subsequent analyses. We used
Pearson’s correlations to examine the relationships between
essentialist beliefs and implicit and explicit prejudice.

1321

Results
Overall, participants gave more essentialist responses than
would be expected by chance (M = .84, CI = .77-.90; t(72) =
9.92, p < .001), and there was no change in the magnitude of
essentialist beliefs about race across development (r (72) =
.06, p = .59).
Across all participants, there was an overall implicit bias
towards whites (M = .21, CI = .07-.35; t(61) = 3.09, p =.003),
with participants demonstrating a stronger association
between white/good and black/bad, than between white/bad
and black/good. In line with the hypothesis that essentialism
leads to the development of prejudice, essentialist beliefs
about race were associated with increased implicit prejudice,
as measured by the chIAT (r (61) = .31, p = .01: Fig. 1).

*

Implicit prejudice (IAT D score)

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
Weak Essentializer

Strong Essentializer

Figure 1: Relationship between essentialist beliefs about
race and greater implicit prejudice as measured by the chIAT
as shown for weak (M = -.04, CI = -.24-.17, n = 19) and strong
(M = .32, CI = .15-.49, n = 42) essentializers. Strong
essentializers were significantly more likely to exhibit
implicit prejudice towards blacks than weak essentializers
(t(59) = -2.55, p =.013).
Essentialist beliefs about race were also marginally
associated with greater feelings of warmth towards white
individuals, as measured by the white composite score on the
feelings thermometer (r (22) = .40, p = .06). We found no
relationship between essentialist beliefs about race and
feelings of warmth towards blacks (r (22) = -.13, p = .56).
There was also no relation between essentialism and
responses on the social preference task (r (63) = .08, p = .56).

Discussion
We found that essentialist beliefs about race were related to
white children’s implicit prejudice towards members of a
socially disadvantaged, racial minority out-group, and
explicit feelings of warmth towards members of their own
socially advantaged, racial majority in-group. Echoing the
results of studies done in adults, we found that by the age of
five, white children show a clear relationship between
essentialism and increased implicit prejudice towards blacks,
an out-group, and are beginning to show a relationship

between essentialism and greater liking of whites, their ingroup. Co-occurrence of essentialist beliefs and prejudice
early in development and during the pre-/early-school years
when exposure and knowledge of social structure and
hierarchy is less fully developed supports the hypothesis that
essentialism contributes to the early formation of prejudiced
attitudes.
There are several remaining questions that will be
important to address in future work. Although this study
found that the link between essentialism and prejudice is not
dependent upon extensive social experience and knowledge
of stereotypes, the precise mechanism by which essentialism
might affect the formation of prejudice is still an open
question. There are multiple, non-mutually exclusive ways
by which essentialism could lead to increased prejudice, and
these mechanisms could vary depending on the social group
being essentialized, the social group status of the individual
who holds the essentialist beliefs, or developmental stage.
For example, as members of a socially dominant group,
essentialism in white individuals might be associated with
greater prejudice towards socially disadvantaged racial
groups by emphasizing the boundaries and distinctiveness
between racial groups, or by leading them to view out-group
members as a distinctly different kind of individual (e.g., No
et al., 2008). In either manner, these views are likely to
increase their in-group bias and positive feelings towards
their own racial group, leading them to feel more warmly
towards their own group members. White adults and children
both demonstrate similar relationships between essentialism
and greater in-group liking, in support of the idea that
essentialism in white individuals is associated with prejudice
towards out-groups by reinforcing group boundaries and
increasing in-group preferences.
Without data on black children, it is difficult to determine
whether essentialism contributes to the formation of
prejudice in the same way across all social groups. As
essentialism is related to increased prejudice towards ingroup members in black adults (Mandalaywala, Amodio, &
Rhodes, in prep), it is possible that essentialism in black
children or adults might be associated with prejudice through
more of a post-hoc justification of a socially disadvantaged
position than was found in white children or adults. By
utilizing a more diverse sample and studying these same
relationships in black children, we can better understand
whether the mechanistic link between essentialism and
prejudice is similar across children (i.e. similar relationship
regardless of child characteristics), varies based on specific
characteristics of both the individual and the particular
category being essentialized (i.e. different relationships
depending
on
child
characteristics),
and/or
is
developmentally variant (i.e. relationship changes between
childhood and adulthood as a consequence of social
experience).
Children as young as four- to six-years-old show
increased liking and prefer to affiliate with those higher in
social status and wealth, and at these ages they also begin to
equate race and social status (Shutts, 2015). Therefore, even

1322

though the data we present here did not support the
hypothesis that essentialist beliefs are applied to justify
prejudice, it is possible that different results would be
obtained in minority race children, opening up the possibility
that some social groups might use essentialist reasoning in a
post-hoc manner, while for others essentialism is a necessary
component for the formation of prejudiced attitudes
However, as we did not manipulate children’s essentialist
beliefs, we are unable in this study to assess a causal
relationship between essentialism and prejudicial attitudes.
Future research should experimentally manipulate
essentialist beliefs about race and assess the consequences for
racial attitudes and prejudice to determine whether
essentialism is simply related to prejudice or actually leads to
it. Findings from recent experimental research in adults
suggest that there is a causal relationship in which
essentialism directly influences the degree of prejudice
reported towards blacks (Mandalaywala, Amodio, & Rhodes,
in prep; Williams & Eberhardt, 2008), but the present study
does now allow us to support that claim in children.
This study supports the proposal that certain key features
of intergroup cognition are continuous across development
(e.g., Dunham, Baron, & Banaji, 2008), and that essentialist
beliefs about race are more likely to contribute to the
formation of prejudiced attitudes than to be a consequence of
prejudiced attitudes, at least in socially advantaged white
children. Whereas additional research incorporating a more
diverse sample of children will continue to clarify the
underlying relationship between essentialism and prejudice
and the direction of this relationship, this research lays the
basis for future studies to investigate new ways to shape early
developmental processes to reduce intergroup biases and
prejudice towards vulnerable groups in society.

Acknowledgments
This research would not have been possible without the time
and efforts of our undergraduate research assistants or
without the families who participated in this research at the
Children’s Museum of Manhattan. We also thank Yarrow
Dunham for providing stimuli and scripts for the chIAT, and
David Amodio for advisement on measures of prejudice. This
work was supported by NSF grant BC-1226942 to Rhodes.

References
Aboud, F. E. (2003). The formation of in-group favoritism
and out-group prejudice in young children: Are they
distinct attitudes? Developmental Psychology, Vol 39, 4860.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Amodio, D.M., & Devine, P.G. (2006). Stereotyping and
evaluation in implicit race bias: Evidence for independent
constructs and unique effects on behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 652-661.
Andreychik, M.R., & Gill, M.J. (2014). Do natural kind
beliefs about social groups contribute to prejudice?
Distinguishing bio-somatic essentialism from bio-

behavioral essentialism, and both of these from
entiativity. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 18,
454-474.
Baron, A. S., & Banaji, M. R. (2006). The development of
implicit attitudes: Evidence of race evaluations from ages
6, 10, and adulthood. Psychological Science, 17, 53–58.
Bastian, B., & Haslam, N. (2006). Psychological
essentialism and stereotyping endorsement. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 228-235.
Bastian, B., Loughnan, S., & Koval, P. (2011). Essentialist
beliefs predict automatic motor-responses to social
categories. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 14,
559-567.
Brewer, M. B. (1999). The psychology of prejudice:
Ingroup love or outgroup hate. Journal of Social Issues,
55, 429–444.
Deeb, I., Segall, G., Birnbaum, D., Ben-Eliyahu, A., &
Diesendruck, G. (2011). Seeing isn't believing: The effect
of intergroup exposure on children's essentialist beliefs
about ethnic categories. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 101, 1139-1156.
Diesendruck, G., Goldfein-Elbaz, R., Rhodes, M., Gelman,
S., & Neumark, N. (2013). Cross-cultural differences in
children's beliefs about the objectivity of social
categories. Child Development, 84, 1906-1917.
Dunham, Y., Baron, A.S., & Banaji, M.R. (2008). The
development of implicit intergroup cognition. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 12, 248-253.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. Oxford University
Press.
Greenwald, A.G., McGhee, D.E., & Schwartz, J.K.L.
(1998). Measuring individual differences in implicit
cognition: The Implicit Association Test. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1464-1480.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2003).
Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: I.
An improved scoring algorithm. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 85, 197-216.
Haslam, N., Bastian, B., Bain, P., & Kashima, Y. (2006).
Psychological essentialism, implicit theories, and
intergroup relations. Group Processes and Intergroup
Relations, 9, 63–76.
Haslam, N., & Levy, S. R. (2006). Essentialist beliefs about
homosexuality: Structure and implications for prejudice.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 471-485.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2002). Are
essentialist beliefs associated with prejudice? British
Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 87-100.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist
beliefs about social categories. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 39, 113-127.
Hirschfeld, L. A. (1995). Race in the making: Cognition,
culture, and the child's construction of human kinds. MIT
Press.
Jayaratne, T. E., Ybarra, O., Sheldon, J. P., Brown, T. N.,
Feldbaum, M., Pfeffer, C. A., & Petty, E. M. (2006).

1323

White Americans' genetic lay theories of race differences
and sexual orientation: Their relationship with prejudice
toward Blacks, and gay men and lesbians. Group
Processes & Intergroup Relations, 9, 77-94.
Kinzler, K.D., & Dautel, J.B. (2012). Children’s essentialist
reasoning about language and race. Developmental
Science, 15, 131-138.
Levy, S.R., & Dweck, C.S. (1999). The impact of children’s
static versus dynamic conceptions of people on stereotype
formation. Child Development, 70, 1163-1180.
Mahalingam, R. (2003). Essentialism, culture, and power:
Representations of social class. Journal of Social Issues,
59, 733-749.
Mandalaywala, T.M., Amodio, D.M. & Rhodes, M. (in
prep). Essentialism promotes racial prejudice by
increasing acceptance of the status quo.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning, pp. 179-195,
Cambridge.
Morton, T.A., Hornsey, M.J., & Postmes, T. (2009).
Shifting ground: The variable use of essentialism in
contexts of inclusion and exclusion. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 48, 35-59.
No, S., Hong, Y., Liao, H., Lee, K., Wood, D., & Chao, M.
M. (2008). Lay theory of race affects and moderates
Asian Americans’ responses toward American culture.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 9911004.
Pauker, K., Ambady, N., & Apfelbaum, E. P. (2010). Race
Salience and Essentialist Thinking in Racial Stereotype
Development. Child Development, 81, 1799-1813.
Pauker, K., Xu, Y., Williams, A., & Biddle, A. M. (in
press). Race essentialism and contextual differences in
children's racial stereotyping. Child Development.
Prentice, D. A., & Miller, D. T. (2007). Psychological
essentialism of human categories. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 16, 202-206.
Rhodes, M., & Gelman, S. A. (2009). A developmental
examination of the conceptual structure of animal,
artifact, and human social categories across two cultural
contexts. Cognitive Psychology, 59, 244-274.
Rhodes, M., Leslie, S.J., & Tworek, C. (2012). Cultural
transmission of social essentialism. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109, 13526-13531.
Shutts, K. (2015). Young children's preferences: Gender,
race, and social status. Child Development Perspectives,
9, 262-266.
Taylor, M. G., Rhodes, M., & Gelman, S. A. (2009). Boys
will be boys; cows will be cows: Children's essentialist
reasoning about gender categories and animal species.
Child Development, 80, 461-481.
Williams, M. J., & Eberhardt, J. L. (2008). Biological
conceptions of race and the motivation to cross racial
boundaries. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
94, 1033-1047.

Waxman, S.R. (2010). Names will never hurt me? Naming
and the development of racial and gender categories in
preschool-aged children. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 40, 593-610.
Waxman, S.R. (2012). Social categories are shaped by
social experience. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16, 531532.
Waxman, S.R., Medin, D., & Ross, N. (2007).
Folkbiological reasoning from a cross-cultural
developmental perspective: early essentialist notions are
shaped by cultural beliefs. Developmental Psychology,
43, 294-308.
Yzerbyt, V., Corneille, O., & Estrada, C. (2001). The
interplay of subjective essentialism and entitativity in the
formation of stereotypes. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 5, 141-155.

1324

