Reading experience shapes the mental timeline but not the mental number line
Benjamin Pitt 1
(bpitt@uchicago.edu)

Daniel Casasanto1,2
(casasanto@uchicago.edu)

1

2

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5848 S. University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Grossman Institute for Neuroscience, University of Chicago, 5812 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract

People conceptualize both time and numbers as unfolding
along a horizontal line, either from left to right or from right
to left. The direction of both the mental timeline (MTL) and
the mental number line (MNL) are widely assumed to depend
on the direction of reading and writing within a culture.
Although experimental evidence supports this assumption
regarding the MTL, there is no clear evidence that reading
direction determines the direction of the MNL. Here we
tested effects of reading experience on the direction of both
the MTL and MNL. Participants read English text either
normally (from left to right) or mirror-reversed (from right to
left). After normal reading, participants showed the spacetime associations and space-number associations typical of
Westerners. After mirror reading, participants’ space-time
associations were significantly reduced but their spacenumber associations were unchanged. These results suggest
that the MTL and MNL have different experiential bases.
Whereas the MTL can be shaped by reading experience, the
MNL is shaped by other culture-specific practices through
which people experience numbers arrayed in left-right space.
Keywords: SNARC; Mental number line; Mental timeline;
Space; Time; Reading direction; Numerical cognition

Introduction
Across many cultures, people use left-right space to think
about both time and number. In English-speaking cultures,
people associate earlier events with the left side of space
and later events with the right, forming an implicit mental
timeline (MTL) that progresses from left to right. Likewise,
English speakers associate smaller numbers with the left and
larger numbers with the right, forming an implicit mental
number line (MNL) that increases from left to right. These
spatial mappings of time and number have been
demonstrated in hundreds of experiments, most often using
reaction time (RT) tasks: People tend to respond faster to
earlier events and smaller numbers using their left hand and
to later events and larger numbers using their right hand
(Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993; Wood, Willems, Nuerk
& Fischer, 2008; Bonato, Zorzi & Umiltà, 2012). These
spatial mappings of time and number are also evident in
people’s spontaneous gestures (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012)
and eye movements (Fischer, Castel, Dodd & Pratt, 2003;
Loestscher, Bockisch & Brugger, 2008) across lateral space.
What determines the directions of the MTL and MNL?
On the basis of cross-cultural variation, many scholars have
assumed that the directions of both the MTL and MNL are
determined by the direction in which people read and write

text. Yet, upon examination, the evidence for this
assumption is much stronger for the MTL than the MNL.
People from Western cultures show MTLs that progress
from left to right (Spaniards: Santiago, Lupáñez, Pérez, &
Funes, 2007; Canadians: Weger & Pratt, 2008), whereas
people from cultures where text is written from right to left
show the corresponding reversal in the MTL (i.e. earlier
events on the right, later events on the left; Arabic: Tversky,
Kugelmass & Winter, 1991; Hebrew: Fuhrman &
Boroditsky, 2010; Ouellet, Santiago, Israeli & Gabay, 2010;
cf., Tversky et al., 1991). Despite this clear correlation, it is
not known to what extent the direction of reading and
writing is a cause or an effect of cross-cultural variation in
implicit space–time mappings, in part because cultural
practices tend to covary. Groups who write from left to right
also tend to spatialize time on calendars and graphs from
left to right (Tversky et al., 1991), and to gesture according
to a left-to-right mental timeline (Casasanto & Jasmin,
2012; Cooperrider & Nuñez, 2009). This covariation leaves
open many possible scenarios according to which
orthography could play a primary causal role, a mediating
role, or no causal role at all in determining the direction of
the MTL (see Casasanto & Bottini, 2014).
Testing whether reading experience can play a causal role
in determining the direction of the MTL requires
experimental intervention. Casasanto and Bottini (2014)
randomly assigned Dutch speakers to read text in either
normal orthography (from left to right) or mirror-reversed
orthography (from right to left) while classifying events as
either earlier or later in time. Participants who read normally
were faster to classify earlier events with their left hand and
later events with their right hand, reflecting the left-to-right
MTL typical of Westerners. By contrast, those who read
mirror-reversed text showed the opposite pattern of RTs,
showing a right-to-left MTL like that of Arabic speakers.
Together, the correlational and experimental data provide
strong support for the claim that reading experience can
determine the direction of the MTL.
In the case of the MNL, however, the evidence is much
less clear. In general, the direction of the MNL covaries
with the direction of written text in a culture: Westerners
tend to show MNLs that increase from left to right (e.g.
French: Dehaene et al., 1993; Scots: Fischer, 2008;
Canadians: Shaki, Fischer, & Petrusic, 2009), whereas
people from some Arabic cultures show MNLs in the
opposite direction (i.e. smaller numbers on the right, larger

2753

numbers on the left), consistent with the right-to-left reading
direction in their cultures (Palestinians: Shaki et al., 2009;
Lebanese: Zebian, 2005). This cross-cultural variation has
lead to a general consensus that, like the MTL, the MNL’s
direction is determined by the direction of orthography.
Yet, overall, the claim that reading or writing experience
determines the direction of the MNL is neither wellsupported by empirical evidence nor clearly motivated.
First, the direction of people’s MNLs appears to be only
loosely correlated with the direction in which they read and
write text. In their seminal study establishing the SpatialNumerical Association of Response Codes (SNARC) effect,
Dehaene et al. (1993) found that French participants
responded faster to small numbers with the left hand and
large numbers with the right. However, this same study
found “no evidence” of a reversed SNARC effect in Iranians
who had extensive exposure to right-to-left orthography.
Another study found a reversed SNARC effect in Arabicspeaking Palestinians but no SNARC effect in Hebrewspeaking Israelis, who also read text from right to left (Shaki
et al., 2009). One other study has demonstrated a reversed
SNARC effect among Arabic-speakers (Zebian, 2005), but
contrary to predictions, Arabic-English bilinguals showed
reversed SNARC effects that were numerically stronger
than those of Arabic monolinguals (and English
monolinguals showed no significant SNARC effect).
Although these three studies are often cited as evidence for
the proposal that reading direction shapes the MNL, none of
them clearly support this proposal (see also Fischer, Shaki,
& Cruise, 2009).
The only direct experimental test of the effect of reading
experience on the direction of the MNL produced a null
result1. French participants responded to number words
presented in either standard or mirror-reversed orthography.
Participants showed normal SNARC effects in both
conditions; Orthography had no effect on the strength or
direction of the SNARC (Dehaene et al., 1993: Experiment
8). In spite of this result, the researchers concluded that
“[t]he particular direction of the spatial-numerical
association seems to be determined by the direction of
writing,” (Dehaene et al., 1993, pg. 394) – a conclusion that
has been widely accepted for more than two decades. Yet,
there is little evidence to support this conclusion, and some
clear reasons to doubt it, on the basis of both correlational
and experimental data.
Why might reading experience determine the direction of
the MTL but not the MNL? The answer may be found in the
experience of reading. When reading English text, people’s
eyes start on the left side of the page at an earlier time and
1

In a study by Shaki & Fischer (2008), Hebrew-Russian bilinguals
showed weaker SNARC effects after reading in Hebrew than after
reading in Russian. However, in these experiments, reading
direction was confounded with language. Therefore, any difference
between conditions may be due to other cultural factors that differ
across these language groups.

end on the right side at a later time. In this experience,
progress through time correlates with progress (rightward)
through space. This experiental correlation between space
and time in orthography is sufficient to determine the
direction of the MTL (Casasanto & Bottini, 2014).
There is no analogous correlation between space and
number in the act of reading ordinary text (as opposed to
reading numbers, per se). Moving rightward across the page
corresponds to moving later in time, but it does not
correspond to moving greater in number (unless people
count words as they read, which is unlikely). Reading or
writing text creates an experiential link between space and
time, but not between space and number. As such, the
proposal that reading experience plays a functional role in
determining the direction of the MTL is well motivated, but
the proposal that reading experience plays a functional role
in determining the direction of the MNL is not.
Here we tested the effects of reading experience on the
direction of the MTL and MNL, by randomly assigning US
participants to read either normal or mirror-reversed English
text. After reading training, we assessed the strength and
direction of participants’ MTLs and MNLs as indexed by
their RTs on matched space-time and space-number
congruity tasks. We reasoned that if reading direction can
play a causal role in determining the direction of both the
MTL and the MNL, then participants should show normal
space-time and space-number congruity effects after reading
normal text, and reduced (or reversed) effects after reading
mirror-reversed text, for both time and number.
Alternatively, if the directions of the MTL and MNL are
determined by different kinds of experience, then mirrorreversed reading should reduce (or reverse) the space-time
congruity effect but not the space-number congruity effect.

Method
Participants
Sixty-four right-handed native English speakers from the
University of Chicago community participated for payment
or course credit. Half were randomly assigned to the
standard reading condition (n=32) and the other half to the
reversed reading condition (n=32).

Materials and Procedure
Participants performed a two-part experiment in which a
training phase was followed by a test phase.
Training Phase. In the training phase, participants read a
passage silently in either standard or mirror-reversed
orthography. They were seated in front of a 24-inch Apple
iMac computer (with the keyboard and mouse removed) and
were told that they would be asked some comprehension
questions after reading. Text appeared in black on a white
background and spanned the width of the screen. The text,
which was excerpted from Zen and the Art of Motorcycle
Maintenance (Persig, 1974), consisted of 2,964 words and

2754

spanned 25 pages. After reading each page, participants
pressed the central key on a button box to advance to the
next page. On average, reading training lasted about 12
minutes in the standard condition and 36 minutes in the
reversed condition and was limited to 45 minutes by the
experimenter. After reading, participants responded to five
comprehension questions by selecting one of two answers.
Test Phase. The test phase immediately followed the
training phase and consisted of three tasks in which
participants were instructed to respond “as quickly and
accurately as possible.” In the months task, 3-letter
abbreviations for the months of the year (February through
October except June) appeared on the screen one at a time.
Participants classified each month as either “earlier” or
“later” than June in the calendar year by pressing one of two
response keys. In one block of trials, participants used the
left-hand key for months that were earlier and the right-hand
key for months that were later. This response mapping was
reversed in the other block of trials and block order was
counterbalanced across participants. In two number tasks
(digits and number words), participants classified numbers
(1 - 9 except 5) as either “greater” or “less” than five. For
one block, they used the left-hand key for small numbers
and the right-hand key for large numbers. In the other block,
this response-mapping was reversed. In the digits task,
numbers were presented as Arabic numerals; in the number
words task, they were presented as English number words.
In training and test, all instructions and stimuli appeared in
capital letters and were presented in normal orthography in
the standard reading condition and in mirror-reversed
orthography in the reversed reading condition.
In each block, the eight unique stimuli appeared in
random order eight times, composing 128 trials per task. At
the beginning of each block, the experimenter asked the
participant to raise the hand corresponding to each of the
responses to ensure clarity of the response mapping. Each
trial began with 500 ms of a black screen followed by a
fixation cross whose duration varied uniformly between 500
and 1000 ms. Throughout testing, all numbers and words
were presented in white on a black background at the center
of the screen. The order of months and number tasks was
counterbalanced across participants such that the months
task was first for half of participants and the number tasks
were first for the other half of participants. Within the
number tasks, the order of the digits and number words
tasks was counterbalanced across participants.
After testing, participants were debriefed to determine
whether they were aware of the experimental hypotheses,
and they then completed a language history questionnaire
and the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971).

Results
Three subjects who failed to follow instructions and one
who guessed the purpose of the training were replaced. The
error rate was significantly higher in the reversed reading

condition (4.16%) than in the standard reading condition
(3.20%; χ2(1, N=64)=16.03, p=.0006) and significantly
higher in the months task (4.11%) than in the number words
task (3.28%; χ2(1, N=64)=7.94, p=.005; all other p’s > .10).
Although statistically significant, these differences in error
rates were very small (less than 1%). We excluded
inaccurate trials (3.68%) and accurate trials with RTs less
than 200ms or greater than 2500ms (2.53%).
To evaluate space-time congruity effects, months were
coded for ordinal position in the calendar year. We
conducted an analysis of variance (ANOVA) on RTs with
response hand and ordinal position of months as predictors.
We used the same analysis to evaluate space-number
congruity effects: RTs were entered into an ANOVA with
response hand and ordinal position of numbers as predictors
(a measure of the SNARC effect; see Dehaene et al., 1993;
Gevers et al., 2010; van Dijck & Fias, 2011)2. In all tests,
RTs were reciprocal-transformed to approximate a normal
distribution of residuals and subjects were included as a
random effect.

Space-Time Associations
RTs greater than 2.5 standard deviations from subject means
were removed (4.47%). In the standard reading condition,
the interaction between response hand and position was
highly significant (F(1, 3622)=46.15, p<.0001), indicating a
reliable standard space-time congruity effect in which
earlier months were associated with the left and later months
were associated with the right (mean slope=18.61ms/position). A significant space-time congruity effect
was also found in the reversed reading condition (F(1,
3570)=6.98, p=.008; mean slope=-8.34ms/position); of
primary interest, this effect was significantly weaker than in
the standard reading condition (F(1, 7192)=8.09, p=.004;
Fig. 1, left). Reading direction reliably changed the MTL, in
the predicted direction.

Space-Number Associations
Digits Task RTs greater than 2.5 standard deviations from
subject means were removed (4.95%). In the standard
reading condition, the interaction between response hand
and position was highly significant (F(1, 3681)=44.01,
p<.0001), indicating a reliable standard SNARC effect in
which small numbers were associated with the left and large
numbers were associated with the right (mean slope=7.68ms/digit). A nearly identical SNARC effect was found
2

For comparison with other findings, we report and plot the
SNARC effect in each task as a regression slope, following Fias,
Brysbaert, Geypens, & Géry (1996), regressing dRT values
(dRT=right-hand – left-hand RT) for each number or month over
ordinal position. Although these slopes can also be used for
inferential statistics, using them here would be inappropriate for
several reasons. For example, statistical tests across these data
points cannot include random effects of subjects, which can
increase Type I error rate. Furthermore, because Fias et al.’s
method collapses over large amounts of data (here, a 128:1
compression) it is unfit for testing the higher-order (3-way and 4way) interactions on which our experimental questions depend.

2755

in the reversed reading condition (F(1, 3604)=42.73,
p<.0001; mean slope=-7.94ms/digit). The difference in the
SNARC effects across conditions did not approach
significance (F(1, 7285)=.05, p=.82).
Number Words Task RTs greater than 2.5 standard
deviations from subject means were removed (5.02%). In
the standard reading condition, the interaction between
response hand and position was significant (F(1,
3650)=11.20, p=.0008), indicating a reliable standard
SNARC effect (mean slope=-5.77ms/digit). A significant
standard SNARC effect was also found in the reversed
reading condition (F(1, 3625)=9.69, p=.002; mean slope=2.75ms/digit). The difference in the SNARC effects across
conditions did not approach significance (F(1, 7275)=.01,
p=.92).
Comparison of number tasks To compare the effect of
reading condition between the digit task and the number
words task, we conducted an ANOVA on reciprocaltransformed RTs with position, response hand, reading
condition, and task as predictors. The effect of reading
condition on the SNARC effect did not differ between the
two number tasks (F(1, 14622)=.02, p=.89). We therefore
combined the RT data from the digits task and the number
words task, doubling our item-wise power to detect an effect
of reading direction on the MNL.
Number Tasks Combined In the standard reading
condition, the interaction between response hand and
position was significant (F(1, 7366)=47.69, p<.0001),
indicating a reliable standard SNARC effect (mean slope=6.69ms/digit). A reliable standard SNARC effect was also
found in the reversed reading condition (F(1, 7264)=35.16,
p<.0001; mean slope=-5.10ms/digit). Of primary interest,
the SNARC effects did not differ across reading conditions
(F(1, 14630)=.12, p=.73; Fig. 1, right). Reading direction
had no effect on the direction of the MNL.
Comparison of time and number tasks To compare the
effect of reading direction on the space-time and spacenumber congruity effects, we used a linear mixed-effects

model in R. Reciprocal-transformed RTs were predicted by
response hand, ordinal position, reading condition, and task,
with random slopes and intercepts for subjects. The effect of
reading condition on the space-time congruity effect was
reliably stronger than the effect of reading condition on the
space-number congruity effect (χ2(1)=7.99, p=.005). The
significant effect of reading experience on the MTL was
greater than its non-significant effect on the MNL.

General Discussion
The directions of the mental timeline and mental number
line both vary across cultures, and both are often attributed
to culture-specific habits of reading and writing. Here we
tested the effect of reading direction on the direction of the
MTL and MNL in the same group of participants. After
reading normal English text, participants showed the spacetime and space-number associations typical of Westerners.
After reading mirror-reversed text (from right to left),
participants’ space-time associations were significantly
weakened but their space-number associations were
unchanged. These results provide evidence that reading
direction can influence the direction of the MTL, but
challenge the claim that reading direction shapes the MNL.
These findings address two shortcomings of the only
other experimental test of the effect of reading direction on
the MNL. Dehaene and colleagues (1993; Experiment 8)
found no effect of reading direction on the SNARC effect.
In principle, this null effect could result from an insufficient
experimental manipulation. First, there was no training
phase in Dehaene et al.’s experiment. Second, there was no
manipulation check. Therefore, there is no evidence that the
amount of exposure to mirror-reveresd text that participants
received was sufficient to influence spatial mappings in
their minds. In the current study, (a) we included a training
phase to greatly increase participants’ exposure to mirrorreversed text, and (b) we included a manipulation check:
although reading training had no effect on the participants’
MNL it had a highly significant effect on their MTL. As

Figure 1. Left: Significant space-time congruity effects differed across reading conditions. Right: Significant spacenumber congruity effects did not differ across conditions (standard SNARC effect).

2756

such, the lack of such an effect on the MNL in the present
study cannot easily be attributed to a paucity of reading
training. Nor can it be attributed to a lack of power: By
combining data from the two number tasks, we had twice as
much item-wise power to detect differences in spacenumber congruity effects as space-time congruity effects.

How experience shapes mental metaphors
Why does reading experience shape the MTL but not the
MNL? Both space-time associations and space-number
associations can be considered mental metaphors: point-topoint mappings between analog continuums in two different
conceptual domains, in which the source domain (e.g.
space) serves as a scaffold for representations in the target
domain (e.g. time, number), which is typically more abstract
(Casasanto, 2010; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). The specifics
of these mental metaphors are established through
correlations in particular kinds of experience (Casasanto,
2013). Manipulating the kind of experience in which source
and target domains are correlated should affect the mapping
between them; manipulating other kinds of experience
should not. This principle predicts the pattern of results we
find here: space and time are correlated in the experience of
reading text, but space and number are not. Therefore,
manipulating reading experience affected the MTL but not
the MNL.
Experiential bases of left-right time mappings What
kinds of experience provide a correlation between space and
time? In the act of reading, as people move their attention
through space in either one direction or the other they also
“move” through time. When reading each line of an English
text, the reader’s eyes begin on the left side (at an earlier
time) and end on the right side (at a later time). This
correlation between progress through time and progress
rightward through space results in an MTL in which earlier
events are associated with the left and later events are
associated with the right. In other cultures, reading from
right to left produces an MTL that progresses in the opposite
direction. Although experience with orthography may be
sufficient to determine the direction of the MTL in the
laboratory (Casasanto & Bottini, 2014), it is likely that
beyond the lab reading experience combines with other
culture-specific experiences to shape the MTL: experiences
like using calendars, graphs, or written timelines, which also
provide a correlation between space and time.
Experiential bases of left-right number mappings What
kinds of experience provide a correlation between space and
number? There appears to be more than one answer. Here
we consider 3 possible experiential bases of space-number
mappings: reading and writing text; reading and writing
numbers; and finger counting. All three of these practices
vary across groups of people, and all three correlate roughly
with the direction of the MNL across cultures. Only the last
two practices, however, appear to be causally related to the
direction of the MNL.

Reading and writing text Whereas the act of reading
provides a correlation between space and time (no matter
what the content of the text may be), reading does not
provide a correlation between space and number. Without
providing such a correlation, how could reading experience
influence the MNL?
In principle, the direction of written text could have an
indirect influence on the direction of the MNL, via the
MTL. Starting in childhood, people experience numbers in a
consistent temporal order in both speech and writing. When
people count aloud, the word “one” is spoken before “two,”
etc. Given an MTL that progresses from left to right, the
temporal sequence of number words in the count list could
cause people to associate numbers that occur earlier with the
left and numbers that occur later with the right, producing a
culture-specific MNL that reflects reading direction.
However, the present findings do not support this account.
To the degree that the direction of the MNL depends on the
direction of the MTL, changes in the MTL should cause
corresponding changes in the MNL. Contrary to these
predictions, changes to the MTL did not produce changes to
the MNL in our participants, who showed standard spacenumber congruity effects regardless of differences in their
space-time congruity effects. These findings, therefore,
provide no evidence for either a direct or an indirect effect
of reading direction on the MNL.
Reading and writing numbers Although numbers are not
systematically spatialized in text, they are systematically
spatialized on written number lines, which appear on
calendars, graphs, rulers, computer keyboards, and other
cultural artifacts. Changing the relative left-right positions
of smaller and larger numbers has been shown to modulate
the SNARC effect. In a training experiment, reading recipes
in which large numbers appeared on the left of the page and
small numbers appeared on the right caused a positive shift
in the slope of participants’ SNARC effects (compared to
the opposite spatialization of numbers), even though reading
direction was held constant across conditions (Fischer,
Mills, & Shaki, 2010). Thus, the spatialization of written
numbers on a page can influence the MNL even when it is
in direct conflict with the direction of written words.
Finger counting Like written number lines, finger counting
provides a correlation between space and number. In the act
of finger counting, each number is assigned to a distinct
location in lateral space. Individual differences in fingercounting habits correspond to differences in the SNARC
effect: People who start counting on their left hand (leftstarters) were found to be more likely to show a standard
SNARC effect than right-starters (Fischer, 2008). Likewise,
when responding to single digits using all 10 fingers, people
are fastest to respond to single digits when the response
mapping between numbers and fingers matches their own
finger-counting routine (DiLuca et al., 2006). In an
experimental test of the role of finger counting experience in
determining the direction of the MNL, participants were

2757

trained to count on their fingers either from left to right or
from right to left. Participants who counted left-to-right
showed a standard SNARC effect whereas those who
counted right-to-left showed no SNARC effect. Less than
15 minutes of finger counting from right to left caused a
reliable change in the MNL (Pitt & Casasanto, 2014). By
contrast, in the present study, more than twice as much
experience reading text from right to left caused no such
change in the MNL.

Conclusions
Here we challenge the assumption that the directions of both
the MTL and the MNL are determined by the direction of
reading and writing. Less than 40 minutes of reading mirrorreversed English text reliably changed participants’ spacetime associations, but left their space-number associations
unchanged. These results suggest that the directions of the
MTL and MNL are determined by different kinds of
experience. Whereas the MTL is shaped by experiences
that, like reading, provide a correlation between space and
time, the MNL is shaped by other culture-specific
experiences that, like finger counting, provide a correlation
between space and number.

References
Bonato, M., Zorzi, M., & Umiltà, C. (2012). When time is space:
evidence for a mental time line. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 36(10), 2257-2273.
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2011). Do
English and Mandarin speakers think about time
differently? Cognition, 118(1), 123-129.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for thinking. In V. Evans & P. Chilton
(Eds.), Language, cognition, and space: State of the art and new
directions (pp. 453-478). London: Equinox Publishing.
Casasanto, D. (2013). Experiential origins of mental metaphors:
Language, culture, and the body. In M. Landau, M.D. Robinson,
& B. Meier (Eds.), The power of metaphor: Examining its
influence on social life (pp. 249-268). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association Books.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R. (2014). Mirror Reading Can Reverse
the Flow of Time. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General. 143(2), 473-9.
Casasanto, D., & Jasmin, K. (2012). The hands of time: Temporal
gestures in English speakers. Cogit. Linguistics, 23(4), 643–674.
Cooperrider, K., & Núñez, R. (2009). Across time, across the body
Transversal temporal gestures. Gesture, 9(2), 181-206.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 122(3), 371–396.
Di Luca, S., Granà, A., Semenza, C., Seron, X., & Pesenti, M.
(2006). Finger–digit compatibility in Arabic numeral
processing. The Quarterly J. Exp. Psych., 59(9), 1648-1663.
Fias, W. (1996). The importance of magnitude information in
numerical processing: Evidence from the SNARC
effect. Mathematical Cognition, 2(1), 95-110.

Fischer, M. H. (2008). Finger counting habits modulate spatialnumerical associations. Cortex, 44(4), 386–92.
Fischer, M. H., Castel, A. D., Dodd, M. D., & Pratt, J. (2003).
Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of attention. Nature
Neuroscience, 6(6), 555-556.
Fischer, M. H., Mills, R. A., & Shaki, S. (2010). How to cook a
SNARC: Number placement in text rapidly changes spatial–
numerical associations. Brain and Cognition, 72(3), 333-336.
Gevers, W., Santens, S., Dhooge, E., Chen, Q., Van den Bossche,
L., Fias, W., & Verguts, T. (2010). Verbal-spatial and
visuospatial coding of number-space interactions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. General, 139(1), 180–90.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Loetscher, T., Bockisch, C., & Brugger, P. (2008). Looking for the
answer: The mind's eye in number space. Neuroscience, 151(3),
725-729.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness:
the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9(1), 97-113.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010). Is the
future the right time? Experimental Psychology, 57(4), 308–14.
Pirsig, R. M. (1974). The art of motorcycle maintenance. William
Morrow, New York.
Pitt, B., & Casasanto, D. (2014). Experiential origins of the mental
number line. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B.
Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1174-1179). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Santiago, J., Lupáñez, J., Pérez, E., & Funes, M. J. (2007). Time
(also) flies from left to right. Psych. Bulletin & Review, 14(3),
512-516.
Shaki, S., & Fischer, M. H. (2008). Reading space into numbers: a
cross-linguistic comparison of the SNARC effect. Cognition,
108(2), 590–9.
Shaki, S., Fischer, M. H., & Petrusic, W. M. (2009). Reading
habits for both words and numbers contribute to the SNARC
effect. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(2), 328–31.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991). Cross-cultural
and developmental trends in graphic productions. Cognitive
Psychology, 23(4), 515-557.
van Dijck, J.-P., & Fias, W. (2011). A working memory account
for spatial-numerical associations. Cognition, 119(1), 114–9.
Weger, U. W., & Pratt, J. (2008). Time flies like an arrow: Spacetime compatibility effects suggest the use of a mental
timeline. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(2), 426-430.
Wood, G., Willems, K., Nuerk, H., & Fischer, M. H. (2008). On
the cognitive link between space and number : a meta-analysis
of the SNARC effect. Psychology Science Quarterly, 50(4),
489–525.
Zebian, S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts, spatial
thinking, and directionality of writing: The SNARC effect and
the reverse SNARC effect in English and Arabic monoliterates,
biliterates, and illiterate Arabic speakers. Journal of Cognition
and Culture, 5(1-2), 1-2.

2758

