Recursive belief manipulation and second-order false-beliefs
Torben Braüner (torben@ruc.dk), Patrick Blackburn (patrickb@ruc.dk), and Irina Polyanskaya (irinap@ruc.dk)
Roskilde University, Denmark
Abstract
The literature on first-order false-belief is extensive, but less is
known about the second-order case. The attainment of secondorder false-belief mastery seems to mark a cognitively significant stage, but what is its status? Is it an example of complexity only development, or does it indicate that a more fundamental conceptual change has taken place? In this paper we
extend Braüner’s hybrid-logical analysis of first-order falsebelief tasks (Braüner, 2014, 2015) to the second-order case,
and argue that our analysis supports a version of the conceptual change position.
Keywords: Second-order false-belief tasks; hybrid logic; natural deduction; complexity only; conceptual change; belief
formation; belief manipulation; recursion

Introduction
First-order false-belief tasks are a widely studied family of
reasoning tasks in cognitive and developmental psychology.
A well known example is the Sally-Anne task:
A child is shown a scene with two doll protagonists, Sally
and Anne, having respectively a basket and a box. Sally
first places a marble into her basket. Then Sally leaves
the scene, and in her absence, Anne moves the marble
and puts it in her box. Then Sally returns, and the child
is asked: “Where will Sally look for her marble?”
Children above the age of four typically handle this task correctly: they say that Sally will look in the basket, which is
where Sally (falsely) believes the marble to be. Younger children, on the other hand, say that Sally will look in the box:
this is indeed where the marble is, but this information is not
available to Sally and hence the response is incorrect. For
children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), the shift to
correct responses usually occurs at a later age.
The attainment of first-order false-belief mastery is a milestone in the acquisition of Theory of Mind (ToM), the capacity to ascribe mental states such as beliefs to oneself and
others, and some researchers account for ASD using some
form of a ToM deficit hypothesis; see (Baron-Cohen, 1995).
Many first-order false-belief tasks have been devised, and
over the past 35 years both correlational and training studies (involving both typically developing and children with
ASD) have yielded robust results (concerning, for example,
the link between ToM and linguistic abilities; see the metastudy (Milligan, Astington, & Dack, 2007)).
Second-order false-belief tasks are less well studied. Consider the following version of the second-order Sally-Anne
task (the bold font highlights the new text added to the firstorder version just given; the bracketed [Sally will] marks the
shift in word order from ‘will Sally’):
A child is shown a scene with two doll protagonists, Sally
and Anne, having respectively a basket and a box. Sally
first places a marble into her basket. Then Sally leaves

the scene, and in her absence, Anne moves the marble
and puts it in her box. However, although Anne does
not realise this, Sally is peeking through the window
and sees what Anne is doing. Then Sally returns, and
the child is asked: “Where does Anne think that [Sally
will] look for her marble?”
Again there is a transition age. Children above the age
of six typically handle this task correctly: they respond that
Anne thinks that Sally will look in the basket, which is where
Anne (falsely) believes that Sally believes the marble to be.
Younger children respond that Anne thinks that Sally will
look in the box: this is where Sally knows the marble to be,
but Anne does not know that Sally knows this and hence the
response is incorrect. For children with ASD, the shift tends
to occur at a later age, if indeed it happens at all.
The mastery of second-order false-beliefs is another key
step in the acquisition of ToM, but less is known about it
and many conclusions are tentative (Miller, 2009, 2012). The
direction of the causal relation between second-order falsebelief task competence and linguistic competence remains
unclear, and though there have been second-order correlation studies on children with ASD, we know of no linguistic training studies on this population investigating the link
between language and second-order false beliefs. Finally —
the issue we address — there is no consensus on the status
of the shift from first-order to second-order mastery. Starting with (Sullivan, Zaitchik, & Tager-Flusberg, 1994), some
researchers have viewed it as a reasonably straightforward addition to first-order mastery: the acquisition of second-order
mastery occurs when the child has sufficiently strengthened
his or her information processing capacities, such as working memory and sequencing; following (Miller, 2009, 2012)
we call this the complexity only position. Other researchers,
starting with (Perner & Wimmer, 1985), have argued that the
transition marks a more fundamental cognitive shift; again we
follow Miller and call this the conceptual change position.
The bulk of our paper is theoretical. We extend Braüner’s
(Braüner, 2014, 2015) hybrid-logical analysis of first-order
false-belief tasks to the second-order case, and argue that our
analysis lends weight to a version of the conceptual change
position. But the backdrop to our theoretical work is an ongoing training study on Danish speaking children with ASD
which investigates whether training in linguistic recursion
can lead to improvement in second-order false-belief mastery.
We briefly link the theoretical analysis with our experimental
work in the concluding discussion.

Logical analyses of false-belief tasks
There have been few previous applications of logical methods to false-belief tasks. The pioneering work is due to

2579

Stenning and Van Lambalgen, who analyse the Sally-Anne
and other first-order false-belief tasks using non-monotonic
closed world reasoning (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008).
The first-order Sally-Anne task has also been formalized using an interactive theorem prover for a many-sorted first-order
modal logic (Arkoudas & Bringsjord, 2008). Applications
of logical models to second-order false-belief tasks are even
rarer: the clearest example is the use of Dynamic Epistemic
Logic in (Bolander, 2014), though the use of game theory
in (Szymanik, Meijering, & Verbrugge, 2013) to investigate
performance in higher-order social reasoning is also relevant.
Our approach differs from these papers in a key respect:
it takes the notion of perspective shift as fundamental. The
work just cited formalizes false-belief reasoning from a
global perspective; the hybrid logical approach of (Braüner,
2014, 2015) formalizes the local shifts of perspective required
by the experimental subject when reasoning about the agents
in the scenario (that is, Sally and Anne). The intuition is this.
Correctly handling the first-order Sally-Anne task seems to
involve taking the perspective of another agent, namely Sally,
and reasoning about what she believes. So to speak, you have
to put yourself in Sally’s shoes.1 In the following two sections
we explain why natural deduction in hybrid modal logic enables us to formalize the reasoning underlying the first-order
Sally-Anne task perspectivally.

Hybrid modal logic
Modal logics are a family of logics in which the truth-value of
logical formulas is evaluated relative to models consisting of
propositional information distributed over a collection of abstract points; in Braüner’s approach to false-belief tasks, these
abstract points are taken to be people, and the information distributed over them is their beliefs, what they see, and so on.
Modal formulas are evaluated locally: truth-value evaluation
begins from the perspective of one particular person and then
goes on to take into account other people’s perspectives.
Modal logic makes use of various (application dependent)
modal operators; here we will use such operators as B (to express that someone believes something) and S (to express that
someone sees something). For example, Bφ expresses that
someone believes the information φ (whatever that might be).
Modal operators can be applied recursively: BBφ expresses
that someone believes the information that Bφ, that is, someone believes that someone believes φ.
Hybrid modal logics are extended modal logics in which it
is possible to refer to individual points. Hybrid logic is crucial
to this paper as it gives us the tools needed to refer to Sally
and Anne, and to model their reasoning. Technically, hybrid
logic is built by extending ordinary modal logic with nominals, which are special propositional symbols interpreted to
1 This might suggest that we are adopting the simulation-theory
view of ToM, cf. (Gordon, 2009). But we are agnostic here: ‘perspective taking’ may seem reminiscent of ‘simulation’, but their relationship (if any) is unclear. Our talk of putting ourselves in someone else’s shoes should be read in a pre-theoretic sense: it expresses
an intuition that we wish to formally model in hybrid logic.

Figure 1: Hybrid-logical rules
c

φ
@c φ

φ1 . . . φn

(@I)

@c φ

c

(@E)

φ
[φ1 ] . . . [φn ][c]
·
·
·
ψ
(Term)∗

[c]
·
·
·
ψ

(Name)†
ψ
ψ
∗ φ1 , . . . , φn , and ψ are all satisfaction statements and there
are no undischarged assumptions in the derivation of ψ besides the specified occurrences of φ1 , . . . , φn , and c.
† The nominal c does not occur in ψ or in any undischarged
assumptions other than the specified occurrences of c.

be true at exactly one point (so here, a person). Nominals
should be thought of as naming the unique person they are
true at. For example, we shall use s as a nominal true at Sally;
in effect it is a ‘name’ or ‘constant’ that picks out Sally.
One other piece of hybrid logic machinery will be important: satisfaction operators. If φ is an arbitrary formula and
s is the nominal that names Sally, then a new formula @s φ
can be built. The @s prefix is called a satisfaction operator,
and the formula @s φ is called a satisfaction statement. The
satisfaction statement @s φ says that the formula φ is true at a
particular person, namely Sally, as she is the person s refers
to. We call the nominal (here s) used in satisfaction statements the point of view nominal.
Let’s make this just a little more concrete. Prefixing the
belief formula Bφ with the satisfaction operator @s yields the
formula @s Bφ which says that Sally believes the information
φ. Satisfaction statements of this form will play an important
role in our analysis.
These informal examples should help guide the reader in
what follows. For more on hybrid logic see (Blackburn, 2000)
and (Braüner, 2011).

Seligman’s natural deduction system
Logicians have developed many (very different) methods of
formal proof; in this paper we make us of the one called natural deduction. Natural deduction was originally developed to
model the structure of mathematical argumentation, but there
is now some experimental backing for the claim that natural
deduction is a mechanism underlying human deductive reasoning more generally; see (Rips, 2008). Be that as it may,
we shall argue that the change in proof structure required as
we move from modelling the first-order Sally-Anne task to
modelling the second-order version supports the view that
a conceptual change takes place in the developmental shift
from first- to second-order false-belief mastery.2
2 So,

broadly speaking, our work falls into the “mental logic”
approach in the psychology of reasoning. The major alternative
is the “mental models” approach, which views the construction of
models as the mechanism underlying human reasoning. We earlier

2580

Two main ideas drive natural deduction. The first is that
there are two different kinds of rule for each logical connective: one to introduce it, the other to eliminate it. The second,
crucial to this paper, is that hypothetical reasoning (or conditional reasoning) is hardwired into the very core of natural
deduction: we can make an assumption, work out its consequences, and then discharge it (get rid of it).3 We use the natural deduction system for hybrid logic obtained by extending
the standard natural deduction system for classical propositional logic with the rules in Figure 1; the symbol c in these
rules is an arbitrary nominal (that is, the name of a person).4
The rules @I and @E in Figure 1 are the introduction
and elimination rules for satisfaction operators. The @I rule
says that if we have the information c (so we are reasoning
about the person called c) and we also have the information
φ, then we can introduce the satisfaction operator @c and conclude @c φ, which says that φ holds from c’s perspective. The
@E rule says: suppose that when reasoning about the person
named c, we also have the information that @c φ. Then we
can eliminate the satisfaction operator @c and conclude φ.
But it is the Term rule that drives our analysis. This rule
lets us switch to another person’s perspective using hypothetical reasoning: the bracketed expressions [φ1 ] . . . [φn ][c] in the
statement of the rule are (discharged) assumptions. The key
assumption is c, which can be glossed as: let’s switch perspective and temporarily adopt c’s point of view. Incidentally,
when using the Term rule we must make at least one assumption c, but we can make several, and this is often necessary to
drive the proof through. The remaining (discharged) assumptions [φ1 ] . . . [φn ] in the rule’s statement are additional assumptions we may wish to make about the information available
from c’s perspective.5
The rule works as follows. Suppose that on the basis of
assumptions φ1 . . . φn , c we deduce ψ from c’s perspective.
Then the Term rule tells us that if φ1 . . . φn are available in
the original perspective,6 then we can discharge the assumption (which we do by bracketing them, thus obtaining the
[φ1 ] . . . [φn ][c] displayed in the statement of the rule) and conmentioned (Bolander, 2014) which analyses first- and second-order
false-belief tasks in Dynamic Epistemic Logic. As this is a formalism designed for a (sophisticated form of) model manipulation, this
work is probably best classified as a mental models approach. There
are also more practically-motivated intermediate approaches, for example the P OLYSCHEME agent architecture (Kurup, Bignoli, Scally,
& Cassimatis, 2011), which integrates multiple representations and
has both rule-based and model-based features.
3 For a full formulation of the discharge mechanism, we refer the
reader to (Braüner, 2011).
4 This is a modified version of Seligman’s original natural deduction system for hybrid logic (Seligman, 1997) and is taken from
Chapter 4 of (Braüner, 2011). We omit the rules for propositional
connectives such as ∧, → and ¬ as (a) they are standard and (b)
we prefer the more perspicuous proof tree obtained by ‘hiding’ the
simple propositional reasoning involved in the Sally-Anne task.
5 The Name rule tells us that if we can prove the information φ
by adopting some arbitrary perspective c, then φ also holds from the
original perspective. As we won’t use this rule in our analysis, we
refer once more to (Braüner, 2011) for further discssion.
6 Indicated by the premisses φ . . . φ listed just above the horin
1
zontal line in the statement of Term given in Figure 1.

clude ψ unconditionally in the original perspective.
The Term rule is subtle and powerful.7 Indeed, as we shall
now see, the hybrid logical analysis of the first-order SallyAnne task boils down to a single application of Term, namely
one modelling the shift from the experimental subject’s perspective to Sally’s.

Formalizing the first-order Sally-Anne task
In this section we describe how (Braüner, 2014) formalizes
correct reasoning in the Sally-Anne task. Let us call the child
performing the task (the experimental subject) Peter. Let t0 ,t1
and t2 be three successive times where t0 is the time at which
Sally leaves the scene, t1 is the time at which the marble is
moved to the box, and t2 is the time after Sally has returned.
Here’s the intuition we wish to model. To answer the question, Peter views matters from Sally’s perspective and reasons
as follows. At the time t0 , when Sally leaves, she believes that
the marble is in the basket since she sees that it is. As she sees
no action to move it, when she is away at t1 she also believes
the marble is in the basket. At t2 , after she has returned, she
still believes that the marble is in the basket since she was
out of the room when Anne moved it at the time t1 . So Peter
concludes that Sally believes that the marble is in the basket.
In our formalization we make use of the predicates l(i,t)
and m(t) and the modal operators B and S mentioned above.
The argument i in the predicate l(i,t) denotes a location, and
the argument t in l(i,t) and m(t) denotes a timepoint. We take
time to be discrete, and use t + 1 to denote the successor of t.
l(i,t) The marble is at location i at time t
m(t) The marble is moved at time t
S
Sees that ...
B
Believes that ...
s
Nominal naming Sally
We also make use of four belief formation principles:8
(D)
B¬φ → ¬Bφ
(P1)
Sφ → Bφ
(P2)
Bl(i,t) ∧ ¬Bm(t) → Bl(i,t + 1)
(P3)
¬Sm(t) → ¬Bm(t)
Principle (D) is a common modal principle which says if we
believe something to be false, then we don’t believe it.
Principle (P1) states that beliefs may be formed as a result
of seeing: that is, seeing leads to knowing. This is principle
(9.2) in (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008), page 251.
Principle (P2) is reminiscent of both principle (9.11) in
(Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008), page 253, and axiom
[A5 ] in (Arkoudas & Bringsjord, 2008), page 20. Principle
(P2) formalizes a “principle of inertia” saying that a belief
that the predicate l is true is preserved over time, unless it is
believed that an action has taken place causing the predicate
7 A subtlety worth emphazing is that (as is stated in Figure 1) the
assumptions [φ1 ] . . . [φn ] must all be satisfaction statements, otherwise the rule is not sound. We refer the reader to (Seligman, 1997)
and Chapter 4 of (Braüner, 2011) for further discussion.
8 This terminology is from (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008).
The distinction they draw between belief formation and belief manipulation is central to our paper, and we shall return to it shortly.

2581

Figure 2: Formalization of the child’s correct response in the first-order Sally-Anne task
[s] [@s S¬m(t0 )]
[s] [@s Sl(basket,t0 )]
Sl(basket,t0 )
Bl(basket,t0 )

(@E)

(P1)

S¬m(t0 )
B¬m(t0 )
¬Bm(t0 )

Bl(basket,t1 )
[s]

(@E)

(P1)

@s Bl(basket,t2 )

@s Bl(basket,t2 )
to be false.9
Principle (P3) encodes the constraint that if someone
didn’t see the marble being moved, then they can’t have come
to believe that it moved. Obviously this is not generally true,
but the point of the formalization is to capture how Peter reasons about the Sally-Anne scenario (Well, she can’t have seen
it, so I guess she won’t believe it).
The perspectival reasoning involved in the Sally-Anne task
can be formalized as the derivation in Figure 2. We have already given Peter’s informal perspectival reasoning; the formal proof mirrors it in full detail using a single application
of Term in which the assumptions about s model the shift to
Sally’s perspective. The first two premises @s Sl(basket,t0 )
and @s S¬m(t0 ) taken together say that Sally at the earlier
time t0 saw that the marble was in the basket and that no action was taken to move it. The third premise, @s ¬Sm(t1 ),
says that Sally did not see the marble being moved at the time
t1 (since she was absent). Note that when applying the belief
formation principles, we simply use them as rules. For example, when applying P1 (that is Sφ → Bφ, or seeing leads
to knowing) we simply use it to license the move from Sφ on
one line to Bφ on the next.10

From belief formation to belief manipulation
The proof tree just discussed may seem complex, but it has
a simple structure. The bulk of the reasoning on the (rather
messy) right-hand-side of the proof tree consists of correctly
sequencing applications of belief formation principles until
the crucial formula @s Bl(basket,t2 ) — Sally believes the ball
is in the basket — is deduced. What turns this into a formalisation of correct reasoning in the Sally-Anne task is the
way the sequencing of belief formation principles is perspectivized. The right-hand-side sequencing occurs between the
9 For a discussion of how the inertia principle is applied — and
just as importantly, how it is not applied — in the second-order Sally
Anne task, see (Braüner, Blackburn, & Polyanskaya, 2016).
10 As we remarked earlier, we do this to ‘hide’ the simple propositional reasoning involved. Strictly speaking, deducing Bφ from
Sφ requires us to apply the propositional rule of modus ponens to
Sφ → Bφ. Using the belief formation principles as additional natural
deduction rules enables us to omit such steps and reduce the size of
the proof tree.

¬Sm(t1 )

(P2)

Bl(basket,t2 )

@s Sl(basket,t0 ) @s S¬m(t0 ) @s ¬Sm(t1 )

[s] [@s ¬Sm(t1 )]

(D)

¬Bm(t1 )

(@E)

(P3)
(P2)

(@I)

(Term)

initial assumptions of s (which perspectives it as Sally’s reasoning) and the final application of Term which lets us conclude that the crucial formula is also true from Peter’s point
of view. In short, the analysis consists of Belief Formation +
Perspectival Reasoning correctly combined.
Analagous remarks are made by Stenning and Van Lambalgen about their own analysis of first-order false-beliefs tasks;
see (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008), page 257. They note
that the bulk of the reasoning involves belief formation principles and their analysis succeeds because it is carried out using
closed world reasoning; we might summarise their approach
as Belief formation + Closed World Reasoning correctly combined. However they then go on to remark that what they call
Belief Manipulation rules (which codify how to reason from
one belief state to another) are unnecessary.
As far as first-order false-belief reasoning is concerned, we
agree completely. Indeed, until now we have provided no
proof rules for manipulating the belief operator B beyond the
belief formation principles. And that is because, to model
the first-order Sally-Anne task, we had no need of anything
else. But belief manipulation rules will be needed if we are
to extend our perspectival analysis to the second-order SallyAnne task.11 We turn to this task now.

Formalizing the second-order Sally-Anne task
First an observation. Peter (the experimental subject) has the
same beliefs about Sally in the first-order Sally-Anne task
as Anne has about Sally in the second-order task. For example, in the first-order task Peter believes that Sally does
not know the ball has moved (and he’s right) whereas in the
second-order task Anne analogously believes that Sally does
not know the ball has moved. Anne is wrong about this (Sally
peeked through the window) but the fact remains that her beliefs about Sally match those of Peter in the simpler task.
This suggests that we should extend the first-order analysis
by (a) using our first-order analysis as an analysis of Anne’s
reasoning about Sally in the second-order task and (b) embedding this pre-existing proof into a larger proof which captures
11 Stenning and Van Lambalgen do not analyse second-order falsebelief tasks.

2582

Figure 3: Belief manipulation rule for the B operator

Bφ1 . . . Bφn

[φ1 ] . . . [φn ]
·
·
·
ψ
(BM)∗

Bψ
∗ There are no undischarged assumptions in the derivation of
ψ besides the specified occurrences of φ1 , . . . , φn .

Peter’s reasoning about Anne in the second-order task. That
is, we should add another level of nesting to the perspectival
analysis. Making this work requires us to introduce a recursive belief manipulation rule for B.
We have chosen the rule given in Figure 3. We call it BM.
It is a version of a rule from (Fitting, 2007) that fits naturally
with our tree-style natural deduction proofs.12 We will also
make use of the following additional notation:
D Deduces that ...
a Nominal naming Anne
and of a natural deduction formulation of the belief formation
principle
(P0)
Dφ → Bφ
which says that if we can deduce the information φ then we
believe φ. This is principle (9.4) in (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008), page 251.
With this machinery in place, the reasoning in the secondorder Sally-Anne task can be formalized by the proof tree in
Figure 4 (where to save space, we have omitted names of the
introduction and elimination rules for the @ operator). Note
how this derivation is built around our analysis of the firstorder case: the dots in the upper-right corner of Figure 4 mark
where this earlier proof slots in.
This is indeed a formalization of the second-order SallyAnne task. The conclusion, @a B@s Bl(basket,t2 ), says that
Anne believes that Sally believes that the marble is in the basket at the time t2 , and this indeed the correct response the the
second-order task.
Moreover, Peter (who is now working away at the secondorder task) can establish this. The first two premises used
in the application of Term with which the proof concludes,
@a S@s Sl(basket,t0 ) and @a S@s S¬m(t0 ), say that at time t0 ,
Anne saw that Sally saw that the marble was in the basket and
that no action was taken to move it — this is the case since
both Anne and Sally were present.
The third premise used in the concluding application of the
Term rule, @a D@s ¬Sm(t1 ), says that Anne deduced that Sally
did not see the marble being moved at the time t1 — this is
the case since Anne was present but Sally was absent at that
time (and Anne did not see sneaky Sally peeking).
Finally, note the crucial role the belief manipulation rule
BM plays in glueing the two levels of perspectival reasoning
together. The embedded proof (which reasons from Sally’s
12 In

essence we are adding natural deduction machinery for the
modal logic called K, the weakest normal modal logic.

perspective) yields the conclusion @s Bl(basket,t2 ), the correct response to the first-order task. But this is not enough:
Peter must be able to deduce that holds from Anne’s perspective. The application of BM prefixes the belief operator to
form B@s Bl(basket,t2 ), and the very next step of the proof
shows that this belief holds from Anne’s point of view too.

Concluding discussion
We do not deny that second-order reasoning is more complex
than first-order — the previous section with its embedded
proof and use of the BM rule showed this clearly. Nonetheless, our analysis also suggests that the transition to secondorder competence marks a more significant development than
is suggested by the complexity only position: the full reification of beliefs. Attainment of first-order false-belief competence marks the stage at which the child becomes aware of
the fact that beliefs held by other agents can be false; secondorder competence marks the stage where beliefs become objects in their own right that can be recursively manipulated.
This shift is mirrored in our analysis: we jumped from a logic
of Belief formation + Perspectival Reasoning to one which
allows unrestricted Belief Manipulation as well.
This is a significant advance. Beliefs are special objects.
The child must learn that they can be embedded one inside
another, and acquire the competence to carry out novel logical
manipulations — and something like the BM rule, essentially
a tool for handling beliefs recursively, seems to be required
for this. It is tempting to speculate that at this stage of development some sort of “recursion module” is adapted to handle
these strange new objects — but be that as it may, in typically developing children the reasoning architecture seems to
be enriched at around the age of six in ways that suggest that
a genuine conceptual change has taken place.
Recursively stacked beliefs lie at the heart of this transition,
and this brings us back to our empirical work (Polyanskaya,
Braüner, & Blackburn, 2016). Our logical investigations were
carried out as part of an ongoing training study involving
Danish speaking children with ASD. Our study is driven by
the hypothesis that the delay (or even failure) experienced by
children with ASD to attain second-order false-belief competence is linked to difficulties in belief manipulation. We are
investigating whether children with ASD use linguistic recursion as a “scaffolding” to develop belief manipulation; this
might explain why some children with ASD can pass secondorder false-belief tasks, an explanation which was advanced
in the first-order case by (Hale & Tager-Flusberg, 2003).
At the time of writing, our study was still work in progress.
Nonetheless, we hope that these remarks show that there is a
link between the abstract work of this paper and the concrete
reality of psychological experimentation.

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the funding received from the
VELUX FOUNDATION for the project Hybrid-Logical
Proofs at Work in Cognitive Psychology (VELUX 33305).

2583

Figure 4: Formalization of the child’s correct response in the second-order Sally-Anne task
[a][@a S@s Sl(basket,t0 )] [a][@a S@s S¬m(t0 )] [a][@a D@s ¬Sm(t1 )]
S@s Sl(basket,t0 )
B@s Sl(basket,t0 )

(P1)

[@s Sl(basket,t0 )][@s S¬m(t0 )][@s ¬Sm(t1 )]
·
·
·
(P1)
(P0)
B@s S¬m(t0 )
B@s ¬Sm(t1 )
@s Bl(basket,t2 )
(BM)
B@s Bl(basket,t2 )
[a]
D@s ¬Sm(t1 )

S@s S¬m(t0 )

@a S@s Sl(basket,t0 ) @a S@s S¬m(t0 ) @a D@s ¬Sm(t1 )

@a B@s Bl(basket,t2 )

(Term)
@a B@s Bl(basket,t2 )
The vertical dots in the upper-right corner represent the derivation in Figure 2. So this proof contains two applications of Term:
the concluding application, which is shown, and the one inside the earlier proof, which is not.

References
Arkoudas, K., & Bringsjord, S. (2008). Toward formalizing
common-sense psychology: An analysis of the false-belief
task. In PRICAI 2008: Trends in artificial intelligence (Vol.
5351, pp. 17–29). Springer-Verlag.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism
and theory of mind. MIT Press.
Blackburn, P. (2000). Representation, reasoning, and relational structures: a hybrid logic manifesto. Logic Journal
of the IGPL, 8, 339–365.
Bolander, T. (2014). Seeing is believing: Formalising falsebelief tasks in dynamic epistemic logic. In A. Herzig &
E. Lorini (Eds.), Proceedings of the European conference
on social intelligence (ECSI-2014) (pp. 87–107). IRITCNRS, Toulouse University, France.
Braüner, T. (2011). Hybrid logic and its proof-theory
(Vol. 37). Springer.
Braüner, T. (2014). Hybrid-logical reasoning in the Smarties and Sally-Anne tasks. Journal of Logic, Language and
Information, 23, 415–439.
Braüner, T. (2015). Hybrid-logical reasoning in the Smarties and Sally-Anne tasks: What goes wrong when incorrect responses are given? In Proceedings of the 37th
annual meeting of the cognitive science society (pp. 273–
278). Pasadena, California: Cognitive Science Society.
Braüner, T., Blackburn, P., & Polyanskaya, I. (2016). Secondorder false-belief tasks: Analysis and formalization. In
Proceedings of Workshop on Logic, Language, Information
and Computation (WoLLIC 2016). Springer-Verlag.
Fitting, M. (2007). Modal proof theory. In P. Blackburn,
J. van Benthem, & F. Wolter (Eds.), Handbook of modal
logic (pp. 85–138). Elsevier.
Gordon, R. (2009). Folk psychology as mental simulation. In E. Zalta (Ed.), The stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Stanford University. (On-line encyclopedia article available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/folkpsychsimulation.)
Hale, C., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (2003). The influence of language on theory of mind: a training study. Developmental
Science, 6, 346–359.
Kurup, U., Bignoli, P., Scally, J., & Cassimatis, N. (2011). An

architectural framework for complex cognition. Cognitive
Systems Research, 12, 281–292.
Miller, S. (2009). Children’s understanding of second-order
mental states. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 749–773.
Miller, S. (2012). Theory of mind: Beyond the preschool
years. Psychology Press.
Milligan, K., Astington, J., & Dack, L. (2007). Language
and theory of mind: Meta-analysis of the relation between
language ability and false-belief understanding. Child Development, 78, 622–646.
Perner, J., & Wimmer, H. (1985). “John thinks that Mary
thinks that...” attribution of second-order beliefs by 5-to 10year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 39, 437–471.
Polyanskaya, I., Braüner, T., & Blackburn, P. (2016). Linguistic recursion and Autism Spectrum Disorder. Manuscript.
Rips, L. (2008). Logical approaches to human deductive reasoning. In J. Adler & L. Rips (Eds.), Reasoning: Studies of
human inference and its foundations (pp. 187–205). Cambridge University Press.
Seligman, J. (1997). The logic of correct description. In
M. de Rijke (Ed.), Advances in intensional logic (Vol. 7,
pp. 107 – 135). Kluwer.
Stenning, K., & van Lambalgen, M. (2008). Human reasoning and cognitive science. MIT Press.
Sullivan, K., Zaitchik, D., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (1994).
Preschoolers can attribute second-order beliefs. Developmental Psychology, 30, 395–402.
Szymanik, J., Meijering, B., & Verbrugge, R. (2013). Using
intrinsic complexity of turn-taking games to predict participants’ reaction times. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1426–
1432). Cognitive Science Society.

2584

