Recursion in Nicaraguan Sign Language
Annemarie Kocab (kocab@fas.harvard.edu)1, Ann Senghas (asenghas@barnard.edu)2,
Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)1
1

Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
2
Department of Psychology, 1009 Broadway, New York, NY 10027 USA
Abstract

Syntactic recursion is argued to be a key property of natural
languages, allowing us to create an infinite number of
utterances from a finite number of words and rules. Some
have argued that recursion is uniquely human. There are at
least two possibilities for the origins of recursion: 1)
Recursion is a property of the language faculty. 2) Recursion
is an historical accomplishment and is culturally constructed
over millennia. Here we ask whether an emerging sign
language, Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL), exhibits
syntactic recursion by comparing the language of the first
three age cohorts of signers. Signers (n=27) watched and
described vignettes designed to elicit relative clauses. Results
suggest that signers from all three cohorts have strategies to
fulfill the discourse function of relative clauses, picking out
an individual from a set. The grammatical form of the
utterances differs across cohorts, with signers from later
cohorts clearly producing embedded structures.
Keywords: language emergence; syntactic recursion

Introduction
Recursion, defined as “a procedure that calls itself, or… a
constituent that contains a constituent of the same kind”
(Pinker & Jackendoff, 2005), is argued to be a key property
of natural languages, allowing us to create an infinite
number of utterances from a finite number of words and
rules1. For instance, we can generate sentences like “Sally
said that the boy cried” from “The boy cried,” and “Billy
thinks that Sally said that the boy cried” from “Sally said
that the boy cried,” and so on. Some theorists have argued
that recursion is uniquely human and might even be the sole
property that sets human language apart from animal
communication systems (Hauser, Chomsky, Fitch, 2002).
However, at least one language, Pirahã, has been reported to
lack syntactic recursion (Everett, 2005), raising doubts
about this claim. It remains an open question as to whether
recursion is indeed a hallmark of human language and if so,
where the capacity to implement rules within rules comes
from.2
1
Note that recursion is not unique to the language system.
Recursion is a property of generative systems and is found in other
cognitive domains, such as visual cognition.
2
There is a great deal of controversy about recursion, its
definition, and its relevance to language and types of output
generated by recursive functions (e.g., Tomalin, 2006; Watumull et
al., 2014). In this paper, we adopt one definition, used by Pinker &
Jackendoff (2005) and others: the embedding of a constituent in
another constituent of the same type.

A central goal in cognitive science has been the
identification of what uniquely human properties account
for our language system. One possibility is that language
arises from our mental architecture, and the capacity to
create language is present is every human mind. The
language faculty may be a part of our genetic endowment
(e.g., Chomsky, 1968; 2000; Pinker, 1994) or language may
be a product of general changes in our conceptual resources
and computational abilities (e.g., Christiansen & Charter,
2008). The properties and organization of language then
reflect the structure of human cognition (Chomsky, 1975;
Pinker, 2007). A second possibility is that language
developed gradually over historical time, rather than
phylogenetic time, through a process of “cumulative cultural
evolution” (Tomasello, 2011; Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner,
1993). Here, language is a side effect of the human capacity
for social learning and cultural transmission (e.g.,
Tomasello, 2008).
Recently, the study of emerging sign languages, such as
Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL), has offered the
opportunity to better understand how languages are created
and the roles of the individual learner and the community of
users. NSL is a new language created by a deaf community
in Managua, Nicaragua. Before the 1970s, there was little
opportunity for deaf people to gather together and interact,
and consequently Nicaragua had no standardized sign
language. In the mid-1970s and early 1980s, the government
opened a new primary school for special education followed
by a vocational school. For the first time, deaf Nicaraguan
children and adolescents were able to gather together in
large numbers. While lessons were in spoken Spanish and
instruction primarily focused on lip-reading and speaking
Spanish (with limited success), students communicated
through gestures, and a new sign language emerged and
continues to develop (Polich, 2005). Each successive group
of children who enters the community introduces linguistic
complexity into the language that adults are unable to
acquire (Senghas, 1995; Senghas & Coppola, 2001). This
pattern gives rise to a unique community, where the older
signers, the initial creators of the language, represent earlier
stages of the language than do younger signers (Senghas,
Kita, & Özyürek, 2004). Today, NSL has multiple coexisting age cohorts of users, from the creators of the
language to the young children now learning and changing
the language. In this project, we examine the language of
signers from the first cohort (children who entered the
community in the 1970s and early 1980s, the second cohort
(entered the community in the mid-1980s to early 1990s),

1343

and the third cohort (entered the community in the mid1990s to early 2000s).
By comparing the language of different cohorts of
children who entered the community at different times,
research on NSL to date has revealed a rich and nuanced
picture of how historical and cognitive processes interact
(e.g., Flaherty & Senghas, 2011; Pyers et al., 2010; Senghas,
2003). Many features of language do not develop
immediately from the structure of a single human mind, nor
do they require long periods of historical evolution. Instead,
these elements emerge over the span of a few generations,
indicating that convergence on these forms does not require
prolonged historical evolution, but may require a
community of users, transmission, and in some domains,
sequential age cohorts of learners.
The present study addresses a fundamental unanswered
question about a key property of language and the human
mind. Specifically, we explore when recursion emerges in
the creation of a new language.
The capacity for, and importance of, recursion in the
language system can be seen in children’s acquisition of
syntactic recursion. Languages vary in which structures are
recursive. For instance, possessives are recursive in English,
but not in German (Roeper, 2011). This cross-linguistic
variability in syntactic recursion has been argued to pose a
learning challenge for children acquiring their first language
(Roeper, 2011). Nonetheless, children can and do acquire
syntactic recursion. Preschool-aged children are initially less
likely to assign a recursive interpretation to embedded
structures, parsing them as conjoined instead. For instance,
when presented with an array of five balls in the order of
red, green, blue, orange, and green, and asked to show the
experimenter “the second green ball,” 3- and 4-year-olds
chose the first green ball in the array rather than the second
(Matthei, 1982). Similarly, other work demonstrates that
young children initially prefer conjoined interpretation for
possessives in English and Japanese and then acquire the
embedded structure (Fujimuri, 2010 as cited in Roeper,
2011; Limbach & Adone, 2010).
Everett (2005) argues that Pirahã lacked syntactic
recursion. Further experimental work was not successful in
eliciting embedded possessives or relative clauses in
elicitation tasks (Piantadosi et al., 2012). In addition, a
corpus analysis based on 15 stories (approximately 10,000
sentences) revealed no strong evidence of recursion for
relative clauses, complement clauses, possessives, or
conjunctions and disjunctions, but there was possible
evidence suggesting recursive use of topics or repeated
arguments (Piantadosi et al., 2012). The question of whether
or not Pirahã lacks syntactic recursion remains open (e.g.,
Nevins, Pesetsky, & Rodrigues, 2009).
In the current study, we turn to an emerging language and
ask whether NSL exhibits syntactic recursion and if the
cohorts of signers show differences in the types of structures
they produce. There are at least three broad possibilities for
the origins of recursion. The first is that recursion is a
property of the language faculty and thus should emerge

early in a new language, like NSL (and Pirahã is anomalous,
but see Piantadosi et al., 2012). The second is that recursion
is an historical accomplishment (like mathematics) and is
culturally constructed over time (e.g., Deutscher, 2005;
Tomasello, 1999; 2008; 2011). On this view, recursion
should not emerge in just three generations of NSL signers.
A third possibility is that recursion is a property of the
human mind, but a new language takes time to converge on
(syntactic) forms for its expression, perhaps because of the
need for a community of users.
Certain linguistic structures have been identified as
typical examples of recursion, such as adjectives (the second
green ball), relative clauses (the boy who kicked the ball fell
down), complements (John thinks that Sally is not coming
today), possessives (my mother’s brother’s daughter’s dog),
and prepositional phrases (the cat in the hat on the table)
(Everett, 2010; Roeper, 2011). We investigate one structure
that can take recursive interpretations: relative clauses.
Comparing the language of three age cohorts of NSL
signers, we ask how early we might observe evidence for
syntactic recursion to better understand where the capacity
for recursion stems from and when it emerges in a new
language.

Experiment 1
Relative clauses serve to pick out an individual or subset
from a set of referents (e.g., the boy who was typing from a
set of boys performing different actions). Syntactically,
relative clauses are full clauses that modify a noun phrase.
In many languages, they contain a gap: a missing argument
that is co-referential with the noun that they modify. In other
languages, or syntactic contexts, this gap is filled, for
example, with a resumptive pronoun as in “There are guests
who I am curious about what they are going to say” (Prince,
1990). Semantically, they contain an element that is related
to the noun or noun phrase. In the experiment, we examine
whether NSL signers have strategies to fulfill the discourse
function of relative clauses, namely picking out an
individual from a set and whether there are form-based
distinctions in the syntax.

Method
Participants in this study were 27 deaf Nicaraguan signers
who were exposed to the emerging sign language by 6 years
of age. Ten of the participants entered the signing
community before 1983 (mean age of entry: 3.99, range:
3.0-5.7), and are referred to as the first cohort (mean age:
41.69, range: 37.2-46.8). Ten participants entered the
community between 1986 and 1990 (mean age of entry:
4.01, range: 3.1-5.3), and are referred to as the second
cohort (mean age: 30.84, range: 28.2-33.4). Seven
participants entered the community between 1993 and 1998
(mean age of entry: 3.77, range: 3.0-4.6), and are referred to
the third cohort (mean age = 22.06, range: 20.7-24.9).
Stimuli and procedure Two versions of six events were
created. One version was designed to elicit relative clauses

1344

and the other conjoined clauses. The relative clause versions
of the events each depicted three characters (see Figure 1).
The three characters were similar in appearance (same
gender, similar physical features and coloring, similar
clothing) but performed distinct identifying actions (e.g.,
one writing, one typing on a laptop, and one reading).
Signers first saw individual clips depicting each character
separately. Then signers saw a clip with all three characters
together performing their respective actions, with a fourth
individual watching the scene (see Figure 2). After a short
period of time, the fourth individual leaves, and one of the
three characters then engages in a new action (e.g., falls off
a chair). Signers are asked to tell the fourth individual who
had left the scene prior to observing the new action what
happened.
The conjoined clause version differed from the embedded
clause version in that the event portrayed only one
character, instead of three characters (e.g., one character
typing on a laptop then falling off a chair, see Figure 3).
Here, the observing individual leaves prior to seeing any of
the actions.

Figure 1. Example of the three characters in the relative
clause stimuli. Each individual performs a different action
(e.g., typing).

Figure 2. Example of new action in the relative clause
stimuli. The left panel depicts all three characters with a
fourth individual observing the scene. The right panel
depicts a unique individual engaged in a particular action
(e.g., falling).

Figure 3. Example of conjoined clause stimuli.
The stimuli were normed on Amazon Mechanical Turk
with monolingual English speakers. They were found to
reliably elicit relative clauses (the boy who was typing fell)
or reduced relatives (the boy typing fell) in the relative

clause version, and conjoined clauses (the boy typed and
fell, the boy typed then fell) in the conjoined clause version.
For the relative clause versions, signers first saw movies
of the individual characters and were asked to describe each
clip to ascertain that they interpreted the actions portrayed in
the way we intended. Signers then saw the clip with all three
characters and were asked to describe the event. For the
conjoined clause versions, signers saw a single movie and
were asked to describe the event. We filmed their
descriptions for later analysis.
Coding Signed descriptions were coded for by the first
author, a fluent signer of ASL (American Sign Language)
with 8 years of research experience with NSL. Our coding
centered on three levels of representation: semantics
(differences in the discourse function of the descriptions),
syntax (differences in the form), and prosody.
Semantics: We coded whether signers from all cohorts
were able to fulfill the discourse function of relative clauses,
picking out an individual from a set. In the relative clause
version, the fourth individual in the scene sees the different
actions of the characters (e.g., typing, reading, writing), but
not the new action (e.g., falling). Because the fourth
individual is aware of the different actions of individuals in
the set, but not the new action of one individual, we expect
that signers will identify the target individual when
describing what happened, producing a description like the
boy who was typing fell, contrasting the target with the other
boys who were performing different actions (reading and
writing). The establishment of a set and then the selection of
an individual of that set is the semantic function that relative
clauses serve, where the interpretation is one like: “There is
a boy typing, a boy reading, and a boy writing. The boy who
was typing fell” as opposed to “There is a boy typing, a boy
reading, and a boy writing. The boy is typing and falls.”
In contrast, in the conjoined clause version, there is a
single character performing both actions. The observing
individual leaves before seeing any of the actions. We
expect that signers will produce what amounts to a
conjoined clause, describing the scene as one where a boy is
typing and then falls. Here, there is only a single character
in the scene and the observer does not see the initial action,
thus there is no identifying action that picks out a specific
individual (e.g., the one who is typing). As such, a
description of this event should semantically differ from a
description in the relative clause version, where no set has
been established.
Syntax: We coded one possible marker of form
difference: the repetition and reduction in length of the verb
that picks out the unique individual. Sign languages possess
a rich system of verbal morphology, where signs can be
inflected for person, number, location, and manner (see
Padden, 1983; 1990). In ASL, verbs can be inflected
through changes in movement to indicate aspectual
information or in location to indicate subject-object
agreement (Klima & Bellugi, 1979; Padden, 1983). Previous
observation of NSL has noted use of a reduction in the

1345

Results
The data were submitted to logistic mixed effects regression
models with item and subject as random effects. For the
analyses, we constructed separate logistic mixed effects
models, with the trial coded as 1 when the variable of
interest was present and 0 when it was absent. Cohort was
coded using two dummy variables, with the first cohort
acting as the baseline (the intercept). We compared two
models: one model with cohort as a predictor variable and
one model without cohort as a predictor variable.
First, we looked at whether signers from all three cohorts
mentioned the identifying action of the target individual
(e.g., typing) and the new action (e.g., falling). The model
with and without cohort showed no significant difference,
F(3, 5) = 2.169, p = .338 (Cohort 1: 97%; Cohort 2: 98%;
Cohort 3: 100%). Then we examined whether signers
established the set of referents from which the unique
individual is picked out, specifically if they mentioned all
three characters in the event. Again, we found no significant
difference between the model with cohort and the model
without cohort, F(3, 5) = 4.042, p = .133 (Cohort 1: 60%;
Cohort 2: 73%; Cohort 3: 77%). Signers from all three
cohorts established the set of referents and described the
identifying action and new action of the target individual,
providing robust evidence that all three cohorts have
strategies to fulfill the discourse function of relative clauses.
The third analysis looked at whether signers repeated the
individuating verb, as we would expect if they were
producing a relative clause. If this device is developing in
the language, we expect to see a difference across the
cohorts. This was observed in the ANOVA comparison of
the model with cohort and the model without cohort, F(3, 5)

Proportion of all trials

= 5.314, p = .070. We then conduced pairwise comparisons
to determine where the differences among cohorts lay (see
Figure 3). The difference between the first cohort and the
second cohort was significant (p < .01), as was the
difference between the first cohort and the third cohort
(p < .01). The difference between the second and third
cohorts was not significant (p = .960).

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Cohort 1

Cohort 2

Cohort 3

Figure 3. Proportion of trials in which signers repeated the
individuating verb.
Finally, we looked at whether there was a reduction in the
length of the second mention of the individuating verb.
Here, we constructed linear mixed effects models for the
comparison, computing the timing difference using a ratio
of the length in milliseconds of the second mention of the
individuating verb to the length of the first mention of the
verb. The ANOVA analysis revealed that the model with
cohort as a predictor performed significantly better, F(4, 6)
= 6.470, p = .039 (see Figure 4). Follow-up comparisons
revealed that the difference between the first and second
cohorts was marginally significant (p = .077), and the
difference between the first and third cohorts was significant
(p = .014). The difference between the second and third
cohorts was not significant (p = .354).

Ratio	  of	  second	  verb	  to	  
0irst	  verb	  

length of verbs as anaphor, suggesting this device may be a
possible candidate for relative clause embedding.
In the relative clause version of our events, there is an
opportunity to mention the individuating verb twice: the
first when establishing the set (one boy typing, one boy
reading, and one boy writing) and the second when
describing the new action (the boy who was typing fell).
Previous observations of NSL suggest that one possible
marker of a relative clause is a reduction in the length of the
verb the second time it is mentioned. The second, reduced
mention of typing refers back to the boy who is typing,
established at the beginning of the description.
In the conjoined clause case, there is no set of individuals
and thus no action that individuates. As such, typing is only
mentioned once, and does not serve as an identifier, but
rather as a description of the first of two actions observed in
the scene.
Prosody: We coded for differences in prosody. A relative
clause (the boy who was typing fell) has a different prosodic
structure than a conjoined clause (the boy was typing then
fell). This difference may be marked with a longer pause or
additional descriptions between mention of typing and
mention of falling in the conjoined clause case compared to
the relative clause case.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Cohort 1

Cohort 2

Cohort 3

Figure 4. Ratio of second-mentioned verb to first-mentioned
verb out of trials in which signers repeated the individuating
verb.
Future work will analyze differences in descriptions of the
relative clause stimuli and the conjoined clause stimuli.

1346

Proportion	  of	  trials	  

Preliminary coding suggests that there are some prosodic
differences as well as a greater number of words separating
the two verbs in the conjoined clause descriptions compared
to the two verbs in the relative clause descriptions,
suggesting that descriptions with a relative clause differ
prosodically from descriptions with a conjoined clause. We
plan to do additional coding as well as perform a closer
examination of the type of words that separate the two verbs
in the two types of clauses (e.g., some words are related to
the action encoded by the second verb).

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

whether linguistic rules that may allow for infinite
expression are present in each individual human mind or if
the formation and expression of these rules depend on social
context and transmission across individuals. Early findings
from this work suggest that syntactic recursion, while not
appearing immediately in a new language, may nonetheless
be an early-emerging property. Importantly, while we found
suggestive evidence for syntactic recursion in the language
of only the third cohort signers, signers from all three
cohorts were able to express semantically different
utterances, indicating that even if a language may not have
syntactic recursion, human thought is recursive.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Nicaraguan participants for their enthusiastic
participation. This research was supported by an NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship to A.K., and a NIH/NIDCD
grant R01 DC05407 to A.S.

Relative clause
Conjoined clause

References
Cohort 1 Cohort 2 Cohort 3

Figure 5. Proportion of trials in which words separated the
two verbs in relative clause descriptions and conjoined
clause descriptions.

Discussion
In the current study, we investigated whether the capacity to
implement linguistic rules within rules (syntactic recursion)
emerges early in a new language or if it must be constructed
over historical time.
Our results suggest that signers from all three cohorts
have strategies to fulfill the discourse function of relative
clauses, namely picking out an individual from a set,
producing semantically different utterances when describing
a relative clause version of an event and a conjoined clause
version. However, the grammatical form of the utterances
differs across cohorts, with signers from later cohorts
producing sentences with relative clauses. Specifically,
third-cohort signers may be producing a reduced (shorter)
form of the verb in the relative clause (the boy who was
typing fell) compared to the first (longer) mention of the
relevant individual and his action (there is a boy typing).
Follow-up studies will attempt to answer open questions
from this work, ascertaining whether the prosodic
differences observed between relative clauses and conjoined
clause are indeed due to differences in form rather than
differences in timing of the events. Future work will also
test an alternative possible explanation for the reduction of
verbs that we observed, namely that any subsequent mention
of the same verb (rather than just the verb in a relative
clause) is accompanying by a reduction in length.
The recent emergence of a sign language in Nicaragua
offers us the opportunity to capture the creation and
development of a new language. Here, we investigate

Chomsky, N. (1968). Language and Mind. New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World.
Chomsky, N. (2000). New Horizons in the Study of
Language and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Christiansen, M. H., & Charter, N. (2008). Language as
shaped by the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31,
489-558.
Deutscher, G. (2000). Syntactic Change in Akkadian: The
Evolution of Sentential Complementation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Deutscher, G. (2005). The Unfolding of Language. New
York: Holt Paperbacks.
Emmorey, K. (2002). Language, Cognition, and the Brain:
Insights From Sign Language Research. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Everett, D.L. (2005). Cultural constraints on grammar and
cognition in Pirahã. Current Anthropology, 46, 621-646.
Everett, D. L. (2010). You drink. You drive. You go to jail.
Where’s recursion? In M. Speas & T. Roeper (Eds.),
Recursion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fitch, W. T., & Hauser, M. D. (2004). Computational
constraints on syntactic processing in nonhuman primates.
Science, 303, 377–380.
Flaherty, M., & Senghas, A. (2011). Numerosity and
number signs in deaf Nicaraguan adults. Cognition, 121,
427-436.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The
faculty of language: what is it, who has it, and how did it
evolve? Science, 298, 1569-1579.
Nevins, A., Pesetsky, D., & Rodrigues, C. (2009). Pirahã
exceptionality: A reassessment. Language, 85, 355–404.
Padden, C. (1983). Interaction of Morphology and Syntax in
American Sign Language. Doctoral dissertation,
Linguistics Department, University of California, San
Diego.

1347

Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York:
Harper Perennial Modern Classics.
Pinker, S., & Jackendoff, R. (2005). The faculty of
language: what’s special about it? Cognition, 95, 201-236.
Prince, Ellen. 1990. Syntax and discourse: A look at
resumptive pronouns. In Proceedings of the sixteenth
annual meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society:
General session and parasession on the legacy of Grice,
482–497. Department of Linguistics, University of
California, Berkeley.
Pyers, J., Shusterman, A., Senghas, A., Spelke, E., &
Emmorey, K. (2010). Evidence from an emerging sign
language that language supports spatial cognition.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107,
12116-12120.
Richie, R., Yang, C., & Coppola, M. (2013). Modeling the
emergence of lexicons in homesign systems. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-fifth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 1223-1228.
Roeper, T. (2011). The acquisition of recursion: How
formalism articulates the child’s path. Biolinguistics, 5,
57–86.
Senghas, A. (1995). Children’s Contribution to the Birth of
Nicaraguan Sign Language. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT.
Senghas, A. (2003). Intergenerational influence and
ontogenetic development in the emergence of spatial
grammar in Nicaraguan Sign Language. Cognitive
Development, 18, 511-531.
Senghas, A., & Coppola, M. (2001). Children creating
language: how Nicaraguan sign language acquired a
spatial grammar. Psychological Science, 12, 323-328.
Senghas, A., Kita, S., & Özyürek A. (2004). Children
creating core properties of language: Evidence from an
emerging sign language in Nicaragua. Science, 305, 17791782.
Tomasello, M. (2011). Human culture in evolutionary
perspective. In M. Gelfand, C. Chiu, & Y.Hong (Eds.),
Advances in Culture and Psychology. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of Human Communication.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The Cultural Origins of Human
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, T., Kruger, A., & Ratner, H. (1993). Cultural
learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 495-552.

1348

