Reflexive Spatial Attention to Goal-Directed Reaching
Alexis A. Barton (aabarton@indiana.edu)
Bennett I. Bertenthal (bbertent@indiana.edu)
Samuel Harding (hardinsm@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E.10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Social interaction involves cues such as gaze direction, head
orientation, and pointing gestures that serve to automatically
orient attention to a specific referent or spatial location. In this
paper we demonstrate that an observed reaching action
similarly results in a reflexive shift in attention as evidenced
by faster responses that are congruent with the direction of the
reach, than responses that are incongruent. This facilitation is
evident quickly after the onset of the reach action and is due
to the rapid prediction of the reach-goal. When the task
involves a saccadic response (Experiment 1) this prediction is
inhibited and results in a reverse-congruence, faster responses
to incongruent than congruent cues, when the cue occurs after
the reach is completed. This reverse-congruence is not present
when the task involves a key press (Experiment 2) or a mouse
movement (Experiment 3). We propose that the inhibition of
the predictive saccade is overcome when the eye movements
toward the goal are activated to guide the mouse movement.
The three experiments together demonstrate that automatic
attention distribution and its effects on behavior depend on
the response.
Keywords: action perception; reflexive attention; action
prediction

Introduction
Social cues that guide another person’s attention to a
specific location come in various forms such as eye-gaze,
head orientation, and pointing gestures (Langton, Watt, &
Bruce, 2000). The observer often processes these cues
automatically as their attention is quickly deployed in such a
way that it is hard to inhibit. For example, when presented
with a face that displays averted gaze, participants are faster
to detect a target when the gaze is in the same direction as
the target’s location than when it appears in the opposite
location (Driver et al., 1999; Friesen & Kingstone, 1998).
Similar compatibility effects are seen following the
presentation of a pointing hand (Bertenthal, Boyer, &
Harding, 2014; Crostella, Carducci, & Aglioti, 2009).
Furthermore, this shift in spatial attention may influence
responses differently based on the type of response required.
Crostella, et al. (2009) report that observation of a
distracting gaze cue interferes with saccadic responses,
whereas, a distracting point gesture interferes with a
pointing response.
Paradoxically, a grasping hand does not automatically
capture attention in the location of the grasped object
(Fischer & Szymkowiak, 2004) even though it, too, is a
social cue. Furthermore, grasping actions will modulate

perspective taking, but not spatial orienting (Mazzarella,
Hamilton, Trojano, Mastromauro, & Conson, 2012). Fischer
& Syzmkowiak (2004) suggest that a point is a deictic
gesture that continues to represent the intentions of the
actor, whereas, a grasp is an indication that an action has
already been performed and observers are not reflexively
drawn to attend to an object that has already been acted
upon.
While this claim may apply to the observation of a static
grasping hand, there is evidence to suggest that it is less
likely to apply to a dynamic reaching and grasping action.
Indeed, a static presentation of a pre-shaped grasping hand,
unlike the completed grasp, results in automatic spatial
attention to a congruently shaped object (Fischer, Prinz, &
Lotz, 2008), and even infants as young as 5 months will
orient faster to a target that is in the same direction as a
static pre-shaped grasping hand (Daum & Gredebäck,
2011).
In fact, recent studies measuring eye movements during
the observation of reaches find that observers will
predictively shift their gaze to the goal of the reach prior to
the completion of the action (Flanagan & Johansson, 2003).
These predictive saccades are very similar to the proactive
eye movements made by an actor during reaching. It has
been hypothesized that this coordination between the
observer’s gaze and the actor’s reach could be attributable to
observers mapping perceived actions to a corresponding
system of motor representations including the prospective
looks to the goal (Flanagan & Johansson, 2003). Alternative
explanations for the prediction of observed action goals
involve cognitive, rather than motor, mechanisms such as
statistical learning or the attraction to goal salience (Eshuis,
Coventry & Vulchanova, 2009).
If the prospective eye movements to the reach goal are
automatically activated during observation then we expect
that covert spatial attention will likewise be automatically
shifted in the direction of the reaching action. Furthermore,
if spatial attention is captured by a reaching action then
observation of a dynamic reach will facilitate fast and
accurate responses in the same direction during a spatial
cuing task, even if the reach is irrelevant to the task.
The current study aims to investigate the relation between
perceiving dynamic, goal-directed actions and spatial
attention. We followed the approach of Crostella et al.
(2009), and presented a video of a goal-directed reach in
conjunction with a spatial cueing task. The reaching action

1044

Figure 1: Still images showing the stimulus video of
reaching actions with the cue and response targets
overlaid. In this trial, the cue to respond occurred after the
reach-to-grasp action was completed at 1250 ms.
is non-predictive of target locations and participants were
instructed to ignore it. Thus, if we see that responses that are
congruent with the direction of the reach are facilitated in
comparison to responses that are incongruent, we can
assume that observation of the reach automatically shifted
the participant’s spatial attention toward the reach-goal.
Furthermore, we manipulated the timing of the reaching
action with regard to the stimulus cue. In this way, we could
assess the automatic processing of the reach at multiple time
points and evaluate the effects of both ongoing and
completed actions.

Experiment 1: Saccadic Response
Methods
Participants Thirty undergraduate students in introductory
psychology courses at Indiana University participated in this
experiment (Mean age: 19.6 years, SD: 0.8 years; Left
handed: n=6; Male: n=9).
Stimuli & Apparatus The stimuli (Figure 1) consisted of
videos of an actress, visible from the neck down, reaching to
grasp one of two objects resting on the table in front of her.
The actress reached with either her right or left hand to the
object on her ipsilateral or contralateral side. The full
duration of the reach was 1000 ms and the grasp around the
object was completed after 1250 ms. Trials were presented
in a pseudorandom order with no more than three
consecutive trials of the same reach type or same goal
location. The stimulus cue began as a filled black square
centered on the screen and the two response targets were
unfilled black rectangles placed around the location of each
potential reach goal.
Stimulus presentation was performed using E-Prime
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburg, PA). Gaze data was
collected with a Tobii TX300 eye tracking system
(Stockholm, SE) sampling at 120Hz.
Design and Procedure On each trial the video began with
the actress placing her hands on the table in front of her and
then reaching for one of the objects. After a variable amount
of time (stimulus onset asynchrony, SOA) the stimulus cue

changed from black to either blue or red to cue a target.
Participants were instructed to fixate the stimulus cue and
wait for the color change, then to shift their gaze to the
rectangle around the object on the right when the cue was
red and to the rectangle on the left when the cue was blue.
They were also told that if they looked away from the cue
before it changed the trial would be repeated. When gaze
was detected within the correct response-target AOI for a
minimum of 500ms the color of the response-target
rectangle changed to grey to indicate to the participant that a
response had been recorded. On 50% of the trials the cued
direction was congruent with the direction of the reach and
on 50% of the trials the cued direction was incongruent with
the direction of the reach. Immediately following the
response the video stopped and remained on the screen for a
variable inter-trial interval between 300 and 1000ms.
In order to explore the effects of the time course of the
observed action on spatial attention, the following SOAs
were used in this experiment: -250, 0, 250, 500, 750, 1000,
and 1250ms. A negative SOA indicates the stimulus cue
changed color before the onset of the reach, whereas a
positive SOA indicates the cue occurred after the reach.
Participants completed 6 blocks of 60 trials for a total of
360 trials, with congruent and incongruent trials
counterbalanced. The number of ipsilateral and contralateral trials as well as the number of right and left handed
reaches were also counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
Response Time Figure 2a presents the mean saccadic
response times for congruent and incongruent trials at each
SOA. Saccadic response times were analyzed in a 2
(congruence) x 7 (SOA) within subjects ANOVA. This
analysis revealed a significant main effect of SOA
(F(6,24)=12.65, p<.0001, η2=.76) and a significant
interaction between SOA and Congruence (F(6,24)=3.22,
p=.018, η2=0.45). Paired comparisons revealed significantly
faster responses to congruent than incongruent cues at
250ms (t(29)=3.55, p=.001, d=0.60), but the opposite effect,
faster responses to incongruent than congruent cues, at
1250ms (t(29)=2.73, p=0.011, d=0.26).
Replication In the preceding study we could not predict a
priori which SOAs would show a congruence effect or
reverse-congruence effect, which was the reason for a
partial replication. We focused on SOAs that previously
showed a significant effect (250 and 1250ms) as well as an
even longer SOA (1600ms) to determine if this reversecongruence effect continues beyond the end of the observed
reaching action. Analysis of the saccadic response times
revealed main effects of SOA (F(2,23)=5.24, p=.01, η2=.31)
and congruence (F(1,24)=7.59, p=.01, η2=.24) as well as an
interaction between SOA and Congruence (F(2,23)=6.08,
p=.008, η2=.35). Paired comparisons revealed congruent
responses are faster than incongruent at 250ms (t(24)=3.67,
p.=001, d=0.48), and incongruent faster than congruent at
both 1250 ms (t(24)=2.80, p=.01, d=0.88) and 1600 ms
(t(24)=3.21, p=.004, d=0.88).

1045

Figure 2. Saccadic response times (a) and Key-Press response times (b) for congruent and incongruent trials in
Experiments 1 and 2 respectively. Error bars represent ± standard error of the mean. * p<.05.
Discussion The results from this experiment demonstrate
that the observation of a reach reflexively shifts attention in
the direction of the goal. Even though participants were
instructed to ignore the reaching action, their attention was
captured by this stimulus and they were unable to inhibit
covertly orienting in the reach direction, which resulted in
faster saccadic responses to congruent targets and slower
responses to incongruent targets. We speculate that this shift
in spatial attention is a consequence of the automatic
activation of the predictive saccade to the reach goal due to
the direct matching of the observed action to its
corresponding motor representation. This congruence effect
was strongest at 250 ms SOA, and then began to dissipate as
participants had sufficient time to inhibit their reflexive
attentional shift and instead plan an intentional, controlled
response. It is possible that observing the reaching action
nearing its completion also contributed to a reduction in the
activation of the eye movement response. This experiment,
however, cannot dissociate these two factors because long
SOAs and reach completion are confounded.
The reverse-congruence effect seen at longer SOAs was
an unexpected result and one that is not typically reported in
spatial cueing studies with social stimuli (for an exception
see Friesen and Tipper, 2004). This pattern of responses is
similar to the well-established phenomenon of inhibition of
return (IOR) where saccades toward a previously attended
location are slower compared to an unattended location
(Posner & Cohen, 1984). In this experiment, however, the
time course of the effect is significantly delayed relative to
the typical IOR pattern (Klein, 2000), and it has previously
been reported that social cues do not result in IOR even at
long SOAs (for a review see Frischen, Bayless & Tipper,
2007). A related concept is the ‘Social IOR’ (Skarratt, Cole,

& Kingstone, 2010) which describes the tendency for people
to perform slower reaches to a location where their jointaction partner has recently reached. For these reasons, we
are hesitant to suggest that the reverse-congruence effect is
another example of IOR. Instead, we believe that it is in
part due to the task instructions associated with this
experiment as we will discuss later on.
The congruence effect in this experiment is consistent
with the premotor theory of attention which proposes that a
shift in spatial attention necessarily precedes a goal directed
action such as an eye movement (Rizzolatti, Riggio, &
Sheliga, 1994). This theory would also predict that
automatic shifts in attention would be associated with
responses in any modality. This is in contrast to the results
of Crostella et al. (2009) where there was a one-to-one
mapping of the stimulus and the affected response. Those
results can be attributed to the automatic activation of a
To test if both the congruence as well as reversecongruence effects of the current experiment would be
replicated with another motor response, we modified the
current task by substituting a key-press for a saccadic
response.

Experiment 2: Key-Press Response
Methods
Participants Twenty students participated in this
experiment (Mean age: 19.7 years, SD: 1.3 years Left
handed: n=6 Male: n=5).
Stimuli and Apparatus The stimuli and the SOAs in this
experiment were identical to Experiment 1. All stimulus
presentation and response collection procedures were

1046

performed using E-Prime (Psychology Software Tools,
Pittsburg, PA).
Design and Procedure Participants were instructed to press
the ‘J’ key on a standard American computer keyboard with
their Right index finger when the stimulus cue changed to
red and the ‘F’ key with their Left index finger when the cue
changed to blue.

Results and Discussion
Response Time Analysis of key-press response times
revealed a main effect of SOA (F(6,14)=4.12, p=.02,
η2=.62), but no main effect of congruence (F(1,19)=1.42,
p=.23, η2=.07) nor interaction between SOA and congruence
(F(6,14)=0.91, p=.32, η2=.36). Planned comparison revealed
participants were significantly faster to congruent than
incongruent cues at 250 ms SOA (t(19)=2.89, p=0.009,
d=0.15, Figure 3).
Replication Because there was no evidence of a reversecongruence effect at the longer SOAs we decided to focus
our replication efforts on the range of SOAs where we
expected the congruence effect. The analysis of response
times confirmed significant main effects for SOA
(F(6,14)=13.77, p<.001, η2=.86) and Congruence
(F(1,19)=11.33, p=.003, η2=.37) with significantly faster
responses to congruent than incongruent trials at 125, 250,
375 and 500 ms SOAs (all t(19)>2.38, all p<.03).
Discussion The results of this experiment were consistent
with our expectation that participants would again respond
faster to the congruent target at short SOAs. In contrast to
Experiment 1, this experiment showed no evidence of a
reverse-congruence effect at long SOAs. This result
suggests that the effects of the irrelevant reach and grasp
action were different as a function of response mode.
We hypothesize that the reason for a reverse-congruence
effect in only Experiment experiment1 is because the
saccadic response was influenced by both the irrelevant
stimulus facilitating a congruent response as well as the task
demands that inhibited a congruent response. As illustrated
by Figure 3, each trial begins with inhibition of an eye
movement in any direction because participants are
instructed to fixate the stimulus cue and not move their eyes.
Once the reaching action begins at time 0 ms, there is a
covert shift in attention as well as a gradual build-up in the
activation of a proactive eye movement. Recall that this
attentional bias comes from the observation of the reaching
action and the reflexive activation of a predictive eye
movement to the reach-goal. Based on our results, this
activation peaks at around 250ms and then decreases due to
competition from the intentional inhibition of an eye
movement. When the reach ends at 1000ms the activation
associated with the predictive eye movement ends, but the
inhibition remains resulting in an inhibitory rebound.
The results of Experiment 1 are consistent with this
explanation. In the 250 ms SOA, congruent responses are
facilitated relative to incongruent responses. Then, the
saccadic response times in congruent trials consistently

Figure 3. The proposed model of activation and
inhibition of eye movements toward the reach-goal
that explains the reverse-congruence at long SOAs in
saccade response times (E1; solid line) but not
saccadic responses in conjunction with mouse
movements (E3; dashed line)
increase from 250 ms to 1250 ms SOA while the saccadic
response times in incongruent trials remains relatively flat
(Figure 2). This is because the predictive eye movement to
the reach-goal is being inhibited which slows responses in
the same direction. This inhibition does not affect responses
in the incongruent trials. Furthermore, this inhibition is not
evident in the key-press responses. Instead, the congruent
responses are consistently facilitated relative to the
incongruent responses. We suggest that this is because the
inhibition of the key press response does not increase over
the course of the trial and is applied equally to congruent
and incongruent responses.
To test our hypothesis about selective inhibition of the
predictive saccade, we modified the task to include a mouse
movement response and measured how this multi-modal
response affected saccadic response times. Note that mouse
movements, like goal-directed reaches, are visually guided
actions. Therefore, the eyes are activated in this task to both
proactively move in the direction of the actor’s reach, and to
guide the mouse movements to the target in response to the
cue. We expected that the additional activation associated
with preparing a mouse movement that would not subside
until the response was completed would offset the inhibition
of the predictive saccade at the completion of the reach by
the actor.

Experiment 3: Mouse Movement + Saccade
Response
Methods
Participants Twenty-seven students participated in this
experiment (Mean age: 19.5 years, SD: 0.9 years; Left
handed: n=7; Male: 12), three participants were tested and
excluded from analysis due to noncompliance with task
instructions.

1047

Results and Discussion

Figure 4. Still frame from Experiment 3 immediately
following the color change of the cue in the 500ms SOA
condition.
Stimuli and Apparatus Video stimuli from Experiment 1
was cropped to include only the reaching action and
presented in the top third of the screen. Additionally, textbox centered at the bottom of the screen with the word
‘START’ and an asterisk was centered within the response
rectangles over each of the objects. The following SOAs
were used in this experiment: 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250,
and 1600ms.
Design Participants were instructed to initiate each trial by
clicking the mouse on the ‘START’ box, then remaining on
box until the cue changed. They then moved the cursor and
clicked on the asterisk in the right box if the cue was red and
clicked the asterisk in the left box if the cue was blue.

Response Time Analysis of saccadic response times
revealed significant main effects of both SOA
(F(5,22)=11.99, p<0.001, η2=.73) and congruence
(F(1,26)=29.58, p<0.001, η2=.53) as well as a significant
interaction between SOA and congruence, (F(5,22)=3.20,
p=.025, η2=.42). Planned comparisons revealed significantly
faster congruent responses at the 500, 750, 1000, and 1250
ms SOAs (all t’s(26)> 2.18, all p’s<.04). Critically, there
was no evidence of a reverse-congruence effect at 1250 or
1600ms.
An analysis of the mouse response times revealed only a
main effect of SOA (F(5,22)=4.28, p=.007, η2=.49) due to
faster response times at the longer SOAs. Neither the main
effect of congruence (F(1,26)=2.64, p=.116, η2=.09) nor the
interaction between SOA and congruence (F(5,22)=0.51,
p=.77, η2=.10) were significant.
Discussion As predicted saccadic response times continued
to show an early congruence effect, albeit delayed relative
to Experiments 1 and 2, but no reverse-congruence effect as
seen in Experiment 1. This is consistent with our hypothesis
for the reverse-congruence effect, because, in this case, the
eye movement continues to be facilitated as it is needed to
guide the mouse movements. Note that there was no
evidence of response times in the congruent condition
increasing as SOAs increased beyond 250ms. This is
because the build-up of an inhibitory response to prevent a
premature eye movement was offset by the preparation to
move the mouse in the congruent direction. Unlike the
activation of a proactive eye movement which was
stimulated from observing the actor’s reach, the activation
of the eye movement associated with the mouse movement
continued until the completion of the response.
Interestingly, the mouse response times did not reveal
either a congruency or reverse-congruency effect, and, in
fact, showed no consistent differences between congruent
and incongruent responses. This result underscores the
importance of using multiple response measures as the
mouse response-time alone may have lead one to conclude
that there was no effect of action observation on attention
distribution.

General Discussion

Figure 5. Saccadic response time in Experiment 3.
Error bars represent ± standard error of the mean.
* p<0.05; ** p<.001.

Taken together the results of these three experiments
demonstrate that attention is automatically captured by the
observation of dynamic reaching actions. In all three
experiments participant’s responses are faster when the
response direction is congruent with the direction of the
reach, but only when the cue to respond occurs shortly after
the onset of the reach stimulus. This only tells part of the
story however, because the time course of the reach’s
influence is not the same across all responses. The eye
movement response in Experiment 1 showed a significant
reverse-congruence effect, where the responses to cues at
long SOAs were slower in the direction congruent with the
reach. We suggest that this reverse-congruence reflects a

1048

steady build-up of inhibition in order to ensure that the eye
does not move from the fixation square until cued. We
tested this hypothesis by adding a visually-guided response
in Experiment 3, and the results revealed that the activation
associated with preparing a mouse movement overcame the
inhibition of the saccadic response..
These results contribute to our understanding of reflexive
shifts in attention to observed actions in three ways:. First,
we used a dynamic stimulus. By presenting videos of a
reaching action, as opposed to still images of a grasp, we
were able to examine the role of ongoing actions in a more
ecologically valid way. While this opens up the possibility
that any dynamic motion stimulus would similarly drive
attention, we predict that this would not be the case. Recall
that we presented both ipsilateral and contralateral actions.
Contralateral actions start on the side opposite from the
eventual reach-goal, and would therefore initially facilitate
incongruent responses if shifts in attention were driven only
by movement. Critically, the congruence effect was
consistently present in the 250ms SOA despite the fact that
250ms into a contralateral reach the hand had just reached
the midline of the actor (Figure 1) and therefore the
perceived direction of the hand movement was still
somewhat ambiguous.
Second, presenting a dynamic reaching action helps to
clarify an apparent inconsistency in the literature where
some studies are reporting no spatial orienting following a
grasp (Fischer & Szymkowiak, 2004; Mazzarella et al.,
2012) and others are reporting that an incomplete grasp
does automatically drive attention (Fischer et al., 2008,
Daum & Gredebäck, 2011). By studying the effects of an
ongoing reaching action on automatic spatial orienting we
observed results that are consistent with both results.
Attention is automatically oriented in the direction of the
reach while the reach is ongoing. This facilitation ends
when the reach is complete, supporting Fischer &
Szymkowiak (2004) explanation that completed actions do
not drive attention.
Finally, the use of multiple response measures revealed
that automatic spatial orienting affected responses
differently depending on the response modality. Taken
together the results of these experiments support a
hypothesis that could not be tested by one experiment alone.
The reverse-congruence effect observed in Experiment 1
appears very similar to inhibition of return despite evidence
that social cues do not elicit IOR. Increasing the activation
of the eye movements in the direction of the reach by adding
the mouse movement response eliminated the reversecongruence effect and allowed us to reject the IOR
explanation while providing support for our hypothesis of
specific saccade inhibition.

References
Bertenthal, B. I., Boyer, T. W., & Harding, S. (2014). When
do infants begin to follow a point? Developmental
Psychology, 50(8), 2036–2048.
Crostella, F., Carducci, F., & Aglioti, S. M. (2009).

Reflexive social attention is mapped according to
effector-specific reference systems. Experimental
Brain Research, 197(2), 143–151.
Daum, M. M., & Gredebäck, G. (2011). The development of
grasping comprehension in infancy: covert shifts of
attention caused by referential actions. Experimental
Brain Research, 208(2), 297–307.
Driver, J., Davis, G., Ricciardelli, P., Kidd, P., Maxwell, E.,
& Baron Cohen, S. (1999). Gaze perception triggers
reflexive visuospatial orienting. Visual Cognition, 6(5),
509–540.
Eshuis, R., Coventry, K. R., & Vulchanova, M. (2009).
Predictive eye movements are driven by goals, not by
the mirror neuron system. Psychological
Science, 20(4), 438-440.
Fischer, M. H., Prinz, J., & Lotz, K. (2008). Grasp cueing
shows obligatory attention to action goals. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(6),
860–868.
Fischer, M. H., & Szymkowiak, A. (2004). Joint Attention
for Pointing but not Grasping Postures. Cortex; a
Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System
and Behavior, 40(1), 168–170.
Flanagan, J. R. R., & Johansson, R. S. (2003). Action plans
used in action observation. Nature, 424(6950), 769–
771.
Friesen, C. K., & Kingstone, A. (1998). The eyes have it!
Reflexive orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5(3), 490–495.
Frischen, A., Bayliss, A. P., & Tipper, S. P. (2007). Gaze
Cueing of Attention: Visual Attention, Social
Cognition, and Individual Differences. Psychological
Bulletin, 133(4), 694–724.
Klein, R. M. (2000). Inhibition of return. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 4(4), 138-147.
Langton, S. R. H., Watt, R. J., & Bruce, V. (2000). Do the
eyes have it? Cues to the direction of social attention.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(2), 50–59.
Mazzarella, E., Hamilton, A., Trojano, L., Mastromauro, B.,
& Conson, M. (2012). Observation of another's action
but not eye gaze triggers allocentric visual perspective.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
65(12), 2447–2460.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 3–25.
Posner, M. I., & Cohen, Y. (1984). Components of visual
orienting. In H. Bouma & D. G. Bouwhuis (Eds.),
Attention and Performance X (pp. 531–556). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum
Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L., & Sheliga, B. M. (1994). Space
and selective attention. In C. Umilta & M. Moscovitch
(Eds.), Attention and performance XV, 15, 231-265.
Skarratt, P. A., Cole, G. G., & Kingstone, A. (2010). Social
inhibition of return. Acta psychologica, 134(1), 48-54.

1049

