Representing Sequence: The Influence of Timeline Axis and Direction
on Causal Reasoning in Litigation Law
Amy Rae Fox (amyraefox@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, California State University - Chico
(current) Department of Cognitive Science, University of California San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA

Martin van den Berg (mvandenberg@csuchico.edu)
Department of Psychology, California State University - Chico
Chico, CA USA

Erica de Vries (Erica.deVries@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr)
Laboratory of Educational Sciences, Univ. Grenoble Alpes
Grenoble, France
Abstract

information offered by attorneys using PowerPoint presentations than those offering the same information by oral argument alone. Participants also believed these attorneys were
more credible, and decided in favor of their clients more often. The authors concluded that the use of visual aids influenced juror decision-making through both cognition (comprehension of the evidence) and persuasion (attitudes about
the evidence). In a review of research addressing the effect
of visualizations on courtroom decision-making, Feigenson
(2010) noted a lack of convergent evidence on the effects of
courtroom graphics, suggesting a nuanced role of visual evidence moderated by a number of factors, including: message
format (i.e. still image, static-sequential animation, moving
image animation, simulation), features of the case (e.g. complexity and familiarity of the scenario), and features of the
case presentation (e.g. timing in case, differential use by opposing party). Feigenson also hypothesized a number of mediating variables, including: comprehension of the scenario,
juror’s ability to visualize the scenario, credibility, likeability,
and emotional responses. While the results of experimental
studies are mixed, this body of research suggests a range of
effects that multimedia exhibits may have on comprehension,
reasoning and subsequent decision-making. There is an urgent need for targeted research to explore the mechanisms by
which these effects may occur, and the extent to which they
are relevant to the high stakes arena of litigation law.

Can the representation of event sequence influence how jurors
remember and reason in a legal case? We addressed this question by examining the interaction between an individual’s preferred spatial construal of time (SCT) for an external (visualspatial) representation and the SCT of a courtroom graphic.
One hundred fifty three undergraduates played the role of jurors in a fictitious civil trial. The details of a case were recounted in a multimedia presentation featuring timelines animated in one of four orientations: left-right, right-left, topbottom, and bottom-top. Participants were assessed on measures of comprehension and causal reasoning. Results indicated effects of timeline orientation and SCT choice behavior on comprehension and reasoning. We discuss these results
in terms of the role of attention in temporal-causal reasoning,
and implications for the design of multimedia materials for the
courtroom.
Keywords: external representation; courtroom graphics; visualization; spatial construal of time; sequence; events; multimedia learning

Introduction
In litigation, lawyers often describe a situation while making an argument as to the cause of an alleged wrongdoing.
Temporal order—a sequence of events—is the most basic
requirement for causation. Increasingly, lawyers are turning to graphical representations such as animated PowerPoint
presentations to support their courtroom arguments. In this
study, we investigate the influence of the visual-spatial representation of event sequence on the comprehension and causal
reasoning of jurors.

Sequence

Visual Evidence

We are interested in exploring how litigators might use multimedia displays to communicate about causation. Causation
is a complex, multi-faceted construct in both law and philosophy, that has at least one basic requirement: the order
of events. A cause can only be a cause if it occurs before
an effect. In the auditory verbal medium, we can represent
temporal order in situ, the first thing I say precedes the second thing I say, and so on. Similarly, in the visual-verbal
medium, the first thing I write precedes the second. Research
on text and listening comprehension has shown that comprehension for temporal order is significantly better when events

While computers and their multimedia artifacts are nearly
ubiquitous in classrooms and boardrooms, their introduction
to the American courtroom is a more recent phenomenon. A
growing body of research is addressing the use of computergenerated exhibits as demonstrative evidence1 . Park and
Feigenson (2013) found that mock jurors remembered more
1 Demonstrative evidence is offered to illustrate or clarify the tes-

timony of a witness or the argument of a lawyer. Examples include
a list of facts the lawyer refers to in supporting a claim of causation,
or a timeline of events leading up to a crime.

450

are presented in chronological order in language (Mandler,
1985; Fenker, Waldmann, & Holyoak, 2005). Accordingly,
if lawyers wish for their arguments to be understood and remembered, they would do well to instruct jurors about a sequence of events in the order they are alleged to unfold. To
accompany such an oral argument, a lawyer might use a visual aid such as a timeline as demonstrative evidence.
A timeline is both a communication tool and a cognitive
artifact. It consists of a chronological organization of events,
most often depicted on a two-dimensional surface. Events
may be represented by descriptions (i.e. text) and/or depictions (i.e. icons, pictograms or photographs). The flow of
time unfolds along a linear path, often a horizontal or vertical axis. The positions of events serve as indicators anchoring their relative place in time. Depending on the granularity
of detail, much information about the temporal relations of
the events may be extracted from the representation, such as
timing (a date/time) and duration (a quantity). Sequence information is always present, inherent in the spatial structure
of the representation. In conjunction with an auditory narration, a pictorial timeline becomes a multimedia presentation.
A timeline may also be animated to progressively elaborate
a sequence of events in situ. Such a multimedia representation is potentially powerful, with both space and time, verbal
and pictorial, auditory and visual mechanisms employed to
communicate event sequence.

its adequacy to fulfill task demands (Torralbo, Santiago, &
Lupiáñez, 2006; Santiago, Román, & Ouellet, 2011; Santiago, Ouellet, Román, & Valenzuela, 2012).
A task requiring the representation of temporal sequence
on a two- dimensional surface brings attention to an allocentric frame of reference (Torralbo et al., 2006), thus activating
a Reading/Writing Direction (RWD) consistent SCT of leftright for English speakers (Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter,
1991). The result is the construction of a left-right oriented
mental model in working memory, structuring knowledge of
the sequence of events. If, however, a multimedia stimulus is
presented in a different SCT, an individual must either import
an alternative mapping into working memory, or perform a
transformation of the incoming information into the SCT of
the existing mapping. This raises two important questions:
(1) Does the format of multimedia materials impact on the
construction of the mental model? (2) If so, how does this
impact reasoning operations on the mental model?

Present Investigation
We apply this conceptual framework to the domain of litigation law with three goals: (1) Preferences: replicate previous research on the relationship between SCTs and RWD,
extended to computer-based stimuli. (2) Flexibility: test hypotheses derived from the Coherent Working Models Theory (Santiago et al., 2011) about the construction of mental
models from inconsistent SCTs. (3) Stability: explore the
stability of SCT preferences and potential impacts on mental
model construction. We address these goals by focusing on
the interaction between an individual’s preferred SCT for a
narrowly-defined task and the SCT of a stimulus.

Learning About Sequence From Multimedia
When individuals experience a multimedia presentation, they
process the stimuli through sensory mechanisms into working
memory where stimuli are processed in accordance with their
modalities (auditory, visual) and representational formats (descriptive, depictive) (Schnotz, 2014). The information is integrated with existing knowledge from long-term memory, the
result of which is a mental model, representing the sequence
of events in terms of spatial relations (Schaeken & JohnsonLaird, 1995). But what happens when the stimuli contain
information about abstract concepts, such as time? A substantial body of research suggests that the embodied experience of space serves to structure our conceptualization of the
abstract notion of time, such that certain properties of space
(e.g. relative position, continuity) are imported into the domain of time (e.g. sequence, succession) (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980; Boroditsky, 2000). The mapping of time onto space is
guided by conventions established through the habitual use of
language and cultural artifacts (Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013).
We call these mappings spatial construals of time (henceforth
SCTs). Although multiple SCTs may be present in long-term
memory (Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013), it is theorized that
the import of mappings into working memory for task performance is constrained by a coherence-seeking mechanism2 .
According to the Coherent Working Models Theory, given
a set of available mappings, only one is selected based on

Hypotheses We hypothesize that individuals in the target
population (English speakers of jury-eligible age) will prefer a RWD-consistent SCT (left-right) for a computer-based
sequencing task. We predict the choice of this SCT will be
stable: when asked to reconstruct a sequence of events after
a stimulus, participants would likely persist. We hypothesize a limit to the flexibility of thinking with differing SCTs,
such that the presentation of timelines oriented with different
SCTs (same axis/opposite RWD or different axis) will impair
the development of coherent mental models. Consequently,
participants exposed to such stimuli will have poorer comprehension of the case and make more errors in causal reasoning.

Methodology
Design
Two factors, Timeline Axis and Consistency of Timeline
Direction with Reading/Writing Direction (henceforth, direction) were fully crossed, yielding a 2-Axis (Horizontal/Vertical) x 2-Direction (Consistent/Inconsistent) design
with four between-subjects conditions: (1)left-right, (2)topbottom, (3)right-left, and (4) bottom-top.

2 For example, it would be incoherent to simultaneously construe
the flow of time as both Back-to-Front and Front-to-Back.

451

(a) SCTs = L − R

(b) SCTs = T − B

(c) SCTs = B − T

(d) SCTs = R − L

Figure 1: Stimuli - Timelines for Four Experimental Groups

Participants

Experimental Stimuli The experimental stimuli consisted
of a fictitious civil litigation involving a motorist/cyclist traffic accident3 . The scenario was developed such that verdicts
in favor of the plaintiff or defendant were equally justified,
depending on which of the conflicting witness statements a
juror chose to believe. Measures of comprehension and reasoning were balanced for either verdict, mitigating the impact
of bias toward either party.

One hundred fifty three undergraduates (63% female) sampled from a mid-sized American university were randomly
assigned to the experimental conditions in exchange for
course credit. The participants ranged from 18 to 64 years
of age (Median=22). All reported fluency in English, with
89% reporting English as a first language, and 11% reporting
Spanish. Native speakers of Mandarin, Arabic and Farsi were
excluded from the sample. No significant differences were
found between experimental groups with respect to other demographic variables, including involvement in traffic accidents and laterality.

The experimental manipulation was embedded in a multimedia presentation of testimony consisting of a PowerPoint
presentation, ostensibly displayed in a courtroom accompanying a lawyer’s examination of a witness. Participants heard
an unidentified lawyer questioning a police officer who responded to a traffic accident. The police officer reported the
events leading up to the accident as described by the defendent motorist and plaintiff cyclist. During each description, a
timeline appeared on-screen, serving as the experimental manipulation. The axis and direction of the timeline depicted
were different for each experimental group (Figure 1). Each
timeline was animated in a sequential fashion and synchronized with the audio description.
Measure of Comprehension Comprehension was measured via twenty-five multiple-choice questions developed
in accordance with the Meaning Identification Technique
(MIT) for evaluating reading and listening comprehension
(Marchant, Royer, & Greene, 1988).
Measure of Reasoning To assess temporal-causal reasoning, participants were asked to arrange twenty-eight events
described in the testimony along a timeline (Figure 3). This
task aims to capture both the spatial structure and content of
a mental model. The structure of the model was determined
by the chosen orientation of the timeline SCT2 . Causal reasoning was evaluated by scoring the submitted sequence in
relation to its logical consistency with the verdict the participant rendered. For example, if a participant rendered a verdict in favor of the cyclist but indicated on the timeline that
the cyclist ran the red light, the response would be logically

Materials
Measure of Spatial Construal of Time A novel measure
was developed as an indicator of participants’ preferred spatial construal of time (SCT) for event sequence in the context
of a well-defined task. Participants were asked to construct a
timeline to indicate the order of a sequence of events. They
were first instructed to choose an orientation (axis and direction) for the timeline (Figure 2). The orientation selected by
the participant was recorded as the SCT and utilized for the
subsequent sequencing task. The SCT measure was utilized
twice during the experimental protocol, once before stimulus
presentation (SCT1 ), and once after (SCT2 ).

Figure 2: Measuring SCT preference for representational
task. The second item in each figure was positioned on the
other side of the timeline to demonstrate that both sides could
be utilized in the following task.

3 Based on a scenario from the 2014 Colorado State High School
Mock-Trial Program (Colorado Bar Association, 2014).

452

inconsistent. Two graduate students developed the scoring
rubric which was applied via a computer algorithm.

interaction between axis and direction, and no effects were
significant for reasoning.

Procedure
Participants were seated at computer workstations equipped
with headphones and guided through the study under the
guise of a mock-trial. First, participants completed the first
measure of spatial construal of time (SCT1 ). Then, they
viewed the stimulus multimedia presentation. Following the
testimony, they answered 25 questions testing their comprehension of the case. Then, they constructed a timeline of
events mentioned in the testimony (SCT2 and reasoning measures). Finally, they were asked to render a verdict. Participants were then debriefed. The total runtime averaged 43
minutes.

Results
Preferences for SCTs
A majority (76%) of participants selected a left-right SCT in
the first sequencing task (henceforth SCT1 -constrained sample), followed by 12% selecting bottom-top, 10% top-bottom,
and 2% right-left. In paper-based studies, participants face a
stimulus oriented parallel to their sagittal axis, while in the
present computer-based study, participants faced a stimulus
oriented perpendicular to their sagittal axis (Figure 4). Our
results are consistent with findings of studies conducted on
children with paper-based stimuli (Tversky et al., 1991), suggesting that the influence of RWD is consistent across at least
two spatial axes as well as a change in representational media.

Figure 5: Group Means of Comprehension by Experimental
Group.

Stability in SCTs
To explore the stability of SCT preferences while performing
cognitive activities, we derived a new measure, SCT Choice
Behavior4 , based on the post-stimulus SCT2 in relationship
to the SCTs (experimental group) and pre-stimulus SCT1 .
Of the 116 participants in the SCT1 -constrained sample,
seventy-one persisted with SCT1 when presented with a differing SCTs . Twenty-eight received the same stimulus as
SCT1 and persisted. Ten adapted to the SCTs and seven chose
a third, different SCT2 . We performed a multivariate KruskalWallis test to examine the influence of SCT choice behavior
on comprehension and reasoning, which revealed a significant effect on reasoning, χ2 (3, n=116)=10.7, p=.013. Participants who chose SCT2 different than both SCT1 and stimulus
SCTs had significantly lower scores on the reasoning task.

Discussion

Figure 4: Orientation of Stimuli in Paper vs. Computer-based
Studies.

To explore preferences, flexibility and stability of spatial construals of time (SCTs) and effects on courtroom reasoning, we
asked participants to assume the role of jurors in a mock-trial.
We successfully replicated previous findings on the concordance of SCTs with RWD (Tversky et al., 1991) this time
with computer-based interactive data visualizations. Concerning flexibility, our results shed light on the flexibility of
SCTs and the role of attention as a coherence-seeking mechanism. Regarding stability, we offer new evidence as to the stability of SCT choices over sequential representational tasks,
and discuss how these behaviors might affect operations on
mental models.

Flexibility in SCTs
As hypothesized, a significant positive correlation was found
between measures of comprehension and reasoning (r=.273,
p<.01). A factorial MANOVA examining the effect of stimulus SCT on comprehension and reasoning yielded a significant main effect for direction, Λ = .95, F (2,111)= 3.08,
p=.05, η2p = .05. Univariate analyses revealed a significant
effect of direction only on comprehension, F (1,112)=3.92,
p=.05, η2p = .03. Inspection of the estimated group-means revealed that the direction of the effect was opposite to our hypothesis. Timelines oriented inconsistent with RWD (bottomtop and right-left) were related to higher comprehension
scores (see Figure 5). The data did not reflect a significant

4 SCT

Choice Behavior values: persist (SCT1 6= stimulus, SCT2
≡ SCT1 ), adapt (SCT1 6= stimulus, SCT2 ≡ stimulus), neither
(SCT1 6= stimulus, SCT2 6= stimulus, SCT1 6= SCT1 ), indeterminate (SCT1 ≡ stimulus ≡ SCT2 ).

453

(a) SCT2 = L − R

(b) SCT2 = T − B

(c) SCT2 = B − T

(d) SCT2 = R − L

Figure 3: Start Positions of Interactive Timelines for Reasoning Measure. Text inside circles provide short description of events
(e.g. CYCLIST enters intersection). Circles are organized into color coded categories (e.g. car events, bicycle events, traffic
signals, etc.)

Preferences for SCTs

timeline SCTs have a deleterious effect on causal-reasoning.
We presumed that reasoning, an operation that manipulates a
mental model, depends first on the fidelity of the contents of
the model (Schaeken & Johnson-Laird, 1995). In this way, we
expected that comprehension and reasoning measures would
be strongly correlated. The actual correlation between measures was weak (r=.273, p<.001), and in fact only significantly correlated for the left-right stimuli condition (r=.403,
p=.05). This suggests that participants in other groups may
have found the reasoning task so challenging that they either
substantially reduced their effort, or, through manipulation of
the interactive data visualization, altered the contents of their
mental model. To investigate these alternatives in the future,
we need to compare the internal consistency of answers on the
comprehension measure with arrangement of events on the
reasoning measure. This will allow us to determine if participants indicated a different understanding of the sequence of
events on the reasoning task than they indicated on the prior
comprehension task.
We suspect that the task difficulty likely influenced the effort expended on the reasoning task (indicated by reasoning
time). While there were no significant differences in reasoning time between groups, there was a strong correlation between reasoning time and reasoning scores only for the rightleft group (r=.647, p<.001). It is likely that the lengthy manipulation of the interactive data visualization required by the
reasoning task had the unintended consequence of altering
participants’ mental models, rather than reflecting their structure and content. A substantial body of literature supports
the view that data visualizations are tools on which individuals may offload cognitive processing (see (Hollan, Hutchins,
& Kirsh, 2000). We seek to refine the reasoning measure
to more accurately reflect the content of participants’ mental
models without manipulating them.

As predicted, participants demonstrated a strong preference
for the left-right SCT in the sequencing task. The observation that the preference was consistent across transversal
and sagittal axes presents an interesting question for future
research on SCTs. Might a change in axis be equally flexible
when considering deictic time as sequential time? Or is this
effect only observable for sequential relations, and on axes
for which culturally derived SCTs exist? Answers to these
questions may have practical applications in the realm of immersive virtual reality and 3D data visualization, as well as
shed light on the complex relationship between external representations and temporal/spatial cognition.

Flexibility in SCTs
The most interesting results came when examining the influence of stimulus SCTs on comprehension. We found that
stimulus SCTs different from RWD resulted in superior comprehension. One explaination for this result is found by considering the role of attention in thinking with SCTs. By asking participants to construct a simple timeline prior to stimulus exposure, we brought attention to their preferred spatial
construal for the task (SCT1 ), ostensibly resulting in import
into working memory. When presented with a different SCTs
(stimulus) individuals needed to import an alternative mapping, or transform the incoming information to the SCT1 .
Rather than impair model construction, our data suggest this
allocation of cognitive resources had an advantageous effect.
If we assume that the discrepancy between SCT1 and timeline orientation required additional attention be paid to the
stimulus, then this increased attention may have resulted in
a net increase in the cognitive resources dedicated to model
construction. The harder the task was, the more the attention the participants devoted. As attention is a limited resource, however, we think it unlikely this effect would persist
for increasingly complex tasks. We predict a threshold level
of complexity, after which inconsistent SCTs would result in
decreased performance.
The data failed to support our hypothesis that inconsistent

Stability of SCTs
As predicted, most individuals persisted with their intial
choice of SCT. Our analysis revealed that participants who
chose a SCT2 different from both their SCT1 and SCTs had

454

References

significantly lower scores on the reasoning task. This result
may indicate a limit on the flexibility of SCTs during higher
order cognitive activities; perhaps individuals can perform
transformation between two SCTs without performance impairment, but not three. We plan a follow-up experiment to
investigate the use of differing SCTs within the same stimulus
presentation (i.e. one orientation for the defense, a different
orientation for the prosecution). Alternatively, it is possible
that the choice of a third SCT for the reasoning task was in itself indicative of a lack of effort on the part of the participant.

Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring: understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75(1), 1–
28.
Feigenson, N. (2010). Visual evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 17(2), 149–154.
Feigenson, N. (2011). The Visual in Law: Some Problems
for Legal Theory. Law, Culture and the Humanities, 10(1),
13–23.
Fenker, D. B., Waldmann, M. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (2005).
Accessing causal relations in semantic memory. Memory &
cognition, 33(6), 1036–1046. doi: 10.3758/BF03193211
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed
cognition: toward a new foundation for human-computer
interaction research. Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 7(2), 174–196.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mandler, J. M. (1985). On the comprehension of temporal
order. , 1(4), 309–320.
Marchant, H. G., Royer, J. M., & Greene, B. (1988). Superior Reliability and Validity for a New Form of the Sentence
Verification Technique for Measuring Comprehension. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 48, 827–834.
Núñez, & Cooperrider. (2013). The tangle of space and time
in human cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(5),
220–9. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.03.008
Park, J., & Feigenson, N. (2013). Effects of Visual Technology on Mock Jurors. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
27(December 2012), 235–246.
Santiago, Ouellet, M., Román, A., & Valenzuela, J. (2012).
Attentional factors in conceptual congruency. Cognitive
Science, 36, 1051–1077.
Santiago, Román, A., & Ouellet, M. (2011). Flexible foundations of abstract thought: A review and a theory. In
T. W. Schubert & A. Maass (Eds.), Applications of cognitive linguistics: Spatial dimensions of social thought.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Schaeken, W., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1995). Mental models
and temporal reasoning. Cognition, 60(96), 205–234.
Schnotz, W. (2014). Integrated Model of Text and Picture
Comprehension. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (2nd ed., chap. 4). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupiáñez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of reference. Cognitive Science, 30(4), 745–57.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515–557.

Limitations and Future Work
While we placed a high value on external validity in the design of our experimental materials, the participants’ exposure
to stimuli was not reflective of genuine litigation, where juries hear arguments over the course of several hours or days
before group deliberation. Additionally, participants were not
permitted to use external cognitive aids such as note taking,
or review of testimony and transcripts. Any effect of graphics
on real-life courtrooms must be considered in combination
with the effects of persuasive argumentation and jury deliberation, and how these might operate in a more representative
population.
In this investigation, we approached the courtroom as a
classroom; before jurors can be persuaded, they must be
instructed about the details of a case. Our approach was
to apply research from the learning sciences to understand
how jurors might integrate information from multiple sources
and modalities. Our results add to the growing body of research on the influence of multimedia in the courtroom (see
(Feigenson, 2010, 2011; Park & Feigenson, 2013) by providing evidence that differential presentations of temporal sequence can influence comprehension. To clarify these results,
we plan subsequent studies that carefully control allocation
of attention to the learning materials and measurement tasks.
Our data suggest that the orientation of timelines can impact
the comprehension of jurors, and that in situations where a
lawyer wishes to capture jurors’ attention, a left-to-right timeline may be preferable. We recommend testing the hypothesis
that SCTs inconsistent with RWD improve comprehension by
inducing increased allocation of attention, up to a threshold,
at which point performance will begin to degrade. Answers
to these questions will guide the designers of courtroom multimedia presentations on how to orient timelines to be maximally coherent for jurors; or alternatively, how to induce confusion for persuasive purposes.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the U.S. Department of
Education for support of the International Cognitive Visualization program.

455

