Scarcity captures attention and induces neglect:
Eyetracking and behavioral evidence
Brandon M. Tomm (brandon.tomm@psych.ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
2136 West Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada

Jiaying Zhao (jiayingz@psych.ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, and Institute for Resources, Environment and Sustainability
University of British Columbia, 2136 West Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada

Abstract
Resource scarcity poses challenging demands on the human
cognitive system. Budgeting with limited resources induces an
attentional focus on the problem at hand. This focus enhances
processing of relevant information, but it also comes with a
cost. Specifically, scarcity may cause a failure to notice
beneficial information that helps alleviate the condition of
scarcity. In three experiments, participants were randomly
assigned with a small budget (“the poor”) or a large budget
(“the rich”) to order a meal from a restaurant menu. The poor
participants looked longer at the prices of the items and
recalled the prices more accurately, compared to the rich
participants. Importantly, the poor neglected a useful discount
that would save them money. This neglect may arise as a result
of attentional narrowing, and help explain a range of counterproductive behaviors of low-income individuals. The current
findings have important implications for public policy and
services for low-income individuals.
Keywords: Poverty; visual attention; memory; encoding;
decision making;

Scarcity is the condition of having insufficient resources to
cope with demands, and is an urgent and pervasive problem
in the world: Roughly 1.2 billion people live in extreme
poverty with less than $1.25 a day, 1.3 billion people live
without electricity, and more than 780 million lack access to
clean water. This condition presents significant challenges to
the human cognitive system. For example, having limited
financial resources requires the meticulous calculation of any
expenses. Similarly, having limited time requires stringent
management of schedules.
The cognitive consequences of scarcity are recently
revealed by a number of studies (Mullainathan & Shafir,
2013). For example, scarcity causes myopic behavior which
results in the neglect of future events (Shah, Mullainathan, &
Shafir, 2012). Specifically, people under scarcity tend to
prioritize the task at present and over-borrow resources from
the future. Financial scarcity directly impairs cognitive
function, reducing fluid intelligence and the ability to exert
cognitive control (Mani, Mullainathan, Shafir, & Zhao,
2013). These cognitive and behavioral consequences are
particularly problematic because these impairments can lead
to suboptimal decision making and behaviors (e.g., poor time
management or financial planning skills) that further
perpetuate the condition of scarcity.

Currently, it is still unclear what cognitive mechanisms
underlie the impairments caused by scarcity. A possible
explanation of these impairments is that scarcity presents
urgent demands that hijack attentional resources, causing a
strong focus on the present task. Such focus can induce a
neglect of other potentially important information.
Support for this explanation comes from the previous
theoretical and empirical work on the limits of the cognitive
system. Specifically, the cognitive system has a finite
capacity, and people can only receive and process a limited
amount of information at a time (Baddeley, 1992; Luck &
Vogel, 1997; Miller, 1956; Pashler, Johnston, & Ruthruff,
2001). Given this limited capacity, engaging in one process
consumes cognitive resources needed for another, thus
causing interference. For example, studies on inattentional
blindness (Simons & Chabris, 1999; Neisser, 1979) show that
performing a demanding task (e.g., counting how often the
basketball is passed around) results in an inability to notice a
salient event (e.g., a man dressed as a gorilla passing by).
Basic visual features of unattended stimuli may not even be
perceived (Rock & Gutman, 1981). In addition to perception,
this interference can cause serious behavioral consequences
such as impaired driving (Strayer, Drews, & Johnston, 2003).
The limited cognitive resources given competing demands
can thus result in attentional trade-offs between focus and
neglect.
Here, we propose that scarcity forces attentional trade-offs.
Specifically, people operating under scarcity may prioritize
urgent tasks at hand, leaving other information unattended.
This process can be counter-productive because the
attentional neglect can cause the failure to notice useful and
beneficial information in the environment that alleviates the
condition of scarcity. To investigate the attentional trade-offs
under scarcity and the resulting memory performance of
task-relevant information, we conducted three experiments in
the current study.

Experiment 1
The goal of this experiment was to examine the effects of
scarcity on visual attention. We predict that scarcity draws
attention to the task-relevant information, but at the same
time, also causes the neglect of other useful information in
the environment.

1199

Participants
One hundred and ninety undergraduate students (152 female,
35 male, 3 unspecified; mean age = 20.39 years, SD = 3.92
years) were recruited from the Human Subject Pool at the
Department of Psychology at the University of British
Columbia (UBC), and participated in the experiment for
course credit. Participants in all experiments reported normal
or corrected-to-normal vision and provided informed
consent. All experiments reported here were approved by the
UBC Behavioral Research Ethics Board.

Stimuli and Procedure
Participants were presented with a restaurant menu which
contained 24 food items. For each item, the price and the
calories were listed in two columns on the menu (Fig.1). The
menu subtended 12.4° of visual angle in width and 16.2° in
height. A discount clause was shown on the bottom of the
menu (“You may ask for an 18% student discount.”).
Participants were randomly assigned with a small budget
($20; the poor condition) or a large budget ($100; the rich
condition). Thus, the experiment used a between-subjects
design.

Figure 1. Experiment 1. A heat map of the menu showing the
distribution of the average dwell time for the participants in the poor
condition (who ordered a meal with $20). Warmer colors represent
longer average dwell time.

Participants were asked to view the items on the menu and
think about what they would like to order, as if they were
ordering a meal from a restaurant. They were given unlimited
time to place the order, and were told not to exceed the
assigned budget, but they were not required to spend the
entire budget.
The eye gaze of each participant was monitored throughout
the experiment using an SMI RED-250 Mobile Eyetracking
System (60hz). To examine which part of the menu was
prioritized, the menu was divided into four areas of interest:
the left column of the food items, the middle column of the
price information, the right column of the calories
information, and the discount clause.
To measure visual attention, we calculated the dwell time
and the number of fixations in each area of interest. Since
there was no time limit in the experiment, we used the
proportional dwell time (the dwell time spent in each area
divided by the total dwell time on the menu) and the
proportional fixations (the number of fixations in each area
divided by the total number of fixations on the menu) as two
measures of visual attention. The heat maps of the average
duration of dwell time between the poor and the rich
conditions were shown in Figures 1 and 2.

Figure 2. Experiment 1. A heat map of the menu showing the
distribution of the average dwell time for the participants in the rich
condition (who ordered a meal with $100). Warmer colors represent
longer average dwell time.

1200

Results and Discussion
First, we observed that participants in the rich condition took
more time to order (M = 89 seconds) than the participants in
the poor condition (M = 76 seconds) [t(188) = 2.24, p = .03,
d = .33]. This provided motivations for using the proportional
dwell time and fixations in the following analyses between
the two conditions. Moreover, participants with more than 3
standard deviations away from the mean in each measure
were excluded (between 1 and 4 participants in total,
depending on the measure).
For the food items (Fig.3), participants in the poor
condition spent less dwell time (M = 35.11%) than those in
the rich condition (M = 51.98%) [t(185) = 3.91, p < .001, d =
.57]. The poor also made few fixations (M = 36.66%) on the
food items than the rich (M = 48.50%) [t(187) = 3.08, p =
.002, d = .45]. This suggests that the poor participants spent
less time considering which food items they would like to
order than the rich participants did.

This result could be driven by the possibility that scarcity
enhanced attention to all numerical information. Thus, we
examined attention to the calorie information (Fig.5).
Participants in the poor condition spent less dwell time on
calories (M = 2.92%) than those in the rich condition (M =
4.35%) [t(185) = 2.65, p < .01, d = .39]. The poor (M =
3.51%) also made fewer fixations on calories than the rich
did (M = 5.09%) [t(184) = 2.39, p = .02, d = .35]. These
results indicate that financial scarcity draws attention only to
prices and induces a neglect of food items and calories.

Figure 5. The proportional dwell time and fixations on calories
between participants in the poor and the rich conditions (error bars
reflect ±1 SEM; *p<.05, **p<.01).

Figure 3. The proportional dwell time and fixations on food items
between participants in the poor and the rich conditions (error bars
reflect ±1 SEM; **p<.01, ***p<.001).

For prices (Fig.4), participants in the poor condition spent
more dwell time (M = 21.08%) than those in the rich
condition (M = 15.23%) [t(185) = 2.16, p = .03, d = .32].
Similarly, participants in the poor condition made more
fixations on prices (M = 23.07%) than those in the rich
condition (M = 15.81%) [t(185) = 2.91 , p < .01, d = .43]. This
suggests that the poor attended more to prices than the rich
participants.

Importantly, for the discount clause (Fig.6), participants in
the poor condition spent less dwell time (M = 0.83%) than
those in the rich condition (M = 1.83%) [t(184) = 3.51, p <
.001, d = .52]. The poor also made fewer fixations on the
discount clause (M = 0.85%) than the rich (M = 1.82%)
[t(184) = 3.51, p < .001, d = .52]. This suggests that the poor
neglected the discount more than the rich participants.
However, there was no difference in the number of poor
(47%) and rich (55%) participants who looked at the discount
[X2 = 1.35, p = .25]. This suggests that the poor and the rich
are equally likely to look at the discount, but the poor spent
less time looking at the discount.

Figure 6. The proportional dwell time and fixations on the discount
clause between participants in the poor and the rich conditions (error
bars reflect ±1 SEM; ***p<.001).
Figure 4. The proportional dwell time and fixations on prices
between participants in the poor and the rich conditions (error bars
reflect ±1 SEM; *p<.05, **p<.01).

As another measure of attention to the discount, after
placing the order the participants were asked if they had
noticed other information on the menu besides the price and

1201

calorie information. While measures of visual attention
showed that the poor looked less at the discount than the rich
did, there was no reliable difference between the number of
poor participants (38%) and rich participants (35%) who
explicitly reported noticing the discount during debriefing of
the experiment [X2 = .09, p = .76]. However, less than 5
participants spontaneously requested the discount during
their order. Thus, the attentional neglect of the discount was
largely implicit.
We also analyzed the absolute proportional dwell time and
fixation count for all analyses, which yielded nearly identical
results. These absolute measures were not bounded, and
therefore were not subject to trade-offs within a limit. This
means that although the poor dwelled longer on price
information, they did not necessarily dwell less on the
discount.
An alternative explanation for the finding that the poor
attended less to the discount was that scarcity might result in
more efficient processing of task-relevant information. This
would suggest that the poor did not need to look at the
discount as much as the rich, because they were faster in
seeing the discount. Since both the prices and the discount
were task-relevant, this explanation would predict that the
poor would be efficient in processing both price information
and the discount. However, we found that the poor looked
more at the prices but less at the discount than the rich did,
which could not be explained by the efficiency account.
The discount on the menu could in theory help the poor
participants save money and stay within their budget. Despite
this usefulness, the poor participants still neglected the
discount and focused more on the prices of the food items.
This finding is ironic and could help explain why the lowincome individuals engage in neglectful behaviors that are
counter-productive.

Stimuli and Procedure
To increase the demand for memory encoding, we increased
the number of items on the menu. Participants were presented
with a menu which now contained 50 food items. Similar to
Experiment 1, the menu included the price and calories for
each food item.
As in Experiment 1, participants were asked to place a meal
order from the menu as if they were ordering from a
restaurant. As before, participants were randomly assigned
with a small budget ($20; the poor condition) or a large
budget ($100; the rich condition). The experiment again used
a between-subjects design.
After participants placed their order, they were given a
surprise memory test. Participants were asked to recall as
many items from the menu as possible. For each item
recalled, they were also asked to recall the price and the
calorie information of the item as accurately as possible.

Results and Discussion
To measure memory encoding, we calculated the average
absolute error between the recalled prices (and calories) and
the objective prices (and calories) for each participant (Fig.7).
Participants in the poor condition (Mean error = $1.32) were
reliably more accurate in the price recall than those in the rich
condition (Mean error = $2.17) [t(58) = 2.35, p = .02, d =
.61]. However, there was no reliable difference in the calorie
recall between the poor and the rich participants [t(57) = .80,
p = .42, d = .21].

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that financial scarcity prioritizes
the processing of price information, at the cost of other useful
information. Given the attentional prioritization of prices, we
predict that memory encoding of prices will also be
enhanced. This prediction is supported by the recent work
that suggests that visual working memory can be construed
as visual attention preserved internally over time (Chun,
2011; Chun, Golomb, & Turk-Browne, 2011). Feature-based
theories of attention also predict selective facilitation in
visual processing for task-relevant features (Hayden &
Gallant, 2008; Jehee, Brady, & Tong, 2011).
Thus, in Experiment 2 we examined the effects of scarcity
on memory encoding, as a result of attentional prioritization.
We predict that financial scarcity facilitates memory
encoding specifically for price information, and not for other
types of information.

Participants
A new group of 60 undergraduate students (43 female, 17
male; mean age = 19.95 years, SD = 2.30 years) from UBC
participated in the experiment for course credit.

Figure 7. The absolute error in the price recall and the calorie recall
between participants in the price poor and the price rich conditions
(error bars reflect ±1 SEM; *p<.01).

This enhanced performance in price recall in the poor
cannot be explained by the fact that the poor participants
ordered fewer items (M = 2.13) than the rich (M = 3.67) [t(58)
= 3.74, p < .001, d = .98]. First, there was no reliable
difference in the number of recalled times between the poor
and the rich [t(58) = 1.31, p = .20, d = .34]. Second, there was
no difference in the time taken to place the order between the
poor and the rich participants [t(58) = 1.44, p = .16, d = .37].
Third, even if ordering fewer items might improve memory
recall, this benefit would be seen in both price and calorie
recall, but we found that the poor were more accurate only in
price recall, not in calorie recall.

1202

Thus, these findings suggest that financial scarcity
improves memory encoding for task-relevant information
(i.e., prices), but not for task-irrelevant information (i.e.,
calories). Scarcity selectively facilitates memory encoding.

Experiment 3
To generalize the findings in Experiment 2 to a different
domain, we examined how calorie scarcity affects memory
encoding. We predict that calorie scarcity facilitates memory
encoding specifically for calorie information, and not for
other types of information.

the price recall between the two conditions [t(58) = 0.19, p =
.85, d = .04]. Thus, memory encoding was selectively
enhanced for the calorie information in the calorie poor
participants.
Interestingly, we did not observe worse memory encoding
for the neglected task-irrelevant information. That is, the
calorie recall was the same for the price poor and the price
rich in Experiment 2, and the price recall was the same for
the calorie poor and the calorie rich in Experiment 3. Even
though Experiment 1 suggested that task-irrelevant
information was neglected, here we did not see neglect
influenced memory encoding of task-irrelevant information.

Participants

General Discussion

A new group of 60 undergraduate students (49 female, 11
male; mean age = 20.03 years, SD = 2.11 years) from UBC
participated in the experiment for course credit.

Stimuli and Procedure
The stimuli and the procedure were identical to those in
Experiment 2, except for a critical difference. Participants
were randomly assigned with a small calorie budget (500
calories; the poor condition) or a large calorie budget (2000
calories; the rich condition). As before, participants were then
asked to place a meal order from the menu as if they were
ordering from a restaurant. After the order, participants were
given a surprise memory test, where they recalled items from
the menu with the price and calorie information.

Results and Discussion
To measure memory encoding, we calculated the average
absolute error between the recalled calories (and prices) and
the objective calories (and prices) for each participant (Fig.8).
Participants in the poor condition (Mean error = 48.05
calories) were reliably more accurate in the calorie recall than
those in the rich condition (Mean error = 71.61) [t(58) = 2.27,
p = .03, d = .58]. This suggests that the calorie poor showed
better memory encoding of calorie information than the
calorie rich.

Figure 8. The absolute error in the calorie recall and the price recall
between participants in the calorie poor and the calorie rich
conditions (error bars reflect ±1 SEM; *p<.01).

A critical test of our prediction was whether this memory
facilitation is specific to task-relevant information (i.e.,
calories). We found that there was no reliable difference in

The goal of the current study was to examine how scarcity
forces attentional trade-offs and influences memory encoding
driven by such trade-offs. When operating under a limited
financial budget, the poor focused more on the price
information, compared to the rich (Experiment 1). This focus
came with the neglect of other information in the
environment, even if the information could be useful or
beneficial to the poor (e.g., the discount). The attentional
prioritization of prices also resulted in enhanced memory
encoding of price information among the poor participants
(Experiment 2). Likewise, the attentional prioritization of
calories led to better memory encoding of calorie information
among the calorie poor (Experiment 3).
The current findings provide a new perspective on how
scarcity shapes the way people perceive and experience the
external environment. While the perceptual experiences can
be largely characterized by information overload, scarcity
selectively orients people’s attention to specific aspects of the
environment. When operating with financial constraints,
people automatically prioritize price-relevant information.
Such prioritization facilitates memory encoding of these
information, but crucially it comes with a cost, which is the
neglect of the beneficial discount on the menu. An alternative
explanation is that the poor spent less time looking at the
discount because it was highly accessible to them due to high
relevance. However, this explanation fails to account for the
prioritization of the price information which is also highly
relevant to the poor.
The findings also suggest that the rich with abundant
resources have the luxury to attend broadly to the
environment, compared to those under scarcity. The rich
participants in Experiment 1 attended more to the food items,
the calorie information of the food, and the discount, than the
poor did. This means that the rich are able to consider which
food they want to eat, rather than which food they can afford.
In addition, they can also consider health-related (calorie)
information of the food. Overall, the rich can attend to and
process more types of information in the environment to
make an informed choice.
The current study also reveals a painful irony of scarcity.
People with limited resources were too focused on prices,
such that they paid less attention to the beneficial discount
that could save money and alleviate the financial burden. This

1203

irony can help explain why low-income individuals
sometimes engage in neglectful behaviors that are counterproductive (e.g., missing an appointment for a health
checkup, or failure to sign up for benefit programs).
It is worth noting that the current experiments involved an
artificial simulation of scarcity in the lab. In fact, just by
randomly assigning people to receive a hypothetical small or
large budget, we observed a strong effect of scarcity on
attention and memory. Moreover, the participants in our
experiments were not provided with real money, were not
rewarded for frugality, and knowingly were not to receive
any food from the menu. In the absence of possible
consequences of their decisions, the poor participants still
focused on task-relevant information and neglected help to
alleviate the condition of scarcity. This raises the possibility
that, outside the lab when people operate with scarce
resources and can face real consequences of their actions, the
effects of scarcity on attention and cognition observed in this
study may be amplified.
The current findings can help inform public policy and
services targeting low-income populations. Among the
OECD countries, enrollment in social assistance and public
benefit programs is estimated to range between 40% and 80%
(Hernanz, Malherbet, & Pellizzari 2004). Our current study
provides a new explanation for the low participation rate.
That is, the poor who are eligible for these programs fail to
participate because of the attentional trade-offs under
scarcity. Low-income individuals may need to focus on their
financial challenges and deadlines under scarcity, and either
are not aware of these benefit programs and services, or
neglect the enrollment procedures. This attentional account is
not the only factor that can explain the low participation rate,
as there are many other social barriers and stigmas related to
enrollment in assistance programs.
Given the attentional constraints under scarcity, we
propose that social assistance and public benefit programs
should be designed to avoid the attentional neglect in the poor
under scarcity. It may be helpful to streamline assistance
applications and services to make them more salient, more
accessible, and easier to process for the poor. The amount of
effort and attention required from the poor should be
minimized to increase or maintain participation. Benefit
programs and social services can also be made more salient
by using prompts and reminders. This could be done through
any messaging medium such as text-message or email, and
could be effective in catching the attention of those living
under scarcity. Based on our current findings, future research
can design behavioral interventions to avoid attentional
neglect in the poor.

work was supported by Sloan Foundation Grant (2014-6-16),
the Canada Research Chairs program (to JZ), and the Leaders
Opportunity Fund from the Canadian Foundation for
Innovation (F14-05370 to JZ).

References
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory.
The psychology of learning and motivation, 8, 47-89.
Chun, M. M. (2011). Visual working memory as visual
attention sustained internally over time. Neuropsychologia,
49, 1407-1409.
Chun, M. M., Golomb, J. D., & Turk-Browne, N. B. (2011).
A taxonomy of external and internal attention. Annual
review of psychology, 62, 73-101.
Hernanz, V., Malherbet, F., and Pellizzari, M. (2004). TakeUp of Welfare Benefits in OECD Countries: A Review of
the Evidence. OECD Social, Employment and Migration
Working Papers, 17, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Hayden, B. Y., & Gallant, J. L. (2009). Combined effects of
spatial and feature-based attention on responses of V4
neurons. Vision research, 49, 1182-1187.
Jehee, J. F., Brady, D. K., & Tong, F. (2011). Attention
improves encoding of task-relevant features in the human
visual cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 8210-8219.
Luck, S. J., & Vogel, E. K. (1997). The capacity of visual
working memory for features and conjunctions. Nature,
390, 279-281.
Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., & Zhao, J. (2013).
Poverty impedes cognitive function. Science, 341, 976980.
Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2013). Scarcity: Why having
too little means so much. Henry Holt and Company, New
York.
Pashler, H., Johnston, J. C., & Ruthruff, E. (2001). Attention
and performance. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 629651.
Rock, I., & Gutman, D. (1981). The effect of inattention on
form perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 7, 275.
Shah, A. K., Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2012). Some
consequences of having too little. Science, 338, 682-685.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst:
Sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic events.
Perception, 28, 1059-1074.
Strayer, D. L., Drews, F. A., & Johnston, W. A. (2003). Cell
phone-induced failures of visual attention during simulated
driving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 9,
23-32.

Acknowledgements
We thank Bram Scheerlinck and Desmond Fung for
assistance with data collection. We also thank Eldar Shafir,
Anuj Shah, Darko Odic, Alan Kingstone, Rebecca Todd, and
the members in the Zhao Lab for helpful comments. This

1204

