Sentire Decision-Making in a Mixed-Motive Game
Joana Campos (joana.campos@gaips.inesc-id.pt)
Ana Paiva (ana.paiva@inesc-id.pt)
INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa
Abstract
The complexity of situations makes individuals use emotions
to make sense of their environment and interdependent others. In this paper, we build on the idea that physiological reactions give emotional information about the subject and we
focus on Electrodermal Activity (EDA), an index of arousal,
to inspect deep processes of a dyadic interaction in a mixedmotive game. Our interest lies on how conflict episodes unfold, to design intelligent agents that are more socially aware
and thus able to express and recognise dyadic forms of conflict. A qualitative analysis of the data allowed us to identify
moments where players made choices to cope with ongoing
conflict or prospects of it in the future.
Keywords: Conflict; Electrodermal Activity; Skin Conductance Responses ; Agent Modelling;

Introduction
Emotions are inherently informative. They are central to
guide people’s behaviour, to support the interaction with others and they carry information about how one is feeling, her
motives, preferences, motivations and goals. When interacting with others, emotional expressions help the interlocutor
to decode one’s internal state, feelings, worries and satisfaction. Emotions (or instead the appraisal of the environment)
are also transmitted through bodily changes, such as action
tendencies and physiological responses (Lazarus, 1994).
In the work described in this paper, we build on the idea
that physiological reactions give information about the subject and we focus on Electrodermal Activity (EDA). EDA results from the interaction of local electrical processes of the
skin with the sympathetic nervous system of an individual
(Boucsein, 2012). It can, thus, inform us about a myriad of
psychophysiological processes. Our interest lies on how conflict episodes unfold, to design intelligent agents that are more
socially aware and thus able to express and recognise dyadic
forms of conflict. We believe that investigating deep1 details
of the interaction, such as emotional signalling, is critical for
designing more natural experiences between agents and humans. In the future, systems that are able to respond to small
details of the interaction (social signals) will become more effective and efficient in their design purpose (Vinciarelli et al.,
2009). Focusing on EDA, it is a signal that might be potentially useful in helping a therapist to evaluate which strategies
have a more beneficial impact in an autistic child (Chaspari et
al., 2014). Furthermore, jointly with heart rate, in can also
give insights about how immediate emotions can inform bidder’s behaviour in an auction game (Astor et al., 2013).
1 By

deep data we mean, rich data representative of one’s perspectives, emotions and motivations. We believe that these elements
establish the context for many dyadic interactions, which are no
more than a form of relating.

In this paper, we use EDA as a tracing methodology to
study how emotional reactions to events in a bargaining game
can change the dynamics of the negotiation process. We attempt to establish links with phases of conflict in a bargaining scenario, by analysing patterns of skin conductance responses (SCRs). For this purpose, we analyse the EDA of 22
children (aged 10 to 12 years-old) in a mixed-motive game
under incomplete information. We created a real-life setting
reduced to a mixed-motive game, in which the child’s previous experiences and relation with the interactional partner
play a relevant role in the interaction. We have found that,
although there was not overt manifestations of conflict in the
interactions, we could identify moments of intense anxiety
(high number of SCRs), due to extreme initial offers or during more intense negotiation moments, when the parties are
forcing the same deals without making concessions. We conclude the paper discussing our achievements, limitations and
whether EDA is actually useful in this type of scenario.

Related Work
Electrodermal Activity
Electrodermal Activity (EDA) results from the interaction of
local electrical processes of the skin with the sympathetic nervous system of an individual (Boucsein, 2012). It was verified that the skin becomes a better conductor in response
to external stimuli (physical and/or emotional) having influence in myriad of psychophysiological processes. Over the
years, EDA has been studied in several domains ranging from
attention/engagement, information processing and emotion
to clinical research (Dawson, Schell, & Filion, 2007). Researchers found that EDA is an adaptive mechanism to mobilise a ‘flight-or-fight’ reflex, and is related to anticipation,
anxiety and distress (Andreassi, 2000). In the overall, is
linked to cognitive and emotional processes.
The EDA complex2 includes both a tonic level (SCL 3 )
and a phasic response (SCR 4 ). The former is the tonic level
of conductivity of the skin, a slowly habituating measure of
arousal. It slowly decreases when the subject is at rest and
rapidly increases when a novel stimulus is introduced, and
then gradually decreases (Dawson et al., 2007). The latter is
2 Contemporary research has focused on measuring the skin resistance response which relies on external current for its observation
(exosomatic method). Its reciprocal – the skin conductance response
– has been the unit of analysis used widely by researchers. Within
other reasons, skin conductance is easier to measure and increases
with arousal hence, it provides a more intuitive mechanism for data
interpretation.
3 Skin Conductance Level
4 Skin Conductance Response

1403

a small fraction of the tonic level and a rapid changing component (often referred to as peak in the signal), which is sensitive to stimulus novelty, intensity and significance (Dawson et
al., 2007). Stimuli that elicit a SCR are referred to as “eventspecific responses”, and on the opposite, if a SCR occurs in
the absence of an identifiable stimulus, it is called a “nonspecific response” (NS-SCR).

EDA and Decision Making
This interest in affect and emotion in judgement and decision
making (JDM) research has renewed the interest in skin conductance and its potential to support research on how emotion
impacts decisions in general (Figner & Murphy, 2011). For
instance, Wout et al. (2006) studied the role of emotion in the
Ultimatum Game. They focused on how skin conductance responses varied when the proposer offered a fair or an unfair
division. Furthermore, they also assessed if emotional reactions to the type of offer would be the same if the proposer
were a human or a computer. They observed a relationship
between human unfair offers and higher skin conductance associated to rejection of those offers. In other words, SCR
amplitude measured before response was a better predictor of
acceptance or rejection than the offer itself, but the same was
not verified when the proposer was a computer.
Another example is the work by Krosch et al. (2012),
who explored how people make decisions in morally challenging situations, using self-reported and skin conductance
measures. Moral decisions lack a clear right or wrong solution and the authors studied which choices minimise postdecisional consequences5 for the decision maker. In their experiment, subjects participated in a hypothetical choice scenario, with no interaction with a counterpart. Nevertheless,
the results suggest that people reflected increased physiological arousal when facing a conflicting choice, which may be
related to post-decisional worry.
Constant and rapid decision making was studied by
Palomki et al. (2013) in the context of a poker game variant
– No Limit Texas Hold’em (NLHE). This scenario provides
a rich context where the participant has to make rapid investment decisions, under risk and uncertainty. The authors use
anticipatory arousal of various actions as a predictor of what
action is likely to be taken by the decision maker. The authors
have related the emotional reactivity to expected and experienced outcomes.
As it is possible to infer from the above research directions, skin conductance is a phenomenon that does not reflect a single psychological process, even within JDM research. Nonetheless, is a mechanism that can provide information about otherwise hidden processes that reflect how
people make decisions and form judgements (Figner & Murphy, 2011). In our work, we are specially interested in skin
conductance as a process tracing methodology to track cognitive states or stages during a decision making task. For that
reason,and similarly to what have been done before, we focus
5 Decision difficulty,

post-decisional worry, and negative arousal.

on skin conductance responses (SCRs) in anticipation and decision making.

EDA in Mixed-Motive Game: Game of Nines
In mixed-motive negotiations, conflicts are bound to emerge
because participants have opposing preferences, and each attempts to maximise his or her own gains. An experimental
setting in which the potential for conflict exists, acts as a
model of a social interaction that is object of study. For this
study, we used a variation of the “Game of Nines”.

The “Game of Nines”
The “Game of Nines” is a mixed-motive bargaining game and
it was firstly used by Kelley (Kelley, Beckman, & Fischer,
1967). This bargaining game was selected because it creates a
setting where two negotiators face dilemmas concerning their
goals and forms of communication. For a full description of
this game refer to (Campos et al., 2015).
Briefly, the game is played with ordinary playing cards and
involves three parties: the two players and the house/bank
(which is not played by anyone). Each player holds eight
cards from one (Ace) to eight, available every round. During
each bargaining round, the players had to jointly agree on a
possible contract. Each contract corresponded to a card that
would be played by player A and one that would be played by
player B so that their sum would not exceed 9. In each round,
a minimum necessary share (MNS) is assigned to each player,
privately, by the house6 . This MNS value is only known by
the person to whom it was assigned. for a profitable agreement, the negotiator has to bargain for a value above his MNS
(e.g., if a player has a MNS equal to 4 and he plays a 6, he
will get 2 as a reward), without knowing the extent of the concessions the other can make. If the participants do not reach
an agreement in a limited amount of time both get zero. The
player who makes the most profit wins a prize at the end.

What is conflict in this setting?
In this created setting, the structure of the task determines
the degree of interdependence between the dyads. That is, it
establishes the fuel for potential conflict at the beginning of
each round. The task structure is determined by the MNS values that are discovered by each participant when each opens
a new envelope. The rationale behind using fixed MNS values (see Table 1) throughout the game is to create the same
situation each time a new round begins (with the exception
of round 4). In our view of conflict (see (Campos, Martinho,
& Paiva, 2013; Campos et al., 2015) ) at least one party must
perceive the incompatibility between the two and attribute the
interference in achieving the desired goal to the other party.

Method
Twenty-two children (13 girls and 9 boys, age range 10-12)
participated in dyadic sessions of the game. All dyads, with
6 In our experiment the players took a card from an envelop,which
was identified with the number of the correspondent round.

1404

Table 1: Minimum necessary share per round

Player 1
Player 2

1
2
2

Round
2 3 4
1 3 4
3 1 4

Sensors were placed in the child’s non-dominant wrist right
after they were collected from their classroom. After that,
they had to walk to the experiment room (2 minutes walk,
including climbing stairs). Once they got to the room where
the experiment took place, there was a 15 minutes (on average8 ) warm-up period, during which the rules were explained
and the participants were “walked through” two rounds of the
game to learn its mechanics. Next, children were left alone to
play the game and the start of the interaction was “marked”
by pressing the sensor’s button.
Data was collected during Winter, in January and February.

5
2
2

one exception, were same-sex participants. The mixed-sex
dyad was excluded from the analysis described in this paper.
Opt-out consent forms were provided to all of the children’s parents or guardians and all games were video and audio recorded, as well as, their skin conductance.
Each pair had to play 5 rounds. In each new round, each
participant took a MNS (a numbered card ) from an envelope.
The child was instructed not to show the card during the trial
and to never agree to a value below that number. They were
told to negotiate as they saw fit. At the end of the round, each
participant had to show the other his or her MNS value. The
player with more total points in the end wins the game. The
points were not converted to money, but the winner chose a
prize between two choices.

Detection and quantisation of SCRs

Procedure
Before the game sessions, the children completed a sociometric questionnaire and were administered a personality test.
The former was applied mainly to ensure that children on opposite poles (neglected vs. popular) or children who did not
like each other were not paired together, given the sensitive
nature of this experiment7 , to avoid undesirable effects on the
participants. The paired children were from the same class,
hence they knew each other and shared a history.
For the experiment, each dyad was collected from their
classrooms and bracelets to measure their electrodermal activity were immediately attached to their wrists. Then, the
children were conducted to a room that had been made available for the purpose. The participants were sat face-to-face
at the opposite ends of a table that had a card board to assist
them throughout the game. After explaining the rule, the participants were “walked through” two rounds of the game to
learn its mechanics (The pre-game sessions took, on average,
15 minutes). Next, they were left alone to play the game.
To motivate the participants to do well, we told the players
that the person who accumulated more points during the game
would win a prize. In the end, both children won prizes, but
the winner was able to choose between two options (one item
was better than the other).

Equipment and Recordings
Skin conductance was continuously recorded using the Affectiva Q-Sensor, which has been proven to be highly correlated
with data from traditional skin conductance monitoring systems (Poh et al., 2010), with a 8Hz sampling rate.
7 The results from both questionnaires are beyond of the scope of
this paper and are not going to be discussed here.

Although measuring EDA is relatively easy nowadays, the
analysis of stimulus-related activity remains a challenge,
mainly in situations where inter-stimulus intervals (ISIs) are
short and peaks may overlap. To address this issue Bach
and colleagues (Bach, Flandin, Friston, & Dolan, 2010) and
Benedek and Kaernbach (Benedek & Kaernbach, 2010) have
proposed two different approaches, based on signal deconvolution, which promise a reliable measure of SCRs. Both
works resulted in two different tools for the detection of SCRs
and nsSCRs (SCRalyse9 and Ledalab10 , respectively). All the
results we present in this report were obtained using Ledalab,
which we found to be easier to use.
Using Ledalab, EDA signals were de-noised with a lowpass Butterworth filter of 1sec length. Afterwards the signal was analysed using continuous decomposition analysis
(CDA), which decomposes SC data into continuous tonic and
phasic activity (Benedek & Kaernbach, 2010). Furthermore,
we used a response window of 1 to 3 sec after each marker,
with an amplitude threshold of 0.03 µS to determine the SCR.
All nsSCRs were extracted with same minimum amplitude.

Data Analysis
Making decisions consists in evaluate possible options and
think about eventual future consequences, take an action and
then possibly re-evaluate the decision made. Therefore, both
experienced and anticipated emotions influence the decision
making process, mainly in quite uncertain situations (Barry &
Oliver, 1996). Hence, in this analysis we look for variations
in SCRs in three stages (Figure 1): pre-decision (anticipation
of utility), decision and post-decision (experienced utility).
Pre-decision corresponds to the 3s before the event onset,
post-decision which refers to the 3s after the established response window for the event/decision itself. We call to these
three stages a decision block.
The values presented in this analysis were normalised
using a logarithmic transformation (SCRamp = log(1 +
SCRamp)). Furthermore individuals that showed no electrodermal activity were excluded from analysis (Dawson,
Schell, & Courtney, 2011).
8 This warm-up period was no less than 10 minutes, minimum
required to obtain good results from the Q-sensor.
9 http://scralyze.sourceforge.net/
10 http://www.ledalab.de/

1405

Figure 1: Analysis of the SCRs in three stages: pre-decision
(anticipation of utility), decision and post-decision (experienced utility). We call to the set composed by the three stages
decision block

The analysis of EDA, in particular the skin conductance
responses (SCRs), was focused on the actions in the game:
a) see own minimums; b) make an offer; c) decline or reject
an offer; and d) see each other’s minimums. Moreover, it is
the combination of these actions that may allow us to know
more about the emotional dynamics throughout the decisions
made within the game. In the next section, we analyse them
more closely.

Discussing Results
In our approach, a prototypical negotiation is embedded in
the design of the experiment itself. We consider that every
round is composed by a pre-negotiation phase, a negotiation
and a post-negotiation phase (Figure 2).
In this created setting, children bring their expectations
about their partner, their past experiences and the relationship they have built with their partner. These elements, along
with the structure of the task, determine the degree of interdependence between them. That is, it establishes the fuel for
potential conflict at the beginning of each round. Then, they
engage in a negotiation cycle that represents attempts to reconcile conflicting interests and it may be a process marked
by intense emotions, which depends on the individual’s motivation (Van Kleef & Sinaceur, 2013). Building on the idea
that physiological reactions give information about the internal state of the subject, we looked into the EDA of participants, with particular focus on event-related affect 11 . A summary of the % of SCRs elicited in each event is in Figure 3.
In pre-negotiation, players see their minimums and formulate their expectations, aspirations and limits, which may vary
throughout the interaction. The number of SCRs decrease
in anticipation of that event, although there is not a signifi11 The

term affect is used here as a way of describing an affective
reactions to a stimulus ( event, object or person) without demarcating it as positive or negative (Slovic, Peters, Finucane, & MacGregor, 2005)

Figure 2: Flow of the interaction in each round of the Game
of Nines and the affect experienced by the actor of the action
(S) and the other (O) due to the game events. The dotted box
represents a negotiation cycle.
cant difference between rounds (χ2 (4) = 1.143, p = 0.887)12 .
This trend may be caused by a decrease in the novelty effect, one of the sources of SCRs (Boucsein, 2012; Dawson et
al., 2011). The experience of the same event does not vary
much over time (χ2 (4) = 4.154, p = 0.386), but we verify a
peak in Round 4, which reflects the child’s awareness of the
few options available for negotiation and might be related to
the expectancy of possible negative outcomes (Dawson et al.,
2011), We did not find, however, a relationship between the
first offer and the SCRs elicited by the event See Minimum in
each round. Independently of the round the first offers were
high, except in one case:
Case 1 A player demonstrated a feel of guilt in one round
after obtaining a very large profit on the previous one.
That feel of guilt resulted in cooperative behaviour, that
is, she bid low in her first offer (with arousal). This type
of behaviour had been identified before by Ketelaar and
Tung Au (2003), who experimentally showed that the feeling of guilt fuels cooperative behaviour.
Nevertheless, the increasing number of SCRs exhibited by
the See Minimum event itself, as the game progresses, may
be related to the internal desire of achievement, guided by
self-interest only (Barry & Oliver, 1996).
During the negotiation phase, players make offers, counteroffers and generate responses to them. Those actions have
effects on the actor of the action (intrapersonal effects), but
they certainly have interpersonal effects as well. In Figure 2
we call those effects Affect S/O, i.e. affect experienced by
self and by the other. Regarding the affect on the actor of the
action (S), the % of SCRs was higher in Rounds 1, 2, and 5
and occurred when players ask for a large slice of the profit.
Furthermore, SCRs were elicited over intense moments of the
negotiation, that is, slices of the interaction wherein players
are making none or very small concessions or even applying
12 Cochran

1406

Q test

Figure 3: Percentage of SCRs elicted by each action by round. B - Before/Anticipation; D - Event; A - After/Experience
avoidance strategies. In Round 4 disputes are over smaller
gains that originate some or no profit.
Furthermore, we studied more closely what was a party’s
reaction to the other’s offer since it may be related to the action one takes next. SCRs were elicited in the opponent in
two situations: threat and opportunity. Threat corresponds to
situations in which the offer generates low or negative profit.
The immediate response is to reject in opposition to prompt
a counteroffer. Opportunity is linked to offers that reflect
what the opponent wants to accept, resulting in acceptance of
the deal by the opponent. We verify a significant difference
in the mean amplitude of the SCRs elicited in the opponent
(F(1) = 4, 141, p = 0.046) when the bid represents a Threat
(amp = 0.23) or an Opportunity(amp = 0.40)13 .
Accepting and rejecting offers are two moves part of the
“negotiation dance” and throughout the interaction there are
more rejections than acceptances (13 out of 49). Rejection of
offers that elicit an SCR are related to high bids made by the
proposer that are not the first bid. The next action is usually to
replicate the other’s offer or wait for the other’s proposal. But
in particular cases the players used the give up card or threatened to use it, this occurred in situations where the opponent
did not want to change his offer or was continuously offering
bad deals to the player. On the other hand, agreements that
elicit a SCR are linked to bad decisions or to concessions that
still provide a good profit, but it is not possible to distinguish
between the two.
Moving to the post-negotiation phase, this a phase characterised by the revelation of the minimums. The premise is that
the behaviour in subsequent rounds will suffer from previous
decisions (unfair deals, exploitation or deception). Barry et
al. (Barry & Oliver, 1996) alert for situations of asymmetry, wherein a negotiator experiences positive affect and the
other negative. Based on previous findings, this may lead to a
certain level of “retained hostility” that is exhibited in avoidance or retribution in the following encounters. This state of
“retained hostility” was observed twice in our data and are
somehow related to the post-negotiation phase:
Case 2 A negotiator simply engaged in avoidance tactics, using irony to make counteroffers. She did not use the card
give up, but she had threaten to do it a few times.
13 This

data should be taken with a grain of salt though. A spike
linked to an opportunity only occurred 7 out of 68 times, although
we verified a significant (p < 0.05) difference in amplitudes by running ANOVA.

Case 3 A negotiator A got the worse deal in comparison to
his opponent B (in rounds 1,2 and 3), except in Round 4
when B played a card below his minimum. In round 5 they
engaged again in negotiation with few concessions, player
A used the give up card without saying anything before,
just to punish the adversary.
These two cases shift our attention to the levels of affect
post-settlement and its consequences, when the cause for failure is attributed to the opponent (Weiner, 1985), although
they are not directly visible in EDA data. That is, we are
able to identify intense moments of the interaction, but more
information is needed to make these inferences.

Conclusions
The use of EDA as an index of emotional arousal in judgement research is a common approach and has gained momentum in more recent years (Figner & Murphy, 2011). Among
other reasons it a cheap and easy to use method that promises
access to hidden processes and information that may reflect
how people make decisions, unobtrusively. Research on
EDA and decision-making processes has focused essentially
in games that involve a risky decisions (Palomki et al., 2013;
Slovic et al., 2005; Bechara & Damasio, 2005) to understand
people’s moves and to study the physiological signals associated with it. With some exceptions (Krosch et al., 2012),
there is not much research exploring other types of decision
making nor the dynamic process in more natural settings,
as the one presented in this report. To approach such complex experimental design we chose to examine the impact of
affect in specific moments of the negotiation process: prenegotiation, negotiation and post-negotiation phase. From
that point onwards we continuously broke down the components in smaller pieces. In the pre-negotiation, for instance,
we analysed the see minimum event, which in turn was analysed around a decision block that includes: pre-decision (anticipation of utility), decision and post-decision (experienced
utility). This method allowed us to apply between-subjects
analysis of each of the actions in the game.
A limitation of our study is that most of the data obtained
come from pairs 5, 6, 8 and 10, exhibiting different type of
relationships, a pair of best friends and pairs in which the subjects are indifferent to each other. All those were engaged in
longer and more disputed negotiations, resulting in the 3 manifestations of conflict (cases 1, 2, 3). Nevertheless, those were

1407

the subjects who kept showing arousal in repeated events suggesting that SCRs are more related to stimulus significance
than to stimulus novelty. Furthermore, the decision process
was not always fully captured due to the short ISIs between
actions, which did not allowed us to have complete decision
blocks. EDA readings are not useful in such cases (Dawson
et al., 2007) and it is debatable if can be used in more natural experimental settings, unless the experimental paradigm
is better controlled. Moreover, EDA alone may not help us to
automatically make sense of an episode. SCRs only become
interpretable by taking into account time and sequence of actions and stimulus conditions, which not makes SCRs alone
good predictors of behavioural actions.
All these small details of the interaction, which we call
deep data, are critical for designing more natural experiences
between agents and humans. This study shifted our attention to the role of emotion in the manifestation of conflict and
probably the most important finding is the absence of no active behaviours. Dawson et al. (2007) underlines that EDA
is linked to the inhibition system and thus, involved in processes such as responding to punishment, passive avoidance
or to frustrative reward. Hence, it is most responsive when the
subject does not take an action. This is an important implication for the design of agent system that deal with conflict:
emotions are retained and sometimes subjects choose to act
upon them and that is visible in cases 2 and 3 described above.
Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by national funds through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia with reference UID/CEC/50021/2013, a scholarship
(SFRH/BD/75342/2010) granted by FCT and was partially supported by the EU FP7 ICT-317923 project EMOTE.

References
Andreassi, J. L. (2000). Psychophysiology: Human Behavior
& Physiological Response. Psychology Press.
Astor, P. J., Adam, M. T., Jhnig, C., & Seifert, S. (2013).
The joy of winning and the frustration of losing: A psychophysiological analysis of emotions in first-price sealedbid auctions. Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology, and
Economics, 6(1), 14.
Bach, D. R., Flandin, G., Friston, K. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2010).
Modelling event-related skin conductance responses. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 75(3), 349–356.
Barry, B., & Oliver, R. L. (1996). Affect in dyadic negotiation: A model and propositions. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 67(2), 127–143.
Bechara, A., & Damasio, A. R. (2005). The somatic marker
hypothesis: A neural theory of economic decision. Games
and economic behavior, 52(2), 336–372.
Benedek, M., & Kaernbach, C. (2010, June). A continuous
measure of phasic electrodermal activity. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 190(1), 80–91.
Boucsein, W. (2012). Electrodermal Activity. Springer.
Campos, J., Alves-Oliveira, P., & Paiva, A. (2015). Looking
for Conflict: Gaze Dynamics in a Dyadic Mixed-Motive
Game. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems.

Campos, J., Martinho, C., & Paiva, A. (2013). Conflict inside
out: a theoretical approach to conflict from an agent point
of view. In Proceedings of the 2013 AAMAS.
Chaspari, T., Goodwin, M., Wilder-Smith, O., Gulsrud, A.,
Mucchetti, C., Kasari, C., & Narayanan, S. (2014). A nonhomogeneous poisson process model of Skin Conductance
Responses integrated with observed regulatory behaviors
for Autism intervention. In 2014 IEEE ICASSP.
Dawson, M. E., Schell, A. M., & Courtney, C. G. (2011).
The skin conductance response, anticipation, and decisionmaking. Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology, and Economics, 4(2), 111.
Dawson, M. E., Schell, A. M., & Filion, D. L. (2007). The
Electrodermal System. In Handbook of psychophysiology.
Figner, B., & Murphy, R. O. (2011). Using skin conductance
in judgment and decision making research. A handbook of
process tracing methods for decision research, 163–184.
Kelley, H. H., Beckman, L. L., & Fischer, C. S. (1967, October). Negotiating the division of a reward under incomplete
information. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
3(4), 361–398.
Ketelaar, T., & Tung Au, W. (2003). The effects of feelings
of guilt on the behaviour of uncooperative individuals in repeated social bargaining games: An affect-as-information
interpretation of the role of emotion in social interaction.
Cognition & Emotion, 17(3), 429–453.
Krosch, A., Figner, B., & Weber, E. U. (2012). Choice processes and their post-decisional consequences in morally
conflicting decisions. Judgment and Decision Making,
7(3), 224–234.
Lazarus, R. S. (1994). Emotion and Adaptation. Oxford
University Press.
Palomki, J., Kosunen, I., Kuikkaniemi, K., Yamabe, T., &
Ravaja, N. (2013). Anticipatory electrodermal activity
and decision making in a computer poker-game. Journal
of Neuroscience, Psychology, and Economics, 6(1), 55.
Poh, M.-Z., Swenson, N. C., & Picard, R. W. (2010). A wearable sensor for unobtrusive, long-term assessment of electrodermal activity. Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 57(5), 1243–1252.
Slovic, P., Peters, E., Finucane, M. L., & MacGregor, D. G.
(2005). Affect, risk, and decision making. Health psychology, 24(4S), S35.
Van Kleef, G. A., & Sinaceur, M. (2013). The Demise of
the” Rational” Negotiator: Emotional Forces in Conflict
and Negotiation. Handbook of Research on Negotiation.
Vinciarelli, A., Pantic, M., & Bourlard, H. (2009, November).
Social signal processing: Survey of an emerging domain.
Image and Vision Computing, 27(12).
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement
motivation and emotion. Psychological review, 92(4), 548.
Wout, M. V., Kahn, R., Sanjey, A. G., & Aleman, A.
(2006). Affective state and decision-making in the ultimatum game. Experimental brain research, 169(4), 564–568.

1408

