Shakers and Maracas:
Action-based Categorisation Choices in Triads Are Influenced by Task
Instructions
Nicholas J. Shipp (n.j.shipp@herts.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, AL10 9AB, UNITED KINGDOM

Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau (f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University,
Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UNITED KINGDOM

Susan H. Anthony (s.h.1.anthony@herts.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, AL10 9AB, UNITED KINGDOM

Abstract
The forced-choice triad task has become increasingly
popular in use over recent years. While it is seen as being
a categorisation task (Lin & Murphy, 2001) variation in
task instructions often leads to different results. Shipp,
Vallée-Tourangeau, and Anthony (2014) used the triad
task to show that when participants are asked to choose
an option that ‘goes best with the target’, they are more
likely to select the choice that shares an action relation
when it also shares taxonomic information. However
using the instruction to select the item that “goes best” is
vague and might encourage a strategy other than a
categorical decision. The present experiment used the
same triads as in Shipp et al. to test whether participants
would match items based on shared actions or shared
taxonomic relations when given specific categorisation
instructions. The task instructions were manipulated so
that participants either selected the item that “goes best”,
“goes best to form a category” or is “most similar” to the
target. The results found instances where the instructions
of “goes best to form a category” led to a higher
probability that participants would select the action
choices over the instructions of “goes best”. However
when participants were encouraged to use similarity
overall action choices were lower. Therefore the triad
task does encourage a natural categorisation strategy and
differences in task instructions across research are a
result of the stimuli used.
Keywords: Action; Triads; Context; Instructions.

Introduction
Over years of research a variety of tasks have been used
to measure the way in which objects are categorised
including feature/exemplar listing tasks and sorting
tasks. The forced-choice triad task has become a more
popular tool in categorisation research over recent years
and has been successfully used to show the influence of
thematic relations in conceptual knowledge (Lin &
Murphy, 2001; Mirman & Graziano, 2012; Kalénine &
Bonthoux, 2008; Simmons & Estes, 2008).
Triad tasks are formed from a target word presented
with one of two choice options sharing a particular
relation to the target. The choice that participants select

is seen to reflect how information is mentally organized.
Lin and Murphy (2001) researched thematic choices in
adults’ conceptual knowledge where previously it was
thought that only young children make use of thematic
relations (Inhelder & Piaget, 1964; Kalénine &
Bonthoux, 2008; Olver & Hornsby, 1967; Smiley &
Brown, 1979). Lin and Murphy manipulated the choices
where one shared a taxonomic relation to the target and
one shared a thematic relation. For example the target
of bee presented with flies (taxonomic relation) and
honey (thematic relation). The results showed that when
participants were asked to select the item that “goes
best” with the target to form a category, the majority of
choices were for the thematically related item (62%). In
a second experiment Lin and Murphy used the same
triad task adjusted the task instructions. When
participants were instructed with “which two best form
a category” the percentage of participants selecting the
thematically related item decreased (49%).
Using the same triad task and “goes best with”
instructions, Shipp, Vallée-Tourangeau, and Anthony
(2014) identified conditions under which participants
would draw upon action knowledge. Shipp et al.
matched items together because they share the same
physical action to operate them. For example rifle and
water pistol share an action where both are operated
with a ‘trigger’ action. Shipp et al. designed three sets
of triads to measure how often participants selected the
item sharing an action to the target. In the first set of
triads, referred to as the Same Category Object (SCO)
triads, the objects came from the same taxonomic
category. However one of the options also shared an
action with the target. These were designed to test for
the additive effects that action might have in the same
way that previous research had shown that shared
themes have an additive effect when presented with
taxonomic relations (Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999). An
example of an SCO triad shows the target of pencil
presented with elastic band (taxonomic) and paintbrush
(taxonomic + action). In the second set of triads only
one of the choice options shared a taxonomic choice
where the other only shared an action. These Different

	  
	  
2153

Figure 1. Examples of stimuli used in the experiment. From left to right: Same Category Object triad, Different Category
Object triad, and Perceptual Category Object triad in the context-lean condition (top panels) and in the context-rich
condition (bottom panels).
Category Object (DCO) triads were designed to test
competition effects of action against taxonomic
relations. For example the target of rifle was presented
with sword (taxonomic only) and water pistol (action
only). The triads were further manipulated by context
whereby triad pictures were either shown to participants
as three isolated objects against a white background
(context-lean) or shown used by an agent for its
functional purpose (context-rich). The results showed
that participants were significantly more likely to select
the action item on the SCO triads in either context
(context-lean = 61%, context-rich = 70%). However the
overall percentages of action choices on the DCO triads
were low with a significant increase from the contextlean (32%) to the context-rich (53%) condition. This
would therefore suggest that action is less likely to
present as a basis for category membership on its own
but has an additive effect when presented with
taxonomic information. In addition a third set of triads
were designed to assess the confounding variable that
objects that share an action will invariably share
perceptual properties. For example the rifle and water
pistol look similar as they are designed around the
trigger/handle component. Therefore it is possible that
participants selected the action item because they
looked similar rather than sharing an action. The
Perceptual Category Object (PCO) triads were designed
such that none of the three items shared a taxonomic
relation, but one choice option shared perceptual
properties to the target and the other choice shared an
action to the target. If participants were selecting
objects in the triads because of perceptual properties
rather than shared action, then they would be less likely
to select the action items on the PCO triads. The results
deflected this possibility showing that in the context-

rich condition participants were more likely to select the
action choice (69%) showing the strong role that action
plays in the triad task, particularly when presented
within a functional context. In a related study,
Tsagkaridis, Watson, Jax and Buxbaum (2014) used a
triad task to show that participants are more likely to
select thematically related items when they are used
together for a purpose, such as wine bottle and
corkscrew.
Task instructions are particularly important in the
experiments reviewed thus far, but these are
inconsistently formulated. Research has shown that
variations in the task instructions lead to different
choices selected on the triad task as shown by Lin and
Murphy (2001) when participants were asked to select
the item that “goes best” or “which two form a
category”. Simmons and Estes (2008) also showed
different levels of thematic preference across different
experiments when participants were instructed to select
the item “most similar to” (46%), “most different to”
(39%) or “most like to” (57%). Mirman and Graziano
(2012) specifically used the instructions of “goes best”
so as not to cause a taxonomic bias within the task.
While the triad task is seen as a categorisation task
(Estes, Golonka & Jones, 2011; Golonka & Estes, 2008;
Lin & Murphy, 2001; Murphy, 2001; Simmons & Estes,
2008) the task appears to favour a thematic strategy
unless participants are given more explicit category
instructions. However such instructions are somewhat
unclear in what they ask participants to do. It could be
that participants rather than categorising the objects are
selecting the item most similar to the target. While
categorisation and similarity are seen as related
processes where models of categorisation rely on
similarity (Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Rosch & Mervis;

	  
	  
2154

1975; Rosch, Simpson & Miller, 1976) there are
dissociations between them (Goldstone, 1994; Iachini,
Borghi & Sense, 2008; Rips, 1989; Smith & Sloman,
1994). A potential criticism of Shipp et al. is that the
instruction of “goes best” could favour an action
strategy, and participants are not engaging in a
categorisation task. Therefore it is an empirical question
as to whether the same pattern would be found in
performance on the same triads when the instructions
favoured a categorisation strategy. The aim of the
present experiment was to test the effects of varying
instructions on the action choices made in the triad task
previously used by Shipp et al. (2014). The same triads
from Shipp et al. were used and presented either in the
context-lean or context-rich conditions previously used.
However three sets of instructions were used where
participants were asked either to select the item that
“goes best”, “goes best to form a category”, or “is most
similar to the target”. If it is the case that participants on
the triad task use a categorisation strategy then there
should be little difference in action-based choices
between “goes best to form a category” and “goes best”.
If however participants are completing the triad task
using a similarity strategy then there should be little
difference between “goes best” and “is most similar to”.
Several predictions can be made based on the findings
of Shipp et al. as follows; it was predicted that (i)
selection of the action-related item would be highest in
the SCO triads and lowest in the DCO, replicating the
‘additive’ effect found previously, and (ii) the action
choice percentages would be higher in the context-rich
than context-lean conditions. Given that previous
research views the triad task as a categorisation task
(Estes et al., 2011; Lin & Murphy, 2001) it was
predicted that no differences would be found between
the “goes best” and “goes best to form a category”
instructions in terms of the influence on action choices.

Table 1. Full list of the Same Category Object (SCO)
triads used in the experiment
Target Item
Pencil*	  
Glass	  
Spatula	  
Pin**	  
Orange*	  
DVD	  player*	  
Bed*	  
Leaflet	  
Spade*	  
Ketchup*

	  
Table 2. Full list of the Different Category Object
(DCO) triads used in the experiment
Target Item
Fax	  machine*	  
Screwdriver	  
Drink	  bottle**	  
Rifle**	  
Computer**	  
Calculator*	  
Book	  
Paperclip*	  
Deodorant*	  
Knife*	  

Table 3. Full list of the Perceptual Category Object
(PCO) triads used in the experiment
Target Item

Participants

Materials
The same 30 triads (10 x SCO, 10 x DCO, 10 x PCO)
triads used in Shipp et al. (2014) were used here
presented within subjects to participants (see Fig. 1).
The SCO triads consisted of a target with two choice
options sharing a taxonomic relation to the target, but
one also sharing an action with the target. The DCO
triads consisted of a target with a choice option sharing
a taxonomic relation only, and one sharing an action
relation only. The PCO triads consisted of a target with
one choice option sharing an action with the target, and
one sharing perceptual properties. The triads were once
again presented in a between subjects manner either in
the context-lean or context-rich conditions. No
differences were present in the program used except for

Choice Items
Taxonomic
Action Choice
Choice
Telephone	  	  
Photocopier	  	  
Hammer	  	  
Key	  	  
Mug	  	  
Jam	  jar	  
Sword	  	  
Water	  pistol	  
Printer	  	  
Piano	  	  
Set	  square	  	  
Mobile	  phone	  
Ipod	  	  
Wallet	  	  
Ruler	  	  
Clothes	  peg	  
Hair	  gel	  	  
Insect	  repellent	  
Ladle	  	  
Saw	  	  

	  

Method
Ninety undergraduate Psychology students (65 females,
Mage = 21.19, SD = 6.12) took part in the experiment in
return for course credit.

Choice Items
Taxonomic
Taxonomic and
Choice
Action Choice
Elastic	  band	  
Paintbrush	  
Jug	  	  
Cup	  	  
Grater	  	  
Saucepan	  	  
Screw	  	  
Plug	  	  
Banana	  
Strawberry	  
Television	  	  
CD	  player	  
Wardrobe	  
Sofa	  
Poster	  
Newspaper	  	  
Shears	  	  
Trowel	  	  
Vinegar
Salt

Axe	  
Baseball bat*	  
USB pen*	  
Clarinet	  
Nut	  
Present**	  
Cocktail
shaker*	  
Gun	  
Peppermill**	  
Handbag*

Choice Items
Perceptual
Action Choice
Choice
Cane	  
Tennis racket	  
Wrapping paper	   Mace 	  
Chewing gum	  
Phone charger	  
Wooden spoon	  
Balloon 	  
Money 	  
Car key	  
Storage box	  
Shoe 	  
Vase 	  
Maracas 	  
Hairdryer 	  
Spray paint 	  
Cheese grater

Cleaning spray	  
Hair wax 	  
Cookie jar

Note. *Indicates those triads where choice selection
significantly differed from chance with greater selection for
the action choice. **Indicates those triads where choice
selection significantly differed from chance with greater
selection for the taxonomic (SCO/DCO) or perceptual choice
(PCO).

	  
	  
2155

the instructions given at the beginning.

Procedure
The procedure was the same as that used in Shipp et al.
(2014). The triads were presented using Superlab on a
15” Macintosh laptop. The program began with a single
practice triad followed by the 30 test items. A fixation
cue was presented at the top of the screen on each trial
for 1000ms. The fixation cue was replaced by the target
word and picture (dependent on the condition the
participant were assigned to). After 1500ms the two
choice options appeared beneath the target alongside the
appropriate images. Participants were either instructed
to select the choice item that “goes best with the target”,
“goes best with the target to form a category” or “is
most similar to the target”. In the same manner as Lin
and Murphy (2001) participants in the category
instruction condition were presented with a definition in
order to emphasise the categorical nature of the task.
The instructions stated, “A category is defined as a set
of things that share some commonalities - be it
functions, purposes, physical and
perceptual
characteristics, or behavioural predispositions".
Participants were instructed to press the ‘a’ key to
choose the item on the left-hand side of the screen and
the ‘l’ key for the item on the right-hand side of the
screen. The action item was counterbalanced so that in
half of the trials it appeared on the left side or right side
of the screen. After they had made their choice the triad
disappeared and the fixation cue appeared again for the
next triad. Thus the design of the current experiment
was a 3 (instructions) x 2 (context) x 3 (triads) mixed
design with instructions and context as between subjects
factors and triads as a repeated measures factor.

2

context-rich condition, F(1, 84) = 44.70, p < .001, η =
.35. The main effect of Triads was also found to be
2
significantly different, F(2, 168) = 17.91, p < .001, η =
.18. Post hoc analysis using the Bonferroni adjustment
found that the action responses on the SCO triads were
significantly higher than both the DCO triads (p < .001)
and the PCO triads (p < .001). No difference was found
between the DCO triads and the PCO triads (p = .86).
The main effect of Instructions was not significant, F(2,
2
84) = 2.70, p = .073, η = .06, nor was the two-way
interaction between Context and Instructions, F < 1,
The two-way interaction effect between Context and
Triads was significant, F (2, 168) = 11.47, p < .001,
η2 = .12. In all three triads the mean percentage of
choices was higher in the context-rich condition than in
the context-lean condition, but the effect was stronger in
the SCO (p < .001) and PCO triads (p < .001) than in
the DCO triads (p = .035). The two-way interaction
between Instructions and Triads was also significant;
2
F(4, 168) = 2.51, p = .044, η = .06. Post hoc analysis
revealed that the only differences were found on the
PCO triads where GBFC led to a higher mean
proportion of action choices compared to GB (p = .033)
and MS (p < .001). The difference between GB and MS
was marginally significant (p = .051).

	  

Results
The mean proportion of action responses was calculated
for the SCO, DCO and PCO triads across context and
instructions. As was found in Shipp et al., (2014)
participants showed a tendency to select the action
choice more with the SCO (66%) than with the PCO
(57%) and DCO (54%) triads, and more so in the
context-rich (67%) condition than context-lean (51%).
In addition action choices were higher following the
Goes Best to Form a Category (GBFC, 63%)
instructions than in the Goes Best (GB, 58%) and the
Most Similar (MS, 56%) instructions. Due to the
dichotomous nature of the dependent variable the
proportions of the choices made on the triads was
initially analysed using single sample t-tests with a
theoretical mean of 0.5. The results showed that in only
nine (of thirty) triads did the choices not significantly
differ from chance (see Tables 1, 2 and 3). In order to
make the data fully comparable with the previous work
of Shipp et al. (2014) these triads were left in for the
remainder of the analysis.
A 3x2x3 mixed analysis of variance was conducted
on the mean percentage of action choices across the
triads. The analysis revealed a significant main effect of
Context with a higher number of action choices in the

Figure 2.	   Mean percentage of action choices in the
context-lean condition with the Same Category Object
(SCO), Different Category Object (DCO), and
Perceptual Category Object (PCO) triads between the
Goes Best (GB), Goes Best to Form a Category (GBFC)
and Most Similar (MS) instructions. Error bars are
standard errors of the mean.

	  
However of main interest here is the three-way
interaction between Context, Instructions and Triads
2
which was significant, F(4, 168) = 5.01, p = .001, η =
.11. Figures 2 and 3 show the mean proportion of action
choices in each triad across the different instructions,
spilt across the two contexts. Looking at the proportion
of action choices in the context-lean condition (see Fig.
2) no differences were found between the instructions
on the SCO triads. Post hoc analysis found that on the
DCO triads the category instructions (GBFC) led to
higher action choices than GB (p = .028). In addition on
the PCO triads the similarity instructions (MS) led to

	  
	  
2156

lower action choices than GB (p = .006) and GBFC (p =
.003).

Figure 3. Mean percentage of action choices in the
context-rich condition on the Same Category Object
(SCO), Different Category Object (DCO), and
Perceptual Category Object (PCO) triads between the
Goes Best (GB), Goes Best to Form a Category (GBFC)
and Most Similar (MS) instructions. Error bars are
standard errors of the mean.

	  
Examining the context-rich condition (see Fig. 3) no
instruction related differences were found on the DCO
triads. On the SCO triads the MS instructions led to
significantly lower action choices than GB (p = .049)
and GBFC (p = .0.36), but no difference was found
between GB and GBFC (p = .90). In addition on the
PCO triads the category instructions (GBFC) led to
higher action choices than GB (p = .006) and MS (p =
.006). The data here show that under no conditions did
the GB instructions lead to statistically higher action
choices than the GBFC instructions, and the similarity
instructions led to proportionally lower action choices
overall.
The overall mean proportion of action choices on the
triads were recalculated without those triads which did
not significantly differ from chance (see Tables 1, 2 and
3). The analysis was repeated and while the means
across all of the triads increased, the exact same pattern
was found overall with a significant three way
interaction between Triads, Context and Instructions,
2
F(4, 168) = 3.11, p = .017, η = .07.

Discussion
The results reported here replicate Shipp et al. (2014)
where participants were more likely to select the action
choice when it also shared taxonomic information. This
can be seen in the triads where the highest mean
proportion of action choices was seen in the SCO triads
compared to the DCO. In addition action choices were
higher presented in a functional context. This effect was
stronger for the SCO and PCO triads compared to the
DCO triads.
However of main interest was the effect of task
instructions. A potential criticism of the results reported
in Shipp et al. (2014) was that whilst claims were made
by those authors regarding the role of action in a

	  

categorization task, the instructions “goes best with”
might have not have encouraged participants to see the
task as one of categorization and, on the contrary,
encouraged the use of a non-categorical strategy and
more reliance on action. The significant three-way
interaction reported here deflects this criticism. If it
were the case that participants were not using a
categorisation strategy then action choice preferences
with GBFC instructions would be significantly lower
than with the GB instructions. Overall the GB
instructions did not lead to significantly higher action
choice frequencies than the GBFC instructions. In
contrast there are examples within the conditions where
GBFC instructions actually led to higher action choice
frequencies than GB instructions. Therefore rather than
the more ambiguous GB instructions inflating action
choice frequencies, it appears that these instructions are,
if anything, reducing the probability of picking the
action item. In addition, if it were the case on the triads
that GB promoted a similarity strategy rather than a
categorisation then the MS instructions would result in
choice preferences more similar to those obtained with
the GB instructions. However the results show that
action frequencies were lower when participants were
invited to select the most similar item. This further
suggests that the triad task is a categorisation task and
whilst it may draw on the participants understanding of
similarity, performance does not rely solely on this.
An interesting finding here relates to the use of the
GBFC instructions on the DCO triads. With these triads
and instructions selection of the action choice was fairly
high in both the context-lean (60%) and the context-rich
(59%) conditions. Theoretically speaking it would be
predicted that action choice frequencies should be fairly
low with the DCO triads when participants are asked to
group by category as the taxonomic item was designed
to share category membership with the target, and the
action choice was not. For example rifle and sword are
both weapons and therefore when asked “goes best to
form a category” participants should be more likely to
select sword over water pistol as they are both members
of the same category of ‘weapons’ (see Rosch, 1975).
There are two possible explanations for the unexpected
pattern. The first is due to the fact that taxonomic
information contains not only information about
category membership and functional information, but
also perceptual information. If participants are directed
to form a category between the target and choice item
they should be influenced by perceptual information.
Objects which are operated in a similar manner method
such as rifle and water pistol will often share perceptual
characteristics as they are designed to work within the
ergonomic confines of the human body (i.e., designed
around a handle and ‘trigger’ action). Therefore the
action item, to some extent, shared perceptual
characteristics with the target object. Further research
using the same triad task where participants gave
written protocols supports this explanation (Shipp,
Vallée-Tourangeau, & Anthony, in prep). On the DCO
triads participants often gave either an action or
perceptual reason for matching the action-related item

	  
	  
2157

to the target, particularly in the context-lean condition.
Participants gave fewer perceptual reasons in the
context-rich condition compared to the context-lean,
possibly due to the reduced visual aspects of the objects
themselves when they are held by an agent. For
example, the handle of the rifle can no longer be seen in
the context-rich condition because the hand of the agent
blocks it. As such participants report selecting the
action choice in the context-lean condition because of
the shared perceptual aspects, but in the context-rich
report selecting it because of the shared action between
them.
The second possible explanation is that participants
are creating goal-derived categories. For example some
participants might be grouping water pistol with rifle
because of the general goal of “things used for
shooting” in preference to the functional category of
weapon. This type of goal is highlighted by the context
shown and therefore this, in combination with fewer
obvious shared perceptual features, might increase the
salience of such goal-derived categories. This would
also explain why a high percentage of action choices
were seen in the PCO triads where none of the items
shared a standard category membership with the target.
An example of this would be with cocktail shaker as the
target and maracas as a choice option where
participants might derive a sense of category
membership based on the goal of “things that make a
noise when shaken”. The most likely option however is
that both of these explanations work together when
participants make their choices.
In conclusion, the results show previous concerns that
action choices were inflated by the “goes best”
instructions have been alleviated following the
comparison of such instructions with choice preferences
elicited with “goes best to form a category” instructions.
However what is not clear here and needs further
investigation is the type of category participants create
on the fly when engaging with a triad tasks, whether
these are categories that cohere in terms of their
semantic or goal-derived features. There is yet more to
be understood about performance on the forced-choice
triad task.

References
Estes, Z., Golonka, S., & Jones, L. L. (2011). Thematic
Thinking: The Apprehension and Consequences of
Thematic Relations. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation-Advances in Research and Theory, 54,
249-294.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). The role of similarity in
categorization – Providing a groundwork. Cognition,
52, 125-157
Golonka, S., & Estes, Z. (2009). Thematic relations
affect similarity via commonalities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 35, 1454.
Iachini, T., Borghi, A. M., & Senese, V. P. (2008).
Categorization and sensorimotor interaction with
objects. Brain and Cognition, 67, 31-43.

Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1964). The early growth of
logic in the child. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Kalénine, S., & Bontoux, F. (2008). Object
manipulability affects children’s and adult’s
conceptual processing. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15, 667-672.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). Thematic relations
in adults' concepts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-General, 130, 3-28.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory
of classification learning. Psychological Review, 85,
207-238.
Mirman, D., & Graziano, K. M. (2012). Individual
differences in the strength of taxonomic versus
thematic relations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 141, 601-609.
Olver, R. R., & Hornsby, J. R. (1967). On equivalence.
In J. S. Bruner, R. R. Olver, & P. M. Greenfield
(Eds), Studies in cognitive growth (pp. 68-85). New
York: Wiley.
Rips, L. J. (1989). The psychology of knights and
knaves. Cognition, 31, 85-116.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 104, 192-233.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family
resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Rosch, E., Simpson, C., & Miller, R. S. (1976).
Structural bases of typicality effects. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human perception and
performance, 2, 491-502.
Shipp, N. J., Vallée-Tourangeau, F., & Anthony, S. H.
(2014). The context-dependent nature of action
knowledge. In P. Bello, M. Guarani, M. McShane, &
B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2925-2930). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Shipp, N. J., Vallée-Tourangeau, F., & Anthony, S. H.
(in prep). Strategies for making forced-choice
categories: An item analysis of Shipp, ValleeTourangeau, and Anthony (2014).
Simmons, S., & Estes, Z. (2008). Individual differences
in the perception of similarity and difference.
Cognition, 108, 781-795.
Smiley, S. S., & Brown, A. L. (1979). Conceptual
preference for thematic or taxonomic relations –
nonmonotonic relations trend from preschool to old
age. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 28,
249-257.
Smith, E. E., & Sloman, S. A. (1994). Similarity-based
versus rule-based categorization. Memory &
Cognition, 22, 377-386.
Tsagkaridis, K., Watson, C. E., Jax, S. A., & Buxbaum,
L. J. (2014). The role of action representations in
thematic object relations. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 8, 1-12.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Bassok, M. (1999). What makes a
man similar to a tie? Stimulus compatibility with
comparison and integration. Cognitive Psychology,
39, 208- 238.

	  
	  
2158

