Should Moral Decisions be Different for Human and Artificial Cognitive Agents?
Evgeniya Hristova (ehristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Maurice Grinberg (mgrinberg@nbu.bg)
Research Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology
New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo Str., Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
Abstract

approaches to morality when it concerns artificial agents –
consequentialist (utilitarian) and deontological (see also
Allen, Smit, & Wallach, 2005). Concerning moral
evaluation, these approaches give quite different
perspectives on moral agency for artificial cognitive agents
(Wallach & Allen, 2009). The utilitarian approach is not
concerned with the protagonist or the reason of a moral
action but only on the utility of the outcome, so it does not
differentiate between human and artificial cognitive agents.
On the other hand, the deontological approach considers the
nature of the agent and it implies that different agents (e.g.
human or artificial) can have different kind of duties.
This distinction in the approach to moral choice and its
evaluation is used in this paper to investigate how people
perceive artificial agents while making moral decisions. If
participants have a more utilitarian attitude, they are
expected to rate agents’ behavior similarly, based on the
perceived utility of the outcome. If participants have a more
deontological attitude, they would rate differently the
human and the artificial agents depending on the degree to
which they consider them to be moral agents and hence,
morally responsible.

Moral judgments are elicited using dilemmas presenting
hypothetical situations in which an agent must choose
between letting several people die or sacrificing one person in
order to save them. The evaluation of the action or inaction of
a human agent is compared to those of two artificial agents –
a humanoid robot and an automated system. Ratings of
rightness, blamefulness and moral permissibility of action or
inaction in incidental and instrumental moral dilemmas are
used. The results show that for the artificial cognitive agents
the utilitarian action is rated as more morally permissible than
inaction. The humanoid robot is found to be less blameworthy
for his choices compared to the human agent or to the
automated system. Action is found to be more appropriate,
morally permissible, more right, and less blameworthy than
inaction only for the incidental scenarios. The results are
interpreted and discussed from the perspective of perceived
moral agency.
Keywords: moral dilemmas; moral judgment; artificial
cognitive agents; moral agency

Introduction
Moral Dilemmas and Artificial Cognitive Agents

Moral Agency and Artificial Cognitive Agents

Moral judgments and evaluation of moral actions have been
of great interest to philosophers and psychologists. Apart
from the practical importance of better understanding moral
judgments and related actions, morality is an essential part
of human social and cognitive behaviour. Recently, the
behaviour of artificial cognitive agents became central to
research and public debate in relation to the rapidly
increasing usage of robots and intelligent systems in our
everyday life. Several important questions must find their
answers as the use of artificial cognitive agents has many
benefits but also many risks. Some of those questions
concern moral agency - if those agents should be allowed to
make moral decisions and how such decisions are judged
and evaluated.
Moral judgments can be studied in their purest form using
moral dilemmas – situations in which there is a conflict
between moral values, rules, rights, and agency (Foot, 1967;
Thomson, 1985). Moral dilemmas used in the paper are
hyopothetical situations in which several people will die if
the agent does not intervene in some way. The intervention
will lead to the death of another person but also to the
salvation of the initially endangered people.
Analogously to the two main approaches to human
morality, Gips (1995) identifies two basic theoretical

The possibility for moral agency of artificial agents has been
a matter of hot debate (e.g. see Anderson & Anderson,
2011; Wallach & Allen, 2008; Johnson, 2006). It is debated
if the robots should be authorized to kill in moral dilemma
situations, and if so, what rules should govern the real-time
decisions that are necessary to determine whether killing
any particular person is justified (Sparrow, 2007; Wallach &
Allen, 2008).
In this paper, we want to explore the differences in moral
agency evaluation depending on the type of agent - human
or artificial. So, it is important to take into account the
attribution of mind and moral agency to artificial cognitive
systems (Waytz, Gray, Epley, & Wegner, 2010).
In the study of Gray et al. (2007), participants had to
evaluate several characters including a human, a robot, and
a computer with respect to the degree of possessing various
cognitive capacities. The authors further established that
moral judgments about punishment correlated more with
one of the revealed dimensions – ‘agency’ – than with the
second dimension – ‘experience’. In Gray et al. (2007), the
human obtains the highest scores on the ‘experience’ and
‘agency’ dimensions while the robot has practically zero
score on the ‘experience’ and half the maximal score on the
‘agency’ scales. Following the interpretation given by the

1511

authors, this implies that robots are judged as less morally
responsible for their actions compared to humans.

Moral Judgments about the Actions of Artificial
Cognitive Agents
Until recently, research involving moral dilemmas
considered mainly a human agent. Only during the last
years, several empirical studies appeared, exploring the
moral judgments about the actions of artificial cognitive
agents in moral dilemmas (Scheutz & Malle, 2014; Malle,
Scheutz, Arnold, Voiklis, & Cusimano, 2015; Hristova &
Grinberg, 2015).
Malle et al. (2015) compared moral judgments about a
human and a state-of-the-art robot agent choosing the
utilitarian action or inaction. They used a modified version
of the Trolley problem in which the death of the person to
be killed is a side-effect of the action undertaken by the
agent. They found that it is more permissible for a robot
(compared to a human) to do the utilitarian action. It was
also found that a human agent is blamed more the utilitarian
action than for inaction while the robot was equally blamed
for both.
In another study (Scheutz & Malle, 2014), a means-end
scenario was used. In was found that the utilitarian action is
judged to be both more morally wrong and more blameful
than inaction for the human and the robot agent.
While the goal of Scheutz & Malle (2014) and Malle et al.
(2015) was to study the expectations of people of state-ofthe-art robots and inform future robot design, Hristova &
Grinberg (2015) had the goal to explore the moral agency
ascribed to hypothetical future artificial cognitive agents,
which are indistinguishable from humans except for being
built from inorganic materials. The study of Hristova &
Grinberg (2015) contains only the results concerning the
judgment of the utilitarian choice of the agents.
The present paper combines the results presented in
Hristova & Grinberg (2015) with results about the
judgments of inaction by the agents and compares them.
Additionally, a test for moral agency, specifically
concerning the agents used in the present study, has been
carried out whose results are included in the discussion.

Goals and Hypotheses
The goal of this paper is to compare the moral judgments
about the choices of a human agent, a humanoid robot (who
is exactly like a human in terms of experiences and mind but
has a non-organic body), and an automated system.
Table 1 contains the description of the agents. The only
difference between the human and the humanoid robot,
presentation of the agents, is the material the latter is built
from. The automated system, on the other hand, is described
as autonomous, free, and adaptable but lacks experiencing.
The expectation is that despite the fact that the humanoid
robot supposedly has all the features for full morally
responsible agency, people will evaluate its action or
inaction differently compared to those of a human agent.

Another goal of the study is to explore the influence of
the so-called ‘instrumentality’ of harm on moral judgments.
The instrumentality of harm is an important factor in moral
dilemma research (e.g., Borg et al., 2006; Hauser et al.,
2007; Moore et al., 2008). It draws attention to the fact that
harm could be either inflicted intentionally as a ‘mean to an
end’ (instrumental harm) or it could be a ‘side effect’
(incidental harm) from the actions needed to save more
endangered people. It has been found that the unintended
incidental harm (although being foreseen) was judged as
more morally permissible than the intended instrumental
harm (Hauser et al., 2007; Moore et al., 2008).
The utilitarian action is expected to be rated as more
appropriate, more right, more morally permissible, and less
blameworthy when the harm is incidental (compared to
instrumental). However, the discussion about perceived
moral agency suggests that the difference in moral
judgments for the artificial and human agents will be greater
when the harm is instrumental, as such actions involve more
responsibility and direct infliction of harm.
The experiment collected ratings on the rightness, moral
permissibility, and blameworthiness of performing or not
the utilitarian action. The various questions asked can target
different aspects of the evaluation of moral choices, as some
studies suggest (Christensen & Gomila, 2012; Cushman,
2008). According to Cushman (2008), answers to questions
about punishment and blame concern the harm agents have
caused, whereas answers to questions about rightness and
moral permissibility are related to the agent's intentions.
Thus, depending on the type of agents – human or artificial
– the different questions can give information about
different aspects of people’s perception of moral agency.
If people evaluate action/inaction in the moral dilemmas
in a pure utilitarian way (in which the outcome is
important), one could expect that the ratings for all agents
will be the same (Wallach & Allen, 2009). On the other
hand, if evaluation is based on perceived moral agency of
the agents, differences in the judgments are expected.

Method
Stimuli and Design
Moral judgments are studied in a 3×2×2 factorial design
with identity of the agent (human vs. humanoid robot vs.
automated system), agent’s choice (action vs. inaction), and
instrumentality of harm (instrumental vs. incidental) as
between-subjects factors.
Two hypothetical scenarios are used – an instrumental
one and an incidental one. Both scenarios present one and
the same situation and require one and the same action.
The difference between the scenarios is only in the harm
inflicted to the person to be killed: in the instrumental
scenario the body of the person is the ‘instrument’
preventing the death of the five endangered people; while in
the incidental scenario, the death of the person is a byproduct.

1512

Agents choice and resolution

Possible resolution

Situation

Description of the agent

Table 1: Stimuli used in the experiment.
[Human] No description is given, just the name is provided –
Cyril – a common male name in Bulgarian.
[Humanoid robot] The year is 2050. Humanoid robots that
look like people are being manufactured and used, but are
made from inorganic materials. Robots have extremely high
performance – they perceive, think, feel, and make decisions
as humans do. Keido is such a humanoid robot that completely
resembles a human – he looks like a human; perceives, thinks,
feels and make decisions like a human.
[Automated system] The year is 2050. MARK21 is a fully
automated management system, which independently makes
its own decisions, based on the most advanced algorithms and
technologies. Such systems are widely used in metallurgical
plants. They completely independently perceive and assess the
environment and the situation, make decisions, manage the
movement of cargo and all aspects of the manufacturing
process.
Cyril/Keido/MARK21 manages the movement of mine
trolleys
with
loads
in
a
metallurgical
plant.
Cyril/Keido/MARK21 noticed that the brakes of a loaded
trolley are not functioning and it is headed at great speed
toward five workers who perform repair of the rails. They do
not have time to escape and they will certainly die.
Nobody, except for Cyril/Keido/MARK21, can do anything in
this situation.
The only thing Cyril/Keido/MARK21 can do is to activate a
control button and to release
[Instrumental scenario] the safety belt of a worker hanging
from a platform above the rails. The worker will fall onto the
rails of the trolley. Together with the tools that he is equipped
with, the worker is heavy enough to stop the moving trolley.
[Incidental scenario] a large container hanging from a
platform. It will fall onto the rails of the trolley. The container
is heavy enough to stop the moving trolley. On the top of the
container there is a worker who will also fall on the rails.
He will die, but the other five workers will stay alive.
Agent choosing the utilitarian action
Cyril/Keido/MARK21 decides to activate the control button
and to release
[Instrumental scenario] the safety belt of the worker hanging
from the platform. The worker falls onto the rails of the trolley
and as together with the tools that he is equipped with, the
worker is heavy enough, he stops the moving trolley. He dies,
but the other five workers stay alive.
[Incidental scenario] the container hanging from the platform.
It falls onto the rails of the trolley and as the container is heavy
enough, it stops the moving trolley. The worker onto the top
of the container dies, but the other five workers stay alive.
Agent choosing not to do the utilitarian action
Cyril/Keido/MARK21 decides not to activate the control
button that could release
[Instrumental scenario] the safety belt of the worker hanging
from the platform. The worker hanging from the platform
stays alive, but the trolley continues on its way and the five
workers on the rails die.
[Incidental scenario] the container hanging from the platform.
The worker onto the top of the container stays alive, but the
trolley continues on its way and the five workers on the rails
die.

In each scenario, the identity of the agent is varied (a
human, a robot, or an automated system) by providing a
name for the protagonist and an additional description in the
case when the protagonist is a robot or an automated system.
For each scenario and each agent, the agent choice is
either action (the utilitarian action) or inaction.
Each participant read only one of the resulting 12
scenarios given in Table 1.

Dependent Measures and Procedure
The flow of the presentation of the stimuli and the questions
is the following.
First, the scenario is presented (description of the agent,
the situation and the possible resolution, see Table 1) and
the participants answer a question assessing the
comprehension of the scenario.
Then, before knowing what the agent has chosen, the
participants make a judgment about the appropriateness of
the possible agent’s choice (action/inaction) answering a
question about what the agent should do (possible answers
are ‘should activate the control button’ or ‘should not
activate the control button’).
Next, the participants read a description of the choice of
the agent (action – the agent activates the control button, or
inaction – the agent does nothing) and the resolution of the
situation. After that, they give ratings about the rightness,
the moral permissibility, and the blameworthiness of the
described agent’s choice.
The Likert scales used are respectively: for the rightness
of the choice – from 1 = ‘completely wrong’ to 7 =
‘completely right’; for the moral permissibility of the choice
– from 1 = ‘not permissible at all’ to 7 = ‘it is mandatory’;
and for the blameworthiness of the agent – from 1 = ‘not at
all blameworthy’ to 7 = ‘extremely blameworthy’.
All data is collected using web-based questionnaires.

Participants
Three hundred seventy (370) participants answered the online questionnaires.
42 participants failed to answer
correctly the question assessing the reading and the
understanding of the presented scenario and their data was
discarded. So, the responses of 328 participants (230 female,
98 male; 148 students, 180 non-students) were analyzed.
Between 26 and 31 participants took part in each
experimental condition.

Results
Decisions about the Agent’s Action
The proportion of participants choosing the option that the
agent should carry out the utilitarian action (activating a
control button, thus sacrificing one person, and saving five
people) is presented in Table 2.
The data was analyzed using a logistic regression with
instrumentality of harm and identity of the agent as
predictors. Wald criterion demonstrated that only
instrumentality of harm is a significant predictor of the

1513

participants’ choices (p < .001, odds ratio = 3.03). Identity
of the agent is not a significant predictor.

No other main effects or interactions were found to be
statistically significant.
In summary, for the artificial agents (a humanoid robot or
an automated system), choosing the utilitarian action is rated as
more right than not choosing it, while there is no such
difference for the choices of the human agent.

Table 2: Proportion of the participants choosing the option
that the utilitarian action should be done by the agent
Agent
Instrumental Incidental
All
harm
harm
Human
0.60
0.79
0.70
Humanoid robot

0.60

0.85

0.74

Automated system

0.65

0.85

0.75

All

0.62

0.83

Moral Permissibility of the Agent’s Choice

More participants stated that the utilitarian action should be
undertaken when the harm is incidental (83% of the
participants) than when it is instrumental (62% of the
participants). This effect is expected based on previous research
(Borg et al., 2006; Hristova et al., 2014; Moore et al., 2008).

Rightness of the Agent’s Choice
Mean ratings of the rightness of the agent’s choice were
analyzed in a factorial ANOVA with agent’s choice (action
vs. inaction), identity of the agent (human vs. humanoid
robot vs. automated system) and instrumentality of harm
(instrumental vs. incidental) as between-subjects factors.
There is a main effect of agent’s choice on ratings of the
rightness of the agent’s choice (F(1, 316) = 35.8, p < .001).
In general, if the agent chooses to do the utilitarian action,
he gets higher approval (M = 4.6, SD = 1.7) compared to the
situations in which the agent chooses not to perform the
utilitarian action (M = 3.5, SD = 1.6).

Mean ratings of the moral permissibility of the agent’s
choice were analyzed in a factorial ANOVA with agent’s
choice (action vs. inaction), identity of the agent (human vs.
humanoid robot vs. automated system), and instrumentality
of harm (instrumental vs. incidental) as between-subjects
factors.
There is a main effect of agent’s choice on the ratings of
the moral permissibility of the agent’s choice (F(1, 316) =
6.22, p = .013). In general, if the agent chooses to do the
utilitarian action, he gets higher moral permissibility ratings
(M = 4.25, SD = 1.8) than when the agent does not choose
the utilitarian action (M = 3.75, SD = 1.5).
Marginally significant interaction between identity of the
agent and agent’s choice (F(1, 316) = 2.386, p = .094) was
also found (see Figure 2). For the humanoid robot, action
(M = 4.5, SD = 1.9) is rated as more morally permissible
than inaction (M = 3.8, SD = 1.5), F(1, 112) = 5.75, p =
.018. For the automated system, again the action (M = 4.5,
SD = 1.7) is rated as more morally permissible than inaction
(M = 3.7, SD = 1.7), F(1, 108) = 5.42, p = .022. For the
human agent, there is no significant difference in the ratings
for the moral permissibility of the agent’s choice (p = .76,
M = 3.7 for action, M = 3.8 for inaction).

Figure 1: Mean ratings with standard errors of the rightness
of the agent’s choice on a 7-point Likert scale (1 =
‘completely wrong’, 7 = ‘completely right’).

Figure 2: Mean ratings with standard errors of the moral
permissibility of the agent’s choice on a 7-point Likert scale
(1 = ‘not permissible at all’, 7 = ‘it is mandatory’).

However, this main effect is qualified by a significant
interaction between identity of the agent and agent’s choice
(F(2, 316) = 3.21, p = .042, see Figure 1). For the humanoid
robot, action (M = 4.6, SD = 1.9) is rated higher than inaction
(M = 3.4, SD = 1.4), F(1, 112) = 14.53, p < .001. For the
automated system, again the action (M = 4.9, SD = 1.8) is rated
higher than inaction (M = 3.3, SD = 1.8), F(1, 108) = 28.15, p
< .001. For the human agent there is no significant difference in
the ratings for the rightness of the agent’s choice (p = .13, M =
3.7 for action, M = 4.2 for inaction).

In summary, for the artificial agents (a humanoid robot or
an automated system), choosing the utilitarian action is rated
as more morally permissible than not choosing it; while
there is no such a difference in the ratings for the choices of
the human agent.
Marginally significant interaction between instrumentality of
harm and agent’s choice (F(1, 316) = 3.59, p = .059) was also
found (see Figure 3). For the incidental harm scenario,
choosing the utilitarian action is rated as more morally
permissible (M = 4.5, SD = 1.7) than not choosing it (M = 3.7,

1514

SD = 1.4), F(1, 170) = 11.88, p = .001. For the instrumental
harm scenario, there is no difference in the moral permissibility
ratings for choosing or not choosing the utilitarian action (p =
.58, M = 3.8, for action; M = 4.0, for inaction).

Figure 5: Mean ratings with standard errors of the
blameworthiness of the agent on a 7-point Likert scale (1 =
‘not at all blameworthy’, 7 = ‘extremely blameworthy’).
Figure 3: Mean ratings with standard errors of the moral
permissibility of the agent’s choice on a 7-point Likert scale
(1 = ‘not permissible at all’, 7 = ‘it is mandatory’).

Blameworthiness of the Agent
Mean ratings of the blameworthiness of the agent were
analyzed in a factorial ANOVA with agent’s choice (action
vs. inaction), identity of the agent (human vs. humanoid
robot vs. automated system) and instrumentality of harm
(instrumental vs. incidental) as between-subjects factors.
ANOVA showed a main effect of the identity of the
agent, F(2, 316) = 5.386, p = .005 (see Figure 4). Post hoc
tests using the Bonferroni correction revealed that the
humanoid robot is rated as less blameworthy (M = 2.5, SD =
1.5) than the automated system (M = 3.2, SD = 1.9), or the
human (M = 3.1, SD = 1.6), with p = .007 and p = .058,
respectively.

Perceived Moral Agency
To test directly the moral agency ascribed to the agents,
which is central for this study, additional data was gathered
from a group of 32 students. Here, due to the lack of space,
only the most relevant results are presented (the full study
will be reported elsewhere). Participants were asked to rate
each agent’s description on a variety of rating scales among
which scales describing capacities and abilities related to
moral agency. Overall, the human agent is rated higher than
the humanoid robot and the automated system despite the
fact that humanoid robot is described as identical to the
human apart from his building materials.
For instance, on the scale ‘The agent can tell right from
wrong (1 = completely disagree, 7 = completely agree)’, the
human agent is rated higher (M = 4.6) than the humanoid robot
(M = 3.3) and the automated system (M = 2.9), p = .008 and p
= 0.001, respectively. On the scale ‘The agent is responsible for
his actions (1 = completely disagree, 7 = completely agree)’,
the human agent is rated again higher (M = 5.9) than the
humanoid robot (M = 3.6) and the automated system (M = 3.3),
p < 0.001 for both comparisons.
Thus, it seems that although the description of the humanoid
robot was meant to make him as close as possible to a human
agent, people still considered him to have lower moral agency
(comparable to that of an automated system).

Summary and Discussion
Figure 4: Mean ratings with standard errors of the
blameworthiness of the agent on a 7-point Likert scale (1 =
‘not at all blameworthy’, 7 = ‘extremely blameworthy’).
A significant interaction between the instrumentality of
harm and agent’s choice, F(1, 316) = 7.3, p = .007. For the
incidental harm scenario, choosing the utilitarian action is
rated as less blameworthy (M = 2.6, SD = 1.4) than inaction
(M = 3.2, SD = 1.9), F(1, 170) = 6.397, p = .012. For the
instrumental harm scenario, there is no statistically
significant difference in the blameworthiness ratings for
action and inaction (p = .24, M = 3.1 and 2.8).

The paper investigated how people evaluate moral
judgments of human and artificial agents in instrumental
and incidental moral dilemmas. This was achieved by
asking participants to evaluate the appropriateness,
rightness, moral permissibility, and blameworthiness of the
utilitarian action or inaction in a set of moral dilemmas. The
questions were chosen to explore different aspects of
ascribed moral agency.
As expected, the utilitarian action is found to be more
appropriate when the harm is incidental than when it is an
instrumental one. Doing the utilitarian action is found to be
more morally permissible, more right, and less blameworthy
than the inaction only for the incidental scenarios.
Based on previous research, it was expected that
participants would perceive differently the human and non-

1515

human agents in terms of moral agency although the
humanoid robot was described to be identical to a human
with respect to moral agency. These differences were
expected to be larger for instrumental than for incidental
moral dilemmas.
The results concerning the appropriateness of action, rated
before the action or inaction of the agent is known, show no
effect of the type of agent. However, for the artificial
cognitive agents (a humanoid robot and an automated
system), the utilitarian action is found to be more morally
permissible and more right than the inaction. No such effect
is found for human agents.
This is consistent with the interpretation of rightness and
moral permissibility as related to intentions (Cushman,
2008) and agency (Gray et al., 2007). The results presented
here can be interpreted by assuming that participants were
more favorable to the actions of the artificial cognitive
agents because they are perceived to have lower moral
agency than the human agent has.
If people think that artificial cognitive agents have little or
no moral values or rules, they probably expect that such
agents base their decisions on utilitarian calculations using
reasoning. Therefore, they cannot be blamed or judged from
a moral point of view. This was supported by the results
obtained in the additional study using a questionnaire
measuring the perceived moral agency of the agents used in
the study. The results show that the human agent has higher
scores in moral agency than the humanoid robot and the
automated system.
However, the humanoid robot is found to be less
blameworthy for his decisions compared to the human agent
and to the automated system. One could have expected similar
results for the robot and the autonomous system, or that the
automated system is even less blameworthy than the robot. But
apparently, at some point too low moral agency shifts the
responsibility from the artificial agent to its designers and the
automated system has the same rating as the human agent.
The results presented here show that the exploration of moral
agency using moral dilemma is very promising. A systematic
review, including all available results (including Scheutz &
Malle, 2014; Malle et al., 2015) should be done in order to
establish firm basis for future research. Also (as suggested by
one of the reviewers) the experiment should be replicated in
order to check for possible confounding due to the fact that in
the description of the human agent no year is provided.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support by New
Bulgarian University.

References
Allen, C., Smit, I., & Wallach, W. (2005). Artificial morality:
Top-down, bottom-up, and hybrid approaches. Ethics
and Information Technology, 7(3), 149–155.
Anderson, M., & Anderson, S. L. (2011). Machine ethics.
Cambridge University Press.
Borg, J., Hynes, C., Van Horn, J., Grafton, S., & Sinnott-

Armstrong, W. (2006). Consequences, action, and intention
as factors in moral judgments: an FMRI investigation.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(5), 803–817.
Christensen, J. F., & Gomila, A. (2012). Moral dilemmas in
cognitive neuroscience of moral decision-making: A
principled review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 36(4), 1249–1264.
Cushman, F. (2008). Crime and punishment: Distinguishing
the roles of causal and intentional analyses in moral
judgment. Cognition, 108(2), 353–380.
Foot, P. (1967). The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine
of Double Effect. Oxford Review, 5, 5–15.
Gray, H. M., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2007). Dimensions
of mind perception. Science, 315(5812), 619.
Gips, J. (1995). Towards the ethical robot. Android
Epistemology, 243–252.
Hauser, M., Cushman, F., Young, L., Kang-Xing, J., &
Mikhial, J. (2007). A Dissociation Between Moral
Judgments and Justifications. Mind & Language,
22(1), 1–21.
Hristova, E., & Grinberg, M. (2015). Should Robots Kill?
Moral Judgments for Actions of Artificial Cognitive
Agents. In Proceedings of EAPS 2015.
Hristova, E., Kadreva, V., & Grinberg, M. (2014). Moral
Judgments and Emotions: Exploring the Role of
'Inevitability of Death'and “Instrumentality of Harm”
(pp. 2381–2386). Austin, TX: Proceedings of the
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Malle, B. F., Scheutz, M., & Voiklis, J. (2015). Sacrifice
One For the Good of Many? People Apply Different
Moral Norms to Human and Robot Agents.
Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction.
Moore, A. B., Clark, B. A., & Kane, M. J. (2008). Who
shalt not kill? Individual differences in working
memory capacity, executive control, and moral
judgment. Psychological Science, 19(6), 549–557.
Scheutz, M., & Malle, B. (2014). May Machines Take Lives
to Save Lives? Human Perceptions of Autonomous
Robots (with the Capacity to Kill). A paper presented
at The Ethics of the Autonomous Weapons Systems
conference, 2014.
Sparrow, R. (2007). Killer Robots. Journal of Applied
Philosophy, 24(1), 62–77.
Strait, M., Briggs, G., & Scheutz, M. (2013). Some
correlates of agency ascription and emotional value and
their effects on decision-making. In Affective
Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 505-510. IEEE.
Sullins, J. (2006). When is a robot a moral agent?
International Review of Information Ethics, 6, 23-30.
Thomson, J. J. (1985). The Trolley Problem. The Yale Law
Journal, 94(6), 1395–1415.
Wallach, W., & Allen, C. (2008). Moral Machines: Teaching
Robots Right from Wrong. Oxford University Press.
Waytz, A., Gray, K., Epley, N., & Wegner, D. M. (2010).
Causes and consequences of mind perception. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 14(8), 383–388.

1516

