Solution of division by access to multiplication: Evidence from eye tracking
Shawn Tan (shawn.tan@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University

Kasia Muldner (kasia.muldner@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University

Jo-Anne LeFevre (jo-anne.lefevre@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University
Abstract

answer associated with the implied multiplication problem
(e.g., 9 × 8).
In general, people solve problems with smaller operands
more quickly and accurately than they solve problems with
larger operands (Zbrodoff & Logan, 2005). Although this
problem-size effect is extensively documented, the causes of
it are not yet fully understood (Ashcraft & Guillaume,
2009). One possibility is that the problem-size effect arises,
in part, from individual differences in strategy use across
different types of problems. Accordingly, LeFevre and
Morris (1999) found that strategy reports varied with the
size of the operands. For division problems with small
operands, direct retrieval was the most frequently reported
strategy, whereas recasting was mainly reported for division
problems with dividends larger than 25 (referred to as large)
and was less frequently reported for problems with
dividends of 25 or less (referred to as small). The additional
step of recasting could explain why division problems took
longer to solve. However, LeFevre and Morris (1999) did
not explicitly manipulate the format of division problems.
Manipulating the format of basic arithmetic problems
offers insight into the representations of arithmetic facts and
the types of cognitive processes used by problem solvers.
Mauro, LeFevre and Morris (2003) found that participants
took longer to solve problems in division formats than in
recasted multiplication formats, particularly for large
problems. Based on these results, Mauro et al. proposed the
mediation hypothesis: Presenting division in recasted
formats (e.g., 42 = 7 × [ ]) provided problem solvers with a
visual representation that is more compatible with the
process of activation and retrieval of associated
multiplication facts than the traditional division formats
(e.g., 42 ÷ 7 = [ ]). They also proposed that solving divisionformat problems produces longer latencies than solving the
corresponding problem in multiplication format because
solvers recast the problem before retrieving the solution.
This recasting stage is not needed for division problems that
are shown in recasted formats or for division problems in
traditional format that have small operands because they are
solved through direct retrieval. Similar patterns have been
identified for subtraction problems, which participants
report recasting into addition formats to access their
knowledge of addition (Campbell, 2008).
Although Mauro et al. (2003) found evidence for the
mediation hypothesis, they relied on broad behavioral

People report solving division problems by mentally recasting
division problems as multiplication (e.g., 72 ÷ 8 à 8 × [?] =
72). Mediation of division by multiplication occurs mainly on
larger problems. Eye tracking data was used to determine
whether patterns of gaze durations on division problems
provided support for mediation. Adults solved division
problems in two formats: traditional (e.g., 72 ÷ 8 = [ ]) and
recasted (e.g. 72 = 8 × [ ]). Processing of individual problem
elements was compared across formats. Results provide
support for mediation. Processing patterns for traditionallyformatted problems were more similar to those for traditional
division in earlier work (72 ÷ 8) whereas problems in recasted
format (72 = 8 × [ ]) were more similar to patterns found
when participants solved multiplication problems (e.g., 8 × 9).
These findings provide a novel source of support for
differential processing of problems across presentation
formats.
Keywords: mental arithmetic; strategies; numerical
cognition; mathematical cognition; division; eye tracking;
gaze duration

Introduction
Mental arithmetic involves the coordination of memory
retrieval, strategy selection, and decision processes. Much
of the work on mental arithmetic involves basic problems
such as 9 + 6, 18 ÷ 6 or 7 × 5. Even for these basic
problems, participants report using a variety of solution
processes. Although memory retrieval is the most
commonly reported strategy, addition and subtraction
problems may also be solved using counting (LeFevre et al.,
1996a; 2006), and multiplication problems may be solved
via reference to a related fact (e.g., solving 9 × 6 as 10 × 6 –
6; Campbell & Xue, 2001; LeFevre et al., 1996b). Our goal
in the present research was to use eye tracking to provide a
detailed description of the processes involved in solving
division problems. We focused on simple division, that is,
the set of problems which are defined by the inverse of
multiplication problems with operands ranging from 2 to 9
(i.e., 2 × 2 to 9 × 9), such as 12 ÷ 4, 28 ÷ 7, and 54 ÷ 9.
Participants report using two strategies to solve simple
division problems, that is, retrieval and recasting. LeFevre
and Morris (1999) found that when participants were
presented with division problems (e.g., 72 ÷ 9), they
reported first mentally recasting these as multiplication
problems (e.g., 9 × [ ] = 72), and subsequently retrieving the

656

Table 1: Examples of formats, elements and spatial
positions of division problems used in the present
experiment. Of primary interest are the recasted format (b)
and the traditional format (d), shown in bold.

1
(a)
(b)

72
72

(c)
(d)

72
72

2

Spatial Positions
3
4

Recasted format
=
[]
=
9
Traditional format
÷
[]
÷
9

formats (note that the dividend determines problem size).
Gaze times upon each problem element and overall gaze
patterns were analyzed to obtain information on the
processing of problems in recasted vs. traditional formats
and over large and small problems. We subsequently
compared eye-tracking patterns from division problems in
our study with eye-tracking patterns from division and
multiplication problems reported in Curtis et al. (in press)
consisting of three elements (e.g., 72 ÷ 9, 8 × 9).

5

×
×

9
[]

=
=

9
[]

Methods
Stimuli
As shown in Table 1, we created division problems in two
formats: traditional (c and d) and recasted (a and b). The
dividend (i.e., the larger number) was always located in the
first position whereas the missing element was located at
either the third or fifth position. Thus, there were four
possible problem formats. Although participants solved
problems presented in all four formats, we were most
interested in comparing the most familiar traditional format,
that is format (d), to the recasted format (b). This
comparison matched the positions of the dividend and the
divisor, such that only the location of the symbols varied
across the two formats.
For division formats, we created 128 division problems
by combining divisors ranging from 2 to 9 with quotients
ranging from 2 to 9 and varying the location of the missing
element at either the third or the fifth position. In this set,
there were 112 non-tie problems in which divisors and
quotients are not equal. These were divided into two sets of
56 such that reciprocal problems appeared in different sets
(e.g., 6 ÷ 2 = 3, 6 ÷ 3 = 2). There were 8 tie problems with
equal divisors and quotients (e.g., 9 ÷ 3 = 3). Tie problems
were presented twice in each set. Thus, there were 56 nontie and 16 tie problems totaling to 72 problems in division
format for each set. The procedure was repeated for
multiplication formats. This resulted in a total of 288
problems. We divided the problems into two experimental
sets, counterbalanced by format, problem size, and location
of missing element. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of the experimental sets.
We also created 16 practice problems by combining
dividends ranging from 2 to 9 with a divisor of 1, located at
either the 3rd or 5th position respectively. The missing
element was located at the alternative location (5th or 3rd
position).
Problems were presented in black 60 point Arial font on a
white background. Five interest areas were defined, one
around each problem element. Each interest area measured 6
cm by 4 cm and was centered on the problem element (see
Figure 1). The borders of each interest area were connected
but did not overlap.

measures (reaction time, error rate). We propose that more
fine-grained information about how attention is allocated
across formats could shed further light on the mediation
hypothesis. Accordingly, in the present work we used eye
tracking to record participants’ gaze patterns as they solved
division problems in traditional division and recasted
multiplication formats. In general, eye tracking allows the
identification of potential interest areas in a visual display
that capture participants’ attention as they process the
display in response to a specific stimulus. This method has
been used extensively to study participants’ focus of
attention during performance of tasks such as reading or
scene processing (Rayner, 2009). However, use of eye
tracking techniques is still novel in the field of numerical
cognition (reviewed by Hartmann, 2015), and thus there are
relatively few studies that have used eye tracking to study
simple arithmetic (cf. Moeller, Klein, & Nuerk, 2011; Zhou,
Zhao, Chen, & Zhou, 2012). Curtis, Huebner, and LeFevre
(in press) compared patterns of eye tracking on single-digit
addition and multiplication problems, and the corresponding
inverse subtraction and division problems. For division
problems such as 56 ÷ 8, they found that participants spent
more time processing the dividend (i.e., 56) compared to the
divisor (i.e., 8). In contrast, on the inverse multiplication
problems (e.g., 8 × 7), processing time was divided evenly
between the two operands.
In the present study, to further investigate the mediation
hypothesis, participants’ gaze information was recorded as
they solved problems in either a traditional division format
(e.g., 72 ÷ 8 = [ ]) or in a recasted multiplication format
(e.g., 72 = 8 × [ ]). Interactions of problem elements and
elements’ location within the structure of the problem can
influence dwell time durations and resulting gaze patterns.
Given that changing the location of one problem element
entailed a change in location of other elements in the
problem, it was therefore necessary to control the location
of a specific element across all problem formats. Since prior
work suggests that problem size is a factor in determining
whether participants use recasting (LeFevre and Morris,
1999; LeFevre, Mauro and Morris, 2003), we controlled for
confounds between problem size and spatial location by
maintaining the dividend at the first spatial position across

Participants
Thirty-three students (13 males, 20 females) from Carleton
University participated in the experiment for course credit.

657

All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision,
and ranged in age from 16 to 33 years (Mdn = 20).

size: large vs. small) by 2(position of missing element: 3rd
vs. 5th) repeated-measures ANOVAs. Means (of medians)
across participants are shown in Table 2. Small problems
had dividends of 25 or less; large problems had dividends
larger than 25.
As expected, participants were faster at solving small
problems than large problems (1393 vs. 1760 ms), F(1,32) =
40.6, p < .001, ηp2= .56. The location of the missing
element also had an effect: Participants responded more
slowly when the third element was missing than when the
fifth element was missing (1605 vs. 1547 ms), F(1,32) =
5.61, p = .024, ηp2 = .15. Although participants were faster
on recasted than on traditional formats (1560 vs. 1593 ms),
the difference was not significant, F(1,32) = 1.6, p = .21,
ηp2= .05.
Mirroring the results for response time, participants
made fewer errors on small than on large problems (4.7%
vs. 9.4%), F(1,32) = 16.8, p < .001, ηp2= .34. No other main
effects or interactions were significant.
In summary, the overall analyses were consistent with our
expectations. Participants were faster and more accurate on
small than on large problems. We also replicated the trend
for recasted formats to be solved more quickly than
traditional formats. However, the location of the missing
element also influenced solution times. Thus, further
analyses were focused on the comparison of the most
familiar traditional format, (d) in Table 1, to the recasted
format with the same structure, (b) in Table 1. For this pair,
large problems in recasted format were solved more quickly
than those in traditional format (1689 vs. 1735 ms).

Figure 1: Dimensions of interest regions centered on
problem elements for a typical problem in the experiment.

Procedure
Participants were seated at a distance of approximately
60cm in front of a desktop computer with a 15-inch by 13inch monitor. The computer was linked to an SR-Eyelink
1000 eye tracker. The experiment began with the practice
block followed by the 144 problems (36 in each of the four
formats) divided into four blocks, with 36 problems in each
block. Participants were allowed to take a break after
completing each block. Each block started with a calibration
phase followed by presentation of the problems.
At the start of each trial, a 1.25 cm by 1 cm rectangle
randomly appeared at one of the four corners of the screen.
Participants were instructed to look at this rectangle, and
once the eye tracker detected a fixation upon the rectangle,
the problem appeared. This procedure was used to ensure
that participants’ attention would not be focused on the
central interest area upon initial presentation of the problem,
because this could result in artificial inflation of fixation
times on the central interest area. Participants were asked to
verbally state their answer into a microphone placed directly
in front of them and their responses were connected to an
ASIO voice trigger accurate to +/- 1 ms. Problems remained
on the screen until the microphone recorded a response.
Once this occurred, the problem disappeared and the
experimenter recorded the response using a keyboard. Eye
gaze information was recorded by the eye tracker. The
experiment lasted for about 50 minutes.

Table 2: Mean latencies, standard errors, and percentages.
Format

M (ms)
Small
Large

72÷[ ]=9
72÷9=[ ]

1444
1385

72=[ ]×9
72=9×[ ]

1364
1380

SE (ms)
Small
Large

Traditional Format
1808
74.3
128.3
1735
66.2
119.8
Recasted Format
1805
62.4
109.7
1689
69.6
97.1

Error (%)
Small Large
4.2
5.0

10.4
9.6

3.6
5.9

7.7
9.8

Eye gaze patterns

Results

Gaze duration. Gaze duration, defined as the sum of all
fixation times in an area of interest was calculated and
analyzed for each of the five interest areas (as shown in
Figure 1). Analyses of the total number of fixations in each
area of interest produced similar results and so are not
described in further detail.
To obtain information on participants’ attention patterns
for the interest areas in the traditional format (e.g., 72 ÷ 9 =
[ ]) and the corresponding recasted format (e.g., 72 = 9 × [
]), we analyzed median gaze durations for each participant
in a given interest area in a 5(interest area: left number,
symbol-1, middle number, symbol-2, missing element) ×

Trials were discarded if participants made an irrelevant
sound before providing a solution or if the apparatus failed
to detect a response. This resulted in 338 (7.1%) of the trials
being discarded. Participants made errors on a further 300
(6.8%) of the remaining trials. These were not included in
the analyses of response latencies.

Overall Performance
To get a sense of overall performance, we analyzed median
latencies and percentage of errors for all participants in two
separate 2(format: multiplication vs. division) by 2(problem

658

Mean Dwell Time (ms)

700
600
500
400
300
200

Traditional: L÷ M = [ ]

pattern does not always hold. Specifically, Curtis et al.
found that on large division problems, participants spent
longer fixating on the left operand (the dividend) than on
either the operation sign or the divisor. As stated above, this
was not the case in the present research, where gaze
durations to the dividend were longer on large traditional
problems than in the other conditions, but participants
nevertheless fixated most on the middle operand (the
divisor). Thus, there were similarities between the
traditional division format in this research and in Curtis et
al., and between recasted formats and multiplication
problems in Curtis et al.
The pattern of results we obtained, coupled with previous
findings, provides some support for the mediation
hypothesis. However, gaze durations for arithmetic
problems also varied depending on the specific elements
included in the problem display. Even though participants
did not spend much time processing the equal sign or the
missing element in the traditional format, the presence of
these elements may have influenced the overall processing
patterns. Such findings suggest that gaze patterns may need
to be interpreted carefully across different display
conditions.

Recasted: L= M x [ ]

small
large

100
0
Left

÷ Middle =
INTEREST AREA

[]

Left

=
Middle X
INTEREST AREA

[]

Figure 2: Mean gaze durations (total dwell time) for each
interest area by format and problem size.

2(format: traditional, vs. recasted) × 2 (problem size: small
vs. large) repeated-measures ANOVA. The analysis showed
main effects of problem size F(1,32) = 33.69, p < .001, ηp2 =
.513, and interest area, F(4,29) = 105.34, p < .001, ηp2 =
.936, interactions between format and interest area, F(4,29)
= 15.63, p < .001, ηp2 = .683; interest area and problem size,
F(4,29) = 17.23, p < .001, ηp2 = .704; and among format,
interest area, and problem size, F(4,29) = 4.09, p < .01, ηp2
= .361 (see Figure 2).
As shown in Figure 2, participants spent very little time
on the last two interest areas, presumably because these
contained no important information (e.g., the blank was
always in the last position in the two formats that are the
target of this analysis). In the traditional division format,
participants looked longest at the division sign and the
middle number (the divisor). Compared to small problems,
processing time on large problems was also allocated to the
left number (the dividend). In contrast, in the recasted
format, participants spent more time looking at the middle
interest area (i.e., the divisor), with relatively little time
spent looking at the equal sign or the left number. On large
problems, somewhat more time was spent looking at the left
number, but this was still considerably less than gaze
durations on the middle number in this format.
In some respects, these results are similar to those found
by Curtis et al. (2016), who used traditional division
problems but presented these without the equal sign or the
symbol for the missing element (e.g., 72 ÷ 9). Specifically,
in both studies, gaze durations were longer for the dividend
when solving large as compared to small problems,
accounting for the overall effect of problem size. However,
in contrast to Curtis et al., in our data there was a tendency
for fixations in the division format to be shifted rightwards
toward the middle number, possibly because the additional
symbols in our problems resulted in an overall shift of gaze
to the centre of the display. Curtis et al. observed longer
gaze durations to the operator, which in their stimuli
appeared in the middle of the display, on small problems for
all operations. Although these results suggest that
processing of arithmetic problems is directed to the centre of
the display, regardless of the underlying symbols, this

Distribution of attention over time. To explore gaze
patterns over the course of solving a division problem (i.e.,
gaze profiles), we normalized the distribution of processing
times for each problem. This normalization was necessary
because participants varied in terms of the total time spent
to solve a given problem. For each problem, the total time
taken to solve the problem was divided into six equal time
intervals. Within each time interval, gaze duration on each
interest area was calculated by summing the duration of all
fixations for that interest area. We then calculated the
median gaze duration for each interest area and time interval
for each participant, and then calculated means across all
participants. Figure 3 shows these mean distributions of
gaze durations in each interest area across all time intervals
for small and large problems in traditional and recasted
formats.
As shown in Figure 3, problem format and problem size
influenced participants’ distribution of attention over time.
However, in comparing the graphs in Figure 3, some
common patterns of attention can still be observed. First,
there were longer mean durations on the first symbol than
the first and middle operands during time interval 1 for all
four graphs, suggesting that initial processing on all
problems was directed more towards the first symbol
(dashed red line in Figure 3) than towards either operand.
This pattern may indicate that participants initially fixate to
the left of center (see Schneider, Maruyama, Dehaene, &
Sigman, 2012, for a similar finding). The left of center area
(i.e., the second area of interest) contains the symbol
relevant for discriminating between the formats: A division
sign in the second area of interest indicates a traditional
problem whereas an equal sign indicates a problem in
recasted format. Gaze duration on this interest area declines

659

Mean Duration (ms)

quickly in the next two intervals for all except small
problems in traditional formats (e.g., 10 ÷ 2 = [ ]; 18 ÷ 3 = [
]). For all problem types, gaze duration in the middle of the
display (i.e., the single-digit divisor, see green line in Figure
3) increases in time interval 2.
For the recasted format, problem size did not have much
effect on gaze profiles. Following focus of attention on the
division sign during the early stages of the trial, gaze
duration on the middle interest area dominated the
remainder of the trial (green line in Figure 3, lower panels).
There was stable amount of processing to the larger number
(i.e., the dividend, blue dotted line in Figure 3) that was
greater on large than on small problems. On both large and
small problems, the problem size effect appeared to be
distributed equally over the left and middle operands (see
also Figure 2). The similarity in patterns of processing
between small and large problems observed here for the
recasted format was also reported by Curtis et al. (in press)
for traditional multiplication problems (e.g., 3 × 9, 8 × 7).
There were longer gaze durations on the dividend for large
problems than small problems but this did not influence
distribution patterns over time.
In contrast to the findings for the recasted format,
problem size did influence distribution of attention patterns
over time for the traditional format. On small problems,
gaze durations were similar for the middle operand and the
division sign after time interval 2. Gaze duration on the left
operand (the dividend) decreased after time interval 1,
suggesting that participants allocated less attention to the
dividend after the beginning of the trial. In contrast, for
large problems, gaze duration on the operation sign declined
after the first interval. The left operand (dividend) and
middle operand had similar gaze durations for the first half
of the trial, with a gradual shift toward a focus on the middle
operand in the last half of the trial. This pattern may reflect
recasting of the problem in the first half of the trial,
followed by retrieval based on multiplication knowledge.
Curtis et al. found that the dividend was processed longer on
large than on small division problems. We also found a
similar result with longer gaze durations for large than small
problems over all time intervals.
In summary, the analyses of gaze durations across the
course of the trial support the mediation hypothesis in that
gaze distribution patterns over time varied across formats.
We observed similar patterns of gaze distribution over time
for large and small problems in recasted format as compared
to different patterns of gaze distribution over time across
large and small division problems in traditional format.
These differences occurred even though the location of the
numerical information was identical in the two formats.

Traditional Format

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Small: 12 ÷ 3 = [ ]

1

2

3
4
Interval

5

Large: 72

6

1

2

8=[]

3
4
Interval

5

6

Mean Duration (ms)

Recasted Format
140
120
100
80
60

Large: 72

Small: 12 = 3 x [ ]

8x[]

40
20
0
1

2

3
4
Interval

5

6

1

2

3
4
Interval

5

6

Figure 3: Gaze durations normalized across time intervals.
Processing time on the dividend (i.e., the largest number) is
shown by the blue dotted line, the first symbol (i.e., the
division sign in the traditional format and the equal sign in
the recasted format) is shown by the red dashed line, and the
divisor (the smaller number) is shown by the green solid
line. Because very little time was spent on the second
symbol or the missing element (see Figure 2), these were
not included in the graphs.
from memory was the most common strategy for small
problems, as well as for problems in recasted formats,
whereas for large problems in traditional formats,
participants reported mentally transforming the problem into
a multiplication format before retrieving the solution (e.g.,
mentally changing 72 ÷ 8 into 8 × [ ] = 72). We
hypothesized that eye patterns would reflect, at least in part,
the mental activities going on during problem solution
(Rayner, 2009) and that differences observed in eyetracking measures across formats would be associated with
a change in strategy that would influence gaze patterns. The
present research supports this hypothesis by showing that
gaze patterns revealed by eye tracking data vary both across
formats and problem size.
Gaze patterns for problems presented in recasted format
(i.e., 72 = 8 × [ ]) were similar to patterns obtained from
participants who solved traditional multiplication problems
(i.e., 8 × 9) reported by Curtis et al. (in press), suggesting
that in our study, participants were recasting the division
problems into a multiplication format. In both cases,
processing time was concentrated on the central element of
the presented stimulus, with relatively less time spent
processing the other problem elements. Curtis et al.
suggested that participants’ focus on the centre of the
display (i.e., the operation sign) reflected mental processing
occurring during retrieval of the answer, because it
continued after the two operands had been processed. In the
present research, the focus on the center of the display (the
single-digit divisor) may also indicate that participants are

Discussion
In this research we used eye tracking measures to assess
whether strategy differences reported in LeFevre and Morris
(1999) on division problems (i.e., retrieval and recasting)
would be reflected in gaze patterns. Based on earlier studies
(LeFevre and Morris, 1999; Mauro et al., 2003), retrieval

660

using this number to access multiplication knowledge, as
part of mental processing involved in retrieval of an answer.
In contrast, when the same problems were presented in the
traditional division format, processing time was distributed
more evenly across the first, second, and third interest areas,
with additional processing time on the dividend (first
interest area) for large as compared to small problems.
Curtis et al. also observed this problem-size effect on the
dividend for division problems in the traditional format.
Notably, we also identified some factors that may be
important for interpreting gaze patterns. Comparisons
between the results of Curtis et al. (in press) and the present
research suggest that varying the way problems are
displayed may influence processing patterns. Division
problems in Curtis et al. were presented without equal signs
or missing answers (e.g., 72 ÷ 8). Although there were
similarities in the distribution of processing time across that
format and the format used in the present research (e.g., 72
÷ 8 = [ ]), there were also differences that appear to be
related to the presence of the additional problem elements.
These findings suggest that a larger range of formats that
balance the position of specific elements and control for
format familiarity will be necessary in studies that use eye
tracking to study mental arithmetic.
Despite this qualification, the present research
demonstrates the utility of using eye-tracking measures to
extend and corroborate findings from more traditional
dependent variables. We also showed the importance of
comparisons across experiments with varying problem
structures and formats. Comparing gaze profiles over time
further extends inferences from dwell time analyses to
mental activity over the time course of the problem solving
process. In summary, gaze durations and time-course
profiles provided theoretically and empirically relevant
information about mental arithmetic.

Hartmann, M., Mast, F. W., & Fischer, M. H. (2015).
Spatial biases during mental arithmetic: evidence from
eye movements on a blank screen. Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 1-8.doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00012
LeFevre, J.A., Sadesky, G. S., & Bisanz, J. (1996a).
Selection of procedures in mental addition: Reassessing
the problem size effect in adults. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(1),
216–230. doi:10.1037//0278-7393.22.1.216
LeFevre, J.A., Bisanz, J., Daley, K. E., Buffone, L.,
Greenham, S. L., & Sadesky, G. S. (1996b). Multiple
routes to solution of single-digit multiplication problems.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 125(3),
284–306. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.125.3.284
LeFevre, J. A., DeStefano, D., Penner-Wilger, M., & Daley,
K. E. (2006). Selection of Procedures in Mental
Subtraction. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60(3), 209–220. doi:10.1037/cjep2006020
LeFevre, J. A., & Morris, J. (1999). More on the relation
between division and multiplication in simple arithmetic:
Evidence for mediation of division solutions via
multiplication. Memory and Cognition, 27, 803-812.
Mauro, D. G., LeFevre, J. A., & Morris, J. (2003). Effects of
problem format on division and manipulation
performance: Division facts are mediated via
multiplication-based
representations.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 163-170.
Moeller, K., Klein, E., & Nuerk, H.-C. (2011). Three
processes underlying the carry effect in addition-evidence from eye tracking. British Journal of
Psychology,
102,
623–645.
doi:10.1111/j.20448295.2011.02034.x
Rayner, K. (2009). Eye movements and attention in reading,
scene perception, and visual search. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 62(8), 1457–1506.
Schneider, E., Maruyama, M., Dehaene, S., & Sigman, M.
(2012). Eye gaze reveals a fast, parallel extraction of the
syntax of arithmetic formulas. Cognition, 125(3), 475–
490. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2012.06.015
Zbrodoff, N. J., & Logan, G. D. (2005). What everyone
finds: The problem-size effect. In Handbook of
mathematical cognition (pp. 345–508). Psychology Press,
New York, NY.
Zhou, F., Zhao, Q., Chen, C., & Zhou, X. (2012). Mental
representations of arithmetic facts: Evidence from eye
movement recordings supports the preferred operandorder-specific representation hypothesis. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65(4), 661–74.
doi:10.1080/17470218.2011.61621.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada through Discovery
Grants to J. LeFevre and K. Muldner.

References
Ashcraft, M. H., & Guillaume, M. M. (2009). Mathematical
cognition and the problem size effect. In B. Ross (Ed.),
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, Vol. 51 (Vol. 51,
pp. 121–151). Burlington: Academic Press.
Campbell, J. I. D. (2008). Subtraction by addition. Memory
& Cognition, 36(6), 1094–102.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Xue, Q. (2001). Cognitive arithmetic
across cultures. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General,
130(2),
299–315.
doi:10.1037//00963445.130.2.299
Curtis, E., Huebner, M. G., & LeFevre, J. (in press). The
relationship between problem size and fixation patterns
during addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Journal of Numerical Cognition.

661

