Specificity at the basic level in event taxonomies: The case of Maniq verbs of
ingestion
Ewelina Wnuk (e.wnuk@let.ru.nl)
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
Previous research on basic-level object categories shows there
is cross-cultural variation in basic-level concepts, arguing
against the idea that the basic level reflects an objective
reality. In this paper, I extend the investigation to the domain
of events. More specifically, I present a case study of verbs of
ingestion in Maniq illustrating a highly specific categorization
of ingestion events at the basic level. A detailed analysis of
these verbs reveals they tap into culturally salient notions.
Yet, cultural salience alone cannot explain specificity of
basic-level verbs, since ingestion is a domain of universal
human experience. Further analysis reveals, however, that
another key factor is the language itself. Maniq’s preference
for encoding specific meaning in basic-level verbs is not a
peculiarity of one domain, but a recurrent characteristic of its
verb lexicon, pointing to the significant role of the language
system in the structure of event concepts.
Keywords: basic level; categorization; events; verbs; Maniq;
Aslian.

Introduction
How shall an event be called? Paralleling the research
question famously posed by Roger Brown (1958) for
objects, an analogous problem can be raised for events. Is
there a default most salient level of abstraction commonly
applied to refer to events? For objects, such a default level
has been termed the basic level, i.e. the level that
“anticipates the equivalences and differences” relevant in
most “dealings” with particular objects (Brown, 1958, p.
16). A label at the basic level is thus one that brings forward
“an immediately important property of the referent”
(Brown, 1958, p. 17). For example, the default way of
referring to spoons is by the word spoon, rather than a more
general label such as eating implement, or a more specific
one such as dessert spoon. Basic-level categories are said to
be optimal in the sense that they contain maximal
information without being too specific, as this would lead to
excessively fine-grained categorizations. In addition, basic
labels are associated with cognitive advantages and are
typically preferred in communication (Rosch, Mervis, Gray,
Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976).
Particularly revealing for the basic-level theory is the
observation regarding variation as to what concepts are
actually found at the basic level. Contrary to the idea that
basic categories reflect some kind of objective reality and
are thus invariable, there is cross-cultural variation in basiclevel concepts (Dougherty, 1978). For example, some

cultures have expertise in biological categories of plants and
animals, and therefore treat the genus level (e.g. “pine”) as
basic, while other communities of speakers, e.g. some
Western societies, show less interest in those categories and
use superordinate labels (e.g. “tree”) at the basic level (cf.
also Tanaka & Taylor, 1991 for variation within a culture).
Such variation is important as it constitutes evidence for
culture-specific constraints on categorization (cf. Malt,
1995; Malt & Majid, 2013).
While there is ample evidence for a basic level for object
concepts, there has been relatively little work investigating
other ontological categories. For instance, we have
comparatively limited knowledge on the basic level for
events. The existing studies suggest that event hierarchies,
just like object hierarchies, can have a basic-level structure,
with one level of abstraction being more salient than others
(Morris & Murphy, 1990). However, it has been pointed out
that events have a more complex structure when compared
to objects. Crucially, events have less clear-cut boundaries
than objects and can therefore be conceptualized in a larger
number of different ways (cf. Gentner, 1982). This finds
reflection in a greater variability of linguistic labels
encoding events, i.e. verbs are said to be among the most
cross-linguistically variable part of the lexicon in terms of
denotation (Gentner, 1982; Talmy, 1985; Evans, 2011).
Given the freedom in event conceptualization, we may ask:
To what extent is the basic level of events – as reflected in
common verbs – similar across cultures and how much does
it vary?
It is legitimate to expect that the basic level in verbs –
similar to nouns – will be a reflection of local
preoccupations and expertise of particular communities.
Thus, we are likely to find more specific basic-level event
labels for events which are culturally salient. For instance, it
is not surprising that there is an elaborate lexicon of basiclevel harvesting verbs in Dogon (Heath & McPherson,
2009) or climbing verbs in Jahai (Burenhult, 2013;
Schebesta, 1929, pp. 151–152), because these events are
highly salient in these cultures. However, as will be shown
here, in some cultures highly specific verbs at the basic level
occur not only in narrow areas of specialization, but also
domains of basic human experience. This article focuses on
one such area – ingestion – in Maniq, an Austroasiatic
language spoken in southern Thailand. The aim is to
demonstrate that specificity at the basic level in verbs is not
purely a reflection of cultural concerns, but also of the

2687

language’s typological profile, i.e. its consistent preference
for making fine-grained distinctions in basic-level verbs.
In what follows, I first briefly introduce the Maniq society
and give some basic facts about their language. I then
provide a detailed case study of verbs of ingestion,
demonstrating that ordinary references to ingestion events in
Maniq involve the use of verbs with highly specific
meanings. An examination of the broader lexicalization
patterns reveals further that specificity of basic-level verbs
is pervasive in Maniq and is part of the logic of the
language, i.e. it follows a systematic lexicalization principle
applying across verbal domains (cf. Wnuk, 2016; Wnuk &
Majid, 2014).

The Maniq and their Language
The Maniq language belongs to the Northern Aslian branch
of Aslian, a division within the Austroasiatic language
family.
The Maniq are a population of about 300 people
inhabiting the Banthad mountain range of southern
Thailand. They live in small groups scattered across the
provinces of Trang, Satun, Phatthalung and Songkhla.
Maniq speakers belong to the larger ethnographic cluster of
Semang nomadic populations. Their subsistence relies on
hunting and gathering as well as small-scale trade of forest
products. Nomadism is still practiced by a large proportion
of the population, but today there are also Maniq groups that
have settled and embraced agriculture and waged labor.

Ingestion verbs in Maniq
Ingestion is a domain of importance across human
communities and ingestion verbs are high-frequency words
in many languages. However, only some languages
distinguish specific types of ingestion events with separate
basic-level verbs (cf. Bowerman, 2005; P. Brown, 1998;
Burenhult & Kruspe, 2016; Heath & McPherson, 2009;
Rice, 2009). For instance, in English, the verb eat is a single
default descriptor of eating actions. And although there exist
a number of more specific ‘eat’ verbs encoding manner, e.g.
devour, gorge, gnaw, gobble (Levin, 1993, pp. 213–216),
these are not employed in neutral contexts, but are used only
when the manner is somehow salient.
In contrast, in Maniq there are multiple specific ingestion
verbs applicable at the basic level of contrast. These verbs
are neutral, default ways of referring to ingestion events,
frequent in everyday discourse and not restricted to special
registers or groups of speakers (cf. Brown, 2008, p. 169).
They are the preferred labels applied spontaneously in the
free naming of ordinary scenes involving ingestion events,
general statements about ingestion (e.g. I’ve just eaten), as
well as translations of simple sentences from Thai involving
the semantically general ingestion verb ɡin ‘to eat or drink,
to consume’ (e.g. The boy ate the fruit).
In fact, Maniq does not seem to have separate general
‘eat’, ‘drink’ or ‘consume’ verbs. All mentions of
eating/drinking actions involve one of several ingestion
verbs with more specific meanings, selected based on

manner of ingestion and/or type of ingested object (see
further below). In cases, where these parameters are
unknown, speakers typically employ the verb hãw (cf. Table
1), which is the most frequent ingestion verb with the
broadest range of application. Note, though, that this verb is
not a true generic term similar to eat and cannot be used in
contexts where other verbs apply (cf. the verb ɡey in Jahai;
Burenhult & Kruspe, 2016, p. 180). Lack of superordinate
monolexemic labels is common in the Maniq verb lexicon
and accords well with the idea of highly specific basic-level
labels (though it is not always the case that basic-level verbs
lack labeled superordinates).
The discussion below explores the distinctions in Maniq
ingestion verbs. Of central focus is the question of what
semantic principles of categorization apply in this set. It
covers ingestion defined broadly as the absorption of
various kinds of substances through the mouth. The
discussion includes human ingestion verbs, which place
selection restrictions on the consumed objects, and animal
ingestion verbs, which place selection restrictions on
possible actors (cf. Bowerman, 2005).
The data were collected during fieldwork carried out with
a nomadic Maniq group of the Manang district, Satun
province, during five field trips in the period 2009-2014.
The group numbers approximately 15-20 members, but its
size and composition are not fixed and changed somewhat
over this period depending on external conditions such as
food availability. The generalizations made here are based
on observations of spontaneous uses of the verbs in
everyday situations (e.g. with reference to actual ingestion
events), informal interaction with speakers, as well as
interviews in which speakers provided basic ingestion verbs
for various ingested substances named by the interviewer.
These included a range of typical objects foraged by the
group (e.g. wild yams, fruit, game), as well as those
obtained via exchange with outsiders (e.g. cultivated fruit,
coffee, cakes). The most extensive interviews were carried
out with three speakers (1 female) in the approximate age
range of 25-45.

Human ingestion
Table 1 below contains a summary of human ingestion
verbs in Maniq, including ‘eat’, ‘drink’ and ‘inhale’-type
predicates.
Table 1: Basic-level human ingestion verbs in Maniq.
Verb
hãw

2688

Gloss
‘to chew, to eat
mainly
by
chewing’

Example objects
rice,
non-fibrous
yams,
pineapple, cucumber, garlic,
chili, papaya, sweet potato, nut
of Canarium sp., durian,
banana, jackfruit, petai beans,
leafy plants, mushrooms,
cempedak,
baked
goods
(cookies, cakes, bread)

kap
lɨk

‘to bite, to eat
harder objects that
require biting’
‘to swallow, to eat
with little biting
or chewing’

paŋ

‘to eat with
spitting out hard
fibers’

hop

‘to consume
nutritious and/or
savory liquids’
‘to drink nonnutritious liquids’

buʔ
hɔp

yɔt

‘to inhale
medicinal smoke
(does not involve
blowing out)’
‘to inhale and
blow out smoke’

meat, animal fat, fish, bones,
hard fruit
orange, lemon, mango, grapes,
wild gandaria fruit (Bouea
sp.), various unidentified wild
fruit species (e.g. kabɨʔ yəbac)
fibrous yams – especially
ciyak (D. cf. piscatorum) and
ciyak lapɔn (D. laurifolia)1,
sugar cane
soup, honey
water, coffee, medicinal
infusions, coconut water,
honey
smoke from burning dried
roots of the medicinal plant
Dianella ensifolia
tobacco

primary factor is the manner of ingestion. By indicating
manner, ingestion verbs covertly classify objects, as they
restrict the possible range of referents to those with the
consistency or texture fitting with that manner (cf.
Aikhenvald, 2009, p. 106; Heath & McPherson, 2009, p.
42). For instance, lɨk is a way of eating in which the most
prominent part is swallowing since the food does not require
much pre-mastication. The prototypical foodstuffs described
with lɨk are thus softer types of fruit such as oranges, grapes,
as well as a number of wild fruit species, e.g. kabɨʔ yəbac.
Note that in its basic sense lɨk denotes the action of
swallowing and may be employed when no eating is
involved, as in e.g. swallowing one’s saliva or a pill. A
similar pattern is attested with the verb kap, referring to
biting, and hãw, referring to chewing, which are used to
describe eating events in which biting and chewing,
respectively, are the most prominent parts. Compare
example (3), where kap describes a biting event, with (4),
where it is used to describe an eating event.
(3)

naʔ

miʔ
kc-kac
Maniq IMFV-scratch
ʔaɡɛs
ʔɛʔ
kap
mosquito
3
bite
‘It’s like when Maniq scratch after they’ve been
bitten by mosquitoes.’
ʔiɲ
kap
tawɔh paliek
1S
bite
gibbon be.white
‘I eat white gibbons.’ (uttered in a contrastive
context, ‘white gibbons’ are here juxtaposed with
‘black gibbons’)
FOC

Before discussing the semantic distinctions underlying
this system, a few general comments on the structural
properties of ingestion verbs are in order. The items listed in
Table 1 are monomorphemic verbs with no formal
relationship to one another. Rather than being derived from
the same root, each verb stands on its own. The only case of
formal similarity is the pair hop-hɔp, where the verbs share
the underlying template hVp. However, the verbs are
synchronically monomorphemic and cannot be decomposed
into morphological units (cf. Wnuk, 2016). Semantic
richness in Maniq is thus accompanied by formal nontransparency, as the multiple meaning components are
packaged into non-analyzable forms.
Maniq ingestion verbs can occur in syntactically
intransitive (1) and transitive (2) constructions.
(1)
(2)

ʔiɲ
bah
lamah,
1S
NEG
be.hungry
‘I’m not hungry, I ate.’
ʔiɲ
hãw
ʔanciʔ
1S
chew
yams
‘I’m eating yams.’

ʔiɲ hãw
1S chew

Note, however, that even when the object is not overtly
expressed, it is implied since a particular verb is associated
with a restricted range of objects. Thus, for instance,
although the speaker in (1) does not mention what he ate,
the listener can restrict the possible objects to those fitting
with the requirements of the verb hãw (cf. Table 1).
The categorization of ingestion events in Maniq is
influenced by several factors. For most verbs in Table 1, the
1
All identified species of wild yams discussed here are from the
genus Dioscorea. For convenience, the genus name is abbreviated
to “D.”. The identifications are based on Maniq vernacular names
provided in Maneenoon, Sirirugsa, and Sridith (2008).

(4)

hay
like

The fact that the basic set of ingestion distinctions for
solid matter is primarily manner-based constitutes a
departure from the basic pattern among some of Maniq’s
close relatives, i.e. other Aslian languages spoken by huntergatherer groups (e.g. Jahai, Batek Deq, Semaq Beri). In
these languages, the main ingestion verbs are linked not to
manner, but to the categorial identity of a food item. For
instance, in Jahai muc ‘to eat animal’ maps onto all foods
classified as ʔay ‘edible animal’, ɡey ‘to eat starchy food’
onto foods known as bap ‘starchy food’, but ‘to eat ripe
fruit’ onto bɔh ‘ripe fruit’, and hɛ̃w ‘to eat leafy greens’ onto
tʔaʔ ‘leafy greens’ (Burenhult & Kruspe, 2016, p. 180). In
Maniq, the categorial identity of food items is of lesser
importance and in fact no similarly elaborate system of
generic food classes seems to be in place. The only large
classes similar to those in other Aslian languages include
ʔay ‘game’ and kabɨʔ ‘fruit and some vegetables’. There is
no generic label for starchy foods, leafy vegetables, or a
specific label for ripe fruit, and Maniq ingestion verbs do
not indicate such a classification might be operating at a
covert level. Except for food of animal origin associated
consistently with the verb kap (and mostly mapping onto the
ʔay category), most classes of foods are connected to several
verbs, depending on which specific food item from that
class is involved. The verb kap in fact represents a mixed

2689

pattern, since its use is sometimes triggered by the
categorial identity of ingested matter (e.g. in the case of
meat), and sometimes by manner of ingestion (e.g. in the
case of hard fruit).
Fruit and vegetables (kabɨʔ) can be linked to different
ingestion verbs, depending on which specific food item
from that class is involved. Eating soft and juicy fruit like
orange and gandaria, for instance, is typically described
with the “swallow” verb lɨk. Eating fruit with a somewhat
harder or mushy texture such as banana or pineapple is
associated with the “chew” verb hãw. Finally, eating hard
fruit, including not fully ripe fruit, and some vegetables such
as cucumbers is associated with the “bite” verb kap (cf.
Heath & McPherson, 2009, p. 43, for a similar set of
distinctions in Dogon). In addition, there is some variation
as to what verbs are preferred with what fruit. In particular,
fruit with texture not clearly linked to one specific manner
of ingestion (e.g. mango) tends to be used with several
verbs, depending on the speaker or specific context.
Perhaps the most nuanced culturally-salient contrast
among the Maniq ingestion verbs is the one between the
verbs paŋ and hãw. Both verbs are used with several kinds
of foods, but are associated most prominently with wild
yams (Dioscorea spp.), the traditional staple food of the
Maniq (Maneenoon et al. 2008). Underlying the distinction
between them is the classification into fibrous and nonfibrous yam species. Hãw is used with the majority of the
consumed types, which usually do not contain hard fibers,
while paŋ is employed especially with ciyak ‘(D. cf.
piscatorum)’ and ciyak lapɔn ‘(D. laurifolia)’2, which have
hard woody fibers that are never swallowed. Apart from
these two species, a number of others (e.g. ləntak ‘(D.
glabra)’) contain fibers of a softer type, which are varyingly
described with either of the two verbs. The distinction
between paŋ and hãw also roughly maps onto two main
labeled types/sections of tubers – the cylindrically-shaped,
slender and usually fibrous part called tənat, and the thicker
and wider part called bahɨʔ. The consumption of the tənat
sections of tubers is usually described with the verb paŋ,
while bahɨʔ sections with the verb hãw. The covert tuber
classification presupposed by these two verbs thus reveals
fine details about the indigenous botanical knowledge
structure.
While for solid objects, the verb choice is determined by
manner of ingestion, for liquids it is based on the category
of the ingested substance. Thus, the verb hop maps onto
liquid substances collectively classified as lɛŋ ‘nutritious
and/or savory liquid substance’ such as soup, meat juices,
and honey. The verb buʔ, on the other hand, is reserved for
non-nutritious/non-savory items, many of which fall under
the generic label batew ‘water, liquid’ (e.g. water, medicinal
infusions, coconut water), but also coffee. Honey has been

noted to occur both with hop and buʔ. By being linked to
specific classes of liquid substances, these verbs resemble
the classificatory ‘eat’ verbs in other Aslian languages such
as Jahai and Semaq Beri (Burenhult & Kruspe, 2016).
Finally, for volatile substances the choice of verb is
determined strictly by manner. Smoking of a cigarette
described as yɔt involves a quick inhale and a voluntary
action of blowing out the smoke. In contrast, the verb hɔp
describes the inhaling of smoke from the burning of dried
roots of the medicinal plant called kasay ‘Dianella
ensifolia’. Crucially, in the case of hɔp the inhalation is not
followed by deliberate blowing out of smoke – the person
performing the practice usually attempts to inhale deeply
and keep the smoke in the lungs for as long as possible. One
may also apply medicinal smoke locally on a particular
body part, e.g. a leg. In this case, it is common to first ingest
the smoke and then blow it on the ailing body part. This
activity – like cigarette smoking – is described with the verb
yɔt, which illustrates that manner, and not the type of
smoke, is the primary factor determining verb choice.
To summarize, human ingestion verbs in Maniq are
sensitive to a combination of parameters, including the
manner of ingestion as well as categorial identity of ingested
items, which in turn depend on various physical properties
of those items, e.g. their texture, nutritiousness, and taste.

Animal ingestion
Although most discussions of ingestion verb lexicons focus
on the elaboration linked to the ingested object, elaboration
can also be linked to the agent performing the action of
ingestion. In Maniq, such verbs are associated with some
characteristic ways of ingestion typical of specific animals.
In such cases, the identity of the agent is linked to the verb
indirectly via the manner of ingestion. For instance, the verb
coh ‘to strike with a long object’ is a conventional way of
describing pecking and eating-by-pecking, and thus in the
ingestion context, it conveys the action of eating associated
with birds.
(5)

jawãŋ
ʔɛʔ
coh
great.hornbill
3
strike
‘Great hornbills eat fruit.’

kabɨʔ
fruit

Note that example (5) is best translated with eat rather than
peck since in English peck in generic statements of this kind
would be marked. In Maniq on the other hand, coh is a
basic-level predicate, the most unmarked and frequent item
in such contexts. Table 2 lists ingestion verbs associated
with particular animals together with glosses and their
covert agents.

2

Ciyak lapɔn is a medicinal yam species that is too toxic for
consumption (Maneenoon et al. 2008). Note, though, that the
Maniq do classify it as being paŋ-eaten, which suggests that either
this is a hypothetical response (one that would apply if it was
edible), or that there is a way of detoxifying it.

2690

Table 2: Basic-level animal ingestion verbs in Maniq.
Verb
coh
ɲam
dut
lɔs

Gloss
'to eat by pecking'
'to eat fruit, involves spitting out
seeds, skin and pulp'
'to eat by sucking out liquid
substance'
'to eat fruit/nuts (of squirrels and
rats)'

Agent
birds
bats
insects
squirrels,
rats

The verb ɲam is similar to the human ingestion verb paŋ
applied with fibrous tubers in that it involves discarding
some of the masticated matter. In this case, however, the
discarded elements include seeds, skin and pulp of fruit
consumed by fruit bats (e.g. large flying fox (Pteropus
vampyrus)). The verb dut (a loanword from Thai dùut ‘to
suck’) describes sucking or eating-by-sucking, as in, for
instance, bees sucking nectar. Finally, lɔs is associated with
the particular manner in which some rodents such as
squirrels eat fruit and nuts, and is therefore characteristically
applied in descriptions of eating actions performed by these
animals.
Since some animals bite, chew, drink, etc. in ways similar
to people, many human ingestion verbs have been attested
with animals, too. In particular, hãw ‘to chew-eat’, kap ‘to
bite-eat’ and buʔ ‘to drink non-nutritious liquid’ are used
frequently with animal agents, cf. (6) and (7).
(6)
(7)

yəkɔp ʔɛʔ
kap
basiŋ
snake 3
bite-eat dusky.leaf.monkey
‘Snakes eat dusky leaf monkeys.’
kaɲcɛh ʔɛʔ
hãw
kabɨʔ
bearcat 3
chew-eat
fruit
‘Bearcats eat fruit.’

Summary and conclusions
The system of basic-level ingestion verbs described here
reveals a more fine-grained and nuanced categorization of
ingestion events in Maniq than in many other languages,
where only a general division between eat and drink is made
(cf. Newman, 2009; Wierzbicka, 2009). Such specificity
could be argued to be related to cultural factors. This would
then constitute a case parallel to objects, where it was found
that more specific labels at the basic level are a reflection of
community’s expertise in a domain (Dougherty, 1978).
Such interpretation appears to be at least partially true since,
aside from drawing on basic bodily mechanics, a number of
ingestion verbs in Maniq reflect ethnobiological expertise of
Maniq speakers. Their semantics involve culturally relevant
ethnobiological knowledge (e.g. relating to the ingested
objects, behavior of animals, etc.), and presuppose
familiarity with this knowledge. While this provides an
account for how ingestion events are categorized in Maniq,
by itself it does not explain why specific rather than general
labels are preferred. Further insights into this issue can be
gained by taking into account the distinct meal habits of the
community and the typical composition of meals. This has

been suggested by Burenhult and Kruspe (2016) for related
Aslian hunter-gatherer groups. According to this account,
the existence of specific verbs is linked to the fact that meals
in hunter-gatherer communities typically do not involve
elaborate combinations of different foodstuffs, but are often
instances of “opportunistic ingestion of a single resource”
(Burenhult & Kruspe, 2016, p. 194). This would suggest
further that “there is no culturally salient type of ingestion
event for which a general concept or label “eat” seems
necessary” (Burenhult & Kruspe, 2016, p. 194). In other
Aslian languages, this has been connected specifically to the
existence of one particular subtype of semantically specific
ingestion verbs (i.e. food-category-encoding verbs), but it is
conceivable that such distinct meal habits could facilitate a
fine-grained categorization of ingestion events more
generally.
Although culture-specific factors like salience and distinct
meal habits are likely important, by themselves they might
not constitute sufficient pressure for such lexical
elaboration. Ingestion is a domain of basic human
experience, and specific subtypes of ingestion events are
likely salient in many cultures. Yet, semantically detailed
ingestion verbs are found only in a subset of the world's
languages. Similarly, although there is no extensive survey
of ingestion verb paradigms across hunter-gatherer
communities, not all such communities seem to have
equally elaborate systems of ingestion verbs (e.g.
Wierzbicka, 2009). Further analysis of the Maniq verb
lexicon reveals, however, that another key factor is the
language itself. Verb meanings do not exist in a vacuum, but
form part of a system and often pattern in systematic ways
(Gentner, 1982; Talmy, 1985). Hence, the characteristic
ways in which languages encode verb meaning in one
domain tend to recur in other domains too, revealing general
principles underlying lexicalization. In the case of Maniq,
and Aslian languages more generally, specificity is such a
general principle. Aslian languages have often been noted to
have a penchant for encoding specific meanings in
monolexemic verbs occurring across multiple semantic
domains (Kruspe, Burenhult, & Wnuk, 2015; Matisoff,
2003). For instance, in Maniq they are attested not only in
ingestion, but in a number of other domains, e.g. perception
(balay ‘to look up’), location (cibɛl ‘to be located upside
down’), motion (tɨk ‘to move upstream’), and transportation
(ɡalɛs ‘to carry on back’) (cf. Wnuk, 2016). This typological
characteristic makes Maniq and Aslian stand out from many
other languages of their linguistic area, placing them
together with other languages and language groups
characterized by a similar marked preference for verb
specificity, e.g. Mayan (P. Brown, 2008). Thus, although
the basic level for events is partially a reflection of cultural
factors, it is also influenced by the semantic-typological
profile of the language, suggesting a significant role for
language in the structure of event concepts.

2691

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the Maniq community of the Manang
district (Satun, Thailand) and Jaroon Thotsagool. This paper
has benefitted from comments and discussions with Niclas
Burenhult, Asifa Majid, Nicole Kruspe, Rebecca Defina, Ilja
Croijmans, and Laura Speed. This work was supported by
Max Planck Gesellschaft and The Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research.

References
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2009). “Eating”, “drinking” and
“smoking”: A generic verb and its semantics in
Manambu. In J. Newman (Ed.), The linguistics of eating
and drinking (pp. 91–108). Amsterdam ; Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Bowerman, M. (2005). Why can’t you “open” a nut or
“break” a cooked noodle? Learning covert object
categories in action word meanings. In L. GershkoffStowe & D. H. Rakison (Eds.), Building object categories
in developmental time (pp. 209–243). Mahwah, N.J: L.
Erlbaum Associates.
Brown, P. (1998). Children’s first verbs in Tzeltal: Evidence
for an early verb category. Linguistics, 36(4), 713–754.
Brown, P. (2008). Verb specificity and argument realization
in Tzeltal child language. In M. Bowerman & P. Brown
(Eds.), Crosslinguistic perspectives on argument
structure: Implications for learnability (pp. 167–189).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brown, R. (1958). How shall a thing be called?
Psychological
Review,
65(1),
14–21.
http://doi.org/10.1037/h0041727
Burenhult, N. (2013). Categories of arboreal locomotion in
Jahai (Austroasiatic, Malay Peninsula). Unpublished
report.
Burenhult, N., & Kruspe, N. (2016). The language of eating
and drinking: A window on Orang Asli meaning-making.
In K. Endicott (Ed.), Malaysia’s original people : Past,
present and future of the Orang Asli (pp. 175–199).
National University of Singapore Press.
Dougherty, J. W. D. (1978). Salience and relativity in
classification. American Ethnologist, 5(1), 66–80.
http://doi.org/10.1525/ae.1978.5.1.02a00060
Evans, N. (2011). Anything can happen: The verb lexicon
and interdisciplinary fieldwork. In N. Thieberger (Ed.),
The Oxford handbook of linguistic fieldwork (pp. 183–
208). Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S. A.
Kuczaj (Ed.), Language development: Vol. 2. Language,
thought, and culture (pp. 301–334). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Heath, J., & McPherson, L. (2009). Cognitive set and
lexicalization strategy in Dogon action verbs.
Anthropological
Linguistics,
51(1),
38–63.
http://doi.org/10.1353/anl.0.0001
Kruspe, N., Burenhult, N., & Wnuk, E. (2015). Northern
Aslian. In P. Sidwell & M. Jenny (Eds.), Handbook of the

Austroasiatic languages (pp. 419–474). Leiden; Boston:
Brill.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A
preliminary investigation. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Malt, B. C. (1995). Category coherence in cross-cultural
perspective. Cognitive Psychology, 29(2), 85–148.
http://doi.org/06/cogp.1995.1013
Malt, B. C., & Majid, A. (2013). How thought is mapped
into words. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive
Science, 4(6), 583–597. http://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1251
Maneenoon, K., Sirirugsa, P., & Sridith, K. (2008).
Ethnobotany of Dioscorea L.(Dioscoreaceae), a major
food plant of the Sakai tribe at Banthad Range, Peninsular
Thailand. Ethnobotany Research & Applications, 6, 385–
394.
Matisoff, J. A. (2003). Aslian: Mon-Khmer of the Malay
Peninsula. Mon-Khmer Studies, 33, 1–58.
Morris, M. W., & Murphy, G. L. (1990). Converging
operations on a basic level in event taxonomies. Memory
&
Cognition,
18(4),
407–418.
http://doi.org/10.3758/BF03197129
Newman, J. (2009). A cross-linguistic overview of “eat” and
“drink.” In J. Newman (Ed.), The linguistics of eating and
drinking (pp. 1–26). Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Rice, S. (2009). Athapaskan eating and drinking verbs and
constructions. In J. Newman (Ed.), The linguistics of
eating and drinking (pp. 109–152). Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8(3), 382–439.
http://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(76)90013-X
Schebesta, P. (1929). Among the forest dwarfs of Malaya.
London: Hutchinson & Co., ltd.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language
typology and syntactic description: Vol. III, Grammatical
categories and the lexicon (pp. 55–149). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Tanaka, J. W., & Taylor, M. (1991). Object categories and
expertise: Is the basic level in the eye of the beholder?
Cognitive
Psychology,
23(3),
457–482.
http://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(91)90016-H
Wierzbicka, A. (2009). All people eat and drink. Does this
mean that “eat” and “drink” are universal human
concepts? In J. Newman (Ed.), The linguistics of eating
and drinking (pp. 65–89). Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Wnuk, E. (2016). Semantic specificity of perception verbs in
Maniq (PhD dissertation). Radboud University,
Nijmegen. Manuscript in preparation.
Wnuk, E., & Majid, A. (2014). Revisiting the limits of
language: The odor lexicon of Maniq. Cognition, 131(1),
125–138. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.12.008

2692

