Stable Causal Relationships are Better Causal Relationships
Nadya Vasilyeva (Vasilyeva@Berkeley.Edu)*,
Thomas Blanchard (Tblanchard@Berkeley.Edu)*,
Tania Lombrozo (Lombrozo@Berkeley.Edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

*These two authors contributed equally to this work
Abstract
We report two experiments investigating whether people’s
judgments about causal relationships are sensitive to the
robustness or stability of such relationships across a wide
range of background circumstances. We demonstrate that
people prefer stable causal relationships even when overall
causal strength is held constant, and we show that this effect
is unlikely to be driven by a causal generalization’s actual
scope of application. This documents a previously
unacknowledged factor that shapes people’s causal reasoning.
Keywords: stability, causality, explanation, background
conditions, moderating variables

Consider the relationship between being sexually active
and developing deep vein thrombosis. Is the former a cause
of the latter?
In fact, sexual activity increases the probability that a
woman will become pregnant, which in turn increases the
probability that she will develop deep vein thrombosis.
Thus, there is a sense in which being sexually active is
causally relevant to whether one gets thrombosis. Yet this
causal relationship seems different from that between, say,
sexual activity and contracting herpes. When explaining
why someone contracted herpes (but not why a woman has
deep vein thrombosis), we’re likely to cite sexual activity.
Similarly, medical websites list herpes as a sexually
transmitted disease, but do not list deep vein thrombosis as a
risk associated with sexual activity. Why might this be?
The asymmetry between sex and thrombosis versus sex
and herpes doesn’t seem due to a difference in the strength
of association between the relevant factors. Few people
suffer from thrombosis as a result of sexual activity; but
likewise, herpes is only contracted after sexual activity in
some cases (namely, when both the partner is infected and
transmission occurs). And while thrombosis can be caused
by many other factors besides sexual activity, herpes can
also be transmitted by non-sexual forms of physical contact.
Instead, these causal associations could differ in their
robustness or stability. While sex can elevate the risk of
thrombosis under very specific conditions (most notably,
when the person is a woman who becomes pregnant), there
are also plenty of circumstances under which there is simply
no causal relationship between being sexually active and
deep vein thrombosis, e.g., if the person is male, or sterile,
or on blood thinners, and so on. By contrast, the causal
relationship between sex and herpes is more robust insofar
as under most circumstances – whatever your gender, your
diet, your age, etc. – sexual activity puts you at greater risk
of contracting herpes.

The extent to which a causal relationship is stable is not
adequately captured by measures of causal strength that
have dominated research on causal inference, such as ∆P
(Allan, 1980) and power-PC (Cheng, 1997). The reason is
that these measures track the average strength of a causal
relationship in a population, whereas stability has to do with
the extent to which the relationship holds across diverse
segments of the population (or across various
circumstances). True, very unstable causal relationships,
such as the relationship between sexual activity and
thrombosis, also tend to have low average strength. But two
causal relationships can be equally strong on average and
yet not be equally stable. By treating both relationships on a
par, standard measures of causal strength ignore an
important difference between them. For instance, these
measures do not allow us to capture the fact that more stable
relationships   provide more far-reaching and reliable means
for controlling their effects.
Stability is a well-known notion in the philosophy of
science, where it has been introduced and discussed most
extensively by Woodward (2006, 2010). In Woodward’s
framework, one starts with a very undemanding notion of
causal relevance, on which X is causally relevant to Y just in
case X causally influences Y in at least some circumstance.
Stability is then defined as the extent to which the causal
relationship X → Y holds in a variety of background
circumstances. (One can think of background circumstances
as circumstances not included in X and Y.) If X → Y holds in
a wide variety of background circumstances – in particular,
circumstances that we regard as ‘normal’ or ‘important’ –
then it is relatively stable. Woodward argues convincingly
that stability considerations play an important role in
scientific practice, especially in selecting appropriate levels
of causal representation and explanation.
There is also some indirect evidence for the role of
stability in people’s intuitive causal and explanatory
judgments. Lombrozo (2010) found that people are more
willing to consider relationships causal when an association
involves a direct physical connection rather than double
prevention, and – when double prevention is involved – are
more inclined to regard an agent as a cause of an outcome
when the action was intentional (vs. accidental). She argues
that both effects could be due to a difference in the stability
of the relevant relationships. Likewise, there is evidence that
people are less inclined to regard an agent as a cause of a
bad outcome when a third-party intentionally controlled the
agent (Phillips & Shaw, 2015; Murray & Lombrozo, 2016).
A possible explanation suggested by Murray and Lombrozo
is that the dependence of the outcome on the agent is very

2663

sensitive to the third-party’s intentions, and in that respect
fairly unstable. However, so far few direct investigations of
the role of stability in lay causal judgments have been
attempted (but see Gerstenberg et al., 2012), and none that
appropriately control for such relevant features as number of
intermediate causes and causal strength. In particular, to
show that stability has an effect over and above causal
strength, it is essential to consider cases where stability
varies while causal strength (e.g., ∆P) is held fixed.
We conducted two experiments to investigate whether
people are sensitive to stability considerations. Participants
were presented with evidence suggesting either that a causal
relationship holds in only one out of two kinds of
circumstances, or that it holds in both kinds of
circumstances. The causal strength of the relationship (for
the full set of cases) was held fixed across the two
conditions. In philosophy, the notion of stability has been
applied to causal relations both between types (Woodward,
2010) and between token events (Woodward, 2006), and is
held to be important both for causal and explanatory
judgments (Woodward, 2010). To test for these different
aspects and roles of stability, we asked participants to rate
either causal or explanatory judgments at either the type or
token level. (This also allowed us to ensure that any
observed effect wasn’t merely due to idiosyncrasies in the
formulation of particular questions.) If people’s causal and
explanatory judgments are sensitive to stability
considerations, this should be reflected in a lower willingness
to say that C causes or explains E when the relationship
holds only in one possible circumstance.

Experiment 1
The main goal of Experiment 1 was to examine the effect of
stability on judgments of causal relationships when the
causal strength of the relationships is held constant. To do
so, we presented participants with evidence suggesting that
a factor C has a causal influence on an effect E in a certain
population. We further specified that some members of the
population had a certain property D (e.g., a behavioral or
environmental characteristic) that other members of the
population lacked. Participants were assigned to one of two
conditions. In the non-moderated condition, participants
were presented with further evidence suggesting that C has a
causal influence on E both when D is present and when it is
absent. In the moderated condition, by contrast, the evidence
suggested that C causes E only when D is present (i.e., in the
presence of the enabling circumstance). The causal strength
(∆P or power PC) of C → E in the overall population was

Item
Cause variable
Effect variable
Moderator
variable

the same in both conditions, but its stability varied. The
relationship was stable with respect to the moderator
variable (presence or absence of D) in the non-moderated
condition, but unstable with respect to this variable in the
moderated condition.
Participants were asked to rate statements about the
relationship between C and E in the overall population. As the
causal strength of the relation was the same in both conditions,
an effect of stability on causal and explanatory judgments
should manifest itself in higher ratings in the stable (nonmoderated) than in the unstable (moderated) condition.

Method
Participants One-hundred-eighty-two participants were
recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk in exchange for
$1.50. In all experiments, participation was restricted to
users with an IP address within the United States and an
approval rating of at least 95% based on at least 50 previous
tasks. An additional 49 participants were excluded for
failing a memory check.
Materials, Design, and Procedure Participants first
completed a short training to ensure that they could interpret
covariation tables, and were then placed in the role of a
scientist studying several natural kinds on a fictional planet.
Table 1 shows the four kinds – zelmos, drols, grimonds, and
yuyus - each associated with a triad of variables (putative
cause, effect, and moderator). We illustrate the procedure
with zelmos, but the structure was matched across cases.
The scientist was described as investigating the
hypothesis that eating yona plants is causally related to
developing sore antennas. Participants were told that to test
the hypothesis, the scientist performed an experiment,
selecting a random sample of 200 zelmos and randomly
assigning them to two equal groups that ate a diet either
containing or not containing yonas. Participants saw the
results of the experiment in the form of a 2 x 2 covariation
table cross-classifying zelmos based on whether they ate
yonas or not, and whether they developed sore antennas or
not. The numbers in the table were selected to support a
causal strength with a ΔP of about .4 (range .39-.42).
The scientist then decided to conduct a second experiment
with a new, larger sample of 400 zelmos, again randomly
assigning zelmos to one of the two diets. But this time the
scientist discovered after the experiment that due to a
miscommunication between research assistants, half of the
zelmos were given salty water, and the other half were given
fresh water. The two values of this potentially moderating

Table 1: Materials used in Experiments 1 (all four items) and 2 (zelmo and drol items only).
Zelmo
Drol
Grimond
(lizard-like
(mushroom)
(mineral)
species)
eating yona plants
sore antennas
drinking water
(salty vs. fresh)

saline soil
bumpy stems
exposure to forest fire
smoke (occurred vs. not
occurred)

2664

exposure to sulfuric acid
surface cracks
temperature
(hot vs. cold)

Yuyu
(bird)

eating marine snails
brownish feather tint
inhaling volcanic ash
(occurred vs. not
occurred)

Table 2: Sample causal and explanation judgments in Experiment 1, as a function of judgment type and target (type vs. token).
Causal judgment
Explanation judgment
Type
How much do you agree with the following statement about
How much do you agree with the following explanation of
what causes zelmos’ antennas to become sore?: For zelmos,
why zelmos’ antennas become sore?: For zelmos, antennas
eating yonas causes their antennas to become sore.
become sore because of eating yonas.
Your assistants select one of the zelmos with sore antennas from your second experiment. They call him Timmy. During the
experiment Timmy has eaten yonas. You do not know whether Timmy drank fresh water or salty water during the experiment.
Token
How much do you agree with the following statement about How much do you agree with the following explanation of
what caused Timmy’s sore antennas?: Eating yonas caused why Timmy has sore antennas?: Timmy’s antennas became
Timmy’s antennas to become sore.
sore because he ate yonas.

variable were always said to occur normally on the planet
(e.g., in the wild, zelmos drink either fresh or salty water,
depending on what’s available). Luckily for the scientist, the
moderator and cause variables varied orthogonally.
Participants were told that “to see whether drinking salty
water made a difference to the effects of yonas on sore
antennas, you decide to look at the results of the experiment
within each of these two groups.” This time participants
were presented with the data split into two tables, one for
the salty water subgroup, and one for the fresh water
subgroup, each table cross-classifying zelmos in terms of
diet and antenna soreness (see Figure 1).
We varied whether the split tables indicated a relationship
that was moderated or not moderated. In the moderated
cases (illustrated in Figure 1a), in one subgroup (salty
water) the relationship between eating yonas and sore
antennas was very strong (ΔP=.82-.85), while in the other
subgroup (fresh water), the relationship nearly disappeared
(ΔP= -.06-.01). In the non-moderated cases (Figure 1b),
each of the split tables corresponded to relationships with a
ΔP comparable to the ~.40 from the original, unsplit table.
Importantly, the average strength of the relationship across
the two split tables was the same in the moderated and nonmoderated conditions, and equaled the strength of
relationship in the first table that participants saw for each
item (within .02 ΔP units).1 The split tables were
accompanied by a note for moderated [non-moderated]
conditions: “The tables reveal that the data pattern looks
very different [similar] for zelmos who drank salty water
during the experiment and for zelmos who drank fresh water
during the experiment. Please compare the two tables to see
how different [similar] the patterns are.”
Once all three covariation tables had been presented,
participants evaluated either claims about causal
relationships or explanations (Table 2). Each claim was
presented either at the type or token level. All claims were
general, i.e., they stated a relationship between eating yonas
and sore antennas without mentioning the kind of water the
zelmo(s) in question drank.2 Across items, each participant

saw two moderated cases and two non-moderated cases,
presented in random order. Thus, Experiment 1 had a 2
moderator (moderated vs. non-moderated relationship) x 2
judgment (causal vs. explanatory) x 2 target (type vs. token)
mixed design, with moderator manipulated within-subjects.
The dependent variable was agreement with causal or
explanatory claims, measured on a 1 (strongly disagree) to 7
(strongly agree) scale.

1

Figure 1: Sample covariation matrices from Experiment 1: (a) split
tables in the moderated condition, ΔP’s=.85 and .00 (M=.42); (b) split
tables in the non-moderated condition, ΔP’s=.35 and .38 (M=.37).

For each item, average ΔP’s in the moderated and non-moderated
conditions could differ slightly (by no more than .05 ΔP units).
Importantly, the non-moderated condition strength never exceeded
the moderated condition strength, which worked against our
hypothesis. (This also holds for other metrics of causal strength
computed over covariation tables, e.g. causal power, Cheng, 1997.)
2
In both Experiments 1 and 2, an additional group of participants
evaluated qualified causal and explanatory claims that specified the
subgroup defined by the moderator variable, e.g., For zelmos who

Results and Discussion
Our main question was whether relationships with known
moderators support general causal and explanatory claims to
the same extent as relationships without known moderators.
A 2 moderator (moderated relationship, non-moderated
relationship) x 2 judgment (causal, explanatory) x 2 target
(type, token) mixed ANOVA on ratings revealed a main
effect of moderator: as shown in Figure 2, participants were
significantly less likely to agree with claims about causal
and explanatory relationships when a relationship was
moderated than non-moderated, F(1,178)=163.22, p<.001,
ηp2=.478, even though moderated and non-moderated
relationships were equated for overall strength (defined as
the degree of covariation between putative causes and
effects). There were no other significant main effects or
interactions (all p’s≥ .211), suggesting that the effect of
moderator was not itself moderated by the nature of the
judgment (causal or explanatory, type or token).
a.

b.

drank salty water, eating yonas causes their antennas to become
sore. Participants in both experiments also evaluated
counterfactual claims. Due to space limitations, here we focus on
unqualified claims only, and we omit counterfactual ratings.

2665

Figure 2: The effect of moderator on ratings of causal and
explanatory relationships in Experiments 1 (left) and 2 (right).
Error bars correspond to 1 SEM.

Thus, the results of Experiment 1 indicate an effect of
stability over and above causal strength: holding causal
strength fixed, causal relationships are penalized for
instability. The effect was consistent across tasks, holding
both for causal and explanatory judgments at both the type
and token levels.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 provide initial evidence for
an effect of stability (i.e., invariance across a range of
circumstances) on causal and explanatory ratings. Yet these
results are also amenable to an alternative interpretation. In
Experiment 1, the moderated relationship had two
characteristics. First, it was relatively unstable, in that it
held in only one kind of circumstance described in the
fictional world. The non-moderated relationship, by
contrast, held in both kinds of circumstances. Second, the
moderated relationship had a narrower actual scope, i.e., the
actual proportion of the population for which it held was
relatively small: as the moderating variable took the value
favoring the presence of the causal relationship in half of the
actual members of the population, the moderated
relationship held for only 50% of the actual population. By
contrast, the non-moderated relationship held in the entire
actual population. But stability and actual scope are distinct:
an unstable relationship can have wide actual scope if the
circumstance in which it holds happens to be frequent. This
suggests an alternative explanation for the results of
Experiment 1: moderated relationships could be penalized
merely for their narrow actual scope. This alternative
explanation also suggests that the penalty for moderated
relationships could be a superficial pragmatic phenomenon:
a generalization about a population could be infelicitous
when it applies only to a small actual portion of the
population. For instance, “having sex can cause deep vein
thrombosis” is potentially misleading if the generalization
only applies to women who become pregnant.
To address the possibility that our results are driven by a
concern for actual scope rather than stability, we conducted
a further experiment where in addition to varying the
number of circumstances in which a causal relationship
holds (thus investigating effects of stability), we
orthogonally varied the relative size of the two subsets of
the population broken down by the moderator variable (thus
varying actual scope). In Experiment 1, the proportion of the

population for which the enabling circumstance (e.g.,
drinking salty water) held was always 50%, and therefore
fixed actual scope to 50% of the population. In Experiment
2, we introduced two additional conditions: a highfrequency condition in which the enabling circumstance was
present in 70% of the population, and a low-frequency
condition in which the enabling circumstance was present in
30% of the population. The actual scope of the moderated
relationship thus varied across frequency conditions, but its
(in)stability remained the same: in all frequency conditions,
there was one possible circumstance (e.g., drinking fresh
water) in which the causal relationship did not hold.
Experiment 2 also included a set of ratings concerning the
structure and strength of causal relationships. Participants
were asked whether in their view a causal relationship
between the cause (e.g., eating yonas) and effect (e.g., sore
antennas) is likely to exist, and if so how strong it is. By
using such a formulation, which taps more directly into
participants’ beliefs about causal relationships as opposed to
communication and language use, we hoped to address the
possibility that the results of Experiment 1 were due to some
pragmatic infelicity of our general (unqualified) claims.

Method
Three-hundred-and-ninety-three participants (excluding an
additional 83 participants who failed a memory check) were
recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk in exchange for $1.30.
Materials, Design, and Procedure The materials, design
and procedure were the same as in Experiment 1, with the
following exceptions. First, we presented split data tables in
the context of an additional experiment designed to
determine whether the moderator makes a difference (rather
than a consequence of the research assistants’ mistakes), and
we increased the sample sizes in the hypothetical
experiment to accommodate the changes in our design.
Second, we varied the moderator frequency: the base rate
of the enabling circumstance (i.e., the moderator value for
which the causal relationship held) in the natural population
and in the sample. This circumstance occurred in either 30%
(low frequency), 50% (medium frequency), or 70% of cases
(high frequency). Participants were told that the sizes of the
groups were intentionally matched to the frequency of the
enabling circumstance in the natural population.
To keep the mean strength of causal relationships (averaged
across split tables) the same (ΔP=.31) in the moderated and
non-moderated condition despite variation in the base rate

Figure 4: Sample diagram provided to participants to illustrate the
design of a hypothetical study (high-frequency moderator condition).

2666

approximately equal to zero in one subgroup, the strength of
the relationship in the subgroup with a causal association
inevitably had to vary (ΔP=.97, ΔP=.61, and ΔP=.44 for
low, medium, and high, respectively).
Thus, Experiment 2 had a 2 moderator (moderated vs. nonmoderated relationship) x 2 judgment (causal vs. explanatory)
x 2 target (type vs. token) x 3 moderator frequency (low 30%,
medium 50%, high 70%) mixed design, with moderator
manipulated within-subjects. The main dependent variables
were agreement with causal or explanatory claims,
measured on a 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) scale.
Participants also answered questions about the structure
and strength of causal relationships between pairs of
variables (see Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005). For instance,
a structure judgment might ask: “In your opinion, how
likely is it that there is some causal relationship between
eating yonas and having sore antennas?”, rated on a scale
from not at all likely (1) to very likely (7). A strength
judgment might ask: “If there is a causal relationship
between eating yonas and having sore antennas, how strong
do you think it is?”, rated on a scale from very weak
relationship (1) to very strong relationships (7). Only
participants who gave a rating higher than 1 in response to
structure were asked to rate strength. Here we report the
findings for judgments concerning the candidate cause and
effect (e.g., eating yonas à sore antennas). To prevent
participant fatigue given additional ratings, the number of
items was reduced to two (see Table 1).

Results and Discussion
Main ratings. A 2 moderator (moderated relationship, nonmoderated relationship) x 2 judgment (causal, explanatory)
x 2 target (type, token) x 3 moderator frequency (low,
medium, high) mixed ANOVA on main ratings revealed
two main effects. As predicted, moderated relationships
were rated lower than non-moderated relationships
F(1,381)=79.19, p<.001, ηp2=.172, replicating the moderator
effect from Experiment 1 (see Figure 2b). In addition, type
ratings (M=4.63) were higher than token ratings (M=4.26,
F(1,381)=8.97, p=.003, ηp2=.023. There were no other main
effects or interactions (all p’s≥.154). Most notably, there
was no effect of moderator frequency, F(2,381)=1.60,
p=.203.
Ratings of causal structure and strength A 2 moderator
(moderated relationship, non-moderated relationship) x 2

Figure 5: The effect of moderator on ratings of causal structure and
strength in Experiment 2. Error bars correspond to 1 SEM.

judgment (causal, explanatory) x 2 target (type, token) x 3
moderator frequency (low, medium, high) mixed ANOVA
on causal structure ratings revealed a significant main effect
of moderator, F(1,381)=56.49, p<.001, ηp2=.129. As shown
in Figure 5, ratings were on average higher for the nonmoderated relationship than for the moderated relationship.
There was also a significant interaction between frequency
and target, F(2,381)=3.48, p=.032, ηp2=.028; there was a
trend such that token ratings were lower than type ratings in
the high frequency condition but not in others; however
none of the simple effects were significant (p’s≥.275).
An equivalent analysis of strength judgments also
revealed a significant main effect of moderator,
F(1,380)=38.76, p<.001, ηp2=.093, with higher ratings for
unmoderated than moderated relationships (Figure 5). No
other effects reached significance.
In sum, Experiment 2 shows that stability affects causal
judgments even controlling for causal strength, and that this
influence is unlikely to reflect the frequency of the
moderating circumstance or pragmatic considerations.

General Discussion
In two experiments, we document an important factor
shaping people’s assessments of causal relationships over
and above causal strength: the stability of the causal
relationship – that is, the extent to which it holds across
various possible circumstances. While philosophers of
science have stressed the importance of stability in scientific
modeling and explanation, the role of stability in causal and
explanatory judgments has so far been largely
unacknowledged in psychology (but see Gerstenberg et al.,
2012, 2015). Experiments 1 and 2 show that stability
considerations play a consistent role in various contexts:
people are more willing to endorse causal and explanatory
claims involving stable causal relationships for statements at
both type and token levels. The results of Experiment 2 also
indicate that the effect of stability is not reducible to actual
scope (that is, unstable causal relationships are not penalized
merely because they hold in a smaller actual proportion of
the population).
These findings point to an important limitation of the
metrics of causal influence that have dominated the
psychological research on causal reasoning and induction,
such as ∆P or power PC. These measures track one aspect of
causal relationships (their average strength in a population),
but do not capture another important aspect that matters for
causal assessment, namely the extent to which the
relationship holds in a range of plausibly occurring
background circumstances.
Our findings are related to the work of Liljeholm and
Cheng (2007), who show that people can infer the presence
of background factors interacting with a causal relationship
based on differences in covariation across contexts. These
findings are important in demonstrating that people are able
to track the kind of evidence relevant to assessments of
stability, which our experiments show will in turn affect the
endorsement of general causal claims as well as ratings for
causal structure and strength.
Our results also provide support for the exportability

2667

theory of explanation (Lombrozo & Carey, 2006) and causal
ascriptions (Lombrozo, 2010). According to this theory, a
central function of explanations and causal ascriptions is to
pick out patterns of dependence that are exportable in the
sense that they support future predictions and interventions.
If this is correct, we should expect explanatory and causal
ratings to favor more stable relationships: by being
insensitive to variations in background circumstances, a
stable causal relationship provides more reliable
opportunities for future prediction and intervention.
Our findings also suggest directions for future research.
First, how does stability connect with issues of simplicity in
causal representation? As Woodward (2016) notes, causal
structures involving stable relationships can be represented
with sparse causal graphs, whereas unstable relationships
complicate the task of causal representation.
Second, what are the boundaries of the observed effects
of stability? In a very different paradigm involving
collisions among physical objects, Gerstenberg et al. (2012)
found that the robustness of an outcome (whether a ball
clearly or barely went through a gate) did not affect “cause”
versus “prevent” judgments. However, it did predict choices
between descriptors of causal relationships (“caused”
“prevented,” “almost caused/prevented,” “helped (to
prevent)”), and it had some effect on the responsibility
assigned to potentially competing causes in complex causal
structures, including causal chains (Gerstenberg et al., 2015).
Third, is it possible (and necessary) to draw a line
between the stability of a causal relationship with respect to
background
circumstances
(defined
loosely
as
circumstances not included in cause and effect) versus the
stability of an outcome with respect to the manner in which
the target cause occurs (Lombrozo, 2010), and/or to the
status of intermediate causes in a causal chain (e.g., as in
Gerstenberg et al., 2012, 2015)?
Fourth, can stability account for intransitivity in causal
chains? For instance, it’s reasonable to say that sex causes
pregnancy, which causes nausea, but it seems less
reasonable to say that sex causes nausea. Johnson and Ahn
(2015) show that causal chains with equally strong
intermediate links may nevertheless differ in transitivity,
and argue that some causal relations must be represented as
“causal islands” rather than coherent networks. Could
stability help explain what makes some causal relations
behave as causal islands (regardless of the nature of the
representation)? For example, intransitivity could arise if the
component links are evaluated with respect to different sets
of moderators, and/or there is little overlap between subsets
of background circumstances for which the component
relationships hold.
Fifth, how does the stability of a relationship across a
range of circumstances relate to the degree of guidance it
provides? Consider again the causal relationship between
eating yonas and getting sore antennas in the case where it
holds only in one background circumstance. One way to
alleviate this instability is to explicitly build this background
circumstance into the relationship: “For zelmos who drink
salty water, eating yonas causes sore antennas.” This

qualified claim seems better than the bare claim that eating
yonas causes sore antennas – not because it applies to a
wider range of possible circumstances per se, but because it
is more “guiding”: by flagging the circumstance under
which the relationship holds, it provides a better sense of
when the relevant causal relationship can be used for
prediction and control, and is therefore exportable in the
sense that it contains conditions for application, whether or
not those conditions hold widely. Thus one question is
whether people are sensitive to considerations of guidance
when assessing unstable relationships, and how guidance
(achieved by building in background circumstances) differs
from offering an explanation or causal claim with the enabling
conditions instead identified as additional, interacting
causes. The roles of stability and guidance in causal
ascription and explanation are ripe for further investigation.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Varieties of Understanding
Project, funded by the John Templeton Foundation.

References
Allan, L. G. (1980). A note on measurement of contingency
between two binary variables in judgment tasks. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 15, 147-149.
Cheng, P. (1997). From covariation to causation: A theory of
causal power. Psychological Review, 104, 367-405.
Gerstenberg, T., Goodman, N., Lagnado, D.A., & Tenenbaum, J.B.
(2012). Noisy Newtons: Unifying process and dependency
accounts of causal attribution. In Miyake, N., Peebles, D., and
Cooper, R. P., (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 378–383.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Gerstenberg, T., Goodman, N.D., Lagnado, D.A, & Tenenbaum, J.B.
(2015). How, whether, why: Causal judgments as counterfactual
contrasts. In Noelle, D. C., Dale, R., Warlaumont, A. S.,
Yoshimi, J., Matlock,T., and Maglio, P. P., (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
pp.782–787, Austin, TX. Cognitive Science Society.
Griffiths, T.L., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2005). Structure and strength
in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51, 334-384.
Johnson, S. G., & Ahn, W. K. (2015). Causal networks or causal
islands? The representation of mechanisms and the transitivity
of causal judgment. Cognitive science, 39(7), 1468-1503.
Liljeholm, M., & Cheng, P. (2007). Coherent generalization across
contexts. Psychological Science, 18, 1014-1021.
Lombrozo, T. (2010). Causal–explanatory pluralism: How
intentions,,functions, and mechanisms influence causal
ascriptions. Cognitive Psychology, 61(4), 303-332.
Lombrozo, T., & Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation and the
function of explanation. Cognition, 99(2), 167-204.
Murray, D., & Lombrozo, T. (2016). Effects of manipulation on
attribution of causation, free will, and moral responsibility.
Cognitive Science,.doi: 10.1111/cogs.12338.
Phillips, J., & Shaw, A. (2015). Manipulating morality: Third-party
intentions alter moral judgments by changing causal reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 39(6), 1320-1347.
Woodward, J. (2006). Sensitive and insensitive causation.
Philosophical Review, 115, 1-50.
Woodward, J. (2010). Causation in biology: Stability, specificity,
and the choice of levels of explanation. Biology & Philosophy,
25, 287-318.
Woodward, J. (2016). The problem of variable choice. Synthese,
193, 1047-1072.

2668

