Statistical Learning of Prosodic Patterns and Reversal of Perceptual Cues for
Sentence Prominence
Sofoklis Kakouros (sofoklis.kakouros@aalto.fi)
Department of Signal Processing and Acoustics, Aalto University,
PO Box 13000, AALTO, Finland

Okko Räsänen (okko.rasanen@aalto.fi)
Department of Signal Processing and Acoustics, Aalto University,
PO Box 13000, AALTO, Finland
Abstract

and then asking the subjects to grade prominence in a set of
novel utterances. The experiments and results, as described
in the next sections, show that the probability of prosodic
features indeed affects subjective perception of prominence.

Recent work has proposed that prominence perception in
speech could be driven by predictability of prosodic patterns,
connecting prominence perception to the concept of statistical
learning. In the present study, we tested the predictability
hypothesis by conducting a listening test where subjects were
first exposed to a 5-minute stream of sentences with a certain
proportion of sentence-final words having either a falling or
rising pitch trajectory. After the exposure stage, subjects were
asked to grade prominence in a set of novel sentences with
similar pitch patterns. The results show that the subjects were
significantly more likely to perceive words with lowprobability pitch trajectories as prominent independently of
the direction of the pitch change. This suggests that even
short exposure to prosodic patterns with a certain statistical
structure can induce changes in prominence perception,
supporting the connection between prominence perception
and attentional orientation towards low-probability events in
an otherwise predictable context.
Keywords: statistical learning; prosody;
perception; attention; stimulus predictability

Background

prominence

Introduction
Recent theoretical and computational studies have suggested
that there is a connection between perception of prominence
and the predictability of the acoustic prosodic features in
speech (Kakouros & Räsänen, 2014; 2015a; in press). The
general idea is that subjective perception of prominence is a
response elicited to unpredictable prosodic trajectories in a
normal train of speech, thereby drawing the attention of the
listener. This hypothesis extends the existing probabilistic
accounts of prominence that are based, for instance, on the
frequency of occurrence of linguistic units such as syllables
and words (see, e.g., Aylett and Turk, 2004; 2006) or on
word collocation information (see, e.g., Pan & Hirschberg,
2000). The proposal presented in Kakouros & Räsänen (in
press) attempts to explain how the speaker must be also
capable of manipulating the expectations of the prosodic
correlates of prominence in the acoustic signal, therefore
going beyond the probabilistic relations at the symbolic
linguistic level.
In the present study, we conducted a listening experiment
where probabilities of prosodic trajectories were explicitly
manipulated, first exposing subjects to different ratios of
rising and falling pitch trajectories on sentence-final words

Prominence is a prosodic phenomenon that can be generally
defined as the property by which linguistic units are
perceived to be standing out from their environment
(Terken, 1991) and is closely connected to the concept of
stress. As the terminology can be ambiguous, here we use
the term sentence prominence to refer to one or more words
that are perceived to be standing out in a sentence (see, e.g.,
Terken, 1991; Cutler, Dahan, & van Donselaar, 1997, for
related definitions).
Prominence has been examined from a number of
different perspectives (see, Wagner et al., 2015, and
references therein). From the physical perspective, a number
of studies have focused on identifying the acoustic
correlates of prominence. It has been now well established
that energy, fundamental frequency (F0), duration (see, e.g.,
Fry, 1955; 1958; Lieberman, 1960; Terken, 1991;
Kochanski, Grabe, Coleman, & Rosner, 2005; see also
Ortega-Llebaria & Prieto, 2010, and references therein), and
spectral tilt (see, e.g., Sluijter & van Heuven, 1996; but see
also Campbell, 1995; Campbell & Beckman, 1997) are the
acoustic parameters in speech whose variations signal
prominence and constituent boundaries (see also ShattuckHufnagel & Turk, 1996). Another interesting aspect of these
features is the degree of acoustic similarities in prominence
production and perception across different languages. The
central argument is that regardless of the language, all
speakers are equipped with the same production and
perception apparatus, therefore, the type of information
conveyed through speech should not vary greatly (Vaissière,
1983). This assumption may at least be partly true for
prominence as it seems that the basic acoustic correlates of
prosody are the same, although the actual realizations of
prosodic patterns depend on the language (see, e.g.,
Rosenberg et al., 2012; Maier et al., 2009). Additionally, a
speaker can manipulate the acoustic prosodic features
relatively independently of the linguistic content of a
sentence. On the listener’s side, the perceptual outcome of
prominence seems to be the same across languages, that is, a

2489

shift of the attention to a specific part in the stream of
speech.
From the functional perspective, prominence has been
studied with respect to its linguistic and communicative
role. The realization of prominence seems to have effects on
the parsing of information and syntactic structure of
utterances (see, e.g., Calhoun, 2010; Shattuck-Hufnagel &
Turk, 1996). For instance, prominence may indicate the
word in an utterance where the most important information
lies and it has been observed that reaction times (RTs) for
prominent words are shorter when compared to their nonprominent counterparts (see, e.g., Cutler & Foss, 1977). In
all, prominent words seem to attract the listener’s attention
thus allocating extra cognitive processing resources (see,
e.g., Cole, Mo, & Hasegawa-Johnson, 2010). At the level of
the listener’s perceptual processing this implies that there
are elements in speech that attract the listener’ attention.
Cole et al. (2010) have suggested that prominence and
attention might be associated, where a listener’s attention
can be drawn to a word either as a response to acoustic
modulation or due its relative unpredictability. In general,
an attention-capturing stimulus can be seen as something
that is novel or surprising (see, e.g., Itti & Baldi, 2009).
Correspondingly, surprisal can be defined in a probabilistic
way as something that is unpredictable. In the case of the
acoustic prosodic features, this could be manifested, for
instance, as an unpredictable F0 trajectory (see, e.g.,
Kakouros & Räsänen, 2014).
Probabilistic processing at the level of human cognition
is an idea that has held a central role in many models of
language processing. Predictability and frequency effects
have been widely studied, providing evidence that
predictability plays a role in language comprehension,
production, and learning (see, e.g., Jurafsky, Bell, Gregory,
& Raymond, 2001; Jurafsky, 1996). For instance,
predictability of the linguistic elements (such as syllables or
words) seems to affect their acoustic realization during
speech production (see, e.g., Jurafsky et al., 2001). For
example, frequent words are more likely to be reduced in
duration than less frequent words. Several theories have
emerged in an attempt to explain these probabilistic
phenomena, resulting in theories such as the Probabilistic
Reduction Hypothesis (Jurafsky et al., 2001) and Uniform
Information Density (Frank & Jaeger, 2008). At the level of
prosodic prominence, Aylett and Turk’s (2004) Smooth
Signal Redundancy Hypothesis is based on a similar
proposal (linguistic predictability) and suggests that acoustic
differences are linguistically implemented through prosodic
prominence structure. However, most of the theories focus
on examining the predictability of the linguistic units (e.g.,
phonemes, words) in speech whereas little is known about
how the predictability of the low-level or suprasegmental
acoustic features affects speech production and perception.
Moreover, not all acoustic variation can be explained only
by differences in the predictability at lexical or grammatical
level. Thus, investigating how the predictability of the

acoustic prosodic features might affect different phenomena
in speech production and perception is of particular interest.
Previous computational modeling studies reveal that
predictability of prosodic trajectories, when measured in
terms of a probabilistic prosody model learned from a
corpus of speech, is highly correlated with human
perception of prominence in the same set of utterances
(Kakouros & Räsänen, 2014; 2015b; in press). In the
present work, we investigate whether it is possible to induce
different prominence perception patterns in human subjects
by manipulating the probabilities of different prosodic
trajectories during a habituation stage. More specifically, we
ask whether the predictability of F0 trajectories affects the
perception of sentence prominence. The hypothesis is that
low-probability F0 patterns, i.e., the patterns that are less
frequent during the habituation stage, would be regarded as
more prominent independently of the actual direction of the
F0 change.

Experimental setup
We conducted a listening experiment to investigate whether
exposure to a certain probability distribution of rising and
falling F0 trajectories will affect the listeners’ perception of
prominence. The aim was to examine 1) whether
probabilities of prosodic trajectories have an impact on
subjective prominence ratings, and 2) whether a short
exposure to prosodic stimuli is sufficient to alter these
probabilistic expectations from the baseline perceptual
system acquired through life-long experience with spoken
language.
The experiment consisted of two conditions: The first,
referred to as rising standard condition (RSC), involved the
presentation of spoken utterances with 90% of the tokens
having rising fundamental frequency (F0) during the
sentence-final word while 10% of the sentences had falling
F0 during the last word. The second condition, the falling
standard condition (FSC), was similar to the first but with
the ratio of falling and rising tones inverted with, 90% of the
utterances having a falling F0 and the remaining 10%
having a rising F0. The subjects in both conditions were
first habituated to a 5-minute stream of utterances having
the condition-specific F0 distribution while asked to
perform an overt task that was designed to ensure that the
participants were paying attention to the utterances. After
habituation, they were tested in their judgments of
prominence on a set of new utterances that also had falling
or rising F0 trajectories during the last word.

Stimuli
Speech samples from the CAREGIVER Y2 FI corpus
(Altosaar et al., 2010) were used in the study. The style of
speech in CAREGIVER is enacted infant-directed speech
(IDS) spoken in continuous Finnish, corresponding to a
situation where a caregiver is talking to a child, and
recorded in high quality in a noise-free anechoic room. The
corpus was selected due to the availability of multiple
sentences with a simple subject-verb-object (SVO) syntactic

2490

habituation

C V

Rising standard
condition (RSC) 90% rising (N = 99)
10% falling (N = 11)
8 subjects

6 sem
word 1

word 2

word 3

word 4

RT

testing
80% rising (N = 40)
20% falling (N = 10)

Falling standard 10% rising (N = 11) 20% rising (N = 10)
condition (FSC) 90% falling (N = 99) 80% falling (N = 40)
8 subjects

FT
word 4
word 1

word 2

6 sem

word 3

Rising and falling
F0 trajectories
(“RT” and “FT”)

F0

Original utterances

10 basic

F0
10 distract.

F0

F0

5 basic

Figure 2: Overview of the experimental setup.

C V

Figure 1: F0 trajectories for the two conditions. Top panel:
contour for the rising trajectory (RT), Bottom panel: contour
for the falling trajectory (FT). The dashed vertical line
represents the vowel onset.
structure and slow speaking rate that allows easier
manipulation of the F0 patterns in the sentences. After
initial testing, 25 unique utterances from a female speaker
(Speaker 2) were chosen for the experiments based on the
overall naturalness of the stimuli after manipulating the F0
trajectories of the utterances (see below). Each stimulus
consisted of a four-word SVO sentence with an average
duration of three seconds.
Ten of the utterances were assigned as the main
habituation stimuli and five utterances were used solely for
the testing stage. The last ten utterances formed a so-called
distractor set since, despite being grammatically correct,
they had very unusual semantic structure (e.g., “Vauva
antaa kulmikkaan koiran.”, Eng: ”The baby gives the square
dog.”). The distractors were used as targets in the overt task
given to the listeners during habituation (see below).
For each of the 25 utterances, we generated two prosodic
versions with either a falling F0 trajectory (FT) or rising F0
trajectory (RT) on the last word using the pitch
manipulation functionality available in the Praat software
(Boersma & Weenink, 2012). For each stimulus, the
original pitch contour was first flattened and the F0 set to
185 Hz (approximately the average across the original
stimuli), reflecting the most natural sounding pitch level for
the speaker. The F0 trajectory was then modified for the
fourth word (“target word”) of each stimulus while keeping
the rest of the contour flat (Figure 1). Since the primary
stress of Finnish always falls on the first syllable of a word
(e.g., Suomi & Ylitalo, 2002), the pitch excursion for the
falling and rising trajectories was set to start right before the
vowel onset of the first syllable of the fourth word (see, e.g.,
Hermes & Rump, 1994). To ensure consistency, the pitch
excursion for all stimuli started 50-ms before the vowel
onset and peaked 150-ms later, staying constant for the
remaining part of the utterance (Figure 1). As the relation
between pitch excursion size and prominence perception
may vary, some studies reporting that a difference of 1.5
semitones (Rietveld & Gussenhoven, 1985) or even 4

semitones (Hart, 1981) is required for a perceptually
noticeable difference, we preliminarily experimented with a
number of different excursion sizes. After assessing
excursion sizes between 2 and 8 semitones, we selected 6semitone change from the flat F0 as the difference
producing a clear and most natural-sounding perception of
prominence across all stimuli. Thus, the modified
trajectories during the target words had ±6 semitone
excursion from the flat 185 Hz F0 of all previous words in
the utterance (Figure 1). After resynthesizing the utterances
with the modified F0 trajectories, all stimuli were amplitude
normalized.

Participants
Sixteen native Finnish speakers (9 male, 7 female; average
age 28 years) participated in the listening experiment. The
test subjects were recruited from the personnel and students
of Aalto University. All participants reported normal
hearing. The subjects were randomly assigned to the two
test conditions with 8 subjects per condition.

Experimental procedure
The listening experiment was conducted in a sound-isolated
listening booth of the Acoustics Laboratory of the Aalto
University. The habituation and testing software was run on
a Mac mini with Matlab 2014b. The audio from the
computer was fed through a Motu UltraLite-mk3 Hybrid
into a pair of high-quality Sennheiser HD650 headphones.
Participants were given a brief description of the task by
the experimenter and they were then asked to start the
experiment. The experiment consisted of two parts: (i) a
habituation and (ii) a testing stage (see Figure 2 for an
overview). During the habituation stage, participants were
asked to listen carefully to each utterance being played and
press the spacebar whenever they heard a semantically
incoherent sentence (the distractor). The role of the overt
task was to ensure that the subjects engaged into holistic
lexical and semantic processing of the stimuli during the
habituation. The subjects were not given specific
instructions regarding what counts as a semantically
incoherent target, but were instructed to use their own
judgment.

2491

perceived prominence perceived prominence perceived prominence

proportion of responses

0.6
0.5

all subjects
rising standard group
falling standard group

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1st

2nd

3rd

target

no prom.

Figure 3: Proportion of responses to different words in the
test sentences (relative position), including the noprominence option. The error bars denote one standard error
measured across test subjects (SE).
The only difference between the subject groups, i.e., the
RSC and FSC conditions, was the distribution of the rising
and falling F0 trajectories during the habituation and testing
stage. In the case of RSC (FSC), 90% of the stimuli were
RT (FT) (“standards”) and 10% were FT (RT) (“deviants”).
Ten semantically incoherent targets (distractor stimuli) were
interleaved in the data and also followed the same 9:1 ratio.
The ordering of the stimuli was randomized for each
participant in a manner that each participant in each
condition heard each lexically unique training utterance
exactly the same number of times: nine times with RT (FT)
and once with FT (RT). In addition, they heard each
distractor once. The total duration of the habituation stage
was 5 minutes, corresponding to a total of 110 utterances
with a 500-ms silence interval between each utterance. To
avoid repetition of the same utterance in a sequence, the
stimuli were presented in blocks of 11 where each block had
10 unique training sentences and one distractor. There were
no audible pauses between the blocks.
In the second part of the experiment, the subjects heard
the test utterances one-by-one and, for each utterance, they
were asked to grade the prominence level of only the single
most prominent word on a nominal scale of 0 = no
prominence, 1 = slight prominence, 2 = notable prominence.
Subjects were allowed to hear each utterance only once in
order to facilitate the capture of initial perceptual
impressions and in order not to alter the perceived
distribution of the pitch trajectories. The tasks of word
selection and prominence grading were carried out using a
graphical user interface (GUI) where a list of the spoken
words was presented together with the prominence scale.
Subjects used a mouse as the controller to make the
selection. The stimuli distribution in the test stage was set to
have 80% of standards (RT for RSC; FT for FSC) and 20%
of deviants (FT for RSC; RT for FSC) in order to get more
test samples for the deviants than what would be available
from the original habituation distribution. The stimuli were
presented in blocks of 5 comprising, for the case of RSC, 4
RT and 1 FT. There were 10 blocks of test stimuli, adding
up to a total of 50 test tokens per subject. There were no
distractor stimuli during the testing stage.

1.2

p < 0.001, r = 0.185

1.2

***

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6
all standards

1.2

all deviants

p = 0.236, r = 0.094
n.s.

rising all

falling all

1.2

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

p = 0.211, r = 0.049
n.s.

0.6
rising deviants

1.2

p = 0.094, r = 0.059
n.s.

falling deviants

***

rising standards

1.2

p < 0.001, r = 0.242

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

falling standards

p = 0.012, r = 0.126
n.s.

0.6
falling standards

rising deviants

falling deviants

rising standards

Figure 4: Means and SEs for the perceived prominence (0–
2) levels for different stimulus types. Significance and effect
sizes are reported using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test and
using Bonferroni corrected significance level of p < 0.0083.

Results
We first verified how often the subjects labeled utterancefinal words, the targets, as prominent instead of other words
in the sentences. Figure 3 shows the proportion of responses
to each of the four words (relative positions) in the test
sentences and no-prominence responses across all subjects
and for both sub-groups separately. As can be observed
from the figure, the subjects primarily considered the
manipulated target word as a prominent or not prominent
with less than 18% of the responses marking one of the first
three words in the utterances as prominent. In addition, the
response strategies between the two subject groups are
similar, suggesting that both types of pitch patterns were
similarly strong attractors of prominence perception with
respect to other competing words in each utterance.
Since the lexical content of the stimuli was fully
independent of the pitch trajectory, each subject hearing
exactly the same number of repetitions for each sentence,
and each sentence occurring exactly the same number of
times for both falling and rising pitch across both subject
groups, we were able to pool the responses using the
standard/deviant criterion, the absolute direction of the pitch
pattern, or their combination. Figure 4 shows the full
summary of perceived prominence levels across a number
of different comparisons.
The results indicate that there is a main effect of condition
with the less frequent pitch trajectories (deviants) perceived
more prominent (M = 1.02, SD = 0.759) than the standard
trajectory experienced during the habituation (M = 0.655,
SD = 0.66) independently of the direction of the change.
Although the effect is not large, it is highly significant (p <
0.001, Z = 5.44, r = 0.185; Wilcoxon rank-sum test). In
contrast, there are no observable differences between the
perceived prominence of rising and falling pitch patterns
when pooled across both groups, between rising and falling

2492

deviants, or between rising and falling standards (p > 0.0083
after Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons; see
Figure 4 for details). In other words, only the probability of
the pitch trajectory during the habituation and testing has an
impact on the overall prominence levels.
A closer analysis of both subject groups shows that there
are indications for a reversal of preferences between the
groups (Figure 4, bottom panel): Subjects habituated with
frequent rising pitch consider words with a falling pitch
marginally more prominent (M = 0.945, SD = 0.815 for
falling and M = 0.677, SD = 0.613 for rising; Z = 2.510, p =
0.012, r = 0.126) whereas subjects habituated with
predominant falling pitch consider words with a rising pitch
significantly more prominent (M = 1.097, SD = 0.695 for
rising versus M = 0.633, SD = 0.705 for falling; Z = 4.847, p
< 0.001, r = 0.242). Although the effects are not large, the
reversal of preferences between the two subject groups is
clearly seen in the data.

Discussion and conclusions
The present findings suggest that the statistical distribution
of prosodic cues can impact subjective perception of word
prominence. This is in line with the earlier work that
connects the idea of prominence to low-predictability events
in the perceptual stream, i.e., “something standing out from
a context” (Kakouros & Räsänen, in press; cf. Itti & Baldi,
2009) but contrasts with the idea of prosodic stress being
conveyed with certain type of prosodic patterns such as
rising or falling pitch contours (see, e.g., Hermes & Rump,
1994). Since there were no lexical or semantic differences
between the low- and high-predictability targets, the present
results also show that this type of expectation-based
prosodic processing occurs in parallel to lexical processing.
From a cognitive point of view, a predictability-based
system for prominence (i.e., attentional capture) would be
much more flexible than one based on a fixed set of
acoustic/prosodic feature detectors for prominent words.
First of all, it enables “learning” of prominence perception
from language experience, enabling a natural way for
different languages to develop strategies for conveying
prominence when constrained by the simultaneous
production of phonemic contrasts of the language.
Similarly, a predictability-based system allows shorter timescale adaptation to the ongoing communicative situation
where factors such as communication channel (is speech
partially masked by noise?) or talker-specific idiosyncrasies
(acoustic and linguistic characteristics of a specific talker)
can lead to very different acoustic prosodic outcomes than
what can be characterized at a language-general level.
Finally, the predictability framework integrates naturally to
the work on statistical learning and information theoretic
models at different levels of linguistic analysis (see, e.g.,
Jurafsky et al., 2001; Frank & Jaeger, 2008; Aylett and
Turk, 2004) and language learning (see, e.g., Saffran, Aslin,
& Newport, 1996), suggesting that similar basic
mechanisms for capturing statistical regularities in the

sensory input may be responsible for phenomena at multiple
different levels and domains of cognitive behavior.
However, the present findings are preliminary and should
be investigated further in a number of additional
experiments. For instance, the present setup used an
arbitrarily chosen ratio of 1 deviant to 9 standards during
habituation, revealing that the subjects are sensitive to such
a difference. It is unclear whether the magnitude of apparent
prominence is related to the probabilities of the tokens or
whether the mechanism is more binary in nature. In
addition, the fundamental frequency is only one of many
cues to word prominence (see, e.g., Fry, 1955; 1958;
Lieberman, 1960; Ortega-Llebaria & Prieto, 2010) and
factors such as word position and durational cues also play a
role (see, e.g., Luchkina & Cole, 2014). Since we used prerecorded sentences from a corpora originally designed for
other purposes, the speech is typical continuous speech in
the sense that there is a high likelihood to have stress on
sentence-final words. Despite controlling for pitch and
energy, subtle cues such as fine-grained timing in syllabic
structure may still be present, here seen as an inherent bias
to perceive standard targets also as slightly prominent (M =
0.655, SD = 0.660, on the scale of 0–2). However, these
cues were exactly the same for both of our test groups and
cannot affect the group differences.
In all, the current findings provide initial behavioral
support for the hypothesis that prominence and
unpredictability of the acoustic prosodic features are
connected. However, more work is needed in order to
confirm this finding and to understand the characteristics
and limits of the probabilistic framework in the perception
of speech prosody. This also includes extension of the study
for other languages than Finnish.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the Academy of Finland in the
project “Computational modeling of language acquisition”,
Aalto ELEC Doctoral School, and Nokia Foundation.

References
Altosaar, T., ten Bosch, L., Aimetti, G., Koniaris, C.,
Demuynck, K., & van den Heuvel, H. (2010). A Speech
Corpus for Modeling Language Acquisition: CAREGIVER.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2010) (pp. 1062–1068).
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: a functional explanation for relationships
between redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in
spontaneous speech. Language and Speech, 47, 31–56.
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2006). Language redundancy predicts
syllabic duration and the spectral characteristics of vocalic
syllable nuclei. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
119, 3048–3058.
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2012). Praat: doing phonetics by
computer [Computer program]. Version 5.3.13, retrieved
from http://www.praat.org/

2493

Calhoun, S. (2010). The centrality of metrical structure in
signaling information structure: A probabilistic perspective.
Language, 86, 1–42.
Campbell, N. (1995). Loudness, spectral tilt, and perceived
prominence in dialogues. Proceedings of the 13th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS-1995)
(pp. 676–679).
Campbell, N., & Beckman, M. E. (1997). Stress, prominence,
and spectral tilt. In A. Botinis, G. Kouroupetroglou, & G.
Carayiannis (Eds.), Intonation: Theory, Models, and
Applications (Proceedings of an ESCA Workshop) (pp. 67–
70).
Cole, J., Mo, Y., & Hasegawa-Johnson, M. (2010). Signalbased and expectation-based factors in the perception of
prosodic prominence. Laboratory Phonology, 1(2), 425–452.
Cutler, A., & Foss, D. J. (1977). On the role of sentence stress
in sentence processing. Language and Speech, 20, 1–10.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & Van Donselaar, W. (1997). Prosody in
the comprehension of spoken language: A literature review.
Language and Speech, 40, 141–201.
Frank, A., & Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Speaking rationally: Uniform
information density as an optimal strategy for language
production. Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 933–938). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Fry, D. B. (1955). Duration and intensity as physical correlates
of linguistic stress. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 27, 765–768.
Fry, D. B. (1958). Experiments in the perception of stress.
Language and Speech, 1, 126–152.
Hermes, D. J., & Rump, H. H. (1994). Perception of
prominence in speech intonation induced by rising and
falling pitch movements. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 96, 83–92.
Itti, L., & Baldi, P. (2009). Bayesian surprise attracts human
attention. Vision Research, 49, 1295–1306.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and
syntactic access and disambiguation. Cognitive Science, 20,
137–194.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., & Raymond, W. D. (2001).
Probabilistic relations between words: Evidence from
reduction in lexical production. Typological studies in
language, 45, 229–254.
Kakouros, S., & Räsänen, O. (2014). Statistical
Unpredictability of F0 Trajectories as a Cue to Sentence
Stress. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1246–1251). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kakouros, S., & Räsänen, O. (2015a). Analyzing the
Predictability of Lexeme-specific Prosodic Features as a Cue
to Sentence Prominence. Proceedings of the 37th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1039–
1044). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kakouros, S., & Räsänen, O. (2015b). Automatic Detection of
Sentence Prominence in Speech Using Predictability of
Word-Level Acoustic Features. Proceedings of the 16th
Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association (pp. 568–572). Dresden,
Germany: International Speech Communication Association.

Kakouros, S., & Räsänen, O. (in press). Perception of sentence
stress in speech correlates with the temporal unpredictability
of prosodic features. Cognitive Science, accepted for
publication.
Kochanski, G., Grabe, E., Coleman, J., & Rosner, B. (2005).
Loudness predicts prominence: Fundamental frequency lends
little. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 118,
1038–1054.
Luchkina, T., & Cole, J. (2014). Structural and prosodic
correlates of prominence in free word order language
discourse. Proceedings of Speech Prosody (SP-2014).
Maier, A. K., Hönig, F., Zeißler, V., Batliner, A., Körner, E.,
Yamanaka, N., & Nöth, E. (2009). A language-independent
feature set for the automatic evaluation of prosody.
Proceedings of Interspeech (pp. 600–603).
Lieberman, P. (1960). Some acoustic correlates of word stress
in American English. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 32, 451–454.
Ortega-Llebaria, M., & Prieto, P. (2010). Acoustic correlates of
stress in central Catalan and Castilian Spanish. Language
and Speech, 54, 1–25.
Pan, S., & Hirschberg, J. (2000). Modeling local context for
pitch accent prediction. Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(pp. 233–240).
Rietveld, A. C. M., & Gussenhoven, C. (1985). On the relation
between pitch excursion size and prominence. Journal of
Phonetics, 13, 299–308.
Rosenberg, A., Cooper, E. L., Levitan, R., & Hirschberg, J. B.
(2012). Cross-language prominence detection. Proceedings
of Speech Prosody.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926–1928.
Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., & Turk, A. E. (1996). A prosody
tutorial for investigators of auditory sentence processing.
Journal of psycholinguistic research, 25, 193–247.
Sluijter, A. M. C., & van Heuven, V. J. (1996). Spectral
balance as an acoustic correlate of linguistic stress. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 100, 2471–2485.
Suomi, K., & Ylitalo, R. (2002). Word stress and duration in
Finnish. In C. Dunger, B. Granström, D. House & A. M.
Öster (Eds.), Proceedings of the Swedish Phonetics
Conference (Fonetik-2002) (pp. 73–76).
t Hart, J. (1981). Differential sensitivity to pitch distance,
particularly in speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 69, 811–821.
Terken, J. (1991). Fundamental frequency and perceived
prominence of accented syllables. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 89, 1768–1776.
Vaissière, J. (1983). Language-independent prosodic features.
In A. Cutler & D. R. Ladd (Eds.), Prosody: Models and
measurements (pp. 53–66). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Wagner, P., Origlia, A., Avesani, C., Christodoulides, G.,
Cutugno, F., D'Imperio, M., ... & Vainio, M. (2015).
Different Parts of the Same Elephant: a Roadmap to
Disentangle and Connect Different Perspectives on Prosodic
Prominence. In The Scottish Consortium for ICPhS 2015
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS-2015). Glasgow, UK: the
University of Glasgow.

2494

