Structure-sensitive Noise Inference: Comprehenders Expect Exchange Errors
Till Poppels (tpoppels@ucsd.edu)1
1 Department

of Linguistics
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA 92093 USA

Roger P. Levy (rplevy@mit.edu)1,2
2 Department

of Brain & Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Abstract

corresponds to the intended yield of the tree. More generally,
we take w to be an ordered, but otherwise unstructured, string
of atomic elements (e.g., words)1 , and S to contain any additional information, such as the lexical category of words,
their functional position in a phrase structure, etc. /Thus, S
and w characterize the underlying structure and surface form
of the speaker’s intended utterance, and jointly determine the
actual utterance u. Since this is where the speaker’s intention
takes physical shape, u can now be processed by the comprehender to produce I, the input to the interpretation process,
which finally results in the comprehender’s inferred meaning
M0.

Previous research has found that comprehenders are willing
to adopt non-literal interpretations of sentences whose literal
reading is unlikely. Several studies found evidence that comprehenders decide whether or not a given utterance should be
taken at face value in accordance with principles of Bayesian
rationality, by weighing the prior probability of potential interpretations against the degree to which they are (in)consistent
with the literal form of the utterance. While all of these results are consistent with string-edit noise models, many error
processes are known to be sensitive to the underlying linguistic structure of the intended utterance. Here, we explore the
case of exchange errors and provide experimental evidence
that comprehenders’ noise model is structure-sensitive. Our
results add further support to the noisy-channel theory of language comprehension, extend the set of known noise operations to include positional exchanges, and show that comprehenders’ noise models are well-adapted to structure-sensitive
sources of signal corruption during communication.
Keywords: rational analysis; noisy-channel comprehension;
non-literal interpretation;

M

S

w

u

I

M0

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the noisy channel.

Introduction

Communication is successful when M 0 recovers M, which
is threatened by the possibility of signal corruption at various
points along this noisy channel. For example, phonetic reduction may cause the deletion of words between w and u, and
interference during lexical retrieval may result in the accidental substitution of intended words with other words. These are
two examples of (production-based) noise processes that may
cause u to differ from w, but, and this is crucial for the present
paper, these processes may be modulated by the structural information in S. For example, phonetic reduction is more common in function words than in content words (Bell, Brenier,
Gregory, Girand, & Jurafsky, 2009), and accidental substitutions typically involve words of the same grammatical category (Harley & MacAndrew, 2001). Likewise, phonological exchange errors (e.g., “coat-thrutting”) frequently involve
phonemes that occupy the same syllable position or share certain phonetic features (Ellis, 1980). More generally, then, the
effect of S on u, captured by the curved edge in Fig. 1, is manifest in what we call “structure-sensitive” errors: it modulates
the operation of noise processes between w and u, based on
structural information about the atomic elements in w. The
structure-sensitivity of w → u noise processes makes them
qualitatively different from the noise processes that transform
the actual utterance u into the input I to the comprehension
system. The latter are physical and neural processes including
environmental noise, precision limits of perceptual systems,

Evidence that comprehenders adopt non-literal interpretations when the literal meaning of a sentence is implausible
or otherwise unlikely has been around for at least 15 years.
For example, Christianson, Hollingworth, Halliwell, and Ferreira (2001) found that garden-pathed readers partially retain
the thematic role assignment associated with their initial misinterpretation even when it is incompatible with the literal
sentence once the garden path has been resolved. Ferreira
(2003) subsequently showed that such tendencies arise not
only from garden-path constructions, but also in ordinary
sentences with implausible literal interpretations, particularly
when implausible events are expressed using non-canonical
linguistic forms (e.g., in passive voice). These observations raise the questions when and how comprehenders decide
whether or not a given utterance should be taken at face value
and receive a literal interpretation, and if not, what alternative
interpretation should be adopted instead.
According to the noisy-channel (Shannon, 1949) theory of
language comprehension, interpretations arise rationally and
gradiently through probabilistic inference (Levy, 2008). As
per usual in the tradition of Rational Analysis (Anderson,
1990; Chater & Oaksford, 1999), the noisy-channel theory
takes as a starting point the hypothesis that comprehension is
the statistically optimal solution to the problem of communicating under noise. The structure of this problem is schematically represented in Fig. 1: The speaker intends to convey
meaning M by encoding it linguistically in a structured representation S with surface form w. For example, if S is the
intended syntactic tree, w may represent the word string that

1 In principle, these atomic units could also represent phonemes
or orthographic characters, but the present paper focuses on wordbased operations.

378

and imperfection in memory traces of previous input representations. These operate on the actual utterance u and thus
must be conditionally independent of the upstream variables
w and S, which have representational status only internal to
production.
Given this representation of the communicative process,
the comprehender’s decision whether or not a given utterance
should be interpreted literally, comes down to the conditional
distribution P(M 0 |I). We hypothesize that comprehenders infer this distribution by rationally integrating their prior expectations about meanings with the likelihood of the observed
input under their model of the noisy channel:
P(M|I) ∝ P(I|M)P(M)

u0

I

w0

S0

M0

Figure 2: The comprehender’s noise model ideally mirrors
the production process. u0 , w0 , and S0 are the comprehenders
model of u, w, and S (cf. Fig. 1); the dashed edge corresponds
to the structure sensitivity hypothesis pursued in the present
paper. The shading emphasizes that only I is known to the
comprehender and forms the basis for inferring M 0 (cf. Eq i).
their noise model completely mirrors the production process
as represented in Fig. 1, and inferring the intended meaning
of an utterance requires marginalizing over w0 , S0 , and u0 :

(i)

This general characterization of comprehension as
Bayesian inference underscores the importance of understanding the noise model, P(I|M), that comprehenders use
to reverse-engineer the process that may have generated the
input they observed. In keeping with the tradition of Rational Analysis, we take as a starting point the noise model of
an optimal comprehender (Fig. 2), which mirrors the production process and thus explicitly represents the possibility of
various types of noise corruption, as discussed above.
The noisy-channel proposal has found general support
in online reading-time studies (Levy, Bicknell, Slattery, &
Rayner, 2009; Levy, 2011; Bergen, Levy, & Gibson, 2012),
as well as in offline measures of comprehension accuracy
(Gibson, Bergen, & Piantadosi, 2013). However, there are
two important limitations in these previous studies, which are
addressed in the present paper: First, the noise operations that
comprehenders have been shown to detect and repair during
interpretation so far only contain deletions, insertions, and
substitutions, which represent only a small subset of the noise
processes known to affect production. One prominent source
of noise that is known to operate at various levels of linguistic
representation involves the accidental exchange of elements
(e.g., phonemes, affixes, or words), yet no previous study has
found evidence that comprehenders expect and repair such
errors (in fact, as discussed below, Gibson et al. (2013) report evidence that appears to be inconsistent with this possibility). A second, related limitation of previous research is
that all of the extant evidence is compatible with structureinsensitive noise models, since all of the noise processes that
comprehenders have been shown to repair in these studies are
string-based operations that do not require reference to, or
knowledge of, the underlying structure of the input.
The central difference between such structure-insensitive
noise models and the structure-sensitive model we are testing in the present paper is captured by the dashed edge in
Fig. 2: in a structure-insensitive noise model, this connection
does not exist and w0 d-separates u0 and S0 . Consequently,
the underlying structure of the intended word string has no
bearing on the actual utterance except through the word string
itself. If, however, as we hypothesize, comprehenders do consider the possibility of structure-sensitive noise operations,

P(M 0 |I) ∝ P(M 0 )

Z

P(I|u0 )P(u0 |w0 ,S0 )P(w0 |S0 )P(S0 |M 0 )dw0 dS0 du0

w0 ,S0 ,u0

(ii)

To test the structure sensitivity hypothesis and address limitations of previous research, we test whether comprehenders
consider the positional exchange of words a potential source
of signal corruption. Initial support for this hypothesis comes
from the abundance of exchange errors in the phonological
domain (MacKay, 1987), which comprehenders appear to repair routinely during comprehension. For example, upon encountering the phrase “coat-thrutting”, the non-literal alternative “throat-cutting” appears to surface naturally (MacKay,
1987). It is important to note at this point that detecting exchange errors does not require structure sensitivity per se,
since the exchange of two randomly sampled elements in a
string is possible without reference to (or knowledge of) the
underlying structure. However, if comprehenders expect the
exchange of some elements but not others, that would support the structure sensitivity hypothesis because that distinction does require reference to the underlying structure of the
surface string.
Gibson et al. (2013) found evidence that suggests that comprehenders do not consider the positional exchange of at least
some words. They presented participants with sentences that
varied in terms of semantic plausbility and syntactic structure
and probed their interpretation through comprehension questions. Overall, comprehenders readily adopted non-literal interpretations when (a) the literal utterance was semantically
implausible and (b) a more plausible alternative interpretation could be obtained by postulating the deletion or insertion of individual words. However, implausible transitive sentences, such as (1-a), were almost always interpreted literally,
although a more plausible reading was available on the assumption that the two nouns had been exchanged by mistake
(1-b). The finding that comprehenders retained the faithful
but implausible reading in such cases suggests that the word
exchange that would recover the more plausible reading is not
a likely operation under the their noise model.

379

(1)

a.
b.

The literally encoded event is either plausible (package
falling down) or implausible (falling up), and in each case
the other reading is available by exchanging the prepositions
while leaving everything else in place. Both plausibility
and canonicality affect the prior probability of the literal
interpretation: since the implausible event is less likely to
occure, it is less likely to reflect the speaker’s communicative
event, but irrespective of her intended meaning, she is more
likely to express it using the canonical PP order “from...to...”
than the non-canonical “to...from...”.2

The ball kicked the girl.
The girl kicked the ball.

However, the observation that comprehenders do not contemplate exchanges in such cases does not imply that their noise
model precludes any possibility of exchange errors. For example, the noise model may place higher probability on the
exchange of function words than content words or favor exchanges out of syntactic adjuncts compared to complements,
which would make the noun-noun exchanges that are required
for repairing (1-a) a low-probability noise operation.
The present paper provides evidence from applying the
experimental paradigm used in the Gibson et al. to further
explore the status of exchange errors under comprehenders’
noise model. We presented participants with sentences whose
thematic role assignment was either plausible or implausible
on a literal interpretation and, crucially, could be reversed
through the positional exchange of prepositions. If comprehenders are tempted by these non-literal interpretations, that
would suggest not only that exchange errors are among the
noise operations they consider, but also that their noise model
is structure-sensitive in that it assigns greater probability to
the exchange of some elements (e.g., prepositions) than others (e.g., nouns).

Procedure. Participants were presented with 20 experimental items in a random order, interspersed with 48 filler
items. In a full latin square, one of the four versions of each
item was displayed together with a yes/no comprehension
question that was designed to distinguish between plausible
and implausible thematic-role assignments. For example,
the sentences in Table 1 were followed by the question Did
something fall to the floor?, to which completely literal
comprehenders would respond “Yes” following the plausible
sentences and “No” following the implausible ones. Optimal
noisy-channel comprehenders, on the other hand, would
weigh the possibility of an exchange error against the prior
probability of the candidate interpretations, and thus may
exhibit the reverse response pattern when the literal parse is
semantically implausible and/or syntactically non-canonical.
Across items, the plausibility of the comprehension question
was counterbalanced to ensure that the literally correct
answer was equally often “Yes” and “No”.

Methods
Participants were presented with sentences that were plausible or implausible on a literal interpretation, paired with comprehension questions that were designed to distinguish between literal and non-literal interpretations in a 2-alternative
forced-choice task. The materials were constructed to afford
alternative interpretations through word exchanges. To foreshadow the results, participants’ response patterns strongly
suggest that these exchanges were indeed among the noise
operations they considered during comprehension.

Canonicality norming. To estimate the relative canonicality of PP orders, we performed a frequency analysis of
the Brown corpus (Kucera & Francis, 1967) and the Wall
Street Journal (Paul & Baker, 1992) sections of the Penn
Treebank (Marcus, Santorini, & Marcinkiewicz, 1994), using
Levy and Andrew’s (2006) Tregex software package for tree
searches.3 The relative frequency with which each preposition pair occurred in the more frequent order is summarized
in Fig. 3. For the purpose of the 2x2 design, each utterance
was categorized as canonical or non-canonical (based on
the threshold indicated by the dashed line), but the analyses
reported below made use of the continuous estimates.

Participants. 60 self-reported native speakers of English
were recruited via Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk. 1 participant with less than 75% accuracy on filler items was excluded from the analysis.
Materials. Following a 2x2 within-subject design, the
semantic plausibility of the literally described event was
crossed with the order of prepositional phrase (PP) adjuncts,
as illustrated in Table 1. More precise estimates of the semantic plausibility of the utterances were obtained in a separate
norming experiment and the canonicality of PP orders was
estimated in a corpus analysis (both described below).
Plausibility
plausible
plausible
implausible
implausible

PP order
canonical
non-canonical
canonical
non-canonical

Plausibility norming. To quantify differences in plausibility between sentences both within and across items, we conducted a separate norming experiment, in which participants
(n = 12) rated the plausibility of the events described by the
sentences in question (e.g., The package fell from the table to

The package fell...
...from the table to the floor.
...to the floor from the table.
...from the floor to the table.
...to the table from the floor.

Table 1: Example item in 2x2 within-subject design.

380

2 The corpus analysis described below found that in over 90% of
sentences with PP adjuncts headed by “from” and “to” the former
preceded the latter (cf. Fig. 3).
3 The queries for this analysis were, for example, < (@PP <<#
from $++ (@PP <<# to)) and
< (@PP <<# to $++ (@PP
<<# from)), for preposition pair from-to.

from... until...
1.00

to... for...

Mean plausibility rating

from... to...
to... about...
with... about...
from... about...
from... into...
into... with...
at... in...
for... in...
0.25

0.50

0.75

0.75

0.50

0.25

1.00

Relative corpus frequency

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Item

Figure 3: Relative frequency of canonical order of each PP
pair. The dashed line indicates the threshold for categorizing
orders as canonical vs. non-canonical. Errorbars represent
Clopper-Pearson confidence intervals for proportions, calculated with the PropCIs R package (Scherer, 2014).

Figure 4: Mean normalized plausibility ratings of canonical
PP exchange items. As in Fig. 3, the dashed line indicates
the categorization threshold for establishing the 2x2 design.
Errorbars represent SEs of the mean.

the floor vs. The package fell from the floor to the table), using two independent sliders, each ranging from “completely
plausible” to “completely implausible”. Only canonical item
versions were used, so that the sentence pairs that participants
rated differed only in their thematic role assignment, and not
in the order of the prepositions. The two measures obtained
for each sentence pair were normalized and scaled to range
over the interval [0,1] by dividing each by their sum.4

The items used in these three experiments were included in
the norming experiment described above, which presented
all items in a within-subject design to ensure that plausibility norms were comparable across experiments (cf. Fig. 5).
Predictions. If accidental exchanges of prepositions are
possible under comprehenders’ noise model, we expect them
to adopt non-literal interpretations at least on some trials.
More specifically, the noisy-channel model predicts that the
extent to which comprehenders perform such noise inferences
should be inversely proportional to the prior probability of
the literal utterance, and should therefore be driven by the
semantic plausibility as well as syntactic canonicality of the
displayed sentence.
If comprehenders’ noise model is structure-sensitive, they
may assign different probabilities to exchanges of some elements compared to others. Thus, we predict that comprehenders adopt non-literal interpretations in the case of prepositional exchanges more readily compared to the noun-noun
exchanges that would permit the repair of implausible active/passive sentences. In other words, the rate of noise inference should be higher for sentences like The package fell
from the floor to the table compared to sentences like The ball
kicked the girl.

Replication of Gibson et al. experiments. To situate our
results within the context of the Gibson et al. (2013) findings,
we replicated three of the experiments that were reported
in that paper, each testing a different syntactic alternation.
We chose one that according to Gibson et al. had received
mostly non-literal interpretations (DO/PO benefactives), one
that produced a balanced number of literal and non-literal interpretations (transitive/intransitive), and one that triggered
almost no non-literal interpretations (active/passive). Example sentences from each experiment are shown below:
(2)

(3)

(4)

Active/passive:
a. The girl kicked the ball.
b. The girl was kicked by the ball.

[plausible]
[implausible]

Transitive/intransitive:
a. The chemotherapy shrank the tumor. [plausible]
b. The chemotherapy shrank from the tumor.[impl.]

Results
Plausibility and canonicality norming. The mean normalized plausibility ratings of the PP exchange items are shown
in Fig. 4, summarized alongsides the replication materials in
Fig. 5 (since ratings for plausible sentences and their implausible counterparts summed to 1, only plausible versions are
shown). Overall, sentences were rated as either highly plausible or highly implausible (all normalized mean ratings for
plausible items were above 0.9), although the PP exchange
materials were slightly less polarizing than the materials used

Direct-object/prepositional-object benefactives:
a. The father bought his son a bicycle. [plausible]
b. The father bought his son for a bicycle. [impl.]

4 For example, if the plausible sentence was rated as “completely
plausible” (corresponding to a score of 100), and the implausible
alternative received the score 20, the normalized plausibility scores
100
20
were 100+20
≈ 0.83 and 100+20
≈ 0.17, respectively.

381

vealed a main effect of plausibility (β = 1.303, p < 0.0001)
as well as a small, but significant, main effect of canonicality
(β = 0.276, p = 0.038). Both main effects were in the predicted direction: non-literal interpretations were more likely
for utterances with implausible semantics and non-canonical
form than for those that described plausible events and made
use of the more canonical PP order.
Finally, the proportion of literal interpretations of implausible PP exchange items was significantly lower compared to
implausible active/passive sentences (p < 0.001).

Mean plausibility rating

1

0.95

0.9
Active/
Passive

Transitive/
Intransitive

DO/PO
Benefactives

PP
Exchange

Discussion
The results presented here demonstrate that word exchanges
are among the noise operations comprehenders consider
when interpreting implausible or otherwise unlikely utterances. Moreover, they suggest that comprehenders’ noise
model is structure-sensitive, since the possibility of exchanging two words for gains in plausibility was exploited in the
case of PP adjuncts, but not active/passive constructions.
It is not clear from our results, however, exactly what elements comprehenders expect to be subject to exchanges. Notice that the plausible interpretation of

Figure 5: Mean normalized plausibility ratings for plausible
items from all 4 experiments. Errorbars show SEs of by-item
means.
in the Gibson et al. (2013) study, especially the active/passive
sentences.
Noise inference. Fig. 6 shows the results from all four experiments, broken up by construction and binned plausibility.
Consider first the replications of the Gibson et al. experiments
in panels 1, 3, and 4 (from the left). As expected, accuracy on
plausible items (light grey) was largely at ceiling for all of the
experiments, and comparable to the mean accuracy on filler
items (white), which is consistent with Gibson et al.’s results.
Implausible items (dark grey) received non-literal interpretations to different extents across experiments. Most notably,
implausible passives triggered noise inferences significantly
more often than plausible passives (p = 0.02) and marginally
more often than implausible actives (p = 0.1). This result
is consistent with Ferreira’s (2003) findings and slightly different from what Gibson et al. (2013) reported, who found
passives to be interpreted literally on more than 95% of trials.
In all other respects our results closely replicate those from
the Gibson et al. study.
The central prediction of the present study was that implausible (and non-canonical) sentences would provoke nonliteral interpretations that can be reached through the positional exchange of elements within the sentence. We replicated Gibson et al.’s finding that such exchanges appear to
be impossible—or at least highly unlikely—in the case of active/passive constructions, which were overwhelmingly interpreted literally, even when they described highly implausible events (cf. panel 1 in Fig. 6). However, as illustrated
in panel 2, implausible sentences with exchangeable PP adjuncts did receive non-literal interpretations on 31-37% of
trials, while their plausible counterparts were interpreted literally more than 90% of the time, which is comparable to
the mean comprehension accuracy on filler items. Consistent
with this, a binomial mixed-effects regression analysis5 re-

(5)

[PP to [NP the table]] [PP from [NP the floor]]

can be achieved by exchanging either the prepositions or the
nouns (or noun phrases). The significant effect of canonicality does suggest that prepositions were considered the object
of the exchanges at least some of the time because exchanging
nouns does not achieve a change in the order of prepositions
and can therefore not explain the effect of canonicality. However, this does not imply that noun-noun exchanges are impossible. Although we have exemplified possible structuresensitive constraints on exchanges in terms of lexical categories or content/function word status throughout the paper,
it is also possible that the crucial difference between PP exchanges and noun-noun exchanges in actives/passives is that
the former involve adjuncts whereas the latter affect elements
in complement position. It is possible that either or both of
these constraints exist, but since our data do not allow us to
test either of these admittedly post-hoc explanations directly,
they remain in the realm of speculation.

Conclusion
We have reported experimental evidence that comprehenders
expect the communicative signal to be corrupted by accidental word exchanges, and that this expectation is structuresensitive. These results build on previous findings suggesting that the language comprehension machinery chooses rationally from a range of possible interpretations. Going beyond previous formulations of comprehenders’ noise model,
we showed that it more completely mirrors the production
process than previously assumed. Thus, our results add to
a growing pile of evidence that language comprehension is
well-adapted to the problem of communication across a noisy
channel, and makes use of all available information in the

5 The

analysis was carried out using the lme4 R package. The
full formula was response ∼ plausibility * canonicality
(1 + plausibility * canonicality || item) + (1 +
plausibility * canonicality || subject).

382

PP Exchanges

Transitive/Intransitive

DO/PO Benefactives

0.75
0.5
0.25
0

im

pl
a
pa us
s ib
im siv le
pl e
au
ac sib
ti le
pl ve
a
pa us
ss ible
i
pl ve
au
ac sib
tiv le
e
fil
le
rs
no im
nc pla
an us
o ib
im nic le
p a
ca lau l
no si
ni ble
no
c
nc pla al
an us
on ib
ic le
p a
ca lau l
no si
ni ble
ca
l
fil
le
rs
im
p
tra lau
ns sib
im itiv le
in pla e
tra u
ns sib
iti le
pl ve
tra au
ns sib
iti le
v
p
in la e
tra u
ns sib
iti le
ve
fil
le
rs
im
pl
au
si
b
im D le
pl O
au
si
b
PO le
pl
au
si
b
D le
pl O
au
si
b
PO le
fil
le
rs

Proportion of literal responses

Active/Passive
1

Figure 6: Proportion of literal responses across experiments. Errorbars represent SEs of by-subject means.
Harley, T. A., & MacAndrew, S. B. (2001). Constraints upon
word substitution speech errors. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 30(4), 395–418.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. (1967). The Brown University
Standard Corpus of Present-Day American English (Brown
Corpus). Providence: Brown University.
Levy, R.
(2008).
A noisy-channel model of rational human sentence comprehension under uncertain input. Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 234–243.
doi:
10.3115/1613715.1613749
Levy, R. (2011). Integrating surprisal and uncertain-input
models in online sentence comprehension: formal techniques and empirical results. In (pp. 1055–1065). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Levy, R., & Andrew, G. (2006). Tregex and tsurgeon: tools
for querying and manipulating tree data structures. In In 5th
international conference on language resources and evaluation.
Levy, R., Bicknell, K., Slattery, T., & Rayner, K. (2009).
Eye movement evidence that readers maintain and act on
uncertainty about past linguistic input. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(50), 21086–21090.
MacKay, D. G. (1987). Constraints on theories of sequencing
and timing in language perception and production. Language perception and production: Relationships between
listening, speaking, reading and writing, 3, 407.
Marcus, M. P., Santorini, B., & Marcinkiewicz,
M. A.
(1994).
Building a large annotated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank.
Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 313–330.
Retrieved from
citeseer.nj.nec.com/marcus93building.html
Paul, D. B., & Baker, J. M. (1992). The design for the Wall
Street Journal-based CSR corpus. In Proceedings of the
workshop on speech and natural language (pp. 357–362).
Scherer, R. (2014). PropCIs: Various confidence interval
methods for proportions. R package version 0.2-5.
Shannon, C. E. (1949). Communication in the presence of
noise. Proceedings of the IRE, 37(1), 10–21.

search for the interpretation that is most likely to reflect the
speaker’s communicative intent.

Acknowledgments
This work has benefitted from discussion with audiences
at the Linguistics BrownBag at UCSD, AMLaP 2015, and
the 2016 Annual Meeting of the LSA. We gratefully acknowledge support from NSF grant IIS-0953870, NIH grant
HD065829, and an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship to
RPL.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Psychology Press.
Bell, A., Brenier, J. M., Gregory, M., Girand, C., & Jurafsky,
D. (2009). Predictability effects on durations of content
and function words in conversational English. Journal of
Memory and Language, 60(1), 92–111.
Bergen, L., Levy, R., & Gibson, E. (2012). Verb omission
errors: Evidence of rational processing of noisy language
inputs. In Proceedings of the 34th annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1320–1325).
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (1999). Ten Years of the Rational
Analysis of Cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(2),
57–65.
Christianson, K., Hollingworth, A., Halliwell, J. F., & Ferreira, F. (2001). Thematic roles assigned along the garden
path linger. Cognitive Psychology, 42(4), 368–407.
Ellis, A. W. (1980). Errors in speech and short-term memory: The effects of phonemic similarity and syllable position. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
19(5), 624–634.
Ferreira, F. (2003). The misinterpretation of noncanonical
sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 47(2), 164–203.
Gibson, E., Bergen, L., & Piantadosi, S. T. (2013). Rational
integration of noisy evidence and prior semantic expectations in sentence interpretation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(20), 8051–8056.

383

