Syntax Accommodation in Social Media Conversations
Reihane Boghrati1 , Joe Hoover2 , Kate M. Johnson2 , Justin Garten1 , Morteza Dehghani1,2
boghrati, jehoover,katejohn, jgarten, mdehghan@usc.edu
1 Department of Computer Science
2 Department of Psychology
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA
Abstract
The psycholinguistic theory of Communication Accommodation proposes that people modify communication dynamics
(e.g. vocal patterns, gesture, word choice, syntax, etc.) to
minimize (or maximize) their social differences. Research on
communication accommodation has shown that people who
want social approval will modify their linguistic style to match
that of their interactant; however, most studies have been conducted on small-scale datasets and in laboratory situations. In
this work, we investigate the relationship between linguistic
syntactic usage and conversation participation in a more naturalistic conversational setting: social media conversations on
Reddit.com. We introduce a novel approach for calculating
document-level syntactic similarity by relying on natural language processing methods (parse tree generators) and graph
theory techniques (minimum weight perfect matching on complete bipartite graphs). Using the proposed method, we present
the results of two experiments which demonstrate that users
who comment on a post tend to use syntax similar to that of
the original post. Specifically, we provide evidence that comments on a post are more likely to follow the syntactic structure
of the original post, compared to both random comments and
also posts by the author of the comment.
Keywords: Communication Accommodation Theory; Social
Media; Syntax Similarity; Linguistic Style Convergence

Introduction
Communication Accommodation Theory (CAT) is a prominent theory in psycholinguistics that targets the effects of
language on peoples behavior (Giles, 2008). It proposes
that people adjust features of their communication dynamics,
such as vocal patterns and gestures, while interacting with
others in order to maximize or minimize their social differences (Shepard, Giles, & Le Poire, 2001). This speech syntax accommodation convergence or divergence can be conscious or unconscious and is associated with a speaker’s involvement in group dynamic processes, such as social integration and group identification or disidentification (Giles,
Coupland, & Coupland, 1991). To some extent, CAT shares
similarities with a related psycholinguistic theory, Syntax
Priming Theory (Bock, 1986), which suggests that speakers
tend to unconsciously replicate specific syntactical patterns
in their own speech through mere exposure. For example
Gries (2005) analyzed two specific syntactic structures, dative alternation and particle replacement of transitive phrasal
verbs, and showed syntactic priming in a corpus-based study.
In a different study, Reitter, Moore, and Keller (2010) focused on spoken-language and provided evidence for priming of syntactic rules. However, an important difference between Communication Accommodation Theory and Syntax
Priming Theory is that the former posits that this process of

dynamic mimicry is sensitive to social context and serves a
functional social purpose.
Notably, a considerable body of research has investigated
the relationship between word usage and psychologically relevant characteristics. There have been several studies that focused on function words as an indicator of linguistic style,
personality, and communication (Niederhoffer & Pennebaker,
2002). For example, Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gamon, and
Dumais (2011) identified 14 categories of function words
and demonstrated that users who are in the same conversation in Twitter, tend to use words from the same category in
their tweets compared to those who are not 1 . Pennebaker
(2011) emphasized the relationship between people’s use of
function words (i.e. style words) and a range of psychological characteristics. For instance, they found that first person pronoun use (vs ”we” pronouns) is positively related
with honesty. In another study, Boyd and Pennebaker (2015)
showed that function words can help to identify the author of
a piece of writing. These studies provide important insight
into the relationship between linguistic dynamics and sociopsychological constructs.
Research has also provided evidence for the positive social outcomes of CAT when people match their word use to
that of their conversation partners (Jacob, Guéguen, Martin,
& Boulbry, 2011; Guéguen, 2009). For instance, Van Baaren,
Holland, Steenaert, and van Knippenberg (2003) found that
waitresses who repeat customers orders back to them tend to
receive higher tips than waitresses who do not. Another similar study on a product-marketing scenario suggests that when
an interviewer mirrors a participant’s verbal and non-verbal
gestures, the participant will give the product being discussed a higher rating (Tanner, Ferraro, Chartrand, Bettman,
& Van Baaren, 2008). Convergence can occur when people
seek social approval from their interactant (Giles & Powesland, 1975). Further, research shows that people who are
in low power positions tend to adapt their language to the
language of their superiors (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lee,
Pang, & Kleinberg, 2012). However, syntax divergence often appears when a member of a group tries to distinguish
him/herself from an out-group and signal social identity to an
in-group (Samter, 2007).
1 Function words, or style words, are often contrasted with content words, which generally show what people say, whereas style
words indicate how people communicate. Style words categories include pronouns, prepositions, articles, conjunctions, auxiliary verbs,
etc (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010).

1463

Similarity Attraction Theory (a component theory of CAT)
(Byrne, 1971) suggests that people who exhibit overlapping
behaviors and beliefs are more likely to be attracted to one
another. Extrapolating from CAT, one way to become similar
to others and seek social approval is to induce language style
convergence. When people feel close to one another, they affect each other more. Similarly, reducing users perceived social differences by adjusting language style matching could
help us communicate more effectively with users. Giles, Taylor, and Bourhis (1973) conducted a study on bilinguals from
two ethnolinguistic groups and showed that listeners of one
ethnic group were more accepting and thought more highly
of speakers from the second group when they used the first
group’s native language to explain a picture.
In the current research, we investigate the relationship between language style and discussion participation through the
lens of CAT. More specifically, we examine the hypothesis that language use among conversation participants tends
toward syntactic convergence by analyzing the syntax and
structure of their sentences throughout a document (in our
study, post or comment). To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first project which studies CAT by focusing on syntax and structure of language, not just word usage. In other
words, we focus on how people put words together instead of
what words they use.
The conversation-structure of the social network on Reddit.com makes it a good fit for our analysis (Weninger, Zhu,
& Han, 2013). Reddit posts are organized in topical forums called subreddits. Users express their thoughts or post
their questions on subreddits to receive comments from other
users. Both the natural setting and large size of this dataset
make it unique from the previous research in this area using
lab-based experiments.
In what follows, we first introduce our novel approach for
calculating syntactic similarity of two given documents. We
also provide details about the data we used throughout our
project. Next, we discuss the two experiments which we conducted to examine our hypothesis about within-subreddit and
within-person variations in writing style. Each experiment’s
procedure is followed by its results. Finally, we discuss the
conclusion of our work and future directions.

Method
In this section we introduce the approach and the dataset we
used to study syntax accommodation in social media conversations.

Syntax Similarity
To the best of our knowledge, this research is the first to study
syntax accommodation in social media conversations through
the lens of CAT. To achieve this goal, we employed a novel
approach for calculating the syntactic similarity of two documents, which we describe in detail in this section. In the following section, we report results generated by applying this
method to test our hypotheses about syntax accommodation
among Reddit users.

ROOT
S
NP

VP

DT

JJ

NN

VBD

The

angry

bear

chased

.
.

NP
DT

ADJP

the

NN

JJ

JJ

frightened

little

squirrel

Figure 1: An example of a parse tree for the sentence “The
angry bear chased the frightened little squirrel.”

v1

u1

u2

u3

u4

v2

v3

v4

v5

v6

Figure 2: An example of a complete bipartite graph. The
blue vertices are considered as set U and the yellow vertices
are considered as set V.
Our method for calculating the syntactic similarity between
two documents involves three major steps.
First, we build a parse tree for each sentence in the two
documents being compared (De Marneffe, MacCartney, Manning, et al., 2006). A parse tree is a tree-shaped data structure
that represents the syntactic structure of a sentence (e.g. Figure 1). Second, we calculate the between-document pairwise
similarity for each sentence by comparing the parse trees for
all sentences in one document to the parse trees of all sentences in the other document.
We use the Edit Distance algorithm to calculate this similarity between the two parse trees (Navarro, 2001). This algorithm counts the minimum number of operations needed to
transform one tree into the other one. Operations may include
deleting, adding or updating a node in a tree. We then apply
the Edit Distance algorithm to every pair of parse trees between the two documents. For example, if one document has
two sentences and the other document has three sentences,
the edit distance algorithm is performed six times.
We then normalize these results by dividing the output of
the edit distance algorithm by the number of nodes in the
parse trees. This division mitigates potential biases in our
measurement of syntactic similarity due to increases in the
number of operations as the number of nodes increase. The
normalized output represents the syntactic similarity between
the two input sentences parse trees, with a separate measure

1464

of syntactic similarity for each sentence pair between the two
documents. Thus, as the metric approaches zero it indicates
greater similarity between two parse trees.
Third, we use a complete bipartite graph structure and an
algorithm called the Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) to
pair the sentences with the greatest syntactic similarity between two documents. We chose this algorithm to avoid introducing unnecessary noise into the measurement of documentlevel syntactic similarity. In the field of graph theory, a bipartite graph is defined as a graph which is composed of two
independent sets of vertices or nodes, U and V. That is, no
two vertices within the same set are connected by an edge
(e.g. path), a property that is referred to in the field as being
adjacent, but each vertex in one set share an edge with every
vertex in the other set (Figure 2).
Alternatively, we could have estimated the syntactic similarity between documents by taking the average of each
set of sentence-level similarities to yield a point estimate
of document-level syntactic similarity. However, it seems
likely that simply averaging the similarities of all sentence
pairs would risk introducing considerable noise to the overall
model. For example, consider a case in which two documents
are being compared and each document contains three sentences. Further, imagine that within both documents the sentences that constitute those documents have substantially different syntactical structures, but across documents each sentence has a pair with a nearly identical syntactical structure.
We would argue that because these two documents contained
sentences with close syntactic pairs, they should be considered as having strong syntactic similarity. However, simply
averaging the syntactic similarity between all sentence pairs
would wash out this similarity.
In our method, to compare two documents U and V, we
construct a complete bipartite graph with one set’s vertices
representing document U’s parse trees and the other representing document V’s parse trees. Further, each edge between
a given pair of vertices from each set is weighted by the edit
distance between the parse trees represented by those vertices
calculated in step two.
Once the complete bipartite graph is constructed, we use
the Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) to find the pattern of
vertex pairings that minimizes the weights of all edges, an
optimization process referred to as minimum weight perfect
matching. Perfect matching refers to a set of pairwise nonadjacent edges, in which every vertex should appear in exactly one matching. Minimum weight perfect matching is a
special case of perfect matching which attempts to choose
edges with lower weights. Given vertices i ∈ U and j ∈ V ,
the weight function w(i, j) refers to the weight of the edge
between two vertices i and j. The goal in minimum weight
perfect matching problem is to minimize the following equation:
(1)
∑ w(i, j)
i∈Uand j∈V

The minimum perfect matching of the bipartite graph of

sentences pairs the two most similar sentences from the two
given documents (i.e. two sets of U and V). The output
of the Hungarian algorithm is a perfect matching on the
weighted complete bipartite graph of sentences, which gives
us an optimized measure of similarity between two documents. Note that the smaller the output is, the more similar
the two documents are. By using the Hungarian algorithm
to optimize the pairing of sentences to maximize similarity,
our method sidesteps the problem of signal distortion that
would be caused by a simple averaging algorithm. Accordingly, documents that have both high syntactic similarity but
also high within-document syntactic variation are still scored
as having high syntactic similarity.
Figure 3 is an overview of the approach which was described.
We conducted two experiments to test the hypothesis of
syntax accommodation in social media conversations. We hypothesize that comments on a social media post tend to follow
the syntactic structure of the original post. Before we discuss
the details of the experiments, we will first discuss how we
compiled our dataset.

Data
We collected data from Reddit.com to examine CAT in social media conversations. Reddit is a social network in which
users create content (texts or links) and other users may comment on the created content. Reddit is organized into different topical areas which are called subreddits. The posts and
comments on each subreddit are moderated by users for off
topic, making posts on this social media platform cleaner and
more topic-specific than posts found on other forms of social
media.
We used the Text Analysis, Crawling and Interpretation
Tool (TACIT) (Dehghani et al., 2015) to collect data from
two subreddits: /r/liberal and /r/conservative.
In almost all of the collected subreddit posts, users expressed their beliefs and opinions about a particular topic.
This aspect of real conversations and debates makes these
two subreddits suitable for testing for the presence of CAT
and syntax accommodation in social media conversations.
To assemble our corpus, we gathered all the posts in the
/r/liberal and /r/conservative subreddits and their top-level
comments, that is the comments are written directly in response to the post, not to other comment.
We also collected the historical data for the users who had
commented on the /r/liberal and /r/conservative subreddits
through TACIT. Note that some of the users didn’t have any
historical data.
To facilitate syntax comparison between a comment’s text
and the original post’s text, we removed the posts which had
links to other webpages or images but no text content (referred to as selftext). We also removed the posts with no selftext in the users’ historical dataset.
At the end of the data gathering phase, we had a corpus of
167 and 146 posts from /r/liberal and /r/conservative subreddits (with the total of 7256 comments). The average length

1465

a: He	  told	  her	  that	  she	  won	  
the	  prize.
b:	  She	  owns	  the	  tree	  house.

Parse	   Tree	  Generator
c:	  Help	  yourself	  to	  the	  cake.	  
d:	  The	  cat	  in	  the	  hat	  knows	  
some	  tricks.

Edit	  Distance	  Calculator

a

C

b

d

Hungarian	   Algorithm

a
b

0.23

0.24

C
d

Syntax	  Similarity=0.21

Figure 3: Syntax Similarity Calculation Process. The edit distance calculator module calculates the similarity of each pair of
parse trees which are outputted by the parse tree generator module. In the last step, the Hungarian algorithm module finds
the minimum weight perfect matching of the graph of sentences’ parse trees. The bold edges are the ones that are selected by
the Hungarian algorithm. The overall syntax similarity of the two document is the summation of the selected edges’ weights
divided by the number of edges.
of a post or comment in /r/conservative /r/liberal subreddits
is 53 and 87 words respectively. Also the corpus of historical
data included posts from 2902 users.

the original post compared to random comments.
Syntax Similarity(C0 , P0 ) > Syntax Similarity(C1 , P0 ) (2)

Experiment One

In other words, if the left-hand side of the equation 2 is
higher than the right-hand side, it provides evidence that the
syntax of a post affects the syntax of top-level comments
that follow it. Because all predictions were a priori and directional, they were verified with one-tailed tests (Rosenthal,
Rosnow, & Rubin, 2000).

The first experiment aims to examine differences in syntax
among comments and posts in a given subreddit. We hypothesize that comments written in response to a post are more
syntactically similar to the original post compared to a random comment from a random post. In order to exclude the
effects of homophily in syntax accommodation, we selected
the random comparison comment from the same subreddit as
the original comment. Therefore, the original post, comment,
and random comment are all written within the same community.

Results

Approach
In this experiment, we use the entire corpus of posts and
top-level comments from the two subreddits, /r/liberal and
/r/conservative.
Suppose comment C0 is written on post P0 , and post P0
is posted in subreddit S0 . Also, suppose that C1 is a random
comment which is written on a random post, P1 , which is in
the same subreddit as the post P0 (i.e. S0 ). Using the method
proposed in the previous section, we calculate the syntactic
similarity of C0 and P0 and the syntactic similarity of C1 and
P0 , which is a randomly chosen comment from the same subreddit community. We run the syntactic similarity for each of
the 7256 comments in the subreddit S0 . If the syntactic similarity of C0 and P0 is significantly higher than the syntactic
similarity of C1 and P0 , we may conclude that comments on
a post are more likely to follow similar syntactic structure to

To conduct the first experiment, each comment in the subreddit S0 was considered as C0 in the equation 2. We calculated the syntactic similarity of each comment to its original post, P0 for all comments in /r/liberal subreddit and in
/r/conservative subbredit. We also calculated the syntactic
similarity of P0 and a random comment C0 in each run. As
mentioned in the method section, smaller output numbers indicate higher syntactically similarity between the comment
and the post.
The results support our hypothesis that a comment, C0 and
its original post, P0 are more syntactically similar than a random comment C1 and that post P0 (t(14354) = 3.5967, p <
0.01).

Experiment Two
The second experiment was deigned to focus on users’ historical data in order to look at within-person variations in writing
style.
We hypothesize that users’ writing styles in comments are
influenced by the original post’s syntax, and that their com-

1466

ments are more syntactically similar to the post’s writing style
than to their syntax in previous posts. If this hypothesis holds,
it provides strong evidence for syntax accommodation in social media conversations.

Approach
In this experiment, we assessed users’ previous posts.
This dataset contains the historical data of 2902 users
who have commented on the two subreddits, /r/liberal and
/r/conservative.
Suppose comment C0 is written on post P0 from subreddit
S0 , and comment C0 is written by user U0 . Also suppose that
P1 is a random post which is written by user U0 in another
subreddit S1 . We measure the syntactic similarity of C0 and
P0 and also the syntactic similarity of C0 and the randomly
picked post, P1 . We run this experiment for the dataset of historical data of all the users who have commented on /r/liberal
or /r/conservative subreddits. If the syntactic similarity of C0
and P0 is significantly higher than the syntactic similarity of
C0 and P1 , we may infer that the syntactic structure of users’
comments is more affected by the original post’s syntax, compared to the user’s syntax in previous posts.
The left-hand side of equation 3 represents the syntactic
similarity of the comment and the original post, and the righthand side shows the syntactic similarity of the comment and
a random post from the user who has written the comment.
If the left-hand side is significantly higher than the right, our
hypothesis will have been supported.
Syntax Similarity(C0 , P0 ) > Syntax Similarity(C0 , P1 ) (3)

to transform one tree in to another. Finally, we create a complete weighted bipartite graph in which nodes represent sentences and the weights of edges represent edit distance between two paired sentences and then by finding the minimum
weight perfect matching, we compute the syntactic similarity
of the two documents.
Using this method, we provided evidence for the Communication Accommodation Theory in social media conversations through two experiments using a Reddit dataset of two
subreddits consisting of 313 posts, 7256 top-level comments,
and 2902 users’ historical data. We showed that users tend to
follow the language syntax of their conversation partner. In
the first experiment, we tested whether comments which are
written on a post are affected by the original post’s syntax. In
the second experiment, we examined the similarity of a comment to the original post compared to a random post written
by the writer of the comment.
As discussed in the previous section, our results demonstrate that comments that were written on a post are more
syntactically similar to the original post compared to a random comment. This finding supports our first hypothesis that
a post’s syntax affects the syntax of the comments that follow
it. Furthermore, a user’s comment is syntactically more similar to the original post compared to not only a random comment, but also his or her previous posts. This finding provides
strong evidence for the existence of syntax accommodation in
the social media conversations. When users write comments
on a post, they tend to use a similar syntactic structure as the
post’s syntax, rather than using their own previous writing
style.

Results
The entire dataset of users who had commented on /r/liberal
or /r/conservative subreddits is used for this experiment.
For all of the comments in our dataset of /r/liberal and
/r/conservative subreddits, if the comment was written by a
user in the pool of users with historical data, the syntactic
similarity of C0 and the original post P0 , is calculated. We
also calculate the syntactic similarity of C0 and a random
post from the user’s historical data, P1 . We hypothesize that
a comment is more syntactically similar to its original post
compared to user’s previous post. Because the random post
and the comment was written by the same user, we used a
dependent t-test to test our hypothesis and our results show
that C0 is more syntactically similar to P0 compared to P1
(t(4772) = 1.7943, p = 0.036).

Discussion
We applied a novel approach for calculating the syntactic similarity of two documents in order to investigate the Communication Accommodation Theory hypothesis at large scale.
This approach consists of three main steps. First, we generate parse trees for all of the sentences in the two given documents. Next, we measure the difference between each pair
of sentences from the two documents using the Edit Distance
algorithm, which computes the number of operations needed

Conclusion and Future Works
The two studies discussed in this paper provide evidence for
the importance of syntactic similarity for linguistic style accommodation in social media conversations. Our results suggest that a post’s syntactic structure influences the comments’
syntax, providing an evidence for syntax accommodation in
social media conversations. Future research should continue
to explore how language style affects people’s behaviors or
beliefs and whether we can encourage interpersonal liking or
behaviors through syntax matching.
Previous studies have mostly emphasized semantics or
word usage in language while our results provide evidence
for the importance of syntax as a lens to social cognition. In
this work we demonstrated the effect of posts’ syntax on comments’ syntax regardless of the order of sentences. However,
further experiments should be performed to study syntax accommodation at finer-grained levels. Additionally, some syntactic structures might trigger syntax accommodation more
than the other structures, while in our work, we considered
that all have the same effect.
As mentioned earlier, CAT posits that people modify their
communication dynamics to minimize or maximize their social differences by either converging or diverging their language style. Building on Similarity Attraction Theory, we

1467

intend to explore whether using syntactically similar language would influence users’ behavior. Furthermore, we aim
to identify features that promote constructive debates and
whether a good debate is predictable based on the convergence of users language styles.

Acknowledgment
This research was supported in part by NSF IBSS Grant
#1520031.

References
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language production. Cognitive psychology, 18(3), 355–387.
Boyd, R. L., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2015). Did shakespeare
write double falsehood? identifying individuals by creating
psychological signatures with text analysis. Psychological
science, 0956797614566658.
Byrne, D. E. (1971). The attraction paradigm (vol. 11). Academic Pr.
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Gamon, M., & Dumais, S.
(2011). Mark my words!: linguistic style accommodation
in social media. In Proceedings of the 20th international
conference on world wide web (pp. 745–754).
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Lee, L., Pang, B., & Kleinberg, J. (2012). Echoes of power: Language effects and
power differences in social interaction. In Proceedings of
the 21st international conference on world wide web (pp.
699–708).
Dehghani, M., Johnson, K. M., Garten, J., Boghrati, R.,
Hoover, J., Balasubramanian, V., . . . Parmar, N. J. (2015).
Tacit: An open-source text analysis, crawling and interpretation tool. Crawling and Interpretation Tool (September
15, 2015).
De Marneffe, M.-C., MacCartney, B., Manning, C. D., et al.
(2006). Generating typed dependency parses from phrase
structure parses. In Proceedings of lrec (Vol. 6, pp. 449–
454).
Giles, H. (2008). Communication accommodation theory.
Sage Publications, Inc.
Giles, H., Coupland, J., & Coupland, N. (1991). Contexts of
accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics.
Cambridge University Press.
Giles, H., & Powesland, P. F. (1975). Speech style and social
evaluation. Academic Press.
Giles, H., Taylor, D. M., & Bourhis, R. (1973). Towards a
theory of interpersonal accommodation through language:
Some canadian data. Language in society, 2(02), 177–192.
Gries, S. T. (2005). Syntactic priming: A corpus-based approach. Journal of psycholinguistic research, 34(4), 365–
399.
Guéguen, N. (2009). Mimicry and seduction: An evaluation
in a courtship context. Social Influence, 4(4), 249–255.
Jacob, C., Guéguen, N., Martin, A., & Boulbry, G. (2011).
Retail salespeople’s mimicry of customers: Effects on consumer behavior. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 18(5), 381–388.

Kuhn, H. W. (1955). The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics quarterly, 2(1-2),
83–97.
Navarro, G. (2001). A guided tour to approximate string
matching. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 33(1), 31–88.
Niederhoffer, K. G., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2002). Linguistic
style matching in social interaction. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 21(4), 337–360.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2011). The secret life of pronouns. New
Scientist, 211(2828), 42–45.
Reitter, D., Moore, J. D., & Keller, F. (2010). Priming of
syntactic rules in task-oriented dialogue and spontaneous
conversation.
Rosenthal, R., Rosnow, R. L., & Rubin, D. B. (2000). Contrasts and effect sizes in behavioral research: A correlational approach. Cambridge University Press.
Samter, W. (2007). Explaining communication: Contemporary theories and exemplars. Psychology Press.
Shepard, C. A., Giles, H., & Le Poire, B. A. (2001). Communication accommodation theory. The new handbook of
language and social psychology(1.2), 33–56.
Tanner, R. J., Ferraro, R., Chartrand, T. L., Bettman, J. R., &
Van Baaren, R. (2008). Of chameleons and consumption:
The impact of mimicry on choice and preferences. Journal
of Consumer Research, 34(6), 754–766.
Tausczik, Y. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The psychological meaning of words: Liwc and computerized text analysis methods. Journal of language and social psychology,
29(1), 24–54.
Van Baaren, R. B., Holland, R. W., Steenaert, B., & van Knippenberg, A. (2003). Mimicry for money: Behavioral consequences of imitation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39(4), 393–398.
Weninger, T., Zhu, X. A., & Han, J. (2013). An exploration of
discussion threads in social news sites: A case study of the
reddit community. In Advances in social networks analysis
and mining (asonam), 2013 ieee/acm international conference on (pp. 579–583).

1468

