Tangible models and haptic representations aid learning of molecular biology
concepts
Kristen Johannes (kjohann@wested.org)
WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA, 94612

Jacklyn Powers (jpowers@wested.org)
WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA, 94612

Lisa Couper (lcouper@wested.org)
WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA, 94612

Matt Silberglitt (msilber@wested.org)
WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA, 94612

Jodi Davenport (jdavenp@wested.org)
WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA, 94612
Abstract

completed identical pre/post measures organized around
three targets areas: molecular structure, the relationships
between structural properties and function, and the
relationship between model representations and molecules.
The structurally-accurate, 3D-printed models are the
product of technological development at the Scripps
Research Institute (Höst, Larsson, Olson, & Tibell, 2013).
The tangible models use embedded magnets to represent
chemical attraction and repulsion, which allow students to
"feel" bonds form in processes such as protein folding,
nucleic acid synthesis, and viral self- assembly. As the
structure and magnets of the 3D-printed models allow
students to create “correct” models much more easily than
incorrect models, the models provide formative feedback to
the students, prompting them to address misconceptions,
build on incomplete ideas, and confirm correct ideas.
In the field of biology, molecular models have played a
critical role in transforming biochemistry from a descriptive
science into a constructive one (de Chadarevian &
Hopwood, 2004). We explore whether 3D physical models
could be effective for promoting classroom learning by
making explicit links between abstract and physical
(visuospatial and haptic) representations (Bivall, Ainsworth,
& Tibell, 2011). Prompting students to explore the
affordances and limitations of models may scaffold students'
development of metacognitive understanding of complex
fields like molecular biology (Coll, France, & Taylor,
2012).

Can novel 3D models help students develop a deeper
understanding of core concepts in molecular biology? We
adapted 3D molecular models, developed by scientists, for
use in high school science classrooms. The models accurately
represent the structural and functional properties of complex
DNA and Virus molecules, and provide visual and haptic
feedback about biomolecular properties that are often implicit
in traditional models. We investigated: 1) Can we measure
conceptual growth on core concepts? 2) Do lessons with 3D
models improve student outcomes on these measures?, and 3)
What factors mediate learning? Model use yielded measurable
gains in conceptual knowledge and the greatest gains were
related to how actively models were used during a lesson and
the facilitative role adopted by the teachers.
Keywords: Scientific models; science education; molecular
structure; visual representations; haptic representations

Background
Molecular biology requires reasoning about molecules
and processes too small to directly observe. As such,
scientists use models to generate and test hypotheses about
the structures of complex molecules such as proteins,
viruses, and DNA (Berry & Baker, 2010). Many existing
models primarily represent rigid structures of molecules.
Flexible models that embed magnets into 3D-printed
structures demonstrate how molecular structure relates to
biomolecular functions such as DNA replication, viral
assembly, protein folding, and enzyme catalysis. However
learning from complex molecular models requires students
to map between the model features and background
knowledge about the domain. In the current study, we asked
whether experience with flexible, tangible models helps
students develop key conceptual knowledge in novice high
school biology students and whether conceptual growth can
be measured in real time. For the study, we iteratively
developed and revised a series of 3D models and modelbased activities. To assess conceptual knowledge, students

The Current Study
To examine whether interactions with flexible, 3D printed
models embedded with magnets improve students
conceptual understanding of molecular biology, we
introduced two sets of interactive models and activities into
high school biology classrooms. One set focused on DNA
structure and replication, the other on the life cycle of a

372

virus and viral self-assembly. We were interested in three
related questions:
1. Do our (pre-posttest) performance measures capture key
concepts in molecular biology?
2. Do tangible models facilitate student learning of these
concepts?
3. How does variation in classroom environment and model
use relate to variation in learning gains?

followed by identical pre- and post-tests. Classroom
observers for each activity measured students’ interaction
and use of models, the amount of time devoted to different
parts of the activities, and teachers’ roles (e.g., facilitating
group discussion, answering questions, lecturing) across
time points. Teacher interviews and questionnaires solicited
feedback on teachers’ use and perceptions of the activities
and models.

We hypothesized that interactive models would lead to
increased student learning, particularly improving students’
understanding of concepts that are used regularly by
working scientists but are left implicit in traditional biology
curricula. Table 1 summarizes the targeted concepts. We
discuss the concepts in the context of tangible models for
our two featured molecular biology case studies: DNA
replication and viral self-assembly. We further explored
how naturally-occurring differences in classroom contexts
influenced learning gains. As our models targeted concepts
that are known to be challenging and typically absent from
high school biology curricula, there is no clearly suitable
business-as-usual condition for comparison. Thus, current
aim was to establish whether our measures were reliable
indicators of the concepts of interest (Table 1), and whether
these newly developed models and activities improved
student learning over time.

Participants. Nine high-school biology teachers from three
different California schools used the models and activities in
their classrooms. Teachers received 4 hours of training on
background content, features of the models and activities,
and strategies for integrating the models into existing
biology curricula and for giving student feedback. Class
sizes ranged from 22 to 31, yielding final sample sizes of
850 for DNA models and activities and 675 for virus models
and activities. The student sample was 59% female and
included 33% 9th, 49% 10th, 8% 11th, and 10% 12th grade
students.

Models and Activities
Model-based activities typically spanned two class periods.
During this time, students interacted with the models with
the goal of learning about specific phenomena. For each
activity, teachers introduced the models and activities with a
series of discussion questions designed to engage students
with the relevant phenomena. Students were then given the
opportunity to explore the models in small groups and to
work through activity worksheets. After working in small
groups, students shared their observations, evaluated their
responses to the worksheet questions, and revisited the
introductory questions in more detail. Finally, teachers
elaborated on the properties and use of the models
themselves, and helped students make connections between
model representations and the structures, functions, and
processes underlying the phenomena.

Table 1. Examples of target concepts in molecular biology
Concept

DNA replication
examples

Viral assembly
examples

Molecular
structures

The size and structure
of purines and
pyrimidines forces
complimentary base
pairing with different
numbers of H-bonds;
The anti-parallel
leading and lagging
strands of DNA give
rise to the “twist” of
the double helix

The polio virus is
assembled from
identical
pentameter
subparts;

Structurefunction
relationships

H-bonds between
nucleotide bases are
the weakest and first to
break in the
semiconservative
process of replication

The viral
replication cycle
and self assembly
processes are
possible through
repeating units and
limited RNA

Model use and
representations

Model component
sizes and magnetic
strengths are
proportional to the
relative sizes and bond
strengths within the
DNA polymer

Rate of shaking
(virus assembly in
a container) is
analogous to the
temperature of the
system

Magnetic polarity
(attraction bonds)
allow subparts to
assemble into full
virus

DNA model. A significant challenge for physical models of
DNA is the representation of flexibility (that allows sections
of DNA to be available for replication) and bonding that
allows of both pairing and mis-pairing (that results in for
sequences of DNA to code for different proteins). The
multi-component DNA model (Figure 1) consists of
multiple nucleotides, each with a base, sugar and phosphate.
Hydrogen bonds on the bases set in plastic “plungers” that
allow for a certain degree of rotation and accurately
represent the Watson-Crick hydrogen bonding capacity.
Individual bases have attachment sites for the sugars and the
phosphates that make up of the backbone of DNA. Finally,
the covalent bonds that hold the nucleotides together are
represented by a flexible strand of plastic string. The model
features a snap bead design so students can create strands of
DNA with different lengths. In the current version of the
model, one strand is fully connected, representing a
template strand of DNA, whereas the other strand could be
constructed nucleotide-by-nucleotide so students could
engage in the process of replication. The 3D tangible DNA
model allows students to investigate several challenging

Methods
Design. The study was designed as two model-based
activities, described below, administered by teachers during
their normal biology classes. Activities were preceded and

373

concepts including the molecular structure of DNA and the
semiconservative nature of replication.

starting with the virus binding to a cell and ending with
many newly-formed viruses bursting from the cell. Students
next discussed virus structure and replication (with a focus
on correct vocabulary - e.g., capsid, RNA); the viral cycle
compared to other cycles in biology; and the steps in the
viral cycle represented by the cards and 3D model.
Students used the 3D poliovirus model to explore selfassembly: students were instructed to place the virus pieces
into a closed container and continuously shake the
container. As they observed the effect of the rate and force
of shaking and the success of the viral self-assembly
process, they answered questions about the model structure,
stability, and the effect of increasing the energy to the
system. Students also observed the interactions between the
viral subunits and answered worksheet questions that
prompted them to make inferences about the relationship
between viral structure (multiple identical pentameter
pieces) and function (replication and self-assembly).

DNA Labeling and Replication activities. After group
discussion of DNA, students identified and labeled different
parts of the DNA models on a worksheet and provided brief
explanations of the evidence that they used to identify each
part. Students discussed the component parts that make up
DNA’s structure; the ways in which different types of bonds
and spatial configurations enable important functions of
DNA; the advantages and limitations of models (including
comparing tangible DNA models to a folded paper model
that was distributed); and the ways in which the structure of
DNA allow cells to replicate genetic information.
On the second day, students completed a DNA replication
activity, building complementary strands for the DNA
double-helix from the 3D model components. Students
added components (e.g., nucleotides) to the model one at a
time and, after each component was added, responded to a
question on a worksheet. Students discussed: What
processes occur during replication? How is DNA structure
related to function in the process of replication? How does
the process of replication ensure exact copies are
created? And, how do the models help explain the
relationship between structure and function?

Figure 2. Assembly process for Poliovirus model.

Measures
Pre/post tests. Students’ understanding of content was
measured before and after the activities with identical preand posttests designed separately for DNA and virus
activities. Test items were designed to tap into core
concepts, reasoning skills and spatial understandings that
are central to molecular biology. Items were either
researcher-developed, designed to directly address problem
solving and model use, or sourced from AAAS
(MLSCI:Wright & Hamilton, 2008) and other educational
research studies related to molecular biology (e.g., Stieff,
2007). Tests aligned with the key concepts in Table 1.
Sample items from the DNA and virus test are presented
below in (1) and (2), respectively:

Figure 1. Assembled interactive DNA model
Poliovirus model. The 3D model of the poliovirus (Figure
2), developed at Scripps Research Institute, highlights the
dynamic process of self-assembly and the role of
temperature. In self-assembly, subunits come together to
form larger structures as a result of random motion and local
attractions. Most biomolecular processes rely on selfassembly for the formation of complex molecules. However,
self-assembly is a challenging concept because there are few
analogs in everyday life. In the model, molecular
interactions are represented by magnets on the edges of each
viral subunit. When pieces are put into random motion, by
shaking, the pieces collide and the magnetic attraction
causes them to assemble into various intermediate structures
and finally into a complete model of the viral capsid. The
rate of shaking represents the temperature of the system and
students can use the model to investigate the role of
temperature on the formation of particles. The ability of the
model to self-assemble emerges because the local structures
and attractive forces of the poliovirus sub-units were used to
design the model; this process of self-assembly was not
specifically designed.

(1) Two major functions of DNA are replication and
transcription. Name three ways these processes are the
same and three ways they are different.
Explain how the following structures of DNA enable it to
replicate: a. Hydrogen bonds between pairs; b. Covalent
bonds between sugars and phosphates.
(2) Describe one way that self-assembly is needed for
gene expression.
Describe how the following affect self-assembly:
a. The shapes of the parts that self-assemble; b. The
energy available for self-assembly; c. The positive and
negative charges on proteins
Classroom observations. Researchers observed each
activity and recorded the amount of time spent using the
models, the depth of model use, ranging from highly

Viral life cycle and self-assembly activities. After a group
discussion of viral replication, students demonstrated their
understanding of the replication process by arranging steps

374

interactive use to passive observation; and the teacher’s role,
(e.g., addressing the entire class, individually interacting
with students, or doing unrelated activities.)

proficiency, the odds of answering an item correctly vs.
incorrectly. We then used the posttest item difficulty
estimates as fixed item parameters to estimate student
proficiency at pretest, while equating item difficulty
between pre- and posttest. Histograms of students’
proficiency estimates are displayed in Figure 5 for DNA and
Figure 6 for virus activities.

Teacher interviews. Teachers completed a brief
questionnaire after each activity and participated in a oneon-one interview with researchers at the end of the study.
These measures addressed teachers’ implementation and
perceptions of the activities and use of the models.

Substructures

Structure-function

Models

post.9d

Results

post.9c
post.9b
post.9a

1. Do our (pre-posttest) performance measures
capture key concepts in molecular biology?

post.7
post.6

Item

We identified three critical cross-cutting concepts as
post.5b
learning goals: Molecular Substructures, Structure-Function
post.5a
Relationships, and Model Understanding, (see Table 1).
post.4
These concepts were used to design both sets of activities
post.2b
and the pre/post measures. To determine whether the items
post.2a
we developed tapped into the hypothesized targets, we
post.1c.sugar
computed Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) models to
test whether these three critical concepts were latentpost.1c.phosphate
variables around which students’ posttest performance on post.1c.base
the pre/post measures could be organized (loading strength
post.1b
for the DNA and Virus concept models are shown inpost.1a.monomers
Figures 3 and 4, respectively). Specifically, we tested a post.1a.base
model with factor loadings for our three concept-based post.1a.backbone
factors against other two three-factor models, which were
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Loading Strength
based on item type (e.g., multiple choice, diagram, open
Figure 3. Loading strengths for the concept-based CFA
response) and on science curriculum content and objectives
model of DNA posttest items (on y-axis).
(e.g., providing information and constructing explanations),
as well as an exploratory three-factor model in which the
factors were not specified a priori. Models were computed
using the TAM package in R (Kiefer, Robitzsch & Wu,
2015) and we compared BIC values as an index of model
fit, with lower values indicating better fit. For both DNA
and virus activities, the concept-based CFA model yielded
the lowest BIC values of the four. Model fit BIC differences
ranged from 65 to 120 in favor of the concept-model,
strongly indicating a better fit to the posttest data (Rafferty,
1995). These models support the hypothesis that our models
and activities target complex underlying concepts in
molecular biology and not simply, for example, improving
students’ abilities to provide information or select the
correct response on a multiple choice question.
Substructures

Models

Structure-function

post.6b
post.6a
post.5e
post.5d
post.5c

post.5b
post.5a

Item

post.4d
post.4c

post.4b
post.4a
post.3
post.2

2. Do tangible models facilitate student learning of
these concepts?

post.1f
post.1c

After establishing organizing conceptual factors for the
pre and post measures, we examined student responses to
determine whether their proficiency had changed from preto posttest. For both the DNA and virus activities, we fit
separate Rasch models to students' pre and posttest
responses to compare gains in estimated student proficiency
from pre- to post. We first used posttest scores to generate
item difficulty estimates, the odds of students incorrectly
answering an item vs. correctly answering the item,
and Expected A Posteriori (EAP) estimates of student

post.1b
post.1a
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Loading Strength

Figure 4. Loading strengths for the concept-based CFA
model of Virus posttest items (on y-axis).
For both activities, student proficiency increased from preto posttest, following the model activities. The increase was
deemed statistically reliable through Chi-square goodness of
fit tests (DNA: χ2(1, N=850) = 26.2, p<.01; Virus: χ2(1,

375

N=675) = 40.1, p<.01). We take these findings as
preliminary evidence that students using the tangible models
make measurable and reliable gains in their understanding
of key concepts in molecular biology.

and the amount of time teachers spent actively facilitating
students’ activity use.
Students in the DNA activities made greater gains for
more difficult items (β =0.2, p<.05) and several observed
aspects of the classroom environment were also related to
test gains, as shown in Figure 7. The amount of time spent
using the models was not predictive of gains (β= 0.03, ns),
however students who spent long periods of time passively
using models showed smaller test gains (β= -0.31, p<.01).
Additionally, the amount of time that teachers spent
systematically monitoring and assisting students during the
activities predicted greater test gains (β=0.22, p<.01).

Gains in proportion correct from Pretest to Posttest

0.5

Figure 5. DNA activity student proficiency gains, evident as
a distributional shift from pretest (pink) to posttest (blue).
.

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
Active Teacher Role

0.25

Passive Model Use
0.2

Active Model Use

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Frequency of observed behaviors (5-minute intervals)

Figure 7. Relationships between DNA test gains (y-axis)
and frequency of observations of active and passive model
use and active teacher role predictors (x-axis). Passive
model use and active teacher roles were reliable predictors.
In contrast to the DNA activities, students in the virus
activities made greater gains for less difficult items (β =0.28, p<.05). This reversal may be due to the fact that the
virus test items were more difficult, overall, compared to the
DNA items, leaving more room for improvement on easier
items. Similar to the results from the DNA activities, the
quantity of overall model use did not predict test gains.
However, the amount of time students spent actively and
passively using the model had opposite effects on test gains,
as shown in Figure 8. Longer periods of active model use
predicted greater test gains (β =-0.61, p<.01), while long
periods of passive model use predicted smaller test gains (β
=-0.12, p<.01). Finally, teachers’ facilitative role during the
virus activities was not related to students’ test gains: the
amount of time that teachers spent systematically
monitoring and assisting students during the activities was
not a reliable predictor of test gains (β=0.08, ns).
We also examined teachers’ open-ended interview
responses as qualitative evidence for the potentially
facilitating effects of active model use and teacher role in
student performance. Responses from teachers whose
students showed the highest gains revealed common themes
in the ways they structured the activities and used the
models with their students. These teachers all reported
starting their biology unit with the activities and structuring
their class time to maximize model use.

Figure 6. Virus activity student proficiency gains, evident as
a distributional shift from pretest (pink) to posttest (blue).

3. What kind of instructional context and model
usage leads to the greatest gains in learning?
Preliminary analyses (not reported here) revealed that, for
both DNA and virus activities, item difficulty and teacher,
together, predicted gains from pre- to posttest: test gains
vary considerably by item and by teacher. We explored this
variation further by examining classroom observations
collected in each classroom for each activity. Specifically,
we used mixed effects logistic regression models to test
whether differences in gains from pre- to posttest were
related to differences in aspects of classroom model use and
the facilitating role adopted by teachers in the classroom
We fit separate models for DNA activities and virus
activities. Each model included item and classroom random
effects on the intercept as well as several fixed effects,
explained in turn. The best fitting models for both DNA and
virus test gains included item difficulty, the amount of time
students spent engaging with the models in different ways,

376

complex 3D molecular structure, and haptic representations
of the forces and bonds between components enable
students to further reason about how these structures
influence biomolecular processes (Morris et al, 2007; White,
2012). This work highlights the role of learning tools that
allow students to see 3D molecular structure and to use
haptic feedback to “feel” molecular processes through
models that accurately represent both 3D structure as well
as chemical attraction and stability.

Gains in proportion correct from Pretest to Posttest

0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
Active Teacher Role

0.25

Passive Model Use
0.2

Active Model Use

0.15

Acknowledgments

0.1
0.05

The research reported here was supported by the Institute
of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
through Grant R305A120047 to WestEd and the National
Science Foundation under Grant (DRL-1108896, PI JD).
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do
not represent the views of the Institute, the U.S. Department
of Education or the National Science Foundation.

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Frequency of observed behaviors (5-minute intervals)

Figure 8. Relationships between virus test gains (y-axis) and
frequency of observations of active and passive model use
and active teacher role predictors (x-axis). Active and
passive model use were reliable predictors.
Teachers used the models and activities to reinforce
vocabulary, synthesize concepts learned across biology units
and, especially, to highlight properties of molecules that are
otherwise difficult to observe, as a quote from one teacher’s
interview reveals:

References
Bivall, P., Ainsworth, S., & Tibell, L.A.E. (2011). Do haptic
representations help complex molecular learning? Science
Education, 95(4), 700-719.
Berry, C., & Baker, M.D. (2010). Multimedia in
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology education: Inside
protein structures. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Education, 38(8) 425-429.
Coll, R.K., France, B., & Taylor, I. (2012). The role of
models and analogies in science education: Implications
from research. International Journal of Science
Education, 27(2), 183-198.
de Chadarevian, S., & Hopwood, N. (Eds.). (2004). Models
the Third Dimension of Science, Redwood City,
CA: Stanford University Press
Höst, G.E., Larsson, C., Olson, A., & Tibell, L.E. (2013).
Student learning about biomolecular self-assembly using
two different external representations. CBE- Life Sciences
Education, 12, 471-482.
Kiefer, T., Robitzsch, A., & Wu, M. (2015). TAM: Test
Analysis Modules. R package version 1.13-0.
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=TAM
Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayesian Model Selection in Social
Research. Sociological Methodology, 25, 111-163.
Stieff., M. (2007). Mental rotation and diagrammatic
reasoning in science. Learning and Instruction, 17(2),
219-234.
Wright, T., & Hamilton, S. (2008). Assessing student
understanding in the molecular life sciences using a
concept inventory. In: Duff A, Green M, Quinn D,
editors. Proceedings of the ATN Assessment Conference:
Engaging Students in Assessment. Adelaide, Australia:
ATN: American Society for Cell Biology. pp. 216–224.

“[I think] having the models there allowed students to
connect a physical shape and structure to something
incredibly small that they don’t really understand.”
Across high school classrooms, the conceptual gains were
sensitive to students’ opportunity to actively engage with
the models and how teachers linked the interactive models
to complex concepts and vocabulary. The 3D DNA and
virus models offer spatial and haptic affordances that
highlight important structural and functional features. Our
data suggest that using these novel models leads to learning
gains over the course of a few lessons.

Conclusions
In this study, we asked whether valid measures of key
science concepts could be created and whether high school
students that use flexible 3D models better understand key
concepts in molecular biology. The tangible molecular
models accurately represent the structural and functional
properties of complex DNA and virus molecules. Model use
helped high school students understand critical biology
concepts that are often implicit in current DNA and viral
assembly instruction. Active model use and teacher
scaffolding were related to increased pre- to posttest gains.
Our findings demonstrate that non-expert high school
students benefit from model use in reasoning about
molecular structures and processes: concepts that motivate
experts’ use of models in the lab.
Our results also suggest a role for modality-specific,
grounded representations in conceptual learning (Barsalou
et al., 2003; Mahon & Caramazza, 2008). We suggest that
visuo-spatial and haptic representations of the models aid
students in specifically encoding and understanding

377

