Temporal Structure Modulates ERP Correlates of Visual Sequential Learning
Kimberly M. Ross (Kross25@student.gsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 5010, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA

Christopher M. Conway (Cconway@gsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 5010, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA
Abstract

temporal patterns is scare. Most SL studies focus on
learning sequences of stimuli with identical durations and
identical inter-stimuli intervals (e.g. Conway &
Christiansen, 2005; Jost et al., 2015). However, SL of
sequences containing temporal irregularity, that is with
stimuli of varying durations or with different inter-stimuli
intervals, is of fundamental importance to human cognition
because these types of sequences are frequent in our
environment. We often process irregular temporal patterns
that help us make decisions and influence our future
behavior, including when we perform motor movement
coordination, and when we process language or music
(Brandon et al., 2012).
To understand the human ability to process statistical
sequential information better, one must examine both the
ordinal and temporal information available in any given
context. The Dynamic Attending Theory (DAT) proposes
that events with a regular pattern are processed easier than
events with an irregular temporal pattern. This theory
assumes that the brain creates internal oscillations, or
attending rhythms, that entrain to external rhythms, creating
a type of attention to future events, which facilitates
learning (Jones & Boltz, 1989). The internal oscillations of
the DAT are thus adaptive, allowing for enhanced
processing of regular temporal structures. Therefore, the
DAT implies that attention to individual items of a sequence
is stimulus-driven (Jones et al., 2002). In this respect the
temporal structure of a sequence becomes useful or salient
to the attender.
SL can be observed behaviorally (response times) as well
as indexed neurophysiologically with event-related
potentials (ERPs, for a recent review, see Daltrozzo &
Conway, 2014). The ERP technique has been used to study
SL using variations of the classic auditory oddball sequence
task, the serial reaction time task (SRT) and with artificial
grammar learning (AGL) paradigms (Brandon et al., 2012;
Karabanov & Ullen, 2008; Schmidt-Kassow et al., 2009;
Schwartze et al., 2011; Selchenkova et al., 2014;
Selchenkova, Jones & Tillman, 2014). The ERP technique
has the advantage of a high temporal resolution at the
millisecond scale, allowing for the exploration of neural
events with precise timing. Thus, ERPs are particularly well
suited for examining temporal cognition, including SL of
temporal and ordinal regularities.

Sequential learning (SL) refers to the ability to learn the
temporal and ordinal patterns of one’s environment. Whereas
research on the learning of ordinal patterns is common, the
learning of temporal patterns within sequential events has
been far less studied. The current study examines the effects
of synchronous and asynchronous temporal patterns on visual
sequential learning. We hypothesize that entrainment (i.e.
exposure to a regular rhythmic pattern) allows for better
processing of the ordinal structure of sequential events.
Twenty healthy adult participants (11 females, 18–34 years
old) performed two versions of a visual sequential learning
paradigm while event-related potentials (ERPs) were
recorded. The SL task involved the visual presentation of
colored circles, wherein a target circle was embedded that
was partially predictable based on preceding predictor
stimuli. One version of the task incorporated synchronous
temporal presentation of the stimuli whereas the other version
involved asynchronous presentation of stimuli using a
randomized ISI on every trial. Reaction time data
demonstrated that learning occurred in both temporal
conditions. On the other hand, the mean ERP amplitudes
between 350 and 750ms post-predictor onset in the posterior
regions of interest revealed that learning of the statistical
contingencies between stimuli was disrupted for the
asynchronous temporal condition but intact for the
synchronous condition. These neurophysiological data
suggest that the brain processes regular and irregular timing
events differently, with statistical learning of ordinal visual
patterns being improved by a synchronous temporal structure,
possibly a result of heightened attention to the stimuli due to
entrainment.
Keywords: Sequential learning; statistical learning; temporal
processing; entrainment; ERPs

Introduction
An important question in cognitive science is what
facilitates learning of structured events under different
contexts. When events are not fully random but contain a
degree of temporal or ordinal regularity, our brain is able to
extract these regularities to facilitate processing using
predictive mechanisms, that is, by learning to predict future
stimuli in the sequence (Selchenkova et al., 2014). In this
manner, we are able to generate expectancies about future
events, an ability that that allows us to improve our
responses and execution of actions (Rohenkohl et al., 2012).
Sequential learning (SL) is the ability to learn incidentally
the ordinal patterns of one’s environment (i.e., sequences of
items that unfold in time, such as a melody or a gymnastics
routine). Surprisingly, whereas SL studies of the ordinal
structure of sequences are common, research on SL of

The Current Study
The current study uses a probabilistic visual serial learning
task (Jost et al., 2015) with a manipulation of the temporal

740

synchronicity as a way to explore the effects of temporal
regularity on SL. Whereas the literature on the relationship
between SL and temporal processing is scarce, there is some
evidence that temporal regularity modulates SL. The main
conclusions of this research is that a regular temporal
pattern allows for better processing of the sequence, with
faster reaction times and a larger peak amplitude and shorter
latency onset of a P3-like component (Rohenkohl et al.,
2012; Schmidt-Kassow et al., 2009). However, because
most of the studies exploring the effect of the temporal
regularities on SL have been conducted in the auditory
domain, it is important to test this relationship in the visual
domain (Rohenkohl et al., 2012). The results of previous SL
literature have shown that perceptual modality (i.e., visual
vs. auditory patterns) influences SL (Conway &
Christiansen, 2005). Thus, it is important to explore whether
entrainment to a temporal structure can facilitate SL
independently of the modality of the to-be-learned
sequence, that is not only in the auditory but also in the
visual domain.
We hypothesize that: (1) Reaction time data will show
better learning in the synchronous condition compared to
the asynchronous condition; (2) ERP data will show that the
synchronous sequences yield larger peak amplitudes of the
P300 than asynchronous sequences, suggesting a facilitative
effect for processing statistical regularities in temporally
regular events.

with a filler circle following 80% of the time. The target
circle never followed the “zero predictor” circle. After the
target or final filler was presented at the end of the trial, the
sequence repeated itself by starting off again with one to
five filler circles and then the randomly chosen predictor
stimulus. The color assigned to the target, predictors, and
filler circles was randomly chosen for each participant at the
beginning of the task and the selection of colors for each
stimulus type remained constant throughout the task for
each participant. In the synchronous temporal condition, the
stimuli appeared on the screen for 500ms with a 1000ms
(black screen) ISI. In the asynchronous temporal condition,
stimuli appeared on the screen for 500ms, with a
randomized ISI, ranging between 600ms and 1400ms so that
on average across trials the ISI remained the same as in the
synchronous condition (1000ms).

Method
Participants
Twenty adult participants (11 females, 18 right-handed, 1834 years old, average age = 20.5) without reported language,
cognitive, neurological, or psychological deficits and who
were native English speakers participated in this
experiment. Participants were recruited through Georgia
State University’s SONA system, receiving course credit for
their participation. All participants provided written
informed consent, which was approved by the Institutional
Review Board of Georgia State University. Participants
were asked to fill out a brief demographic questionnaire and
the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971).

Figure 1: Visual SL task layout [high probability, HP; low
probability, LP; zero probability, Z]. In this example, three
filler circles precede the predictor stimuli, but this number
could range from one to five. After the appearance of either
a target or filler at the end of the trial, a new sequence
begins. In this example, the target stimuli are green, but in
reality the colors of the standard, predictors and target
stimuli were randomly assigned for each participant.

Procedure
The SL paradigm, based on Jost et al. (2015), involved the
presentation of a sequence of colored circles (brown, blue,
grey, pink, orange, red, purple, yellow, green, white) in the
center of a computer screen with a black background
(Figure 1). Participants were asked to press a button
whenever they saw a circle of a specific color (the “target”).
Each trial consisted of one to five “filler” circles, followed
by one of the three predictor circles (high, low, and zero
predictor-target probability, chosen randomly on each trial).
Depending on which predictor stimulus was presented, the
next stimulus was either the target circle or the filler circle.
The target circle followed the “high predictor” on 80% of
the trials, with a filler circle following 20% of the time. The
target circle followed the “low predictor” 20% of the time,

The experimental conditions were separated into two
separate tasks, synchronous and asynchronous. The
assignment of set colors as well as order of each task were
counterbalanced across participants, so that each participant
received a different set of colors for each task. Each task
lasted approximately 25 minutes, and included the
presentation of 180 trials through 6 blocks of 30 trials each.
Compared to the Jost et al. (2015) paradigm that included
the presentation of 150 trails, the overall number of trials
was increased to 180 trials to increase the signal to noise
ratio, allowing us to better compare ERP effects between the
first and second half of the SL task. After participants
completed both sequential learning tasks, they completed a
pattern consciousness inventory, a measure that tested the

741

overall level of consciousness of the probabilistic structure
of the sequence.
Recording Technique
The electroencephalograph (EEG) was measured from 256
scalp sensors using an Electrical Geodesic Inc. (EGI) EEG
net (Figure 2). Net Station Version 4.3.1 tools were used to
process the EEGs. Active electrode impedances were kept
below 50 kΩ. Recordings were made with a 0.1 to 30 Hz
bandpass filter and digitized at 250 Hz. The EEG was
segmented into epochs -200 to +1000ms with respect to the
predictor onset. An artifact detection operation removed
trials containing noise from eye blinks and other
movements. Separate ERPs were computed for each
participant, experimental condition, electrode and block. All
experimental sessions were conducted in a 132 square foot
double-walled, sound-deadened acoustic chamber.

Figure 2: 256 sensors EEG net with the highlighted nine
regions of interest.

Statistical Analysis
Statistical calculations were performed on the individual
mean amplitude ERPs within the time-window of interest
(350-750ms post predictor onset), estimated from previous
research and visual inspection (Jost et al., 2015)), using Net
Station Version 4.3.1. To analyze the effect of cortical
topography, nine regions of interest were defined (ROIs,
Figure 2): left (LAn), middle (FRz), and right anterior
(RAn); left (LCn), middle (CNz), and right central (RCn);
and left (LPo), middle (POz) and right posterior (RPo)
regions. Based on previous research, we expected the ERP
effects of learning to be focused in the posterior central
(POz) region (Jost, et al., 2015). Visual inspection of the
grand averages confirmed an SL effect in both the left
posterior (LPo) and central posterior (POz) regions, and so
all analyses were conducted on these two combined regions
(posterior medial-left). Repeated-measure ANOVAs on the
individual mean amplitudes were conducted with the
following within-participant factors: Predictor (“high
predictor” or HP, “low predictor” or LP, and “zero
predictor” or Z), temporal regularity (synchronous,
asynchronous) and block (first three blocks vs. last three
blocks). One participant was excluded from the ERP
statistical calculations due to a high percentage (over 60%)
of trials containing artifacts (Synchronous, 94%;
Asynchronous, 82%).
Response times to target stimuli were analyzed with
repeated-measure ANOVAs with predictor, temporal
regularity, and block as within-participant factors. One
participant was also excluded from response time
calculations, due to a computer error.
All statistical analyses were conducted with SPSS (PAWS
Statistics 18 – Release 18.0.3 September 9, 2010). All
reported p-values were adjusted with the Greenhouse–
Geisser correction for non-sphericity, when appropriate.
Partial eta-squared is reported as a measure of effect size for
all ANOVAs (Cohen, 1988; Olejnik & Algina, 2003).
Reported p-values of the posthoc tests were Šidák corrected.

Results
Table 1 displays the mean reaction time data for both the
synchronous and asynchronous tasks, separated by the first
half and second half of each in order to observe effects of
learning that might be present following a certain amount of
exposure to the patterns. A 2x2x2 repeated measures
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of Predictability
[F(1,18) = 11.79; p = .003, 𝜂!! = .40] and a main effect of
Block [F(1,18) = 6.63; p = .02, 𝜂!! = .27], but no significant
interactions. These data indicate that the HP condition was
responded to significantly faster than the LP condition
across both halves of both tasks. The main effect of block
also suggests that participants improved on their
performance of the task in the second part of the tasks,
regardless of predictor type and task synchronicity. Overall,
these results suggest that participants showed facilitation
with responding to targets when the HP stimulus was
present, indicating learning of the ordinal structure in both
the synchronous and asynchronous versions of the task.
Note that numerically the synchronous condition displayed
improved RTs for the HP condition from the 1st half to 2nd
half of the task (379.9 vs. 357.1 ms); although the
asynchronous condition also showed a similar facilitation,
the effect was smaller (387.2 vs. 372.0 ms). However, this
difference in effects was non-significant, likely due to lack
of statistical power [F(1,18) = .112; p =.74, 𝜂!! = .006].
Table 1: Mean (SD) reaction time scores by timing
condition, predictor and block.
Synchronous
1st Half

742

2nd Half

Asynchronous
1st Half

2nd Half

HP

379.9 (59.4)

357.1 (66.0)

387.2 (43.1)

372.0 (63.0)

LP

385.7 (45.9)

379.9 (50.7)

406.7 (40.9)

389.3 (46.8)

ERPs elicited by each predictor type in different ways.
Specifically, whereas in the first half of both tasks, the ERP
effects do not appear to differ, they do differ in the second
half for the synchronous but not the asynchronous task,
presumably reflecting differences in participants’ learning
of the varying predictor-target probabilities.

Mean ERPs (uV )

Mean ERPs (uV )

The ERP data, however, presents a more nuanced picture.
Figure 3 displays the grand averaged ERPs for each task
across all participants, time-locked to the three predictors
(HP, LP, & Z) at the posterior medial-left regions of interest
used for topographic analyses during both the first and
second half of the task. Visual inspection suggests a larger
positivity between about 350ms and 750ms for the HP
predictor compared to the LP and Z predictors in the second
half of the task for the synchronous but not asynchronous
conditions.

2.5

Synchronous Condition

1.5

HP
LP

0.5
-0.5

2.5

Z
1st Half

2nd Half

Asynchronous Condition

1.5

HP
LP

0.5
-0.5

Z
1st Half

2nd Half

Figure 4: Line graph depicting the means in microvolts
(𝜇𝑉) for the posterior medial-left region for each of the
three predictors in the first half versus the second half of the
task 350-750ms post-predictor onset.
A 2x2x3 repeated measures ANOVA confirmed that there
was an interaction between Timing and Predictability 350ms
to 750ms poststimulus onset [F(2,36) = 6.01; p = .006, 𝜂!! =
.25] indicating a significant difference between HP and Z in
the synchronous condition but not the asynchronous
condition (p = .009). There was also a significant Block and
Predictability interaction [F(2,36) = 4.13; p = .040, 𝜂!! = .19]
350ms to 750ms poststimulus onset, indicating that the
difference between HP and LP (p = .03) and HP and Z (p =
.02) was larger in the second half of the experiment,
regardless of timing condition.
While there was no significant three-way interaction
between Predictability, Timing and Block, two 2x3 repeated
measures ANOVAs indicate an effect only in the
synchronous condition. We found a significant Block and
Predictability interaction in the synchronous condition
[F(2,36) = 5.77; p = <.001, 𝜂!! = .24], indicating differences
between means from the first to the second half of the task.
Posthoc tests revealed significant differences between HP
and LP from the first half to the second half (p = .013) as
well as significant differences between HP and Z from the
first half to the second half (p = .01). A repeated measures

Figure 3: Grand average ERPs observed in the posterior
medial and left regions of interest in response to the high
probability condition (HP, red line), low probability
condition (LP, blue line), and zero probability condition (Z,
green line) (vertical axis: electrical potential in 𝜇𝑉,
positivity upward; horizontal axis: time in milliseconds) in
the first and last three blocks of each task. The synchronous
task is shown in the upper panels and the asynchronous task
in the lower panels.
Figure 4 shows the means for the posterior medial-left
region for each of the three predictors in the first three
blocks of the task versus the last three blocks of the task in
both timing conditions. From visual inspection, it is very
clear that the timing condition appears to be affecting the

743

ANOVA found no significant interaction between Block
and Predictability in the asynchronous condition.
The consciousness inventory produced an average rating
per participant, for each temporal condition. A pairedsample t-test revealed no significant differences between
timing groups (t(18)= -.304, p =.77). However, the
consciousness scores were significantly correlated with the
mean ERP amplitudes for each predictor condition in the
second half of the synchronous task: HP (r=.608, p=.006),
LP (r=.614, p=.005) and Z (r=.603, p =.006 ) from 350750ms post-predictor. This suggests that for the
synchronous condition, in the second half of the task, there
was a positive relationship between one’s level of
consciousness of the probabilistic patterns and the ERP
amplitudes.

sensitive to temporal regularities. The P300 may reflect
expectations about when the target stimulus occurs, and
therefore stimuli that occur at expected time points are
processed more efficiently. Since we do not always
experience events in a regular temporal fashion,
understanding how we process events structured with a
varying temporal regularity has important implications for
human cognition, especially for incidental and implicit
learning.
Interestingly, reaction time data showed learning effects
in both timing conditions in the last 3 blocks of the task,
which seems to stand in contrast to the ERP findings. One
interpretation of this discrepancy is that reaction times could
represent the implicit learning of the patterns, while the ERP
effects index attention-dependent processes that were
affected by entrainment. The consciousness scores revealed
a significant positive correlation with ERP means in the
synchronous condition in the last half of the experiment,
suggesting that as one’s awareness of the sequence
increased, so did their neurophysiological responses. The
P300 is known to be affected by attentional manipulations
(Polich, 2007), so taken together, these findings suggest that
temporal regularity results in increased attentional
processing of the patterns while leaving implicit learning
more or less unaffected (for a similar argument that
sequential learning relies upon both implicit and explicit
learning processes, see Batterink et al., 2015) On the other
hand, the means of the reaction times go in the direction that
would be expected if the synchronous condition led to
improved learning; thus, there simply may not be enough
power to detect these effects behaviorally.
In addition to using larger sample sizes, future studies
might explore different ways of varying the temporal
structure of input sequences. For instance, in line with
previous research (Brandon et al., 2012; Selchenkova et al.,
2014), a metrical framework might be adapted and tested
using this predictor-target paradigm. Selchenkova et al.
(2014) manipulated the temporal structure of sequences by
using both metrical and isochronous structures in an
artificial grammar-learning paradigm. They found that the
highly metrical condition showed a larger P300 component
in the exposure phase and an earlier N2 component in the
test phase, in comparison to the isochronous condition.
Studies like these suggest that a complex interplay between
metricality and temporal regularity can have a dramatic
effect on SL, and thus it may be advantageous to further
explore these dimensions.
Finally, the current research on temporal processing and
SL is expected to have implications for our understanding of
certain pathologies. Language, cognitive and motor
impairments, such as Specific Language Impairment (SLI),
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and
dyslexia, as well as Parkinson’s Disease and Schizophrenia,
appear to be associated with temporal and entrainment
deficits that in turn could lead to difficulties in sequence
processing (Basu et al., 2010; Hsu & Bishop, 2014; Davalos
et al., 2011; Harrington et al., 2011; Noreika et al., 2013).

Discussion
This study explored the effects of temporal regularity on the
neural correlates of visual SL using neurophysiological
evidence (ERPs). The main findings of this research are that
(1) reaction time data showed that the target was responded
to faster following the presentation of the high predictor
compared to the low predictor, regardless of temporal
condition, indicating learning for both conditions; (2) under
the synchronous temporal conditions only, the ERPs
indicated a significant effect of predictor type in the last 3
blocks of the task, with greater P300-like amplitudes for the
HP condition.
The ERP results of the synchronous condition mirrors
those of Jost et al. (2015), who also observed a P300-like
ERP component for the HP predictor, reflecting the learning
of the probabilistic contingencies between stimuli. The fact
that this P300 effect was not seen in either the first three or
the last three blocks of the asynchronous task highlights the
fact that processing was enhanced during trials that had
highly regular rhythms. This shows that variability in timing
may influence the P3b, which is typically seen 300-500ms
over central and parietal electrode sites (Schmidt-Kassow,
Schubotz & Kotz; 2009). According to the predictions made
by the DAT, events with highly regular temporal rhythms
produce entrainment of oscillatory waves, so that perception
and encoding are enhanced because stimuli are being
presented during the highest point in the wave of attention
(Jones & Boltz, 1989). Our findings fit well within the
expectation of the DAT that temporal regularity provides an
opportunity to direct attention to salient information, in this
case, the onset of the stimuli being presented, which led to
improved encoding of the statistical regularities.
Whereas the classic oddball paradigm is used to explore
the effect of deviant stimuli in a stream of input, the
modified oddball paradigm that was applied in the present
study (based on Jost et al., 2015), that includes predictortarget statistical contingencies, allows for the exploration of
the extraction of sequential probabilities out of a serial input
stream. While most of the research conducted on SL and
temporal processing has been conducted in the auditory
domain, this study shows that SL of visual stimuli is also

744

For example, SLI is thought to stem from an impairment of
the procedural memory system, which in turn may affect
both sequential and temporal processing (Hsu & Bishop,
2014). Future research ought to explore entrainment and SL
in typical and atypical participants in order to better
characterize the nature of the deficits that these individuals
are experiencing. One possibility is that SL is impaired in
these pathological populations because of a lessened ability
to dynamically attend to stimuli, leading to inefficient
processing of both auditory and visual stimuli. This
research approach is expected to advance our
comprehension and assessment of several types of cognitive
impairments affecting language, attention, motor
coordination, and more generally a wide range of cognitive
systems. By exploring SL in healthy adults and its
relationship with temporal processing, this research could
pave the pathway towards a better understanding of the
cognitive impairments of these pathological populations.

Hsu, H., & Bishop, D. (2014). Sequence-specific procedural
learning deficits in children with specific
language
impairment. Developmental Science, 17, 352-365.
Jones, M.R. (1976). Time, our lost dimension: Toward a
new theory of perception, attention, and memory.
Psychological Review, 83, 323-335.
Jones, M., & Boltz, M. (1989). Dynamic attending and
responses to time. Psychological Review, 96(3), 459-491.
Jones, M., Moynihan, H., Mackenzie, N., & Puente, J.
(2002). Temporal Aspects of Stimulus-Driven Attending
in Dynamic Arrays. Psychological Science, 13, 313-319.
Jost, E., Conway, C., Purdy, J., Walk, A., & Hendricks, M.
(2015). Exploring the neurodevelopment of visual
statistical learning using event-related brain potentials.
Brain Research, 1597, 95-107.
Karabanov, A., & Ullen, F. (2008). Implicit and Explicit
Learning of Temporal Sequences Studied With the
Process
Dissociation
Procedure.
Journal
of
Neurophysiology, 100, 733-739.
Noreika, V., Falter, C., & Rubia, K. (2013). Timing deficits
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD):
Evidence from neurocognitive and neuroimaging studies.
Neuropsychologia, 51, 235-266.
Oldfield, R.C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsycholgia
9(1), 97-113.
Olejnik S, Algina J. (2003). Generalized eta and omega
squared statistics: Measures of effect size for some
common research designs. Psychological Methods,
8:434–447.
Polich, J. (2007). Updating P300: An Integrative Theory Of
P3a And P3b. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118, 21282148.
Rohenkohl, G., Cravo, A., Wyart, V., & Nobre, A. (2012).
Temporal Expectation Improves the Quality of Sensory
Information. Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 8424-8428.
Schmidt-Kassow, M., Schubotz, R., & Kotz, S. (2009).
Attention and entrainment: P3b varies as a function of
temporal predictability. Neuroreport, 20, 31-36.
Schwartze, M., & Kotz, S. (2015). The Timing of Regular
Sequences: Production, Perception, and Covariation.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, X, 1-11.
doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00805
Schwartze, M., Rothermich, K., Schmidt-Kassow, M., &
Kotz, S. (2011). Temporal regularity effects on preattentive and attentive processing of deviance. Biological
Psychology, 87, 146-151.
Selchenkova, T., Francois, C., Schon, D., Corneyllie, A., &
Perrin, F. (2014). Metrical Presentation Boosts Implicit
Learning of Artificial Grammar. PLOS ONE, 9(11), 1-9.
Selchenkova, T., Jones, M., & Tillmann, B. (2014). The
influence of temporal regularities on the implicit
learning of pitch structures. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology,67(12), 2360-2379.

Acknowledgments
We thank the NIH (R01DC012037) for their financial
support and J. Daltrozzo for his help in designing the study.

References
Basu, M., Krishnan, A., & Weber-Fox, C. (2010).
Brainstem correlates of temporal auditory processing in
children
with
specific
language
impairment.
Developmental Science, 13, 77-91.
Batterink, L. J., Reber, P. J., Neville, H. J., & Paller, K. A.
(2015). Implicit and explicit contributions to statistical
learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 83, 62-78.
Brandon, M., Terry, J., Stevens, C., & Tillmann, B. (2012).
Incidental Learning of Temporal Structures Conforming
to a Metrical Framework. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 110.
Cohen J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale (NJ): Erlbaum
Associates.
Conway, C., & Christiansen, M. (2005). ModalityConstrained Statistical Learning Of Tactile, Visual, And
Auditory
Sequences.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(1),
24-39.
Daltrozzo, J., & Conway, C. (2014). Neurocognitive
mechanisms of statistical-sequential learning: What do
event-related potentials tell us? Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 8, 1-17.
Davalos, D., Rojas, D., & Tregellas, J. (2011). Temporal
Processing In Schizophrenia: Effects Of Task-Difficulty
On Behavioral Discrimination And Neuronal Responses.
Schizophrenia Research, 127, 97-98.
Harrington, D., Castillo, G., Greenberg, P., Song, D.,
Lessig, S., Lee, R., & Rao, S. (2011). Neurobehavioral
Mechanisms of Temporal Processing Deficits in
Parkinson's Disease. PLoS ONE, 6(2), 1-14.

745

