Temporal Expressions in Speech and Gesture
İdil Bostan (idbostan@ku.edu.tr)
Ahmet Börütecene (aborutecene13@ku.edu.tr)
Oğuzhan Özcan (oozcan@ku.edu.tr)
Koç University Arçelik Research Center for Creative Industries (KUAR), Koç University
Rumelifeneri Yolu Sariyer 34450
Istanbul – TURKEY

Tilbe Göksun (tgoksun@ku.edu.tr)
Department of Psychology, Koç University
Rumelifeneri Yolu Sariyer 34450
Istanbul - TURKEY
Abstract

the back. Other cultures use different variations of time
orientation. In Mandarin, for example, even though there is
a use of the front-back analogy, people also produce up for
future and down for past (Boroditsky, 2001). In Aymara
language of the Southern America, front represents past and
back represents future (Nunez & Sweetser, 2006). There are
many possible explanations to why and how people locate
temporal features. One important factor to represent time is
the reading and writing direction of speaker’s native
language (Bergen & Lau, 2012). Most languages perceive
earlier events at the left or back of the self and future events
at the right or front of the self. Using nonlinguistic tasks,
Ouellet and colleagues (2010) found that Hebrew speakers
demonstrated the opposite pattern of right to left flow of
time in line with their right to left reading-writing direction.
Spanish speakers have the opposite representation of time,
not only in visual tasks, but also in auditory tasks. Similarly,
Fuhrman and Boroditsky (2010) showed that when asked to
temporally order pictures, English speakers (left to right) put
earlier events to the left side of space, whereas Hebrew
speakers (right to left) put the same events to the right side
of space (see also Boroditsky, Fuhrman & McCormick,
2011). These findings present the impact of reading-writing
direction on other modalities. Thus, in nonlinguistic tasks,
the representation of time seems to be influenced by one’s
native language’s characteristics.
People’s representation of time based on space can also
be apparent in their expressions of time in both speech and
gesture (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012). That is, people talk
about time with regard to space in spatial metaphors. In
English, these metaphors can be in a deictic form with a
reference to a certain time point (e.g., it happened way back
in the past), or may not include any directionality
information at all (e.g., a long time has passed). The frontback analogy is the most dominant spatial axis in English
language, with a few exceptions of other directions (e.g., the
meeting is coming up). However, this kind of use is not
systematic (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012).
Do gestural expressions follow verbal temporal
information? Speech and gesture form an integrated
language system (McNeill, 1992). As a result, gesture is

People use spatial metaphors to talk about temporal concepts.
They also gesture frequently during speech. The
characteristics of these gestures give information regarding
the mental timelines people form to experience time. The
present study investigates the expression of temporal concepts
on a natural setting with Turkish speakers. We found that
Turkish speakers used more metaphoric temporal phrases
(e.g., short period, time flies quickly) than words referring to
time without spatial content (e.g., today, nowadays) in a
session where they talked about people’s fortune.
Spontaneous gestures were mainly classified as metaphoric
and beat gestures and were mostly produced on the sagittal
axis, which contradicts with the previous findings. Yet, we
also found that people used vertical axis to represent current
and future events. These findings suggest that lateral axis may
not always be the most common direction for co-speech
temporal gesture use, and the pragmatic constraints of the
environment may influence the spatial conceptualization of
time.
Keywords: time, spatial metaphors, temporal gestures,
Turkish

Introduction
Time is an abstract concept that we cannot physically
experience through our senses. The need for a concrete
ground to perceive and express time has led to the use of
spatial metaphors. Space is easier to experience in physical
reality, so people usually map their understanding of time
onto space (Boroditsky, 2001). People use spatial metaphors
to talk about time (e.g., Clark 1973; Evans 2004; Lakoff,
1992). For example, it is common for English speakers to
say “move the meeting forward” or “this week has been
long.” Recent research also suggests that people produce
spontaneous gestures to depict temporal information in their
gestures (e.g., Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012; Cooperrider &
Nunez, 2009). Most of the findings stem from experimental
paradigms and many studies use native English speakers as
participants. In this study, we investigate native Turkish
speakers’ use of temporal information in speech and gesture
in a natural setting.
Most Western cultures locate future ahead and past in
1

1871

often used as another source to understand the underlying
mechanisms of cognitive functions. Gestures are also spatial
in nature and can be suitable to embody the content of
temporal speech. Gestures can be classified into four main
categories: iconic gestures that represent actual objects or
actions, metaphoric gestures that refer to abstract ideas or
concepts, deictic gestures that involve pointing to an object
or location, and beat gestures, which are quick hand
movements to supplement information in speech (McNeill,
1992). If speech and gesture are temporally and
semantically integrated, then the descriptions of temporal
relations should be similar in each modality.
Cooperrider and Nunez (2009) suggest that English
speakers’ use of gestures is very predictable based on the
writing direction and their cultural conceptualizations of
time. Previous studies suggest that English speakers gesture
both on the left-right and front-back axes depending on the
task (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012). When asked to gesture
deliberately, deictic metaphors invoke a sagittal mental
timeline, whereas sequential metaphors prime speakers to a
lateral timeline. English speakers refer to the sagittal axis
(from back to front) rather than lateral axis (from left to
right) while speaking metaphorically about time. Yet, they
dominantly use lateral axis in their spontaneous co-speech
gestures about time (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012). This
dissociation points to an implicit placement of sequential
events on the lateral axis.
Turkish is another left to right flowing language based
on the reading-writing direction. Turkish speakers also refer
to time in spatial metaphors and represent it as a physical
entity (Ördem, 2014). Phrases like O günler arkada kaldı
(“those days are behind us”) show Turkish speakers’ use of
sagittal axis while referring to time. Turkish and English
speakers’ expressions of time display parallels in the
conceptualization of time as a spatial motion or a location in
space. Additionally, the developmental stages that lead to an
adult understanding of time are similar between two
language groups when their linguistic comprehension of
metaphors regarding time is measured (Özçalışkan, 2004).
Even though there is accumulating evidence on how
people talk and gesture about time, detailed investigations of
temporal expressions in both speech and gesture in
languages other than English are still insufficient and there
is room for new findings. In languages, several categories
such as duration, tense, sequence time, deictic time, and
metaphors are used to define time (Le Guen & Balam,
2012). This paper focuses on two time concepts: duration
and spatial metaphors to express time.
To understand the mapping between specific temporal
expressions and their gestural construals, in this study we
investigate the types and axes of the gestures people
perform while referring to the past, present, and future as
well as different types of temporal expressions. In a
naturalistic study, we provide a comprehensive examination
of speech and gesture relations by focusing on both time
words without a spatial content (e.g., today, tomorrow) and
spatial metaphors (e.g., before, short time) and providing

both quantitative and qualitative analyses. We predict that
due to the abstract nature of time concept, regardless of the
type of phrase, people would produce more metaphoric
gestures than any other types. If individuals’ gestural
expressions directly map onto verbal expressions, gestures
would follow the timeline depicted in speech.

Method
Participants
Eighteen native Turkish speakers participated in the study.
They were all undergraduate or graduate students (Mage =
22.4, SD= 2.1, 15 females). These individuals were the
speakers (see more information below). In addition, two
individuals participated as listeners.
Materials and Procedure
This study used naturalistic fortune telling sessions as the
design. Turkish fortune telling sessions provide a viable
setting to assess temporal information. In Turkey, coffee
fortune-telling is a widespread practice interwoven in daily
life and considered by most people as an occasion for
creating social interaction. Moreover, Turkish coffee
drinking and fortune telling sessions create an enjoyable,
warm and sometimes humorous social environment. In
Turkish culture, it is very common for people to tell others’
fortune by examining the coffee cup after drinking coffee.
Both the fortuneteller and the listener (the person who drank
the coffee) are engaged and attentive in this interaction (see
Figure 1). The fortunetellers’ narratives involve rich verbal
and non-verbal information. Furthermore, the contents of
fortune telling involve the past, present and future of the
fortune receivers’ lives, which provide abundant natural
temporal data to be examined. That is, fortune telling is a
good setting for us to examine temporal speech and gesture
interaction.

Figure 1: The setting of a coffee cup fortune-telling session

Fortunetellers (speakers in this study) were recruited
among graduate and undergraduate students around the
university campus who were passionate about fortune telling
and performed it occasionally. Listeners of the fortunes
were two female students who were willing to hear their
fortunes. The listeners were blind to the research questions.
In the sessions the fortuneteller, the listener, and the
2

1872

researcher were present. To maintain an environment of
natural conversation, sessions were held in coffee houses
around the campus and the city. Researcher did not
intervene in the process and merely recorded the session.
Fortuneteller and the listener sat face to face, on opposite
sides of a table. Their hands were free to move and they
were able to hold or let go of the coffee cup whenever they
wished to, as would be in a regular coffee drinking setting.
Overall, the physical setting of the experiment resembled
any two people sitting and chatting in a coffeehouse, with
the sole addition of a camera recording the interaction.
There was no limit to the duration of the session, but most
of them averaged around 10-15 minutes. Before each
session the fortunetellers were asked to complete an
informed consent form and a questionnaire with
demographic questions.
The sessions were video recorded with a smartphone
camera. The camera was positioned to frame the hands,
arms and faces of both participants to record the body
movements. A small tripod was used to capture a stable
footage. No instructions were given regarding gesture use.

abstract concept, we categorized them as metaphoric (from
now on we will only use metaphoric to refer to these types
of gestures). Manipulative gestures were also needed to be
included because fortune telling takes place by referring to
the visual stimuli inside the coffee cup, so it was common
for the participants to move or twirl the cup to be able to see
better.
Gestures were then categorized according to the axis, in
which the gesture took place. There were four different
axes: sagittal, lateral, vertical, and diagonal (see Figure 2).
The sagittal axis refers to the front-back orientation, lateral
axis refers to the left-right orientation, vertical axis refers to
the up-down orientation, and diagonal refers to any
combination of these axes. After the axis was identified, the
direction of the gesture was also coded. This involved
several categories within the axis: to left and to right for
lateral, up and down for vertical, forwards and backwards
for sagittal, and any combination of these six directions for
diagonal. If the gesture did not occupy any of these axes, but
was only a movement within the same space or a change in
the posture of the hand, it was coded as no-axis. Mostly beat
gestures were coded as no-axis gestures. Finally, for deictic
gestures, their reference point was also coded. For example,
if they pointed to the ground, the gesture was coded as
vertical axis, downward direction.
The interaction between gesture and speech was also
coded for the match in meaning between both modalities.
From the previous research we know that cultures, who
write from left to right tended to put future in the front, up,
and to the right, whereas they perceived past in the back,
down, and to the left (Bergen & Lau, 2012; Casasanto &
Jasmin, 2012; Ouellet & Santiago, 2010). With this
expectation, whenever a temporal phrase matched with this
formula it was coded a “match” and a “mismatch” when the
phrase and gesture carried the opposite meanings. For
example, when a forward gesture co-occurred with the word
“later”, it was a match situation. In contrast, if the gesture
points at the back, while saying “later,” we coded it as a
mismatch.

Coding
Speech. All speech was transcribed by native Turkish
speakers. First, phrases that involved temporal sentential
meaning were identified such as bu ara çok şanslı olacaksın
(“you are going to be very lucky these days”). Then,
temporal phrases were coded into two levels of meaning:
Literal temporal phrases (LP) or metaphoric temporal
phrases (MP). LPs were the ones that refer to time and did
not involve any spatial content, such as şimdi (“now”). MPs
had some metaphoric meaning in them, expressed by the
spatial words, such as kısa süre (“short period”). This was a
delicate process since many spatial metaphors of time have
been embedded so deeply in Turkish language that they may
seem like literal at first glance. For example the word önce
(before) comes from the root ön, which means front, a
spatial concept (Gentner, Imai & Boroditsky, 2002).
Although önce seems to be a literal phrase, this little
distinction makes it a subtle metaphorical one. Similarly bir
yıl içinde (in one year) has a spatial component based on the
preposition içinde (in). To overcome this problem, we first
categorized phrases into three categories as Literal,
Metaphorical and Subtle-metaphorical. Yet, after analyzing
all of them separately, we found the two metaphorical
groups yielded similar results in people’s gesturing patterns
so we reported them as one MP category. Temporal phrases
were also coded according to their temporal orientation of
the sentence: phrases regarding past (e.g. öncesi “before”),
present (e.g. bugünlerde “nowadays”), or future (e.g.
gelecekte “in the future”).
Gesture. The gestures that accompanied temporal phrases
were identified. A change in the shape of the hand or motion
signaled the end of a gesture. Gestures were first
categorized according to their types: metaphoric, deictic or
beat gestures. Because all iconic gestures referred to an

Figure 2: (top left) lateral axis, (top right) vertical axis, (bottom
left) sagittal axis, (bottom right), and diagonal axis as a
combination of any other axes

3

1873

Results

Table 2: Gesture Types According to Temporal Speech Type

Speech. A total of 227 temporal phrases were identified.
Three participants did not use any temporal phrases during
their sessions, so they were excluded from the analysis. In
total, 64 phrases (28.19%) were LPs and 163 phrases
(71.81%) were MPs. The difference between the use of
different types of phrases was statistically significant, χ2 (1,
227) = 43.18, p < 0.001. The total of 227 phrases consisted
of 72 unique temporal phrases. While some phrases like
“now” were repeated several times across several
participants, some like “its time will come” were used only
once (see Appendix A for all types of phrases). Of all the
phrases, 23% of them referred to the past, 22% referred to
the present, and 55% referred to the future.

Gesture type
Metaphoric
Deictic
Beat
Manipulative

Table 3: Axes According to Temporal Speech Type

People expressed time using either one of the 4 axes
(sagittal, vertical, lateral, diagonal) or no axis at all. 60.78%
of all gestures were performed without an axis. Among
those gestures that were made within an axis, 42.5% were in
sagittal, 7.5% were in lateral, 37.5% were in vertical, and
12.5% were in diagonal axes, χ2 (3,40) = 14.8, p < 0.001.
The majority of no-axis gestures were beat gestures
(87.1%). As seen in Table 1, most metaphoric gestures
consisted of sagittal (40.63%), vertical (25%), and no-axis
(15.63%) gestures.

Gesture
Axis
Sagittal
Lateral
Vertical
Diagonal
No Axis

Table 1: Gesture Type – Axis Interaction

Metaphoric
Deictic
Manipulative
Beat

Sagittal

Lateral

Vertical

13
1
1
2

3
0
0
0

8
5
0
2

Diagonal
3
1
0
1

Metaphoric Phrases
Number-Percentage
22 (31.4%)
4 (5.7%)
41 (58.6%)
3 (4.3%)

Although the use of gesture types did not differ between
literal and metaphorical uses of temporal speech, there were
differences in the use of gesture axis. Vertical and no axis
gestures are the most common in LPs with a significant
level of difference, χ2 (4,32) = 35.5, p < 0.0001. While no
axis gestures were still the most common type in MPs, the
use of vertical gestures decreased and the use of sagittal
gestures increased compared to LPs. The difference in the
use of gesture axis was also significant for MPs, χ2 (4,70) =
87.43, p < 0.0001.
Detailed analysis of this gesture-speech interaction results
provided some interesting findings. Among all 15 vertical
gestures, 6 of them accompanied by the word “now” and 1
accompanied “today” with a downward motion. Although
there were more MP gestures in all gesture axes due to
higher number of metaphorical phrases, vertical axis was an
exception: There were more vertical gestures in LPs
compared to MPs.

Gesture. Among the 15 participants, there were 102
gestures that were accompanied by temporal speech. All
these remaining participants gestured at least once and at the
most 21 times. Of all temporal speech, 45% involved
temporal gesture use. Each participant used at least one
temporal gesture. Of the 102 gestures, 32 (31.37%) were
metaphoric, 8 (7.84%) were deictic, 59 (57.84%) were beat,
and 3 (2.94%) were manipulative gestures. Difference
among gesture types was significant, χ2 (3,102) = 73.43, p <
0.0001. Thus, people mostly produced beat and metaphoric
gestures during temporal expressions.

Axis/
Type

Literal Phrases
Number-Percentage
10 (31.3%)
4 (12.5%)
18 (56.3%)
0 (0%)

Literal Phrases
NumberPercentage
2 (6.3%)
0 (0%)
10 (31.3%)
2 (6.3%)
18 (56.3%)

Metaphoric
Phrases
NumberPercentage
15 (21.4%)
3 (4.3%)
5 (7.1%)
3 (4.3%)
44 (62.9%)

Finally, almost all meaningful gestures that were not beat
gestures (except 1 of them) matched with the accompanied
speech. For example, when people talked about time on a
sagittal axis, they put the future events in front of their
bodies and past to their back. Similarly, earlier events were
represented on the left and future events were put to the
right of the body.

No
Axis
5
1
2
54

Discussion
The use of gesture types was similar for both temporal
speech types, as shown in Table 2. Beat and metaphoric
gestures were the most common types with a significant
level of difference among gesture types for both LP, χ2
(3,32) = 23, p < 0.0001, and MP χ2 (3,70) = 55.14, p <
0.0001 (see Table 2).

The present study investigated temporal speech and
spontaneous gestures accompanying temporal phrases
during a natural conversational setting in Turkish. We found
that Turkish speakers used many spatial metaphors to
express time, and the use of these metaphorical references
for time was twice as many than the use of literal time
words. Almost half of the temporal phrases were
accompanied by spontaneous gestures. Beat and metaphoric
gestures were the most common gestures among all types.
4

1874

In contrast to findings in English, (Casasanto & Jasmin,
2012), the sagittal axis was the dominant one used for
spontaneous temporal gestures in Turkish along with the use
of vertical axis gestures. Previous studies did not report the
use of vertical axis in temporal gestures.
In the present study, we made a detailed examination of
temporal phrases. In a setting when someone talks about the
past happenings and possible future events, time is mainly
expressed using space. Phrases that are not necessarily
considered as spatial can have spatial meanings in Turkish.
In addition, Turkish language is very rich in using spatial
metaphors. For example, to talk about a past event that the
person has close connection with; one can use several
metaphors such as geçmişe bağlılık (connection to the past),
geçmişi anmak (remembering the past), geçmişle bağları
koparmak (loosing the connection with the past) or geçmişte
kalmak (stay in the past). As a result of these, people
produce many different types of spatial metaphors in
Turkish. We also propose that the level of abstractness in
metaphors would differ. In some phrases such as aradaki 1
ay (one month in between) may be less abstract than zaman
harcamak (to spend some time). Yet, in this natural setting
we did not observe enough instances to make a distinction
for the level of abstractness in spatial metaphors. Future
studies need to consider these differentiations in the use of
space to describe time and investigate the level of
abstractness in metaphors in experimental settings.
People attempt to visually support the conveying
temporal message with gestures, which is more difficult to
comprehend as an abstract concept. This is true for both
literal and metaphoric use of temporal phrases. The use of
metaphorical gestures is meaningful in this sense. When
people talk about an abstract concept, they may supplement
it with co-occurring semantic gestures like metaphoric ones.
Yet, people also produced many beat gestures. The use of
these meaning-laden beat gestures may help individuals to
plan for their conversation and may benefit the speaker
thinking about the abstract concept while preparing to talk
about it. The temporal synchrony between speech and
gesture can provide us information about the different
functions of metaphoric and beat gestures, which is a
question for future research.
Regarding the gestural axis, our findings contradict the
previous research that used story prompts are given in story
telling situations (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012). The sagittal
axis was the most commonly produced timeline in
spontaneous gestures. In a natural setting when people talk
about time without any study prompts, they used very few
gestures on the lateral axis. One reason could be due to the
nature of the conversation. In this fortune telling sessions as
people focus on talking about the future (55% referred to the
future events) and the listener sits across the person, it can
be inevitable to use sagittal gestures. The teller refers to the
person to express ideas about what can happen for future
events. Thus, using the sagittal axis in this context can be
more pragmatic than using the lateral axis.

In our analyses, we coded 2 additional categories for
gesture axis: diagonal and vertical. Overall, people produced
very few gestures using a mixture of sagittal and lateral axes
(diagonal). Yet, most of the deictic gestures and 25% of the
metaphoric gestures (8 out of 34) were produced using a
vertical axis. This shows that to represent a present moment
or current events such as “now” or “in the near future”
people can use a vertical axis to refer to these by pointing
the front of their bodies. These gestures are not only simple
pointing gestures, thus the exact purpose of this axis also
needs further investigation in an experimental setting.
One limitation of the current study is that the majority of
temporal gestures come from a few participants, while
others perform 3.5 gestures on average per person. Further
studies need to work with a larger sample size to overcome
these imbalances and have a more homogeneous sample.
Taken together, this study contributes to the literature on
speech-gesture interaction in expressing temporal events. As
in line with studies conducted in English, we presented
evidence for the heavy use of spatial metaphors. However,
metaphoric gestures are produced on a sagittal axis during
natural conversation settings, suggesting that not all types of
settings and/or languages invoke the use of lateral axis for
spontaneous temporal gestures.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sabri Börütecene for Figure 1 drawing and Hulusi
Kayabaşı for helping us with the gestures in Figure 2. We
also thank Sinan Karaçam, Elifnaz Yalçınöz, Bilge Eren,
Jiyan Erincik, Şeyma Taşel, and Zeynep Yıldız for their
help in transcribing and coding the data.

References
Bergen, B. K., & Lau, T. T. C. (2012). Writing direction
affects how people map space onto time. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?:
Mandarin and English speakers' conceptions of
time. Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2011). Do
English and Mandarin speakers think about time
differently?. Cognition, 118(1), 123-129.
Casasanto, D., & Jasmin, K. (2012). The Hands of Time:
Temporal Gestures in English Speakers. Cognitive
Linguistics, 23(4), 643-674.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R. (2014). Mirror reading can
reverse the flow of time. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 143(2), 473.
Cooperrider, K., & Núñez, R. (2009). Across time, across
the body Transversal temporal gestures. Gesture, 9(2),
181-206.
Evans, V. (Ed.). (2003). The structure of time: Language,
meaning and temporal cognition. John Benjamins
Publishing.
5

1875

Metaphorical Phrases

Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-­‐Cultural
Differences in Mental Representations of Time: Evidence
From an Implicit Nonlinguistic Task. Cognitive
Science, 34(8), 1430-1451.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space →
time metaphors. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 17(5), 537-565.
Lakoff, G. (1992). The contemporary theory of metaphor.
In: Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and Thought, 202–
250. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Le Guen, O., & Pool Balam, L. I. (2012). No metaphorical
timeline in gesture and cognition among Yucatec
Mayas. Frontiers in Psychology, 3(271).
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. University of Chicago Press.
Núñez, R. E., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind
them: Convergent evidence from Aymara language and
gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial
construals of time. Cognitive science, 30(3), 401-450.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010). Is
the future the right time?. Experimental Psychology, 57,
308-314.
Ördem, E. (2014). Türkiye Türkçesinde Zaman Metaforları:
Bilişsel Dil Bilimsel Bir Yaklaşım. Journal of Dil
Arastirmalari, (14).
Özçalişkan, Ş. (2004). Time Can't Fly, But a Bird Can:
Learning to Think and Talk About Time As Spatial
Motion in English and Turkish. European Journal of
English Studies, 8(3), 309-336.

1 yıl içinde “in 1 year”
3-4 ay sonra “3-4 months later”
Aradaki 1 ay “1 month in between”
Arkası(ndan) “after/behind (after that)”
Az önce “a moment ago”
Bir ara “some time”
Bir süre sonra “a while later”
Biraz zaman önce “a while ago”
Bu ara/dönem/sıralar “these days/nowadays”
Daha önce “before”
Geçmiş bir yerde kalmış “past is stuck”
Geçmişe bağlılık “connection to the past”
Geçmişi anmak “remembering the past”
Geçmişle bağları koparmak “losing connection with past”
Geçmişte kalmak “stay in the past”
Geçtiğimiz 2 yıl içinde “in the last 2 years”
Geride kalmak “left behind”
İleride(si) “ahead”
Kısa süre/vade “short period/duration”
Kısa zaman sonra “short while later”
Önceki süreç “previous term”
Öncesi “before”
Önümüzdeki 3 ay/dönem “next 3 months/term”
Onündeki süreç “period ahead”
Orta vade “medium duration”
Sonra “Later”
Sonraki günler “Days after”
Sonrası(nda) “After (that)”
Şu sıralar “recently”
Uzun süre/vade “long period/duration”
Vakit vermek “to give time”
Vakti olmak “to have time”
Yakın zaman “close time”
Zaman almak “to take time”
Zaman geçirmek “to spend time”
Zaman girmiş “time came between”
Zaman sıkıştırıyor “time rushes”
Zaman tanımak “to give time”
Zamana bırakmak “to let time go by”
Zamanı gelmek “time has come”
Zamanı var “there is time”

Appendix A.
Time expressed in literal and metaphorical phrases.
Literal Phrases
…’dan beri “since”
1.5 ay “1.5 months”
2 vakte kadar “until 2 times”
Aylardan beri “for months”
Aynı zamanda “at the same time”
Bir anda “suddenly”
Bir gün “one day”
Bir süre daha “a while longer”
Bugün “today”
Eskisi “old”
Geçmiş zaman “past time”
Geçmişte “in the past”
Gelecek “future”
Ne zaman … o zaman “when … then”
Olacak zaman “times to come”
Şimdi(lik) “now (for now)”
Şu an/saat/tarih “this moment/hour/date”
Zamanında “in the past”

6

1876

