The Comprehension of English Garden-path Sentences by
Mandarin and Korean Learners of English as a Second Language
Zhiying Qian (zqian3@illinois.edu)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA

Eun-Kyung Lee (eunkyunglee@yongsei.ac.kr)
Yonsei University, Korea

Dora Hsin-Yi Lu (doralu@tea.ntue.edu.tw)
National Taipei University of Education, Taiwan

Susan M. Garnsey (sgarnsey@psych.illinois.edu)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA
Abstract

or the subject of an upcoming embedded clause. In (1a), the
article turns out to be the direct object of read, and the
scientist did read the article. In (1b), however, the article
turns out to be the subject of the embedded clause, and the
scientist read something about the article, but not
necessarily the article itself. Such temporary ambiguity at
the ambiguous noun (the article) arises because English
allows the complementizer that to be dropped. Sentences
like (1b) can be disambiguated by adding a complementizer
that after the main clause verb, as shown in (2).

How the properties of a first language (Mandarin, Korean)
influence the comprehension of sentences in a second
language (English) was investigated in a series of self-paced
reading time studies. Native Mandarin- and Korean-speaking
learners of English were compared with native English
speakers on how they resolved a temporary ambiguity about
the relationship between a verb and the noun following it in a
sentence (e.g., The club members understood [that] the
bylaws would be applied to everyone.). Frequency biases of
verbs’ subcategorization structure (direct-object-bias vs.
sentential-complement-bias) was manipulated in Experiment
1. Results showed that L1-Mandarin learners of L2-English
were able to use both the verb bias and the complementizer
cue, and their usage of these cues was not modulated by
proficiency. L1-Mandarin learners’ use of the verb bias cue
contrasts with previously reported findings with L1-Korean
learners of L2-English, who showed sensitivity to verb bias
only in higher proficiency learners (Lee, Lu, & Garnsey,
2013). The difference between L1-Mandarin and L1-Korean
learners suggests that L1 word order (Mandarin & English,
SVO; Korean SOV) influences how quickly L2 learners learn
word-order-dependent cues about structures in the L2.
Experiment 2 added plausibility manipulation (e.g., The club
members understood the bylaws/the pool…). Neither the
native speakers or the L2 groups (L1-Mandarin L2-English &
L1-Korean L2-English) used plausibility to disambiguate
sentences, challenging the claims that L2 learners rely more
heavily on plausibility than syntactic cues during sentence
processing.

(2) The scientist read that the article had been published
two months ago.
Readers typically slow down at reading had been in (1b)
than in (2), because they have initially analyzed the article
as the direct object of read. At the position of had been,
they realize that this analysis is incorrect, and thus start to
revise that interpretation. Such slowing down in reading
time is termed garden-path effect, and has been taken to
reflect reanalysis processes.
Another cue native English speakers have been found to
rely on to avoid garden-pathing is verb bias, which refers to
the frequency with which a particular verb takes a particular
structure, such as direct object (DO) or sentential
complement (SC) (Garnsey, Pearlmutter, Myers, &
Lotocky, 1997; Trueswell & Kim, 1998; Wilson & Garnsey,
2009). Consider (3) and (4),

Keywords: verb bias; plausibility; garden-path sentences, L2
sentence processing

(3) The club members understood the bylaws would be
applied to everyone. (DO-bias verb)
(4) The ticket agent admitted the mistake might be hard to
correct. (SC-bias verb)

Introduction
Consider (1),
(1) The scientist read the article…
(a)…………………………at lunch time.
(b)…………………………had been published two
months ago.

Understand biases towards taking direct objects, and admit
towards sentential complements. In (3), the parser
anticipates a direct object after encountering understood,
and thus experiences garden-path effect at would, where
such interpretation turns out to be incorrect. In contrast, the
parser experiences less difficulty processing might in (4),

The syntactic role of the article is temporarily ambiguous
between being the direct object of the preceding verb read

608

because it anticipates an embedded clause after reading the
sentential-clause-biased verb admit, and the sentence turns
out to have the embedded clause structure.
Previous studies have shown that verb bias has a rapid
effect on the processing of direct object/sentential
complement (DO/SC) ambiguous sentences, and that either
the complementizer that cue or the verb bias cue alone is
sufficient for native English speakers to avoid gardenpathing. For instance, Garnsey et al. (1997) found that
native speakers were slower at reading the disambiguating
verb (e.g., would) after DO-bias verbs (e.g., understand),
but not after SC-bias verbs (e.g., admit). After SC-bias
verbs, the reading times at the disambiguating verb in
sentences without the complementizer that (i.e., ambiguous)
were just as fast as those with the complementizer that (i.e.,
unambiguous). This is the optimal efficient pattern of using
the two cues. How about non-native speakers? Are they able
to learn to use verb bias that is specific to the L2? Are they
able to learn the complementizer that cue if such cue is not
available in their native language?
A prevailing view in second language sentence processing
literature claims that while L2 learners are capable of using
lexical-semantic information during online parsing, they
cannot use syntactic information in the way that native
speakers do (i.e., the Shallow Structure Hypothesis; Clahsen
& Felser, 2006). What has not been considered on this view
is L2 learners’ use of lexically-associated syntactic cue,
such as verb bias. On the one hand, verb bias is lexicallyassociated information that is stored in the lexicon and
retrieved when words are recognized. Such information
might be considered to be part of the lexical information the
Shallow Structure Hypothesis claims that L2 learners rely
on. On the other hand, verb bias is about structure, so L2
learners may not use it to the extent that native speakers do.
Studies thus far have revealed that L2 learners are able to
learn L2-specific verb bias cue and use it fast enough to
guide on-line parsing in the L2 (Dussias & Cramer Scaltz,
2008; Dussias, Marful, Gerfen, & Bajo Molina, 2010;
Frenck-Mestre & Pynte, 1997), even if such information
cannot be used in the same way in their L1 because L1 and
L2 use different word orders (Lee, Lu, & Garnsey, 2013).
English follows SVO word order to place verbs early in
the sentence, and therefore verbs provide useful information
about the upcoming syntactic structure. In Korean, however,
since the word order is SOV, verbs appear at the ends of
clauses, and therefore are not useful in the same way as in
English. In addition, unlike in English, where the
complementizer that is optional, a clause-final
complementizer particle ko is obligatory in Korean. Thus
L1-Korean speakers do not have L1 experience with
predicting upcoming structure based on either verb bias or
the complementizer, but they do have experience with an
end-of-clause complementizer that is a perfect cue to an
embedded clause. Since the complementizer is a perfect cue
on its own, it is possible that Korean speakers would never
learn to associate structural biases with verbs, which is a
much less reliable cue. Lee et al. (2013) compared L1-

Korean L2-English speakers of higher proficiency with
those with lower proficiency on their use of verb bias and
the complementizer in reading ambiguous and unambiguous
DO/SC ambiguous sentences that contained DO-bias or SCbias verbs. Results showed that lower proficiency L2learners must rely on the presence of the complementizer to
use the verb bias cue, but higher proficiency group could
use the two cues interactively, just like native speakers.
However, higher proficiency learners did not achieve the
optimal efficient pattern seen in the native speakers.
The fact that higher proficiency L1-Korean learners did
not achieve the optimal native pattern might well be true for
any L2 learners, simply because they don’t have as much
experience as native English speakers. Alternatively,
however, it is possible that the fact that verb bias is not
available early enough in the sentence to base predictions on
in Korean is responsible for the failure to achieve the native
pattern, making it important to test L2-English learners
whose L1 has a word order placing verbs earlier in the
sentence. Mandarin places verbs early in the sentence, with
the same SVO order as English, and native speakers of
Mandarin has been found to use verb bias to develop
expectations about the upcoming structure (Qian, 2015).
Mandarin has no complementizer in the type of DO/SC
sentences used in this study. These differences between
Korean and Mandarin suggest that L1-Mandarin learners of
L2-English might use verb bias and complementizer cues
differently from L1-Korean learners. L1-Mandarin learners
may find it easier to learn and use the biases of English
verbs earlier. As for their ability to use the complementizer
that, it is not clear what to predict. Given that that is a
frequent word, it may be easy for them to learn.
Alternatively, the fact that the English cue that has many
other usages besides a complementizer (pronoun,
demonstrative, relative pronoun,…) may make it a difficult
cue for Mandarin-L1 learners to rely on. Experiment 1 aims
to test these predictions.
Previous research comparing the use of verb bias and
plausibility cues in resolving DO/SC ambiguity by native
English speakers found that plausibility did not have a
chance to influence parsing in the presence of verbs with
strong biases (Garnsey et al., 1997; Trueswell, 1996). It is
possible that the same would not be true for L2 learners
because L2 learners have been argued to rely heavily on
lexical-semantic information rather than structure. Lee et al.
(2013) has already shown that L1-Korean learners of L2English did learn to make use of verb bias in such sentences.
However, they did not also consider the role that plausibility
might play. In Experiment 2, verb bias and plausibility were
both manipulated and pitted against each other to examine
the relative importance of plausibility and verb bias in L2English sentence processing. Native English speakers rely
more heavily on verb bias than plausibility, but the opposite
might be true for L2-English learners.

609

Experiment 1

(Francis & Kucera, 1982) F<1. Verb properties are
summarized in Table 2.

32 native English speakers (22 male, mean age 20) and 78
L1-Mandarin learners of L2-English (26 male, mean age 24)
participated in Experiment 1. The native English control
group was the same group as in Lee et al. (2013).
L2 proficiency was assessed using a cloze test (i.e., fill-inthe-blanks) that contained 40 blanks. The L2 group was
divided into higher and lower proficiency groups based on
median split (lower<32, higher≥32). Additional background
information of the L2 group is summarized in Table 1.

Table 2. Properties of the verbs used in the experiments.
DO bias
SC bias
Mean
Mean log
strength
strength
length
frequency
(%)
(%)
DO-verb
76
13
8.1
1.9
SC-verbs
17
59
7.9
1.7

Participants

To ensure that any effect found at the disambiguating
region was caused only by the biases of the verbs, two
plausibility norming tasks were conducted to examine
whether the ambiguous nouns were equally plausible as the
direct object of the preceding verb and as the subject of the
embedded clause between DO-bias and SC-bias items. The
plausibility of the ambiguous noun as the direct object was
rated by asking a separate group of 56 native speakers of
English to judge the plausibility of the subject, verb and
ambiguous noun combinations on a 1 (very implausible) to
7 (very plausible) scale, as shown in (6).

Table 1. Language background information of the L1Mandarin L2-English group in Experiment 1.
Lower
Higher
All
Proficiency
Proficiency
Learners
Group
Group
# of Participants
78
40
38
Age
24(18-37) 23(18-37)
24(18-35)
Proficiency score
31(21-37) 28(21-31)
34(32-37)
Age of classroom
10(4-16)
10(5-16)
10(4-16)
instruction
Age start residence
21(15-33) 21(15-33)
22(15-30)
in English countries
Duration of L2
country residence 30(6-60)
28(6-60)
32(6-60)
(months)
Daily use of English
50(5-95)
47(10-85)
4(5-95)
(%)

(6) The club members understood the bylaws.
The ticket agent admitted the mistake.
(7) The club members understood that the bylaws were…
The ticket agent admitted that the mistake was…

The ticket agent admitted (that) the
mistake might be hard to correct.

Ambiguous nouns following DO-bias verbs were rated as
slightly more plausible than those following SC-bias verbs
(6.5 vs 6.2, F(1,78)=5.4, p<.05). This replicated previous
findings that plausibility ratings of the ambiguous noun as
the direct object were affected by biases of the verbs
(Garnsey et al., 1997). However, the small difference in
plausibility is unlikely to have a detectable effect in
sentences with strongly biased verbs, given previous
findings from studies specifically manipulating plausibility
(Garnsey et al., 1997).
A separate norming study that assessed the plausibility of
the ambiguous noun as the subject of the embedded clause
was conducted with 12 native English speakers, who rated
on a 1 (very implausible) to 7 (very plausible) scale the
plausibility of sentence fragments such as (7) as the
beginning of a sentence. The ambiguous nouns for both DOand SC-items were both rated as highly plausible (mean
DO: 6.1; mean SC: 6.1) and did not differ between verb
types, F<1. The properties of the ambiguous nouns in
Experiment 1 are summarized in Table 3.

DO- and SC-biased verbs were selected based on a
norming study reported in Garnsey et al. (1997). DO-bias
verbs were followed at least twice as often by direct object
completions as by sentential complement completions in a
sentence production task. The reverse was true for SC-bias
verbs. DO- and SC-biased verbs used in the present study
were matched on the number of letters, F<1, and frequency

Table 3. Properties of the ambiguous nouns used in
Experiment 1.
Plausibility
Plausibility
Mean
Log
as the direct as the clause
length
frequency
object
subject
DO-items 7.4
1.3
6.5
6.1
SC-items 7.1
1.4
6.2
6.1

Materials and Design
Ten DO-bias and ten SC-bias verbs were each used four
times to create 80 sets of sentences, with each set containing
ambiguous and unambiguous versions of the same sentence
(disambiguated by using that), as shown in (5). All
disambiguating verbs and the words immediately following
them were auxiliary verbs, so that the properties of the
disambiguating words did not differ between items with
DO-bias and SC-bias verbs. All critical items ended with
embedded clauses.
(5) Example stimuli in Experiment 1:
DO-bias verb The club members understood (that) the
bylaws would be applied to everyone.
SC-bias verb

610

Critical sentences were distributed over two lists
according to a Latin Square design. 80 distractors were
added to each list for a total of 160 trials per list. A
comprehension question was asked following each sentence,
and the question targeted the content of various parts of the
sentences (e.g., Were the bylaws applied fairly?).

factor for subjects and items revealed a main effect of
ambiguity, with ambiguous sentences being read slower
than unambiguous sentences (425 vs 414 ms; β=10, SE=3,
t>3), an interaction between verb bias and ambiguity, with
the ambiguity effect of DO-items (15 ms) being larger than
that of SC-items (5 ms; β=11, SE=5, t>2), and an interaction
between verb bias and language group (native vs. nonnative; β=15, SE=8, t>2), with the difference between DOand SC-items being bigger in the non-native speakers group
(21 ms) than the native speakers group (10 ms).
Since there was no effect associated with the comparison
between the higher proficiency and lower proficiency L1Mandarin L2-English groups, further analyses did not break
down into higher and lower proficiency groups. Analysis
with the native speakers group showed a main effect of
ambiguity (ambiguous 352 ms; unambiguous 342 ms; t>2)
and an interaction between verb bias and ambiguity, which
resulted because the disambiguating region was read slower
in ambiguous than in unambiguous sentences only when the
main clause verb had DO bias (ambiguity effect 19 ms;
β=18.53, SE=5.61, t=3.30), but not when it had SC bias
(ambiguity effect -1 ms; β=.43, SE=4.39, t<1), as shown in
Figure 1.
Analyses on the L1-Mandarin L2-English group revealed
a main effect of verb bias, with DO items read slower than
SC items (461 vs 440 ms; β=23, SE=11, t>2) and a main
effect of ambiguity (455 vs 445 ms; β=11, SE=4, t>2).
Although the disambiguating region of ambiguous sentences
were read slower than unambiguous sentences only after
DO-bias verbs (t=2.74) but not after SC-bias verbs (t=1.55),
this difference was not big enough to produce an interaction
between verb bias and ambiguity. These results indicated
that L1-Mandarin learners of L2-English were able to use
verb bias and complementizer cues, but that neither cue
alone was sufficient in the way that it is for native speakers.

Procedure
Participants sat in a dimly lit and sound-attenuated booth
in front of a 23-inch LCD monitor. 160 sentences were
presented one word at a time in white 26-point Arial font on
a black background in a non-cumulative moving window
self-paced reading paradigm. Each time participant pressed
a button on a Cendrus-830 response box, the next word
appeared and the previous word reverted to the mask
character. Following each sentence, a comprehension
question was presented and participants press one of two
buttons to indicate yes or no answers. Feedback about
question accuracy was given. A “too slow” feedback
message was presented if participants did not make a
response within four seconds. The sentences were divided
into four blocks with forty sentences each. The experiment
began with a practice block of five sentences, and the entire
session took 30-45 minutes to complete. L2 learners
completed the cloze test after the self-paced reading
experiment.

Results
Comprehension Accuracy On average, the accuracy rate
for native English speakers was 92% (range 87%-96%) and
for L1-Mandarin learners of L2-English was 86% (74%96%). Higher proficiency learners answered comprehension
questions to critical trials more accurately than lower
proficiency learners (88% vs. 85%, p<.01).

L1−English
Residual Reading Times (ms)

Reading Times To remove individual differences in
reading speed, statistical results reported below were based
on length-corrected residual reading times computed
separately for each participant. Reading times in the
disambiguating region were averaged across two words
(e.g., would be) and were then analyzed using linear mixedeffect models with maximal random effects structure (Barr,
Levy, Scheepters, & Tily, 2013). T>2 is interpreted as
significant. Raw reading times are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4. Raw reading times at the disambiguating region in
Experiment 1.
DO-bias verbs
SC-bias verbs
Ambig
Unambig
Ambig
Unambig
L1-English
362
343
341
342
L1-Mandarin 469
454
444
436

30
●

Ambiguous
Unambiguous

15
0
●

●

DO−bias
verbs

SC−bias
verbs

−15
−30

Residual Reading Times (ms)

L1−Mandarin

The disambiguating region. The multi-level model at this
region that included ambiguity, verb bias, language group
(native vs. non-native, high proficiency L2 group vs. low
proficiency L2 group) and their interactions as fixed effects,
and random intercepts and random slopes of the ambiguity

30
●

Ambiguous
Unambiguous

15
0

●

−15

●

−30

DO−bias
verbs

SC−bias
verbs

Figure 1: Reading time at the disambiguating region in
Experiment 1.

611

Discussion

and log frequency (F<1). The same was true for implausible
nouns (Fs<1). As in Experiment 1, 80 distractors were
added to each list for a total of 160 trials per list. The
procedure for Experiment 2 was exactly the same as
Experiment 1.

Experiment 1 manipulated verb bias and the presence of the
complementizer that to compare the use of these two cues
by L1-Mandarin speakers of L2-English and native English
speakers. Native speakers showed the usual interaction
between verb bias and ambiguity, suggesting an optimal,
efficient and interactive use of the two cues. L1-Mandarin
learners have learned to use verb bias, and their use of verb
bias information was not modulated by proficiency,
suggesting that even lower proficiency L1-Mandarin
learners of L2-English have learned to use verb bias
information. Perhaps, this is because they already do the
same in their L1. Given that Mandarin does not have a
complementizer that functions similarly to the
complementizer that in English to signal an upcoming
embedded clause, the prediction was that L1-Mandarin
learners of L2-English might not be sensitive to such a cue.
Contrary to that prediction, L1-Mandarin learners did use
the complementizer cue. The use of complementizer was
also not modulated by proficiency. Presumably, this is
because the complementizer that cue is a salient cue and
therefore is easy to learn.

(8) Example stimuli for Experiment 2:
DO-bias verb
Plausible:
The club members understood (that) the
bylaws would be applied to everyone.
Implausible: The club members understood (that) the pool
would be closed on Mondays.
SC-bias verb
Plausible:
The ticket agent admitted (that) the mistake
might be hard to correct.
Implausible: The ticket agent admitted (that) the kiosk
might be difficult to find.
Table 5. Properties of the ambiguous nouns used in
Experiment 2.
Plausibility as
Plausibility as the
the direct object
clause subject
DO-items
Plausible Noun
6.5
6.1
Implausible Noun
2.3
5.2
SC-items
Plausible Noun
6.2
6.1
Implausible Noun
1.9
5.3

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that L1-Mandarin learners of L2English were able to use both verb bias and complementizer
cues to anticipate upcoming syntactic structure. The next
question is how their usage of those cues compares with the
usage of the kinds of lexical-semantic cues that have been
proposed to be especially important for second language
sentence processing. To evaluated that, Experiment 2 added
plausibility manipulation, and tested native English, L1Mandarin L2-English, and L1-Korean L2-English speakers.

Results
Comprehension Accuracy On average, the accuracy rate to
comprehension questions was 93% for native speakers, 87%
for L1-Mandarin group and 85% for L1-Korean group.
Higher proficiency L1-Mandarin group was more accurate
than lower proficiency L1-Mandarin group (89% vs 85%,
p<.01), and higher proficiency L1-Korean group was more
accurate than lower proficiency L1-Korean group (87% vs
83%, p<.01).
Reading Times At the disambiguating region, analysis on
the residual reading times for native speakers revealed a
main effect of ambiguity, with ambiguous sentences being
read slower than unambiguous sentences (356 vs 349 ms;
β=8, SE=3, t>2), and an interaction between verb bias and
ambiguity (β=13, SE=5, t>2). The interaction resulted
because ambiguous sentences were read slower than
unambiguous sentences only after DO-bias verbs (364 vs
351 ms, β=20, SE=7, t>2) but not after SC-bias verbs (348
vs 347 ms; β=2, SE=4, t<1), as shown in Figure 2. There
was no effect involving the plausibility factor (ts<1.6). This
is consistent with a previous finding that plausibility of the
noun as a direct object had no effect on disambiguation
region reading times in native English speakers when verbs
were strongly biased (Garnsey et al., 1997).
For L1-Mandarin group, there was a main effect of
ambiguity, with ambiguous sentences being read slower
than unambiguous sentences (447 vs 425 ms; β=21, SE=4,

Participants
65 native English speakers, 70 L1-Mandarin speakers of L2English, and 69 L1-Korean speakers of L2-English
participated in Experiment 2. L2 groups were divided into
higher and lower proficiency groups based on median split
in each group (L1-Korean: lower proficiency group<33,
higher proficiency group≥33; L1-Mandarin: lower<35;
higher≥35). Additional language background information
are not provided here due to limit of space.

Materials and Design
The same 10 DO-bias and 10 SC-bias verbs were each used
four times to construct 80 sets of sentences that fully
crossed plausibility and ambiguity, as shown in (8).
Plausible sentences were identical to sentences used in
Experiment 1, for the most part.
As in Experiment 1, the ambiguous nouns were rated for
their plausibility as the direct object of the main clause verb
and as the subject of the embedded clause. Properties of the
ambiguous nouns are summarized in Table 5. Plausible
nouns in sentences with DO-bias verbs did not differ from
those in SC-bias sentences in the number of letters (F<1)

612

Conclusion

t>5), a main effect of proficiency, with the higher
proficiency group reading faster than the lower proficiency
group (421 vs 451 ms; β=16, SE=5, t=3), and an interaction
between verb bias and ambiguity (β=18, SE=8, t>2), which
was caused by the ambiguous sentences being read slower
than unambiguous sentences after DO-bias verbs (462 vs
432 ms; β=40, SE=9, t>4), but not after SC-bias verbs (433
vs 419 ms; β=13, SE=7, t<2), as shown in Figure 2. There
was no effect involving the plausibility factor (ts<2).
For L1-Korean group, there was a main effect of
ambiguity (482 vs 460 ms, t>5), and a main effect of verb
bias (DO 479 ms vs SC 463 ms, t>2). There was no
interaction between verb bias and plausibility, nor were
there any effects involving the proficiency and plausibility
factors (ts<2).
There was a numeric pattern in both the native speakers
and the L2 learners’ data that reading times were slower on
the disambiguation following a DO-bias verb and an
implausible noun. This tendency was not significant in any
language groups, and this effect was hypothesized to be spill
over from reading the implausible noun itself. Due to the
length limit of this paper, data analyses at the ambiguous
noun region were not included.

The present study investigated L2 learners’ use of verb
bias, complementizer that, and plausibility cues to predict
upcoming syntactic structure. Results showed that L1Mandarin speakers combined the verb bias and
complementizer cues interactively, though they did not
show the optimally efficient pattern seen in native speakers.
In addition, even lower proficiency L1-Mandarin learners
have learned to use verb bias and the complementizer,
suggesting that verb bias and complementizer were not hard
to learn for L1-Mandarin learners, perhaps because they use
verb bias in the same way in their L1, and the
complementizer that cue is a salient cue that is easy to learn.
Moreover, just like native speakers, both L1-Mandarin and
L1-Korean learners of L2-English did not use plausibility in
their processing of DO/SC ambiguous sentences,
contrasting the claims that L2 learners rely more heavily on
semantic cues. Perhaps it may simply take too long, even for
native speakers, to put the verb and noun meanings together
in the way that is required for it to influence parsing
decisions.

References
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in
language learners. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27, 3-42.
Dussias, P.E., & Cramer Scaltz, T.R. (2008). Spanish-English L2
speakers' use of subcategorization bias information in the
resolution of temporary ambiguity during second language
reading. Acta psychologica, 128, 501-513.
Dussias, P.E., Marful, A., Gerfen, C., & Bajo Molina, M.T. (2010).
Usage frequencies of complement-taking verbs in Spanish and
English: Data from Spanish monolinguals and Spanish-English
bilinguals. Behavior Research Methods, 42, 1004-1011.
Francis, W.N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency and analysis of
English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.
Frenck-Mestre, C., & Pynte, J. (1997). Syntactic ambiguity
resolution while reading in second and native languages.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50, 119-148.
Garnsey, S.M., Pearlmutter, N.J., Myers, E., & Lotocky, M.A.
(1997). The Contributions of Verb Bias and Plausibility to the
Comprehension of Temporarily Ambiguous Sentences. Journal
of Memory and Language, 37, 58-93.
Lee, E-K., Lu, H-Y., & Garnsey, S.M. (2013). L1 word order and
sensitivity to verb bias in L2 processing. Bilingualism:
Language & Cognition, 16, 761-775.
Qian, Z. (2015). The reanalysis and interpretation of garden-path
sentences by native speakers and second language learners.
(Dissertation), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Trueswell, J.C. (1996). The role of lexical frequency in syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 35,
566-585.
Trueswell, J.C., & Kim, A. E. (1998). How to prune a garden path
by nipping it in the bud: Fast priming of verb argument
structure. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 102-123.
Wilson, M.P., & Garnsey, S.M. (2009). Making simple sentences
hard: Verb bias effects in simple direct object sentences. Journal
of Memory and Language, 60, 368-392.

Residual Reading Times (ms)

L1−English
30
●

Ambiguous
Unambiguous

15
0
−15

●
●

−30

DO−bias
verbs

SC−bias
verbs

Residual Reading Times (ms)

L1−Mandarin
30
●

Ambiguous
Unambiguous

15
0
●

−15
●

−30

DO−bias
verbs

SC−bias
verbs

Residual Reading Times (ms)

L1−Korean
30
●

Ambiguous
Unambiguous

15
0

●

−15
●

−30

DO−bias
verbs

SC−bias
verbs

Figure 2: Residual reading times at the disambiguating
region, collapsing over plausibility, in Experiment 2.

613

