The development of heuristics in children: Base-rate neglect and representativeness
Samantha Gualtieri (sgualtieri@uwaterloo.ca) & Stephanie Denison (stephanie.denison@uwaterloo.ca)
University of Waterloo, Department of Psychology
Abstract
This paper examines the development of the
representativeness heuristic in early childhood. Using a novel
paradigm, we investigated 3- to 6-year-old children’s ability
to use base-rate and individuating information in their
predictive inferences. In Experiment 1, we presented children
with base-rate and individuating information separately to test
their ability to use each independently. In Experiment 2, we
presented children with base-rate and individuating
information together. Two critical trial types were used, one
in which the base-rate information and individuating
information pointed to the same response and one in which
the base-rate and individuating information pointed to
conflicting responses. Results suggest that children progress
to adult-like heuristic-based responding at 6 years of age.
Keywords: decision making, base-rate neglect, heuristics

Introduction
From their first year of life, human infants are able to use
numerical information in their inductive inferences. For
instance, infants expect a random sample drawn from a
larger distribution to resemble the larger distribution (Teglas
et al., 2007; Xu & Garcia, 2008). However, adults tend to
under use numerical base-rate information and over rely on
other types of information in their predictive inferences
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1973). These two literatures pose a
conundrum for cognitive developmentalists: if humans can
use base-rates to make inferences as early as 12 months,
why are adults so inclined to neglect them and when does
the tendency to do so emerge?
In their seminal work, Kahneman and Tversky (1973)
outlined notable cases of adults neglecting base-rates. In the
classic lawyer-engineer problem, participants read a
personality description that was randomly selected from a
sample of 70 lawyers and 30 engineers. This description
was of a person who was conservative, enjoyed puzzles, and
did not care for social issues. When asked to report whether
the person was a lawyer or an engineer, participants
reported it was more likely that the person was an engineer.
That is, people neglected base-rates (i.e., the number of
lawyers and engineers) and over used individuating
information (i.e., the personality description) in their
estimates. Kahneman and Tversky (1973) referred to this as
the representativeness heuristic: people over rely on
individuating information that fits their representation of a
group’s characteristics and ignore important factors, such as
base-rates, resulting in biased judgments in some cases.
The vast literature examining normative (often also
referred to as analytic) versus non-normative (often also
referred to as heuristic) responding often includes two
assumptions (see Kokis et al., 2002 for a review). The first
assumption, which has received mixed empirical support, is
that heuristic responding should decrease in adult samples

as intelligence increases (adults of higher intelligence
should override a heuristic response more often, in favour of
the normative response). A related, though largely untested
assumption is that heuristic responding should decrease with
age, as the ability to override the heuristic response should
improve over development. However, it is difficult to draw
conclusions from the few studies that have investigated the
development of base-rate neglect and the representativeness
heuristic in childhood, as their designs lack features that
have proven vital to understanding the adult work. One
pivotal aspect of Kahneman and Tversky’s (1973) problems
is the familiarity of the group information to participants. In
the previous lawyer-engineer example, adults believe the
person is an engineer, as the description they are given
closely resembles their representation or stereotype of an
engineer. In order to use this heuristic, one has to be familiar
with how individuating information can be used to classify a
specific case. It is important to consider young children’s
experience with group information when examining their
use of the representativeness heuristic (Stanovich, West, &
Toplak, 2011). For example, Jacobs and Potenza (1991) and
Davidson (1995) found age-related decreases in base-rate
use, with the youngest children (6- and 7-year-olds)
providing more normative responses than older children and
adults in tasks that were adapted for children. These results
were interpreted as revealing a counter-intuitive idea:
younger children actually make better predictive judgments
than older children and adults, as they were more likely to
provide the response that was closer to the base-rates.
However, participants in these studies were presented with
group information that may have been unfamiliar to the
youngest children in the sample (e.g., cheerleader and band
member stereotypes). Since it is reasonable to assume that
the youngest children did not have the relevant group
information to begin with, children’s use of base-rates may
have arose from being unaware of the category information,
rather than overriding a heuristic response with a normative
one (Stanovich et al., 2011).
One previous study has highlighted this important
problem by attempting to manipulate the familiarity of
stereotype information across ages. De Neys and
Vanderputte (2011) investigated 5- and 8-year-old
children’s responses to base-rate problems that used both
familiar and unfamiliar group information. Their results
supported the claim that younger children might be
providing normative responses only when they are
unfamiliar with the presented stereotypes (and thus only
have base-rates to go on). However, attempting to find ages
at which these stereotypes are emerging would help
determine if the representativeness heuristic is used when
both types of information are available to the child.
Using a novel paradigm, we examined young children’s
use of base-rate and individuating information in their

2117

inferences. In Experiment 1, we established whether 3- to 5year-old children could use base-rate and individuating
information when presented alone. No previous studies have
established whether children could use base-rate and
individuating information separately in their tasks, which is
vital to understanding how children consider this
information when presented together. In Experiment 2, we
presented 3- to 6-year-old children with both base-rate and
individuating information. Analogous to the adult literature,
we investigated children’s inferences when presented with
individuating information that conflicted with base-rate
information. To examine the integration of information in
young children further, we also included problems in which
the two types of information did not conflict.

indicated that there were lots of robots wearing red, and
very few wearing purple. Following this, children saw a
slide with a single robot wearing a white coat, making its
type unclear. Children were asked to recall which type of
robot there was more of in the group. Participants were then
asked to indicate which type of robot they thought the one
wearing the white coat was. This procedure was also
followed for the shape problem; however, participants saw
one type of robot wearing hearts and another type of robot
wearing stars. To ensure participants did not confuse the
robots with those from the previous problem, the shape
problem took place at a grocery store.

Experiment 1: Methods
Participants
Children in both experiments were tested individually in
lab, at their school or daycare, or at a local museum. Fortyeight children participated in the base-rate condition,
including 16 three-year-olds, 16 four-year-olds, and 16 fiveyear-olds (Mean age = 4 years, 4 months, range = 3 years, 0
months, 9 days to 5 years, 11 months, 20 days, female =
20). An additional child was tested but excluded for failing
to correctly identify the majority group on both problems
(see Procedure for details). Forty-eight children participated
in the individuating condition, including 16 three-year-olds,
16 four-year-olds, and 16 five-year-olds (Mean age = 4
years, 6 months, range = 3 years, 0 months, 27 days to 5
years, 11 months, 29 days, female = 24). An additional child
was tested but excluded for non-compliance.

Procedure, Design and Predictions
Participants in both conditions completed two problems,
presented consecutively. The experimental session was
presented to the children on a laptop, using a PowerPoint
presentation, which was narrated live by an experimenter.
On the first slide, children were told that they were going to
hear about some robots on another planet, and that they
would have to answer some questions about the robots after.
In the base-rate condition, each participant completed a
color and a shape problem, in counterbalanced order (see
Figure 1 for a diagram of the base-rate condition procedure).
Two problem-types (color and shape) were used to maintain
children’s attention. In the color problem, following the
initial introduction, participants next saw a slide with two
robots standing side by side at a library, one robot wearing
red and another robot wearing purple. On the following two
slides, participants saw each robot by itself, and the
researcher pointed out what color the robot was wearing.
The next slide included both of the robots standing side by
side again, and the researcher asked the child to point to the
one wearing red, and the one wearing purple. On the next
slide, participants saw a group of ten robots at the library,
eight wearing red, and two wearing purple. Children were
asked to indicate which type of robot there was more of.
After the child provided their answer, the experimenter

Figure 1: Base-rate condition procedure.
In the individuating condition, each participant
completed a trait and a gender problem in counterbalanced
order (see Figure 2 for a diagram of the individuating
condition procedure). Young children have successfully
considered gender stereotypes and trait-based categories in
other work (Heyman & Gelman, 2000; Martin & Ruble,
2004). As adults are familiar with occupational stereotypes
prior to completing the lawyer-engineer problem, we chose
both of these trial types based on young children’s
familiarity with these categories. In the trait problem,
following the initial introduction, participants saw a slide
with two robots standing side by side at a park, one robot
wearing blue and another robot wearing green. They were
told that most of the time the robots wearing blue were nice,
and the ones wearing green were naughty. On the next slide,
the robot wearing blue was holding flowers, and participants
were told it would bring flowers to another robot on its
birthday. On the following slide, the robot wearing green
was hiding presents, and participants were told that this
robot would hide another robot’s birthday presents.
Participants then saw the blue and green robot standing side
by side on the following slide. Participants were asked to
indicate which type of robot was nice most of the time, and
which type of robot was naughty most of the time.
Following this, children saw a slide with a single robot
wearing a white coat, making its type unclear. Children
were asked to recall which traits were associated with each
color. The experimenter then provided some additional
information about the robot wearing the white coat, which

2118

matched one of the traits. Half of the children heard a
description of nice behavior, as the experimenter said that it
liked to clean up the park and help its friend play on the
swing. The other half of the children heard a description of
naughty behavior, as the experimenter said that it liked to
make a mess of the park and scare other robots. Importantly,
there was no mention of either the word “naughty” or
“nice”; children were only told about the mystery robot’s
behaviour. Participants were asked to indicate which type of
robot they thought the one wearing the white coat was. This
procedure was also followed for the gender problem,
however participants saw one type of robot wearing yellow
and another type of robot wearing orange. They were told
that most of the time the robots wearing yellow liked to play
with toys that girls like, and those wearing orange liked to
play with toys that boys like. When introduced to the yellow
robot individually, it had mostly toys typically associated
with girls (i.e., a unicorn and a doll). When introduced to the
orange robot individually, it had mostly toys typically
associated with boys (i.e., a dinosaur and a helicopter). The
individuating information was as follows: Half of the
children heard a description more typical of girls, as the
experimenter said it liked to play dress-up and house. The
other half of the children heard a description more typical of
boys, as the experimenter said that it liked to play with
trucks and train sets. To ensure participants did not confuse
the robots with those from the previous problem, the gender
problem took place at a school.

Predictions If children can use base-rate information to
make a predictive inference, then they should choose the
type of robot that corresponds to the majority group in that
condition. If children can use individuating information
(specifically, the individuating information about these traitbased categories and gender stereotypes) to make a
predictive inference, then they should choose the color
corresponding to the individuating information given in that
condition. Thus, children received a score of 1 for a correct
response in each condition on each problem.

Experiment 1: Results
Base-rate condition. A repeated-measures Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA) with score on each problem (color,
shape) as a within-subjects factor and age (3-, 4-, 5-yearolds) as a between-subjects factor revealed a significant
interaction (F (2, 45) = 7.82, p = .001, η2p = .26). No main
effects of age (p = .11), or problem type (p = .43) were
found. Post hoc analyses revealed that the interaction was
driven by differences in performance on the shape problems,
as 3-year-olds significantly differed from 4-year-olds
(MeanDifference = -.44, p = .01) and 5-year-olds (MeanDifference
= -.44, p = .01).
Overall performance was significantly different from
chance, as children tended to indicate that the robot
belonged to the majority group (M = 1.5, SD = .77, t (47) =
4.49, p < .001). As we were interested in development
across age, we also examined children’s performance at
each age separately. T-tests revealed that the performance of
4-year-old (M = 1.56, SD = .73, t (15) = 3.09, p = .007) and
5-year-old (M = 1.75, SD = .68, t (15) = 4.39, p = .001)
children were significantly different from chance. Threeyear-olds’ overall performance did not differ from chance
(M = 1.19, SD = .83, p = .34). To investigate this further, we
compared 3-year-olds’ performance on color versus shape
problems with a paired-samples t-test to determine whether
they found one problem more difficult than the other. There
was a significant difference in performance (t (12) = 2.31, p
= .040), as 3-year-olds performed above chance on color
problems (M = .75, SD = .45, t (16) = 2.24, p = .041), but
not on shape problems (M = .44, SD = .51, p = .63).

Figure 2: Individuating condition procedure.
Design In both conditions, the position of the two types of
robots was counterbalanced in each problem (e.g., half of
the children saw the orange robot on the left and half saw it
on the right when they were introduced). The experimenter
always began by telling the child about the robot on the left.
In the base-rate condition, the robots that comprised the
majority group were counterbalanced across both problems.
The position of the majority group was also counterbalanced
in both problems, as the majority was either presented as the
first eight or last eight robots in the group of ten. In the
individuating condition, the individuating information given
about the robot wearing the white coat was counterbalanced
as representative of each type.

2119

Figure 3: Base-rate condition results by age.

Individuating condition. A repeated-measures ANOVA
with score on each problem (gender, trait) as a withinsubjects factor and age (3-, 4-, 5-year-olds) as a betweensubjects factor revealed a main effect of age on performance
(F (2, 45) = 7.12, p = .002, η2p = .24), and no main effect of
problem type (p = 1), or interaction (p = .44). Post-hoc tests
revealed the main effect of age was driven by differences in
the performance of 3- and 5-year-old children (MeanDifference
= .88, p = .001).
Overall performance was significantly different from
chance, as children indicated that the robot belonged to the
group the individuating information corresponded with (M =
1.42, SD = .74, t (47) = 3.91, p < .001). Additional t-tests
revealed 5-year-old children performed significantly above
chance (M = 1.88, t (15) = 10.25, p < .001). However, 4year-olds were only marginally different from chance (M =
1.38, p = .08), and 3-year-olds did not exceed chance (M =
1, p = 1).

year-olds in Experiment 2, as these age groups displayed a
range of abilities for using the individuating information
presented to them. Each age group successfully used baserate information when presented using color, so all problems
in Experiment 2 use color. This set-up, in which all ages can
rely on base-rates, thus holding that ability more or less
constant but varying the ability to use individuating
information, could be particularly informative. It allows
investigation of questions such as: At what ages are children
able to integrate information from both of these sources?
Will children show bias based on representativeness as soon
as they can reliably use individuating information (at 5 years
of age)? Or does this bias develop over time (will there be a
delay in its appearance)? To examine this progression, the
age range is extended to 6 years.

Experiment 2: Methods
Participants
Sixty-four children participated, including 16 three-yearolds, 16 four-year-olds, 16 five-year-olds, and 16 six-yearolds (Mean age = 5 years, 1 month, range = 3 years, 6
months, 24 days to 6 years, 11 months, 27 days, female =
31). An additional seven children were tested, but were
excluded due to interference from another child (n = 3) or
failing to correctly identify the majority group in both
problems (n = 4).

Procedure, Design and Predictions

Figure 4: Individuating condition results by age.

Experiment 1: Discussion
Using a novel paradigm, we established that children are
able to use base-rate and individuating information
separately to make a predictive inference, but that these
abilities are still developing between 3 and 5 years. When
base-rate information was made salient, 4- and 5-year-old
children used base-rates to predict group membership at
above chance levels. Although 3-year-old children’s overall
performance was not above chance, they were able to use
base-rate information when group membership was
presented using color. When individuating information was
made salient, 5-year-old children used the individuating
information to predict group membership at above chance
levels. Four-year-olds approached significance, using the
information correctly approximately 70% of the time.
However, 3-year-old children performed at chance levels,
suggesting that they are unable to use individuating
information to make a predictive inference in our task.
Having examined the ability to use each type of
information separately in young children, the next step is to
extend the task to an analogue of the classic lawyer-engineer
problem in Experiment 2. We continued to test 3-, 4- and 5-

Participants
completed
two
problems,
presented
consecutively. As in Experiment 1, children completed a
trait and a gender problem, using the same color, group, and
individuating information as before. Each child saw one
color pair and the associated group information on the first
trial, and another color pair and associated group
information on the second trial.
Using the trait problem as an example, children were first
introduced to the two types of robots, and were told about
the traits that corresponded to each color, just as in
Experiment 1 (e.g., nice blue and naughty green robots).
Once again, they heard some information about the robots’
behavior at a birthday party. Following this, participants
saw the robots side by side and were asked to indicate which
robot was nice and which one was naughty most of the time.
Next, participants saw a group of ten robots, with eight
wearing blue, and two wearing green. Children were asked
to indicate which type of robot there was more of at the
park. After the child provided their answer, the
experimenter indicated that there were lots of robots
wearing blue, and just a few wearing green. Following this,
children saw a slide with a single robot wearing a white
coat, making its type unclear. To ensure both pieces of
information were equally salient to the child, the
experimenter reminded the child in a counterbalanced order
that most of the time the blue robots were nice and the green
robots were naughty, and that there were more robots
wearing blue at the park. In each problem, base-rate and

2120

group information were explicitly mentioned twice to the
child prior to hearing the individuating information about
the robot. The experimenter then provided some additional
information about the robot wearing the white coat, which
corresponded to one of the group traits. As in Experiment 1,
for the “nice” trait, the experimenter said that it liked to
clean up the park and help its friend play on the swing. For
the “naughty” trait, the experimenter said that it liked to
make a mess of the park and scare other robots. Participants
were asked to indicate which type of robot they thought the
one wearing the white coat was.
Each participant completed a conflict and a no-conflict
problem. In the conflict problem, the base-rate conflicted
with the individuating information given about the unknown
robot. For instance, if there were eight nice robots, the
unknown robot was described as liking to make a mess of
the park and scare other robots. In the no-conflict problem,
the base-rate and individuating information both cued the
same group. For instance, if there were eight nice robots, the
unknown robot was described as liking to clean up the park
and help its friend play on the swing.
Design The order in which the child completed the conflict
and no-conflict problems was counterbalanced across
participants. Further, the group information associated with
the robots in the conflict and no-conflict problems was
counterbalanced (i.e., half of the children completed a
conflict problem about the trait story, and the other half
completed a no-conflict problem about the trait story). The
order of reminding about base-rate and group information
was also counterbalanced. All factors that were
counterbalanced in Experiment 1 were also counterbalanced
here (i.e., color and position of majority, the position of the
two types of robots, the type of robot the individuating
information represented).
Predictions In both problems, the normatively correct
answer is to produce a response that aligns with the baserates (and in the no-conflict problems, this also corresponds
with a response from individuating information). In noconflict problems, children should provide the response
consistent with both the base-rate and individuating
information, as these will point to the same response. In
conflict problems, if children are biased toward using
individuating information when it conflicts with the baserate, they should choose the color corresponding to the
individuating information, rather than the base-rate
information, similarly to adults in the classic tasks.
However, if children do not yet have this reasoning bias, or
if they do not fully grasp the stereotype/category
information, then they might provide responses consistent
with base-rates, rather than individuating information. As
each child completed one conflict and one no-conflict
problem, they received a score of 0 or 1 for each problem
type. In both problems, children received a score of 1 if they
chose the majority group.

Experiment 2: Results
A repeated-measures ANOVA including score on each
problem type (conflict, no-conflict) as a within-subjects
factor and age (3-, 4-, 5-, 6-year-olds) and information
recapped first (base-rate, individuating) as between-subjects
factors revealed a significant interaction of age and problem
type (F (3, 56) = 5.66, p = .002, η2p = .23). There was a
main effect of problem type (F (1, 56) = 18.67, p < .001, η2p
= .25). There were no other main effects or interactions.
The interaction was driven by an effect of age on the noconflict problems (MeanNo-conflict = .70, SD = .46; F (3, 60) =
5.91, p = 0.001). Post-hoc analyses revealed 6-year-olds’
scores on no-conflict problems significantly differed from 3year-olds (MeanDifference = .44, p = .02) and 4-year-olds
(MeanDifference = .56, p = .002). The difference between 4and 5-year-old children on no-conflict problems also
approached significance (MeanDifference = -.38, p = .06; see
Figure 5). There was no effect of age on performance in the
conflict problems (MeanConflict = .38, SD = .49; p = .38).
Additional t-tests revealed age differences on conflict
and no-conflict problems. On conflict problems, 3-year-olds
(M = .44, SD = .51, p = .63), 4-year-olds (M = .44, SD =
.51, p = .63), and 5-year-olds (M = .44, SD = .51, p = .63)
did not exceed chance. Six-year-old children were
significantly different from chance (M = .19, SD = .4, p =
.007). On no-conflict problems, 3-year-olds (M = .56, SD =
.51, p = .63) and 4-year-olds (M = .44, SD = .51, p = .63)
did not exceed chance. Five-year-olds were significantly
different from chance (M = .81, SD = .40, t (15) = 3.10, p =
.007), and six-year-olds were at ceiling (M = 1).

Figure 5: Experiment 2 results by age.

Experiment 2: Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 revealed interesting age
differences in children’s use of base-rates. Three- and fouryear-olds performed at chance levels on both no-conflict
and conflict problems, even though the normative response
in the no-conflict problems corresponded with both baserate and individuating information. Perhaps the 4-year-olds,
who were starting to use individuating information on its
own, but not entirely reliably, face issues integrating both
pieces of information at first, due to a cognitive decoupling
problem (see Stanovich, et al., 2011). The responses of 5-

2121

and 6-year-old children in our task most strongly resembled
the typical patterns of adults1. In no-conflict problems, both
5- and 6-year-old children provided the normative response
at above chance levels, suggesting that by 5, children can
fully handle the task. Interestingly, 5-year-old children did
not show a pronounced bias for relying on individuating
information, as they were at chance on conflict problems.
Six-year-olds showed the predicted pattern from adults on
the conflict problems, suggesting that this bias is fairly well
ingrained, even at this young age.

always be heavily relied on. Have 6-year-old children
developed this expectation? Or will they be more sensitive
to factors like reliability as this bias is developing? Current
experiments in our lab are examining this and related
questions that should provide further insight into the
development of reasoning biases.

Acknowledgments
We thank the families for participating and Emily Chan and
Elizabeth Attisano, for their assistance with data collection.

General Discussion
In two experiments, we were able to verify methods for
examining base-rate neglect and the representativeness
heuristic in young children. We established the ages at
which children can use base-rate and individuating
information, when presented separately and made highly
salient, in Experiment 1. Based on the extent to which
children were able to use base-rate and individuating
information in Experiment 1, we found interesting age
differences in performance when both pieces of information
were available in Experiment 2. Although three-year-olds
could use base-rate information independently, they did not
show a preference for base-rate information on conflict or
no-conflict problems. Four-year-olds, who were able to use
both base-rate and individuating information independently,
also struggled when both pieces of information were
presented together. Five-year-old children performed above
chance on no-conflict problems, though they did not
consistently rely on base-rate or individuating information
on conflict problems. By the age of 6, children’s responses
revealed a pattern reminiscent of adult performance. These
age differences provide useful insight on the
representativeness heuristic, suggesting that its emergence
may not be as straightforward as previously thought. Further
research with 4- and 5-year-old children would provide
insight on the nuances in the development of this bias.
Much additional research can be conducted to further
examine the development of base-rate neglect. For example,
ongoing work in our lab is investigating a second important
feature of the adult work on representativeness that has
been, to our knowledge, untested in children. That is, of
course in many cases, it is reasonable (and highly
computationally efficient) to rely on the type of
individuating information that is provided in these vignettes,
as the information appears to be accurate and reliable.
However, adults will neglect base-rates in favor of
individuating information even when that individuating
information is presented as unreliable or uninformative for
classification. This suggests that adults have an
overwhelming expectation that social information should

References
Davidson, D. (1995). The representativeness heuristic and
the conjunction fallacy effect in children’s decision
making. Merrill Palmer Quart, 41, 328–346.
Heyman, G.D., & Gelman, S.A. (2000). Preschool
children’s use of trait labels to make inductive inferences.
J Exp Child Psychol, 77, 1 – 19.
Jacobs, J.E., & Potenza, M. (1991). The use of judgment
heuristics to make social and object decisions: A
developmental perspective. Child Dev, 62, 166–178.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80(4), 237–251.
Kokis, J., Macpherson, R., Toplak, M., West, R.F., &
Stanovich, K.E. (2002). Heuristic and analytic processing:
Age trends and associations with cognitive ability and
cognitive styles. J Exp Child Psychol, 83, 26–52.
Martin, C.L., & Ruble, D. (2004). Children’s search for
gender cues. Curr Dir Psychol Sci, 13, 67 – 70.
Stanovich, K. E., West, R. F., & Toplak, M. E. (2011). The
complexity of developmental predictions from dual
process models. Dev Rev, 31, 103-118.
Teglas, E., Girotto, V., Gonzalez, M., & Bonatti, L. L.
(2007). Intuitions of probabilities shape expectations
about the future at 12 months and beyond. P Natl Acad
Sci USA, 104, 19156–19159.
Xu, F., & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. P Natl Acad Sci USA, 105, 5012–5015.

1

Adults (N = 36) completed an experiment identical to Expt. 2
(i.e., same gender and trait conflict and no-conflict problems).
Space does not permit a full report of the experiment, but adults
produced the expected results (giving the normative response for
no-conflict and the non-normative response for conflict problems).

2122

