The Effects of Gender Stereotypes for Structure Mapping in Mathematics
Kreshnik Nasi Begolli (keko@temple.edu)
Temple University, Department of Psychological, Organizational, and Leadership Studies, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA
Brooke Herd (bherd@uci.edu), Hannah Sayonno (hsayonno@uci.edu), Susanne Jaeggi (smjaeggi@uci.edu)
University of California, Irvine, School of Education, 3200 Education, Irvine, CA 92697 USA
Lindsey Engle Richland (lrichland@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago, Department of Comparative Human Development, 5730 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637
Abstract
Fear of a negative stereotype about one’s performance can
lead to temporary underperformance on tests; e.g. women
may underperform on a math test when prompted to think
about gender. The current study extends this literature to
examine whether stereotype threat not only leads to
underperformance on tests, but also may impact reasoning
and learning more broadly. We focus in particular on the
effects of stereotype threat on analogical learning, a complex
reasoning process that imposes a high working memory load.
In this study, we examined the effects of gender stereotypes
when females were asked to learn by comparing the
mathematical concepts of combinations and permutations.
Overall, participants given a threat before learning gained less
from the instruction, as reflected by assessments administered
immediately after the lesson and after a 1-week delay. This
could lead to systematic differences in the quality of abstract
representational knowledge for individuals from negatively
stereotyped groups.
Keywords: Gender stereotype threat; analogy; comparison;
mathematics education; video stimulus; working memory

Stereotype threat refers to the phenomenon in which
members of a group fear that others will hold negative
assumptions about their skills or capacities, by feeling
additional pressure of conforming or disproving such beliefs
(Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999). Within education, one
existing stereotype is that women naturally have lower
abilities in mathematics than men, particularly on higher
level mathematics concepts (Maloney & Beilock, 2012;
McJunkin, 2009; Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999).
The current literature suggests that working memory
(WM) overload may be a primary mechanism explaining
detrimental effects of gender stereotype threat on
performance (Beilock, Rydell, & McConnell, 2007;
Schmader & Johns, 2003). Participants are compromising
their WM ability by anxious ideation about the activated
stereotype, thus occupying their WM resources through
thoughts such as “I had better perform well to disprove their
stereotype about me as a woman.” This ideation, while
motivational, also engages verbal working memory, thus
reducing available resources for task engagement.
Most studies of stereotype threat have focused on impact
on test performance, examining the potential for a threat
imposed immediately before a test to temporarily reduce
performance and produce an unrepresentative measure of

participants’ performance (see Steele & Aaronson, 1995).
Very little work has explored whether these threats might
also impact learning, however, which would be a less
temporary impact and might lead to more systematic
differences in knowledge gains by negatively stereotyped
groups. Thus, more research is needed to examine the
effects of stereotype threat on learning.
To close this gap in the literature, this study examined the
effects of gender stereotype threat on learning mathematics
during high working memory load instructional analogies.
Instructional analogies are common within mathematics
education internationally (Richland, Zur, & Holyoak, 2007),
and comparing problems or solutions is a common
pedagogical recommendation (e.g., Common Core State
Standards Initiative, 2012; National Research Council,
2001). However, for students to gain from these
comparisons, they must have adequate available WM
resources to represent two or more systems of relations,
discover their alignments and map between the systems to
draw inferences based on alignments (or misalignments)
leading to encoding of a mathematical schema (Begolli,
Richland, & Jaeggi, 2015; Gentner, 1983; Gick & Holyoak,
1983; Morrison, Doumas, & Richland, 2011; Waltz, Lau,
Grewal, & Holyoak, 2000).
Structure mapping is particularly taxing when learners are
not provided with adequate instructional supports to draw
attention to key relational correspondences or when the
content is not highly familiar (Begolli & Richland, 2016;
Richland & McDonough, 2010; Rittle-Johnson & Star,
2007). Under higher WM demands, novices are more likely
attend to and retain object features of compared
representations rather than abstracting and retaining the
common relational structure. In a previous experiment,
Richland and McDonough (2010) tested the role of high
versus low instructional cues within a video lesson in which
a teacher made an analogy between the mathematical
concepts of combinations and permutations. Students in the
low-cued lesson (hypothesized to require higher WM
demands) performed worse on cross-mapping problems on a
posttest, suggesting their knowledge was less schematized.
Working memory is theorized to lie at the core of the
observed effects of gender stereotype threat and learning
from comparisons. Building on this work, the current study
examined whether the pressure imposed by a threat of

2015

gender stereotypes could reduce WM capacity that students
normally rely on to learn a mathematical schema through
structure mapping.
To test this hypothesis, this study exposed students to
either a threat or neutral video lesson on permutations and
combinations concepts.
In order to ensure that the
instructional analogy imposed high WM demands, we draw
our stimuli from the low-cued video lesson utilized by
Richland and McDonough (2010).
This work has theoretical implications for informing our
understanding of the effects of stereotype threat on learning
through structure mapping, possibly due to underlying
shared mechanisms. Thus, laying the groundwork for
further research to provide evidence linking research on
structure mapping and stereotype threat. Further, this work
has direct implications for informing teachers about the
adverse effects of cultural pressures on learning processes.

Experiment: Impact of Gender Stereotypes for
Instructional Analogy
Method
The research study was a randomized experimental study,
with half of the participants being administered a gender
stereotype threat and the other half receiving no threat. All
participants received the same instruction subsequently.
Learning was measured on an immediate posttest and one
week later. Participants were not cognizant of the study’s
purpose of examining stereotype threat, as the study was
advertised as a GRE math lesson on Combinations and
Permutations.
Participants. Participants were 45 women who participated
in the study either for course credit or monetary
compensation. Only women who had not taken a college
level statistics course were invited to participate in the
study, to reduce the possibility of prior knowledge of
permutations and combinations. The final analyses included
26 females in the threat condition and 19 in the non-threat
condition (five participants in the non-threat condition did
not complete all phases of the study).
Procedure. Participants were directed to a Google Forms
Survey, which collected participants’ demographic
information and screened them based on their previous
knowledge of statistics. If invited to participate, on Day 1,
all participants were given 15-minutes to complete a pretest.
They next answered a questionnaire, viewed an instructional
lesson, and completed a posttest.
Participants were
randomly assigned to either the threat or non-threat
conditions. The videotaped lesson and questionnaire were

varied according to condition. Five to seven days later,
participants were given 15-minutes to complete a delayed
posttest. At the end, participants were debriefed about the
true nature of the experiment.
Questionnaire. The questionnaire for the threat
(experimental) group, primed female identity in order to
reinforce the gender stereotype, taken from (Shih, Pittinsky,
& Ambady, 1999). The control group received a similar
questionnaire after their pretest, with the same format and
number of questions. However, the questions only pertained
to neutral topics, such as whether the participant watched
cable television (Shih et al., 1999).
Instructional Videos. Each student watched a videotaped
lesson on two mathematical concepts commonly included
on the GRE: permutations and combinations. The
instructional portion of the video lesson was identical to the
low-cued video lesson used by Richland & McDonough
(2010). From this, two versions of the video lesson were
developed: 1) the threat condition containing introductory
text providing a stereotype threat, and 2) the non-threat
condition with a neutral introductory text. For the threat
students, the video lesson began with a screen stating
“Please watch the following 15-minute video very
carefully,” which was followed by “The lesson and the
following tests have been shown to display gender
differences in the past, exhibiting lower scores for women
than men.” The wording used to induce threat was modeled
according to a study done by McJunkin (2009), which
examined females’ performance after being exposed to
stereotype threat. The words remained on the screen for 30
seconds before the video lesson on combinations and
permutations, which continued for approximately 13
minutes.
The video lesson for the control group began with “Please
watch the following 15-minute video very carefully,” and
followed with “This lesson and the following tests have
displayed no gender differences in the past; scores between
women and men have been relatively equal”
During the instructional portion, an instructor discussed
two mathematics problems and their solutions. The first
exemplified the concept of combinations and the second the
concept of permutations. Permutations involve finding the
number of arrangements of a set of objects where the
position (or order) is important. Combinations involve
calculating the number of arrangements possible in which
position (or order) is not important. Importantly, the
instructor aligned and mapped between similarities in the
permutation and combination concepts, while highlighting
that the combination problems require an additional
procedural step.

2016

Mathematics Assessment. The mathematics assessments
had four types of problems: facilitory similarity, misleading
similarity, unrelated, and distractors, discussed next.

were presented in an altered order with different numbers.
Both tests contained 2 facilitory similarity problems, 2
misleading similarity problems, and 2 unrelated problems.
Four problems functioned as distractors and assessed
advanced combinatoric problems and factorials.
Answers from participants were coded based on whether
the correct solution strategy was used to solve the questions.
Correct strategy setup was scored as correct. Calculation
errors were not scored, because our interest was to examine
whether students knew which solution strategy was
appropriate given the context. The assessments and coding
was drawn directly from Richland & McDonough (2010).

Facilitory similarity. These questions refer to problems in
which the story context and mathematical structure
correspond between the video lesson and the posttest. This
meant that the story context of the permutation problem in
the instructional lesson (placements in a race), corresponded
with the permutation problem on a posttest (placements in a
race), and the combination problem story context during
instruction was similar to the combination story context on
the posttest.
Misleading Similarity. These questions refer to problems
in which the story context of problems in the instruction
were cross-mapped with problem contexts on the posttest.
For instance if students learned the concept of permutations
in the context of runners in a race, those students may
attempt the same solution strategy on the posttest when
faced with a problem that actually involved combinations
but was set in the context of runners in a race, or vice versa.
This meant that story context during instruction, such as
teaching permutations in the context of a race, was followed
by a combination problem on the posttest in the context of a
race. If participants had coded the abstract relations within
the problems they should perform similarly on the facilitory
and misleading posttest problems. Those who had retained
the surface features should be more likely to preform worse
on misleading problems.
Unrelated Context. These problems were dissimilar in
surface features to problems that were reviewed in the
video, which tested participants’ ability to apply
combinations and permutations solutions in a completely
different context.
Distractor problems. These problems involved factorials
and advanced combinatorics problems, and were not
analyzed.
Pretest. The pretest had 6 questions, 3 testing
combinations and 3 testing permutations concepts. Because
students did not watch the video lesson, these questions
cannot be discussed in terms of facilitory and misleading
similarities and were used as a baseline.
Immediate and Delayed Posttest. Both posttests had 10
questions, which contained the same story contexts, but

Results
Raw means of the mathematics measures at each test point
are summarized in Table 1. The random assignment of
students was successful, with no significant differences in
prior knowledge between the two groups (threat vs. nothreat) at pretest F(1, 43) = .881, p = .353.
We conducted a 2 (time of test: immediate to posttest) x 3
(question type: facilitory, misleading, and unrelated) x 2
(condition: Threat vs. No Threat) repeated measures
analysis of covariance with time of test and surface
similarity as within subject factors and condition as a
between subject factor. Pretest score was utilized as a
covariate and was a significant predictor when used in the
model F (1, 42) = 10.388, p = .002, η2= .198.
As expected and shown in Figure 1, students performed
worse under threat. There was a main effect of condition
F(1, 42) = 4.312, p = .044, η2= .093 such that students who
did not experience the gender threat used the correct
strategy more often on all the problems (M = .57, SD = .31)
than those who were under threat (M = .44, SD = .24). Also,
problems with the same storyline and mathematical
structure on both the lesson and the posttest were easier to
solve than problems that were cross-mapped. Thus, there
was a main effect of question type F(2, 84) = 11.794, p =
.006, η2 = .223, where a larger proportion of facilitory
similarity problems were setup correctly than misleading
similarity problems or unrelated problems (see Table 1).
Follow up pairwise comparisons confirm that facilitory
similarity problems were set up correctly more often than
both misleading similarity (p <.001) and unrelated problems
(p = .001). There was also a trend suggesting that
misleading similarity problems were more likely to lead to
errors when compared to unrelated problems (p = .051).
There was no main effect of time F(1, 42) = 2.041, p = .161,
η2 = .046, such that students’ overall scores were not
significantly different between immediate test (M =.56 , SD

2017

=.21) and delayed test (M =.44, SD =.25). However, there
was an interaction between time of test and question type
F(2, 84) = 7.968, p = .001, η2 = .280. Students were better at
using the correct solution strategies for facilitory problems
immediately after the lesson than 1-week later. The inverse
was true for misleading and unrelated problems. The
decrease for facilitory similarity is likely because the
problem story contexts during instruction became less
salient over time and thus less helpful at posttest (see Table
1).
There was no interaction between question type and
condition F (2, 84) = .005, p = .995, η2 = .003 and no
interaction for time and condition F (2, 42) = .015, p = .682,
η2 = .004. No other interactions were expected to be
significant and our results confirmed this expectation.

Figure 1. Adjusted means for accuracy by condition for
each question type across immediate and delayed posttests
using pretest score as covariate. The bars represent standard
errors.

Discussion
The study reveals that learning from analogy may be
susceptible to pressures from social context, and that effects
can be lasting rather than temporary. Many studies have
examined the role of stereotype threat on performance, but
this study is one of the first to show that threat of negative
stereotypes can impact learning. Unlike previous accounts
documenting the detrimental effects of stereotype threats on
women’s mathematics test performance (McJunkin, 2009;
Steele & Aronson, 1995), inducing the threat before a
learning event and examining outcomes after a 1-week
delay provides new insight into the impact stereotypes can
have for schema formation.
Our data across two time points support that students who
were exposed to stereotype threat were significantly worse
at learning combinations and permutations concepts in
comparison with students who had not been exposed to
stereotype threat, and that these differences lasted over a
week delay.

The mathematics outcomes align with current views
suggesting that concern about negative stereotypes may
particularly impair performance on advanced mathematics
concepts, more than lower working memory problems that
merely require straightforward calculations (see Malone &
Beilock, 2012).
A potential concern regarding our paradigm is that
participants’ immediate posttest performance may have
been impaired not due to learning differences, but due to the
same immediate performance pressure effects observed in
traditional studies of stereotype threat on test performance
(Beilock, Rydell, and McConnel, 2007). At the same time,
any state differences based on the threat should have
dissipated by a 1-week delay. Thus, our results supported
our hypothesis, in that stereotype threat impeded the
learning of mathematics through structure mapping, rather
than artificially decreased test performance. An alternative
explanation for decreased performance could be that the
effects of threat did not impede structure-mapping processes
per se, but broader learning and/or encoding, considering
the effects of threat were similar on facilitory and
misleading problems.
In line with previous findings in the analogy literature,
students in our sample were better able to solve problems
where the context between the lesson and the posttest was
aligned. This shows that students were successful at
encoding the solution strategies involving permutations and
combinations concepts. However, students performed worse
on problems where the context was cross-mapped between
the video lesson and the posttest or the problem context was
unrelated to problems in the video lesson.
The question type differences are also consistent with
Richland and McDonough’s (2010) findings. Misleading
similarity problems may have placed a greater demand on
WM, particularly inhibitory processes, since students would
need to inhibit their inclination to solve based on surface
similarities, in order to apply the correct solution strategy.
Yet, Richland and McDonough (2010) postulate that higher
WM demands, induced by the lack of instructional supports,
led students to misapply solution strategies only on
misleading similarity problems. It is possible that if students
in our study learned from a lesson with high instructional
supports, the effects of threat would dissipate for the
facilitory questions. Thus, manipulating WM demands
through the video lesson in addition to the problem types
(facilitory & misleading) and assessing WM or inhibitory
processes would strengthen our findings. In general, our
results also point towards WM as an important component
of analogical thought or broader learning processes, and
highlight that these may be mechanisms through which
stereotype threat reduces long-term learning and schema
formation.

Implications for Future Research
The paradigm used in this study, administering a
stereotype threat before an opportunity for analogical
learning, provides a platform for ongoing studies that aim to

2018

shed light on the impact of pedagogical supports and WM
resources on structure-mapping and relational reasoning.
For example, Beilock & Carr (2005) found that stereotype
threat affects mathematics performance for women with
higher WM capacities. This suggests that women who are
most likely to succeed underperform when under threat.
While this has tremendous implications for test taking, it
may have even greater implications if students face threat
throughout their learning experience. Thus, students with
greater potential could learn significantly less, which could
accumulate over time, resulting in significant achievement
gaps. Our data coupled with WM measures and a larger
sample size may provide insight into the mechanisms and
behavioral effects of stereotype threat on learning.
On the other hand, there is mounting evidence that
instructional supports offload WM demands, which may
interact with the effects of gender stereotypes. The lack of
instructional supports may be particularly beneficial for
lower performing students and those with lower WM
abilities. Considering that gender stereotypes most
significantly affect females with high WM capacities, we
may find that the effects of threat differ based on
instructional supports and WM capacity. In the current
study, we only used the lowly-cued version of Richland &
McDonough’s (2010) video lesson when inducing
stereotype threat. A continuation of this study will compare
the effects of stereotype threat when learning from a highlycued video lesson. The potential implications of this work
are that competent teachers, who implicitly induce threat,
may help lower performing students at the expense of higher
performers.
Overall, these future studies seek to untangle the effects
of stereotype threat and its possible cognitive mechanisms,
under varying instructional contexts, and clarify their role
for learning mathematics through structure-mapping. While
we discuss mathematics more broadly, combinations and
permutations represent only one mathematical domain, and
further studies are needed to understand whether these
results generalize to other mathematical concepts. Despite
this, it is important to note that the stimulus used (the math
video lesson) does approximate a true lesson experience.
The instruction was not text-based, and came from a live
instructor, thus suggesting greater ecological validity for
generalizing to teacher actions in a classroom setting.
This research has important implications for teachers in
the classroom. Teachers must be aware of the culture they
are creating within their classroom and should support and
facilitate learning through teaching methods that utilize high
instructional supports and reduce any hindrances of societal
pressures that might reduce learners’ abilities.
In sum, these research findings not only reveal the
potentially profound effects of stigma in a learning context
but also suggest various research directions for further
studies. This research creates a platform for further
investigating the role of working memory as an underlying
mechanism of the pressures of social stigma. Furthermore,
our results lead to new research questions regarding

stereotype threat and teaching methods. Questions are left to
be asked regarding the impact of high or low instructional
teaching methods in aiding or preventing stereotype threat
from impeding learners, as well as whether individual
characteristics, such as innate and perceived ability and
motivation, can alter the effects stereotype threat can have
on a learner.

References
Begolli, K. N., & Richland, L. E. (2016). Teaching
Mathematics by Comparison: Analog Visibility as a
Double-Edged Sword. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 108(2), 194–213.
Begolli, K. N., Richland, L. E., & Jaeggi, S. M. (2015). The
Role of Executive Functions for Structure-Mapping in
Mathematics. In R. Dale, C. Jennings, P. Maglio, T.
Matlock, D. Noelle, A. Warfaumont, & J. Yoshimi
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (Vol. 1, pp. 1–6).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Beilock, S. L., & Carr, T. H. (2005). When high-powered
people fail working memory and “choking under
pressure” in math. Psychological Science, 16(2), 101–
105.
Beilock, S. L., Rydell, R. J., & McConnell, A. R. (2007).
Stereotype threat and working memory: mechanisms,
alleviation, and spillover. Journal of Experimental
Psychology.
General,
136(2),
256–276.
http://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.136.2.256
Common Core State Standards Initiative. Common core
state standards for mathematics (2012). Common
Core State Standards Initiative.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure‐Mapping: A Theoretical
Framework for Analogy*. Cognitive Science, 7(2),
155–170.
http://doi.org/10.1016/S03640213(83)80009-3
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1–
38. http://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(83)90002-6
Maloney, E. A., & Beilock, S. L. (2012). Math anxiety:
Who has it, why it develops, and how to guard against
it. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(8), 404–406.
McJunkin, L. M. (2009). Effects of stereotype threat on
undergraduate
women’s
math
performance:
Participant pool vs. classroom situations. Emporia
State Research Studies, 45(2), 27–31.
Morrison, R. G., Doumas, L. A. A. L. a a, & Richland, L. E.
(2011). A computational account of children’s
analogical reasoning: Balancing inhibitory control in
working memory and relational representation.
Developmental
Science,
14(3),
516–529.
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00999.x
National Research Council. (2001). Adding It Up: Helping
Children Learn Mathematics. The National
Academies
Press.
Retrieved
from
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/9822/adding-it-up-

2019

helping-children-learn-mathematics
Richland, L. E., & McDonough, I. M. (2010). Learning by
analogy: Discriminating between potential analogs.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 35(1), 28–43.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2009.09.001
Richland, L. E., Zur, O., & Holyoak, K. J. (2007). Cognitive
supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom.
Science, 316(5828), 1128.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2007). Does comparing
solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural
knowledge? An experimental study on learning to
solve equations. Journal of Educational Psychology,
99(3),
561–574.
http://doi.org/10.1037/00220663.99.3.561
Schmader, T., & Johns, M. (2003). Converging evidence
that stereotype threat reduces working memory
capacity. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85(3), 440.
Shih, M., Pittinsky, T. L., & Ambady, N. (1999). Stereotype
susceptibility: Identity salience and shifts in
quantitative performance. Psychological Science,
10(1), 80–83.
Shih, M., Pittinsky, T. L., & Trahan, A. (2006). Domainspecific effects of stereotypes on performance. Self
and Identity, 5(1), 1–14.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999).
Stereotype threat and women’s math performance.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35(1), 4–
28.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and
the intellectual test performance of African
Americans. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology.
http://doi.org/10.1037/00223514.69.5.797
Waltz, J. A., Lau, A., Grewal, S. K., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2000). The role of working memory in analogical
mapping. Memory & Cognition, 28(7), 1205–1212.

2020

