The Influence of Reputation Concerns and Social Biases on Children’s Sharing
Behavior
Haleh Yazdi (hyazdi@ucsd.edu)

David Barner (dbarner@ucsd.edu)

UCSD Dept. of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

UCSD Dept. of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Gail D. Heyman (gheyman@ucsd.edu)
UCSD Dept. of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
children (3- to 5-year-olds) verbally express strong
preferences for equal outcomes (Ng, Heyman & Barner,
2011) and react emotionally to inequity (Geraci & Surian,
2011; Sutter, 2007), older children (7- to 8-year-olds) are
more likely to display egalitarian behavior when allocating
resources (LoBue, Nishida, Chiong, DeLoache & Haidt,
2011; Smith, Blake & Harris, 2013), particularly in
situations where it is costly to do so (Blake & McAuliffe,
2011). This developmental pattern of stronger inequity
aversion in later years may arise from a growing motivation
for fairness and attention to the needs of others, or it may
reflect a concern with displaying oneself as a cooperative
and useful social partner (Warneken & Tomasello, 2009). In
the latter case, older children may differ from younger
children in that they are simply better at strategically
displaying cooperative behavior (Shaw et al., 2014).
Numerous studies show that children, like adults, are
more cooperative when they believe that their behaviors will
be made known to others versus anonymously (AloiseYoung, 1993; Banerjee, 2002; Engelmann, Over, Herrmann
& Tomasello, 2013; Harbaugh & Krause, 2000; Milinski,
Semmann & Krambeck, 2002). Children steal less and help
more in the presence of a peer observer (Engelmann at al.,
2013), and are more generous with their resources when
others are aware of their actions (Leimgruber, Shaw, Santos
& Olson, 2012).
However, one primary limitation of these studies is that,
by manipulating only audience effects, they provide only a
single factor account of children’s motivations to act
altruistically. Yet, it is very possible that different social
factors, such as the child’s relation to the recipient, may
give rise to different reasons for giving. For example,
children’s sharing of resources with parents or close friends
may be motivated by concerns for the recipient’s well being
rather than by a desire to maintain a positive reputation. On
the other hand, in cases where the recipient is a stranger, and
future interaction with the recipient is unlikely, reputation
concerns may play a larger role in determining children’s
sharing behavior. Additionally, there may be contexts where
children may be motivated by both reputation concerns and
concerns for the recipient.
In sum, by studying children’s motivations for giving
independently of social context, past studies have not
considered the possibility that children’s developing

The present research builds on prior work on the social-contextual
nature of children’s generosity by systematically examining both
observer effects and whether the recipient is an in-group or outgroup member. Although previous research has examined these
factors independently, no study to date has examined them in
conjunction. We also extend prior research by including both
measures of sharing behavior and children’s evaluations of sharing
scenarios, and by investigating a larger sample (N=164) with a
broader age range than is typical of prior research (5- to 9-yearolds). We found that, across the entire age range tested, children
were generous when observed and gave more to in-group members
than out-group members, and that there was no interaction between
these effects. We also found that children’s own sharing behavior
predicted their evaluations of sharing scenarios, with children
rating in-group sharing as "nicer" than out-group sharing.

Keywords: sharing; prosocial behavior; in-group/out-group;
reputation concerns; observer effects

Introduction
Humans share with one another for many reasons,
including an expectation that others may reciprocate, and, in
some circumstances, the knowledge that giving may
enhance their own reputation among peers (e.g., when
giving occurs publicly). Previous work suggests that
children are sensitive to these factors relatively early in life,
giving more to people who are similar to them, and making
efforts to manage their reputations by acting more
generously in the presence of onlookers. However, these
studies have not explored how children weigh factors during
individual acts of sharing, and whether, for example, they
consider their reputation less when giving to people closer
to them (e.g., friends, family, or other in-group members),
or instead consider their reputation equally whether giving
to strangers or to closer acquaintances. We look at this issue
from a behavioral perspective, examining children’s
decisions about sharing their own resources in the presence
or absence of an observer, and from a social evaluative
perspective, examining how children evaluate the decisions
others make about sharing resources.
A growing body of research demonstrates that, beginning
early in life, children behave in a cooperative manner (Hay,
1979; Hay & Murray, 1979; Warneken & Tomasello, 2007)
and become increasingly concerned with upholding social
norms regarding fairness as they get older. Whereas young

259

concern with reputation may be mediated by the particular
social relationship that they have with the recipient of their
giving. To explore this, the current study manipulated both
audience effects and the child’s social relation to the
recipient to address this possibility. Specifically, we
examined whether children’s sharing tendencies would
differ as a function of whether or not (a) they were observed
by a neutral onlooker and (b) the potential recipient shared a
social identity with them.
Various studies show that children attend to the social
identity of potential recipients, and often prioritize members
of their own social group when allocating resources
(Bernhard, Fischbacher & Fehr, 2006; Bigler, Jones &
Lobliner, 1997; Dunham, Baron & Carey, 2011; Fehr,
Bernhard & Rockenbach, 2008; Goette, Huffman & Meier,
2006). One means by which children establish their own
social identity is via social groups, which promote cohesion
among similar individuals (in-group members) while
emphasizing the dissimilarities of others (out-group
members) (Brewer, 1991). The categorization of social
groups can be affected by meaningful shared identities such
as gender, nationality, and race (Tajfel & Turner, 2004), or
they can be determined by a mere categorical distinction
(Tajfel, Billig, Bundy & Flament, 1971; Tajfel, 2001).
Tajfel coined the term “minimal group” to refer to
arbitrarily constructed social groups such as the “red” and
“blue” group. These meaningless social groups are
sufficient to induce children and adults’ preferences for ingroup members across a wide range of measures including
resource allocation in both kids and adults (Dunham et al.,
2011; Locksley, Ortiz & Hepburn, 1980; Spielman, 2000;
Tajfel & Turner, 2004). Additionally, there is strong
evidence of in-group biases when social groups are
meaningful or familiar (Killen, Margie & Sinno, 2006;
Rutland, Killen & Abrams, 2010; Smetana, Killen & Turiel,
1991). These findings demonstrate that regardless of how
groups are established, children weigh considerations for
fairness and cooperation in relation to their obligations
towards in-group members.
The current study used minimal groups to establish a
social relationship between the giver and recipients.
Specifically, we examined if the basis for children’s sharing
tendencies would change based on whether the recipient
was a member of their in-group or out-group. Our design
eliminated the expectation of reciprocity by using “fake”
recipients who children would never interact with.
Furthermore, we used a neutral observer who was not a
member of the child’s in-group or out-group. Previous
studies have shown that children behave more prosocially
when the observer is an in-group member compared to an
out-group member (Engelmann at al., 2013. Since we did
not want the in-group/out-group status of the observer to
confound with other factors, such as anticipation of
punishment or rewards from the observer, we selected a
neutral onlooker. This also allows us to test whether
children are sensitive to reputation concerns when the
observer does not have a group affiliation or vested interest.

By testing for audience effects in the context of
intergroup sharing we sought to differentiate children’s
motivations for giving. If children’s sharing behavior is not
influenced by social biases, we would expect them to give
equally to in-group and out-group members—both in the
presence and absence of an observer. If children’s giving is
subject to reputation concerns, we would expect them to
donate more resources overall in the presence of an
observer. Additionally, if children’s giving is motivated by a
bias towards the potential recipient and their desire to
maintain a positive reputation, we might expect their
intergroup sharing to change as a function of whether or not
they are observed.
Children of all ages may give more to in-group members
when observed than not observed simply because they view
this as the right thing to do, thereby enhancing their
reputations. On the other hand, older children and younger
children may differ in their in-group and out-group giving
behavior. Adult literature suggests that, out-group giving is
more motivated by the desire for favorable impression
management than in-group giving (Levine, Prosser, Evans,
& Reicher, 2005) Older children may have similar beliefs to
adults and give more to out-group members than in-group
members in the observer condition. If this is the case, we
anticipate children’s out-group sharing to change as a
function of being observed. Furthermore, it is possible that
older children, but not younger children, perceive sharing
that occurs in public to be less commendable than sharing
that occurs in private. The prosociality literature indicates
that adults view private donations as more “altruistic” and
less “egoist” than public donations (Padilla-Walker & Carlo,
2014). However, we do not know if children as old as 9years-old have adult-like cognitions about out-group sharing
that occurs in private versus public. If older children differ
from younger children in their beliefs about in/out-group
sharing and private versus public giving, then we expect
their patterns of sharing to also diverge from the sharing
behaviors of younger children.
We also included an evaluation task to test children’s
perceptions of giving. After completing the sharing task,
children were asked to judge scenarios of sticker sharing
between in-group and out-group members. This was to test
whether (a) children act in accordance with what they
believe to be “nice” giving behavior, and (b) if children
believe it is nicer to share with out-group or in-group
members when sharing takes place publicly vs. privately.
Past studies demonstrate a tension between children’s
desire for equal outcomes and their preferences for in-group
loyalty when distributing resources. However, few studies
have examined how this tension influences children’s
beliefs about how others should behave in cooperative
contexts. Olson and Spelke (2008) found that when children
acted on behalf of a third-party protagonist (a doll) they
prioritized the doll’s in-group members when allocating
resources. More recently, DeJesus, Rhodes and Kinzler
(2014) found that 4- to 10-year-old children expected others
to behave in ways that would benefit their own group. Thus

260

children’s evaluations about the way people should behave
are often not congruent with how they expect them to
actually behave. What has not yet been examined is whether
children’s evaluations about how others should allocate
resources amongst in-group and out-group members mirror
their own behavior in a parallel task. Additionally, we know
little about the degree to which children consider social
obligations when evaluating the amount of resources shared
between individuals. Previous studies have found that
children rate scenarios of sharing zero resources as a
“mean” act, especially if resources were earned
collaboratively (Ng, Heyman & Barner, 2011). This
demonstrates that children consider social obligations
between individuals when evaluating sharing behaviors, but
we do not know if this extends to their beliefs about
intergroup sharing.

group (three trials) or their same group (three trials). Each
time a picture of a target child was presented, the
experimenter placed seven stickers on the table in a random
arrangement. Children were told that the stickers belonged
to them and they could distribute the stickers in any way
that they liked. They were led to believe that the envelopes
would later be mailed to each target child’s house, and were
told that the experimenter would not look inside of the
envelopes. Children put the stickers that they wanted to
donate inside the envelopes with the target child’s picture on
it, and put stickers that they wanted to keep in a separate
envelope. Children completed seven trials in total including
one practice trial. For counterbalancing purposes, there were
two different orders for the presentation of target pictures
where one order was the reverse of the other. The in-group
or out-group status of the potential recipient was
manipulated within subjects, and the presence or absence of
an observer during the session was manipulated between
subjects.
For both conditions (observer and no observer), the
experimenter placed a display poster board between herself
and the participant so that the experimenter’s view of the
participant was obstructed. In the observer condition, a
research assistant sat next to the child and maintained a
neutral expression while watching the child complete the
resource allocation trials. Children were told that the
observer cared about how nice they were during the task,
and was watching to see how many stickers they gave away.
Evaluation task: Children were told that they would see
images of how other children played a sticker game similar
to the one they just took part in––except now, they would
decide if the children in the pictures were being “nice” or
“mean” when they played the game. Examples of a child
performing a nice act (cleaning up the classroom) and
performing a mean act (pushing another child down on
purpose) were read to each participant prior to playing the
game. Children answered whether the actions were “nice” or
“mean” to ensure that they understood the meaning of each
term.
Next, children saw eight PowerPoint slides with pictures
of two children (a giver and a recipient) on each slide. The
slides depicted scenarios of sticker sharing between ingroup and out-group members in the presence or absence of
a female observer. The in-group versus out-group status of
the potential recipient was manipulated within subjects and
whether or not an observer was shown was manipulated
between subjects. Children were assigned to the same
observer condition in the judgment task as they had been in
the resource allocation task.
At the start of each trial, children were told which child
donated their stickers and which child was the recipient.
Target children in the evaluation task were 16 Caucasian
females between the ages of 5 to 7. Four scenarios consisted
of giving stickers to the out-group, where the ratios between
giving and keeping were 7:0, 5:2, 2:5, 0:7, and four
matching scenarios consisted of in-group giving. Two
different orders for the presentation of PowerPoint slides

Method
Participants A total of 164 children (82 females) were
tested, with 84 children in the observer condition and 80 in
the no observer condition. Children’ ages ranged from 5 to 9
years with 33 five-year-olds, 32 six-year-olds, 35 sevenyear-olds, 32 eight-year-olds and 32 nine-year-olds; 82%
were Caucasian, 15% were Asian American, 3% were
identified as Mixed/Other by caregivers.
Procedures Children first completed a resource allocation
task and then took part in a social evaluation task in which
they evaluated the resource allocation decisions of other
children. Children randomly selected a green or orange
block hidden behind the experimenter’s back to assign them
to one of two minimal groups (the orange or green group).
Blocks were surreptitiously manipulated to ensure that an
equal number of children from each age group were
assigned to each minimal group. Children were told that
their group included other children in the area who chose
the same color block that they did. They then wore a
wristband matching the color of their group for the duration
of the task. Next, each participant heard four narratives
describing a competitive relationship between the two
groups (e.g., “The orange group really wants to win against
the green group, and the green group really wants to win
against the orange group”). The narratives emphasized
competition between the groups without mention of rivalry
over resources in order to prevent children from viewing the
resource allocation task itself as a competitive task.
Resource allocation task: Stimuli for the resource
allocation task were six full-color head and shoulder
photographs of Caucasian females between the ages of 5
and 7 attached to manila envelopes. We chose all female
recipients to control for gender as an extraneous variable in
children’s
in-group/out-group
sharing
behavior.
Photographs were taken from Dunham et al. (2011) and
were edited using a photo editing software such that half the
children wore orange t-shirts and half wore green t-shirts.
On each trial children were presented with a manila
envelope with a picture of a child from the contrasting

261

were used, where one order was the reverse of the other. For
each trial, children judged whether the giver was nice or
mean. They were then asked either “How nice?” or “How
mean?” and presented with three smiling or frowning faces,
respectively. A six-point pictorial Likert scale adopted from
Ng, Heyman and Barner (2011) was transformed into
values: 6 (very very nice) to 1 (very very mean) for data
analysis.

We did not find significant effects of Age or Gender in
either of the analyses, nor did adding the interaction
between Observer and Group Status improve the goodness
of fit of our model. The difference between the Observer
versus No-observer condition was slightly greater for outgroup giving than for in-group giving, but this was not
statistically significant.
Evaluation task: Multiple regression analysis was used to
test if factors in the evaluation task, as well as children’s’
own giving behavior in the resource allocation task,
predicted children’s’ explicit “niceness” ratings (1= very
very mean…6= very very nice). For each participant, an
average score of In-group/Out-group giving (referred to here
as In-group sharing bias) was calculated by subtracting the
mean number of stickers donated to Out-group members
from the mean number of stickers donated to In-group
members in the resource allocation task.
Data for the evaluation task were analyzed using a linear
mixed model with Participants treated as a random factor.
Correlation tests run prior to creating regression models
revealed low collinearity among predictor variables. Pvalues were obtained by comparing likelihood ratio tests of
the full model with the effect in question against the basic
model without the effect in question. The basic model
included Age and Gender as predictor variables and
participants’ mean “niceness” ratings as the outcome
variable. A second model (Model 2) included Age, Gender,
Observer Condition (Observer, No Observer) and the
interaction between scenario allocation (7:0, 5:2, 2:5, 0:7)
and inter-group sharing between target children (In-group,
Out-group) as predictor variables. The full model included
all predictor and outcome variables of Model 2, in addition
to the interaction between participants’ In-group sharing
bias in the resource allocation task and inter-group sharing
between target children in the evaluation task.
The analyses revealed that the full model accounted for
significantly more variance in children’s “niceness” ratings,
than the basic model and Model 2, 𝑥 ! (1) = 7.07, p = .029.
The increased goodness of fit of the full model compared to
Model 2 demonstrates a significant relationship between
children’s own giving behavior and their judgments of other
children’s intergroup giving. Children’s ratings of different
scenario allocations were dependent on the inter-group
sharing that occurred. Children gave significantly different
ratings for Out-group sharing scenarios where the giver
shared 0 stickers (β = 4.08) versus 2 stickers ((β = 3.64), 5
stickers (β = 3.68) and 7 stickers (β = 4.01). Children rated
giving 0 stickers as meaner (M = 2.49) than giving any
stickers: 2 stickers (M = 3.79), 5 stickers (M = 4.77), or 7
stickers (M = 5.29). Also, to our surprise, we found a
significant main effect of group sharing such that children
rated giving to Out-group members as significantly meaner
(M = 3.77) than giving to In-group members (M = 4.39),
F(1,785) = 40.48, p < .001 (see Figure 2). Additionally,
Observer condition was a significant predictor of children’s
“niceness” ratings (β = 3.94), but age and gender were not.

Results
Resource Allocation task: Analyses were performed in R
3.0.2 (http://www.r-project.org) using the lme4 package
(Bates, Maechler, Bolker & Walker, 2014). For the resource
allocation task we used a linear mixed model with
Participants treated as a random factor. P-values were
obtained by comparing likelihood ratio tests of the full
model with the effect in question against the basic model
without the effect in question. The basic model included
Age and Gender as predictor variables, and mean percentage
of stickers donated by children as the dependent variable.
The full model included Age, Observer Condition
(Observer, No Observer), recipient’s Group Status (Ingroup, Out-group), and the interaction between Observer
and Group Status (Observer/No Observer x In-Group/OutGroup) as predictor variables.
The analyses revealed that adding Observer Condition
and Group Status to the model significantly increased the
goodness of fit as indicated by likelihood ratio tests, 𝑥 ! (1) =
26.55, p < .001. Welch’s two sample t-test indicated that
children in the Observer Condition donated significantly
more stickers (M = 54%), than children in the No Observer
Condition (M = 38%), t(944) = -9.57, p < .001. A paired
samples t-test showed that children donated significantly
more stickers to In-group members (M = 49%) than to Outgroup members (M = 43%), t(163) = 5.03, p < .001).
Figure 1 displays children’ average percentage of giving by
Observer Condition and Group Status.

Average % of Stickers Given

100

75

Observer
N

50

Y

25

0
In

Out

In−Group vs. Out−Group

Figure 1: Percentage of stickers given by observer
condition (Observer, No Observer) and group status (Ingroup, Out-group).

262

Niceness Ratings

6

4

Group
In
Out
2

0
0

2

5

7

Scenario Allocation

Figure 2: “Niceness ratings” (6 = very very nice, 1 = very
very mean) by scenario allocation and inter-group sharing
between target children (In-group, Out-group).

Discussion
We investigated how children's giving to others is
affected by their desire to maintain a good reputation, and
how this interacts with their relationship to potential
recipients. We also examined whether children’s evaluations
of giving are reflective of their own sharing behavior, or if
instead children judge other children negatively for
exhibiting behaviors that they themselves perform.
Consistent with previous studies (Engelmann, Herrmann
& Tomasello, 2012; Shaw et al., 2104), we found that
children were significantly more generous when an observer
was present. We also found that children donated more
stickers to in-group members than out-group members
across both observer conditions. However, surprisingly,
children’s giving to in-group and out-group members did
not significantly differ between observer conditions:
Children’s giving to in-group members was just as
influenced by reputation management as giving to out-group
members, in contrast with our expectation that they might
share for alternative reasons with in-group members—e.g., a
desire to strengthen their group, or a heightened expectation
of reciprocity (Bernhard, Fischbacher & Fehr, 2006;
Sebastiàn-Enesco & Warneken, 2015).
Also surprising were children’s explicit evaluations of
giving behavior, and how they related to their own giving.
Overall, children’s own sharing behavior in the sticker
allocation task predicted their “niceness” evaluations. While
at first analysis this does not appear surprising, one
consequence of this is that they rated scenarios of in-group
giving as significantly nicer than scenarios of out-group
giving. These findings contrast with DeJesus et al.’s (2014)
study, which found that children evaluate out-group giving
as nicer than in-group giving. In our study children did not
rate giving 0 stickers differently for in-group or out-group
giving, but they did rate giving all 7 stickers to an in-group
member as significantly nicer than giving all 7 stickers to an
out-group member. We see two potential reasons for this

difference in findings. First, it is possible that children are
more sensitive to group status in contexts where one must
sacrifice all of his/her resources—e.g., that they are more
likely to consider social obligations in scenarios where
sharing incurs a high cost. Alternatively, children’s
evaluations of giving to in-group or out-group members
may differ when they have themselves recently given, and
themselves chosen to favor the in-group.
Future studies should examine this difference, and also
the unexpected finding that children do not use different
metrics for sharing with in-group and out-group members.
Our intuition, beginning this study, was that in many cases,
such as feeding one’s family or providing clothing and
shelter, reputation management is likely to be a secondary
factor in giving behaviors. From this intuition, we reasoned
that sharing might differ more generally between in-group
and out-group members. While this second prediction
appears to be incorrect, it remains unknown whether
children’s motives for giving to close relations might still be
less sensitive to concerns about reputation, or whether here
too, children give less when others are watching.
Future work should also examine why children seek to
appear prosocial to a stranger. For example, it is unclear
whether children were more generous in front of observers
because they cared about their reputation or because they
anticipated that their behavior could have resulted in a
reward or punishment.
Also of interest is how suboptimal environmental
conditions such as social instability and resource scarcity,
which make sharing more costly for children, constrain their
sharing behavior. Research in adults indicates that when
faced with uncertainty of resource availability, individuals
become less cooperative, especially across group boundaries
(LeVine & Campbell, 1972). However, much remains
unknown about how such factors across diverse societies
impact children’s sharing behaviors. Our sample consisted
of predominantly Caucasian children of high socioeconomic status living in a wealthy, urban community in the
U.S. where resources are abundant and competition over
scarce resources is minimal. This makes it unclear how well
our findings generalize to children with different
socioeconomic and ethnic backgrounds. How might children
living in diverse areas of the U.S. or other countries
compare to the children we tested? It is possible that with
varying cultural and social norms regarding altruistic giving,
we will find great variability in children’s sharing
tendencies. Future research in this area is needed to explore
how cultural and socioeconomic differences may influence
developmental trajectories of prosocial behavior.

Acknowledgments
We thank Del Mar Heights Elementary School for their
involvement with recruiting participants, and Miriam
Rubenson, Nestor Tulagan, Sydney Ghazarian and Kaitlyn
Peck for their help in testing participants. We also thank
Katie Wagner, Kevin Smith and Tim Lew for their help with
data analyses.

263

Leimgruber, K.L., Shaw, A., Santos, L.R. & Olson, K.R. (2012).
Young children are more generous when others are aware of
their actions. PLoS ONE, 7, e48292.
Levine, M., Prosser, A., Evans, D. & Reicher, S. (2005) Identity
and emergency intervention: How social group membership and
inclusiveness of group boundaries shapes helping behavior.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 443-453.
LeVine, R.A., & Campbell, D.T. (1972). Ethnocentrism: Theories
of conflict, ethnic attitudes, and group behavior. New York:
Wiley.
LoBue, V., Nishida, T., Chiong, C., DeLoache, J. S., & Haidt, J.
(2011). When getting something good is bad: Even three-yearolds react to inequality. Social Development, 20(1), 154–170.
Locksley, A., Ortiz, V. & Hepburn, C. (1980). Social
categorization and discriminatory behavior: Extinguishing the
minimal intergroup discrimination effect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 773–783.
Milinski, M., Semmann, D. & Krambeck, H. J. (2002). Reputation
helps solve the ‘tragedy of the commons’. Nature, 415, 424–
426.
Moore, C. (2009). Fairness in children’s resource allocation
depends on the recipient. Psychological Science, 20(8), 944–
948.
Ng, R., Heyman, G.D., & Barner, D. (2011). Collaboration
promotes proportional reasoning about resource distribution in
young children. Developmental Psychology, 47(5), 1230–1238.
Olson, K. R. & Spelke, E. S. (2008). Foundations of cooperation
in young children. Cognition, 108, 222–231.
Padilla-Walker, L.M. & Carlo, G. (2014). Prosocial Development:
A multidimensional approach. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Piazza, J., Bering, J.M., & Ingram, G. (2011). “Princess Alice is
watching you”: children’s belief in an invisible person inhibits
cheating. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 109, 311–
320.
Sebastiàn-Enesco, C. & Warneken, F. (2015). The shadow of the
future: 5-year-olds, but not 3-year-olds, adjust their sharing in
anticipation of reciprocation. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 129, 40–54.
Shaw, A., Monitinari, N., Piovesan, M., Olson, K.R., Gino, F. &
Norton, M.I. (2014). Children develop a veil of fairness.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 143, 363–375.
Smith, C. E., Blake, P. R., & Harris, P. L. (2013). I should but I
won’t: Why young children endorse norms of fair sharing but
do not follow them. PLos ONE, 8(3), e59510.
Spielman, D. A. (2000). Young children, minimal groups and
dichotomous categorization. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 26, 1433–1441.
Sutter, M. (2007). Outcome versus intentions: On the nature of
fair behavior and its development with age. Journal of
Economic Psychology, 28, 69–78.
Tajfel, H. (2001). Experiments in intergroup discrimination. In M.
A. Hogg & D. Abrams (Eds.), Intergroup relations: Essential
readings. London: Psychology Press (Original work published
1971).
Tajfel, H., Billig, M. G., Bundy, R. P. & Flament, C. (1971).
Social categorization and
intergroup behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology,
1(2), 149–178.
Warneken, F., Tomasello, M. (2009). The roots of human
altruism. British Journal of Psychology, 100, 455–471.
Whisman, M. A., & McClelland, G. H. (2005). Designing, testing,
and interpreting interactions and moderator effects in family
research. Journal of Family Psychology, 19(1), 111–120.

References
Aloise-Young, P.A. (1993). The development of self-presentation:
Self-promotion in 6-to-10-year-old children. Social Cognition,
11, 201–222.
Banerjee, R. (2002). Audience effects of self-presentation in
childhood. Social Development, 11, 487–507.
Banerjee, R., Bennett, M., & Luke, N. (2010). Children’s
reasoning about the self-presentational consequences of
apologies and excuses following rule violations. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 28, 799–815.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. (2014). Lme4:
Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4.R package
version 1.1-6.
Benenson, J.F., Pascoe, J. & Radmore, N. (2007). Children’s
altruistic behavior in the dictator game. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 28, 86–175.
Bernhard, H., Fischbacher, U. & Fehr, E. (2006). Parochial
altruism in humans. Nature, 442, 912–915.
Bigler, B. S., Jones, L. C. & Lobliner, D. B. (1997). Social
categorization and the formation of intergroup attitudes in
children Child Development, 68(3), 530–543.
Blake, P. R., & McAuliffe, K. (2011). “I had so much it didn’t
seem fair”: Eight-year-olds reject two forms of inequity.
Cognition, 120, 215–224.
Blake, P.R. & Rand, D.G. (2010). Currency value moderates
equity preference among young children. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 31, 210–218.
Brewer, M. B. (1991). The social self: On being the same and
different at the same time. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 17, 475–482.
DeJesus, J.M., Rhodes, M. & Kinzler, K.D. (2014). Evaluations
versus expectations: Children’s divergent beliefs about resource
distribution. Cognitive Science, 38(1), 178–193.
Dunham, Y., Baron, A. S., & Carey, S. (2011). Consequences of
“minimal” group affiliations in childhood. Child Development,
82(3), 793–811.
Engelmann, J.M., Over, H., Herrmann, E. & Tomasello, M.
(2013). Young children care more about their reputation with
ingroup members and potential reciprocators. Developmental
Science, 16, 952–958.
Fehr, E., Bernhard, H. & Rockenbach, B. (2008). Egalitarianism
in young children. Nature, 454, 1079-1084.
Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U. & Gächter, S. (2002). Strong reciprocity,
human co-operation, and the enforcement of social norms.
Human Nature, 13, 1–25.
Geraci, A., & Surian, L. (2011). The developmental roots of
fairness: Infants’ reactions to equal and unequal distributions of
resources. Developmental Science, 14, 1012–1020.
Goette, L., Huffman, D. & Meier, S. (2006). The impact of group
membership on cooperation and norm enforcement: Evidence
using random assignment to real social groups. The American
Economic Review, 96(2), 212–216.
Harbaugh, W.T. & Krause, K. (2000). Children’s altruism in
public good and dictator experiments. Economic Inquiry, 38,
95–109.
Hay, D.F. (1979) Cooperative interactions and sharing between
very young children and their parents. Developmental
Psychology, 15, 647–653.
Hay, D.F. & Murray, P. (1982). Giving and requesting: Social
facilitation of infants’ offers to adults. Infant Behavior and
Development, 5, 301–310.
Judd, C. M., McClelland, G. H., & Ryan, C. S. (2009). Data
analysis: A model comparison approach. NewYork:
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.

264

