The Relationship Between Inhibitory Control and Free Will Beliefs in 4-to 6-YearOld-Children
Adrienne O. Wente (adrieorchid@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Titus Ting (tripletxtreme@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Rosie Aboody (raboody@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Tamar Kushnir (Tk397@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, MVR Hall
Ithaca NY, 14850

Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract

act against external social or normative constraints, or even
internal motivational constraints, such as one’s own desires.
In regards to motivational constraints, Kushnir et al.
(2015) asked 4-to 6-year-old children a series of questions
about the freedom to act against or refrain from acting on
one’s own immediate desires. Children were asked if people
can simply ‘choose to not’ perform a desirable action, such
as to not eat a tasty cookie. They were also asked if they
could ‘choose to’ engage in an undesirable action, such as
eat a disgusting cracker. Six-year-olds endorsed the freedom
to act against desires, including the ability to refrain from
desired actions (i.e. to exercise self control). Four-year-olds,
on the other hand, tended to believe that people’s behavior
had to be consistent with their desires, especially in cases
that required self-control.
Kushnir et al. (2015) argue that this finding reflects a
conceptual change in children’s folk psychology or theory
of mind. Two-year-olds view actions as stemming from
desires (Wellman & Woolley, 1990). A belief in free will, or
choice, can be viewed as an added component to this causal
chain. With this added link, actions need not stem directly
from desires, but can be altered through choice.
A theory theory framework suggests that children’s
beliefs take the form of intuitive theories that undergo
continual revision as new evidence is encountered (Gopnik
& Wellman 2012). Under this framework a child might
initially hold a belief that actions stem from immediate
desires, and thus self-control (refraining from desirable
actions) is not possible. As they encounter additional
evidence they may gradually come to believe that the
relationship between desires and actions is mediated by
choice.

This study explores the relationship between beliefs about
self-control and the ability to exercise self-control in 4- to 6year-old children. Sixty-eight children were asked a series of
questions to gauge whether they believed that they could
freely choose to act against their desires or inhibit themselves
from performing desired actions. Children were also asked to
provide qualitative explanations for why they could or could
not exercise free will, and to complete two inhibitory control
tasks: forbidden toy and day/night. Choice responses were
negatively correlated with performance on the forbidden toy
task, when children performed that task first. There was also a
negative correlation between a belief in an internal locus of
control, and success on the forbidden toy measure. Refraining
from touching a forbidden toy appears to be correlated to less
belief in free will. Though this may appear counter-intuitive,
it is consistent with cross-cultural research.
Keywords: cognitive development; executive function; social
cognition; choice; free will; inhibitory control

Background
Previous research suggests that a belief in one’s ability to
freely exercise self-control emerges between the ages of 4
and 6. (Kushnir, Gopnik, Chernyak, Seiver, & Wellman,
2015). During this same period, children also become better
at practicing self-control (Carlson, 2010). The present study
explores the relationship between self-control abilities and
corresponding free will beliefs.
A concept of free will may have several different
components, which is part of why defining free will can be
philosophically problematic. Under one interpretation, free
will is viewed as the ability to act free from external
physical constraints. Other definitions specify the ability to

770

Method

What types of additional evidence might children receive?
One possibility is that children are simply taught a theory of
choice and free will by other people, one which includes the
message that acting against or refraining from acting on
one’s own desires is a free choice. Another possibility is
that beliefs about choice and related beliefs about selfcontrol stem from first person experiences. Perhaps children
witness themselves or other people practicing self-control,
and develop a belief in free choice to explain why this is so.
Related to this second possibility, young children are
continually developing increasing abilities to delay
gratification and practice self-control (Carlson, 2010).
Endogenous changes in inhibitory control could spur the
conceptual change in children’s beliefs about free will.
Several lines of research support the possibility of a link
between beliefs about free will and inhibitory control. First,
researchers have found a positive correlation between the
development of inhibitory control and theory of mind
(Carlson & Moses, 2001; Oh & Lewis, 2008). As free will
beliefs are a subcomponent of theory of mind beliefs, it is
possible that this relationship extends to free will beliefs.
Other research suggests that holding a belief in an internal
locus of control is positively correlated with self-control
(Mischel, Zeiss, & Zeiss, 1974). Children who believe their
actions (and thus their choices) are guided by internal
processes, like desires, may do better in tasks that require
self-control than children who believe their actions are
externally guided (by the situation, or by others).
On the other hand, cross-cultural research suggests the
opposite relationship. People from interdependent cultures
hold a stronger belief in an external locus of causation than
do people from independent cultures (Choi, Nisbett &
Norenzayan, 1999), and a recent study found that Chinese
children hold weaker beliefs about free will than U.S.
children (Wente et al., in press). Nevertheless, children from
interdependent cultures, like China, tend to outperform U.S.
children on inhibitory control tasks (Sabbagh, Xu, Carlson,
Moses & Lee, 2006; Oh & Lewis, 2008). This may seem
counter-intuitive from a Western perspective. It is possible,
however, that children in interdependent cultures think that
self–control reflects the direct influence of external social
norms, rather than an internal choice to follow those norms.
To explore the relationship between self-control and free
will beliefs, the current study tested 4- to 6-year-olds on the
forbidden toy and day/night inhibitory control tasks, and
measured their beliefs about free will. Approximately half
of the children completed the free will task first, and half
completed the inhibitory control tasks first. This allowed us
to assess the possibility of carryover effects between tasks.
To further explore the relationship between locus of control
and self-control, children were asked to explain why they
could or could not practice free choice. In Kushnir et al.
(2015), most explanation types could be classified as
internal or external. The present study uses a slightly
modified coding scale.

Four- to 6-year-old children were asked a series of questions
to gauge whether they believed that people could inhibit
themselves from performing desired actions, or act against
their desires. To measure inhibitory control, each child also
completed the forbidden toy and day/night tasks. Task order
was counterbalanced so that some children completed the
inhibitory control measures first and others answered the
free will questions first.

Participants
Participants were 68 4- 5- and 6-year-olds (M=5.37, Range=
4.01-6.97 years, 26 males) recruited from a study participant
database or local preschool. Additionally, 14 children were
excluded from the study. Of these, 8 failed to complete the
full study (most because they expressed fear of being alone
in the testing room), 5 were excluded due to experimenter
error, and 1 due to low English language proficiency. All
participants were tested in Berkeley, CA. The sample was
predominantly middle and upper middle class and
represented the diversity of the local population.

Stimuli
Free Will Task The experimenter used white index cards to
draw different activities and foods children suggested.
Day Night Task The day/night images featured in Gerstadt,
Hong, & Diamond (1994) were photocopied, and replicas
were created. The night card featured a white moon and
stars on a black background. The day card featured a white
background with a sun outlined in black. Children were
tested on 8 of each type of card.
Forbidden Toy Task A marble run and several small
marbles were used. The marble run was approximately two
feet tall and consisted of a series of tracks the marbles could
roll down when placed in the opening at the top.

Procedure
All children were tested in a small testing room located in
the Institute of Human Development at the University of
California Berkeley, or in an empty room at their preschool.
The order of the free will questions and inhibitory control
testing as well as which inhibitory control task was
presented first was counterbalanced across participants.
Free Will Task The free will task was modeled after
Kushnir et al. (2015). All children answered 2 physically
impossible control questions, 2 action (desire) questions,
and 2 inhibition (desire) questions and 2 possibility control
questions taken from Wente et al. (in press).
Action (desire) questions gauged whether children
believed that they could choose to act against their desires.
Children suggested an activity and food that they really

771

disliked. Then the experimenter drew the activity or food for
the child and used the drawings to ask the experimental
questions. For example, if the child indicated that they did
not like raw onions, the experimenter drew a raw onion and
said, “Let’s pretend this is a raw onion sitting on the table in
front of you. You really do not like raw onions; you really
think they taste yucky. Your mom says that it is ok to eat the
onion or not eat the onion. Can you choose to eat the onion,
or do you have to not eat the onion because you don’t like
it?”
Inhibition (desire) questions gauged whether children
believed that they could choose to inhibit themselves from
performing a desired action. Children were asked to name a
favorite food and activity. The experimenter drew the food
or activity and asked the child if they believed they could
choose to inhibit themselves from eating the food or
engaging in the activity. For example if the child said they
really enjoyed eating ice cream, the experimenter drew a
picture of ice cream and said, “Lets pretend that this is ice
cream sitting on the table in front of you. You really like ice
cream; you really think it tastes yummy. Your mom says it’s
ok to eat the ice cream or not eat the ice cream. Can you
choose to not eat the ice cream, or do you have to eat it
because you like it?”
Impossible control questions used similar language, but
instead asked children if they believed they could choose to
do impossible things. They were, “If you really wanted to
could you choose to {float in the air/ walk through a wall}
or do you have to {come down/ walk around the wall}?”
Possibility control questions, on the other hand, asked
children if they believed they could choose to do possible
and desirable things. These questions were, “Can you
choose to {walk into the living room/ step down off a step}
or do you have to {stay in the kitchen/ stay on the step}?”
Children were also asked to provide a qualitative
explanation following their choice response. For example,
if the child said they could “choose to not eat the cookie”
the experimenter asked, “And why can you choose to not eat
the cookie?”
The order that the ‘choose to’ and ‘have to’ options were
first presented was counterbalanced within and across
participants. Question order was counterbalanced across
participants. Control and desire questions were alternated.

and had to leave the room to go and get it. The child was
told not to touch the toy while the experimenter was gone.
Children waited 5 minutes for the experimenter to return.

Results
Free Will Task
Children answered 4 question types: possible control,
impossible control, inhibition desire and action desire. For
each of these question types, children answered 2 questions.
Response patterns did not differ across the 2 questions, and
thus the data were combined for further analysis. For each
question type, children received a ‘choose to’ score that
ranged from 0-2. A 0 indicates that the child provided no
‘choose to’ responses, whereas a 2 indicates that they
provided 2.
An initial set of independent samples t-tests were used to
examine whether children’s answers differed as a result of
task order (free will first vs. inhibitory control first).
Children were more likely to provide inaccurate ‘choose to’
answers to the impossible control questions when the free
will task was conducted first, t(66)= 2.54, p=.013. However
children’s answers were well below chance for both orders
of presentation: free will first, t(32)= 3.72, p=.001;
inhibitory control first, t(34)= 16.23, p<.001. There was no
effect of task order for the other 3 question types. There was
also no effect of task order when examining just the children
who passed the forbidden toy task.
Overall, children provided ‘choose to’ responses
significantly less than chance for the impossible control
questions, t(67)=-15.93, p<.001, and significantly more than
chance for the possible control questions, t(67)= 33.04,
p<.001. This indicates that children believed they could not
choose to perform impossible actions, yet did believe that
they could choose to perform unconstrained actions. It also
suggests that children understood the language and structure
of the questions.
A 4(Question type: Action vs. Inhibition vs. Impossible
Control vs. Possible Control) x 3(Age: 4 vs. 5 vs. 6)
Repeated Measures ANOVA on mean ‘choose to’ responses
indicated a main effect of question type, F(3, 195)= 99.49,
p<.001, a main effect of age, F(2, 65)= 10.84, p<.001, and a
interaction between age and question type, F(6, 195)= 5.54,
p<.001.
Paired sample t-tests were used to explore the main effect
of question type. Children provided more ‘choose to’
responses for both the inhibition desire questions, t(67)=
9.09, p<.001 and the action desire questions, t(67)= 10.09,
p<.001 than the impossible control questions. They also
provided fewer ‘choose to’ responses for both the inhibition
desire questions t(67)=4.96, p<.001 and action desire
questions t(67)= 3.4, p=.001 than the possible control
questions. There was a trending difference in responses
between the action and inhibition questions, t(67)=1.99,
p=.051, suggesting that children might have provided more
choose to responses for the action questions.

Day/Night Task The day night task was modeled after
Gerstadt, Hong, & Diamond (1994). Children were
instructed to say “day” when the experimenter showed them
the night card, and “night” when the experimenter showed
them the day card. There was a training phase where
children had to provide 6 correct answers. The test phase
consisted of 8 of each type of card.
Forbidden Toy Task This task was modeled after the
forbidden toy procedure in Carlson (2005). The
experimenter introduced children to an enticing toy, a
marble run, and demonstrated how it worked. The
experimenter then said that s/he had forgotten something

772

Independent samples t-tests also revealed that 4-year-olds
provided significantly fewer ‘choose to’ responses than 5year-olds, t(47)= 3.76, p<.001. There was no difference
between 5- and 6-year-olds.
To explore the age by question type interaction, four
Univariate ANOVAs looked at the effect of age on ‘choose
to’ responses for each of the 4 question types. There were
no developmental differences for the impossible control and
possible control questions, but there was a difference for the
action questions, F(2, 65)= 6.38, p=.003. Independent
samples t-tests indicated that 5-year-olds provided more
‘choose to’ responses than 4-year olds, t(47)= 2.17, p=.035,
but that there was no difference between 5- and 6-year-olds.
There was a similar finding for the inhibition questions, F(2,
65)= 15.5, p<.001, the difference between 4- and 5-yearolds was significant t(47)= 4.23, p<.001, but the difference
between 5- and 6-year-olds was not.
Overall, children provided more ‘choose to’ responses for
desire questions than for impossible control questions, and
fewer ‘choose to’ responses for the desire questions than for
possible control questions. Children’s ‘choose to’ responses
for the desire questions increased between ages 4 and 5.
Means and comparisons to chance (1) are presented in
Figure 1.

.25. Overall, the mean internal score was .411, SD= .358,
and mean external score was .564, SD= .364. A one-way
ANOVA revealed that there were no significant
developmental differences. Independent samples t-tests did
reveal that children who completed the free will task first
trended towards providing more internal explanations than
children who completed the inhibitory control portion first
t(66)=.1.92, p=.059. The ratio of internal to external
explanations was similar when the free will questions were
asked first. However, children who completed the inhibitory
control tasks first provided significantly more external than
internal explanations, t(34)= -2.77, p=.009.
Table 1: Explanation Coding
Explanation
Type
Internal

External

Figure 1: Mean ‘choose to’ response

Other

Definition

Example Explanations

References “I don’t want to.”
to mental
“Your brain says what you
states or
want to do.”
processes,
“I can choose to go
or choice
anywhere or not go
itself
anywhere.”
References “Because it's not fair.”
to factors
“My mommy is ok with it.”
external to
“It’s so good.”
the child’s
“What if you have a tummy
mind
ache.”
“I don’t know”/ no answer/ irrelevant
answer/ combination of internal and
external

Day/Night Task
All children received a day/night score ranging from 0-16.
A score of 0 meant that the child provided no correct
answers whereas a score of 16 meant that the child provided
all correct answers. Means and standard errors are presented
in Table 2.
Table 2: Day/Night Scores

Qualitative Explanations

4-year-olds
5-year-olds
6-year-olds

To explore children’s beliefs about locus of control,
children were also asked explain their answers to the choice
questions. For example, if a child answered that they had to
eat a cookie, the experimenter asked, “Why do you have to
eat the cookie?” All answers were coded as internal,
external, or other. See Table 1 for further information about
explanation coding.
Each child was assigned an internal and external score.
These were asymmetrical because some answers were coded
as ‘other.’ Scores indicated the proportion of internal or
external explanations given. For example, if the child
provided 3 internal explanations and 1 external explanation
they received an internal score of .75 and external score of

N

Mean

SE

23
25
19

9.17
10.4
13.11

.87
1.01
1.03

An independent samples t-test indicated that children’s
answers did not differ based on task order. A 3(Age: 4 vs. 5
vs. 6) Univariate ANOVA on day/night score revealed that
children’s performance improved with age, F(2, 64)= 3.88,
p=.026. Independent samples t-tests indicated that the
difference between 4- and 6-year-olds was significant,
t(40)= 2.93, p=.006. No other age differences reached
significance.

773

Forbidden Toy Task

Splitting data by task order again revealed that children
who provided external explanations were more successful at
the forbidden toy task, but only when they answered the free
will questions first. There was a trending negative
correlation between internal score and forbidden toy wait
time, r(29)=-.35, p=.051, and a trending positive correlation
between external score and forbidden toy wait time,
r(29)=.35, p=.051. Again, a One-Way-ANOVA confirmed
that children who passed provided significantly more
external explanations if they completed the free will task
first, F(1, 32)= 5.195, p=.03.
For children who completed the inhibition tasks first,
there was a negative correlation between children’s free will
score and wait time during the forbidden toy task, r(32)=.433, p=.01. A Univariate ANOVA on free will score,
controlling for age, and using the pass/not pass variable
confirmed this finding. When the inhibitory control tasks
were completed first, children who passed the forbidden toy
task provided significantly fewer ‘choose to’ responses than
children who failed, F(1, 32)= 7.133, p=.012.

Children waited 5 minutes for the experimenter to return to
the room, and received a score ranging from 0-300 based on
the number of seconds they waited without touching the toy.
For example, if the child touched the toy 18 seconds into the
delay period, they received a score of 18. An independent
samples t-test indicated that children’s wait time did not
differ as a result of task order. A 3(Age: 4 vs. 5 vs. 6)
Univariate ANOVA did not reveal age differences. Children
also received a pass/fail score. Exactly half the children, 34,
passed, and half the children failed. Fisher’s exact tests
confirmed that age differences in the pass/fail variable were
not significant.

Relationship Between Measures
Next we explored the relationship between measures.
Children’s answers to the inhibition and action desire
questions were combined and all children received a free
will score that ranged from 0-4. A higher score indicates
that the child provided more choose to responses.

Discussion

Table 3: Correlations between measures
Internal

D/N

External

Children’s answers to the free will questions were consistent
with results of previous studies (Kushnir et al., 2015). Older
children ascribed more choice than younger children for the
desire questions, and they trended towards ascribing more
choice in cases of action than inhibition. There were no
developmental differences for the control questions. There
were developmental differences on the day/night task. Older
children scored higher than younger children. Age did not
predict performance on the forbidden toy task. Half the
children passed this task, and half touched the toy.
Neither the forbidden toy task nor the day/ night task was
positively correlated with free will beliefs. Previous
research found a positive relationship between the
development of theory of mind and executive functioning.
In particular, studies have found a correlation between cool
executive functioning tasks, such as the day night task, and
theory of mind (Carlson & Moses, 2001, Sabbagh et al
2006). The present results do not suggest that free will
beliefs are related to executive functioning in the same way
that theory of mind beliefs are, although they do not
necessarily rule out this possibility.
Both qualitative explanations and choose to responses
were related to the forbidden toy task. Children who
answered the free will questions first, and provided external
responses, were more likely to later pass the forbidden toy
task. Also, children provided more external explanations if
they answered the free will questions after completing the
inhibitory control measures.
At first, these results seem at odds with previous research
showing that holding a belief in an internal locus of control
enhances self-control (Mischel, Zeiss & Zeiss, 1974).
However, this prior work assumes a strong internal motive;
the child decides if they want persist and work towards a
reward. The forbidden toy task, on the other hand, has a
strong external motive – to obey the experimenter’s rule not

Forbidden

(a) Partial correlations all data combined (n=68)
Free Will

.06

Internal Score

.01

-.08

-.11

-.07

-.89*

-.31*

.12

.01

Day/ Night
External

.25*

(b)Partial correlations for free will first (n=33)
Free Will

.03

Internal Score

-.17

-.03

.21

-.3

-1*

-.35

.3

.00
.35

Day/ Night
External

(c) Partial correlations for inhibitory control first (n=35)
Free Will
Internal
Day/ Night
External

.14

.14

-.19

-.43*

.27

-.73*

-.15

-.14

-.02
.06

Partial correlations controlling for age were calculated
using the following variables: free will score, internal score,
external score, day/night score and forbidden toy wait time.
Results indicate that internal score was negatively correlated
with forbidden toy wait time, r(64)=-.31, p=.012, whereas
external score was positively correlated, r(64)= .25, p=.042.
Running a similar analysis using the pass/not pass variable
confirmed this finding. A One-Way ANOVA on mean
external score revealed that children who passed the
forbidden toy task provided more external explanations than
children who failed, F(1, 67)= 5.37, p=.024.

774

References

to touch the toy. No reward is given for those who pass,
other than the reward of following the rule.
Analysis also revealed a negative relationship between
self-control abilities and beliefs about free will. Of those
who completed the inhibition tasks first, children who
preformed better on the forbidden toy measure provided
fewer ‘choose to’ responses to the free will questions than
those who failed.
Ego depletion (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, &
Tice, 1998) could explain the negative correlation found in
this study. Children may have depleted their willpower
practicing self-control, and then subsequently answered that
they could not further practice self-control. However, there
were no order effects for the desire free will questions. The
experience of control itself did not make children less likely
to endorse free will, suggesting that ego depletion cannot
explain these results. Instead, children who passed the task
were less likely to endorse free will than those who did not.
These results are consistent with cross-cultural results
where inhibitory control is correlated with an external locus
of control and lesser belief in free will. One explanation is
that people perceive acts of self-control differently. There is
evidence that some actions, particularly actions based on
external moral norms, may not be viewed as freely chosen.
Furthermore, the extent that they are tends to differ across
cultures (Chernyak & Kushnir, 2014; Chernyak et al, 2013).
Some children may have not touched the toy because they
did not believe that they had the choice to touch the toy. In
order to fail, on the other hand, children must first conceive
of the choice to touch the toy. Their subjective experience
during the forbidden toy task may have subsequently
influenced answers during the free will task. In this sense,
the subjective first person experience of practicing selfcontrol could, over time, shape beliefs about free will.
These findings suggest a number of ways that the practice
of self-control may relate to beliefs about self-control. First,
we found that children who provided external explanations
performed better on a forbidden toy self-control task.
However, this relationship is in the opposite direction than
previous findings. Second we found that children provided
more external explanations after completing the inhibitory
control tasks. Finally, we found a relationship between the
experience of self-control and free will beliefs, but this
relation was that children who exercised self-control were
less likely to endorse free will. Future research should
consider how beliefs about free will relate to both internally
and externally motivated acts of self-control, and how
culturally variable experiences influence children’s abilities
and beliefs.

Baumeister, R., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D.
(1998). Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited
resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74, 1252-1265.
Carlson, S. (2005). Developmentally sensitive measures of
executive function in preschool children. Developmental
neuropsychology, 28, 595-616.
Carlson, S. (2010). Developmentally sensitive measures of
executive
functioning
in
preschool
children.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 28, 595-616.
Carlson, S. & Moses, L. (2001). Individual differences in
inhibitory control and children's theory of mind. Child
Development, 1032-1053.
Chernyak, N., Kushnir, T., (2014). The self as a moral
agent: Preschoolers behave morally, but believe in the
freedom to do otherwise. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 0, 1-12.
Chernyak, N., Kushnir, T., Sullivan, K.M., & Wang, Q.
(2013). A comparison of Nepalese and American
children’s concepts of freedom of choice and social
constraint. Cognitive Science, 37, 1343-1355.
Choi, Nisbett & Norenzayan (1999). Causal attribution
across
cultures:
Variation
and
Universality.
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 47-63.
Gerstadt, C. L., Hong, Y. J., & Diamond, A. (1994). The
relationship between cognition and action: Performance
of children 3.5-7 years old on a Stroop-like day-night test.
Cognition, 53, 129- 153.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M., (2012). Reconstructing
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 138, 1085-1108.
Kushnir, T., Gopnik, A., Chernyak, N., Seiver, E., &
Wellman, H. M. (2015). Developing intuitions about free
will between ages four and six. Cognition, 138, 79-101.
Mischel, W., Zeiss, R., & Zeiss, A. (1974). Internal-external
control and persistence: Validation and implications of
the Stanford preschool internal-external scale. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 265-278.
Oh, S., & Lewis, C. (2008). Korean preschoolers’ advanced
inhibitory control and its relation to other executive skills
and mental state understanding. Child Development, 79,
80-99.
Sabbagh, M. A., Xu, F. Carlson, S. M., Moses, L. J. & Lee,
K. (2006). The development of executive functioning and
theory of mind: A comparison of Chinese and U.S.
preschoolers. Psychological Science, 17, 74-81.
Wellman, H. M., & Woolley, J. D. (1990). From simple
desires to ordinary beliefs: The early development of
everyday psychology. Cognition, 35, 245-275.
Wente, A., Bridgers, S., Zhao, X., Seiver, E., Zhu, L., &
Gopnik, A. (In press). How universal are free will
beliefs? Cultural differences in Chinese and U.S. 4- and
6- year-olds. Child Development.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the John Templeton
Foundation for funding this research, as well as Sophie
Bridgers and Elyanah Posner for help with data collection.

775

