The impact of biased hypothesis generation on self-directed learning
Doug Markant (markant@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Rationality
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Lentzeallee 94, Berlin, Germany
Abstract

being able to predict whether SDL will be effective depending on the nature of the learning problem.

Self-directed learning confers a number of advantages relative
to passive observation, including the ability to test hypotheses rather than learn from data generated by the environment.
However, it remains unclear to what extent self-directed learning is constrained by basic cognitive processes and how those
limits are related to the structure of the to-be-learned material.
The present study examined how hypothesis generation affects the success of self-directed learning of categorical rules.
Two experiments manipulated the hypothesis generation process and assessed its impact on the ability to learn 1D and 2D
rules. Performance was strongly influenced by whether the
stimulus representation facilitated the generation of hypotheses consistent with the target rule. Broadly speaking, the findings suggest that the opportunity to actively gather information is not enough to guarantee successful learning, and that
the efficacy of self-directed learning closely depends on how
hypothesis generation is shaped by the structure of the learning environment.
Keywords: self-directed learning, category learning, active
learning, information search, hypothesis generation

Self-directed category learning
A recent study by Markant and Gureckis (2014) suggests that,
indeed, the benefits of SDL depend closely on the structure of
the target concept. The authors compared passive reception
and self-directed selection in a perceptual category learning
task (see stimuli in Figure 1, left), in which the target classification rule was either one-dimensional (1D, a criterion
on a single feature dimension) or two-dimensional (2D, requiring the integration of both feature values). Receptionbased learners observed stimuli generated from bivariate normal distributions corresponding to each category, whereas
selection-based learners chose items to learn about by specifying the feature values. Selection led to higher accuracy
than reception among those participants learning 1D rules. In
contrast, in the 2D case selection was no better than reception, and participants in both conditions were well-described
as responding according to simpler 1D hypotheses.
The goal of the present study was to examine whether
this divergence between selection-based learning of 1D and
2D rules was caused by a biased hypothesis generation process. The experimental manipulations were motivated by an
account of hypothesis generation as involving the sampling
of salient cues and relations in the environment (Trabasso,
Bower, & Gelman, 1968; Wallach, 1962). Accordingly, the
success of SDL should depend on whether the feature representation facilitates the generation of hypotheses that are of
the same form as the target rule. Poor learning of 2D rules
in Markant and Gureckis (2014) may have been driven by
stimuli with highly distinct dimensions that encouraged the
generation of 1D hypotheses, rather than 2D hypotheses that
involve integrating two dimensions. In contrast to existing
theories of category learning that assume inherent differences
in the difficulty of acquiring 1D and 2D rules (e.g., Ashby,
Paul, & Maddox, 2011), under this proposal the ability to
learn either type of rule through SDL depends on whether the
feature representation encourages the generation of hypotheses of the same form.

Self-directed learning (SDL) is typically characterized by
an interaction between external and internal search processes.
Active information collection and exploration of the external
environment are hallmarks of SDL (e.g., a student deciding
how to study or playing with a new toy to learn how it works).
Information resulting from this external search then influences an internal belief updating process, often conceptualized as the sequential generation and evaluation of new hypotheses, which in turn drives subsequent information gathering. This ongoing interaction is central to theories of conceptual discovery, including scientific inquiry (Klahr & Dunbar,
1988), explanatory reasoning (Johnson & Krems, 2001), and
sensemaking (Weick, 1995).
Although previous research has described a number of benefits of SDL relative to passive learning conditions, it is less
clear how its efficacy is constrained by basic cognitive and
perceptual processes (Gureckis & Markant, 2012). Previous
work suggests that, in particular, SDL may be strongly limited by failures or biases in the hypothesis generation process.
For instance, in concept learning tasks people make effective
information search decisions when given a set of hypotheses
to discriminate, but often fail to generate alternative hypotheses on their own (Tweney et al., 1980). Biased hypothesis
generation may be especially impactful in real-world domains
involving large or ill-defined hypothesis spaces. In education,
some researchers have argued against pedagogical practices
which emphasize self-directed discovery because students often fail to generate the target concept in the absence of guidance that narrows the hypothesis space (Mayer, 2004). Thus,
understanding the hypothesis generation process is critical to

Experiment 1
The first experiment examined the effect of perceptual feature representations on self-directed category learning. People were predicted to be more likely to generate 1D hypotheses when stimulus features are highly separable or it is difficult to combine information about their relative magnitudes,
a bias that should facilitate the learning of 1D target rules.

444

Rectangles

formly tiled the feature space. This grid was partitioned into
8 blocks, each of which included 8 stimuli from every quadrant of the stimulus space, for a total of 32 items in each test
block. The order of test items within each block and the order
of the eight test blocks were randomized for each participant.

Height

Radius

Dials

Angle

Procedure
The experiment was presented in a web browser using the psiTurk software (Gureckis et al., 2015). There were 8 blocks in
total, each comprised of 16 learning trials followed by 32 test
trials. Participants received .02A
C for every correct classification during test trials, for a total possible bonus of 5.12A
C.

Width

Figure 1: Example stimuli in the DIAL (left) and RECT
(right) conditions in Experiment 1. Dotted lines indicate the
set of target classification rules. Axis-aligned lines correspond to 1D rules, diagonal lines correspond to 2D rules.

Learning trials On each learning trial a stimulus was randomly generated (with feature values drawn from a uniform
distribution over their respective ranges) and displayed onscreen. The participant could then simultaneously vary the
features by moving the mouse, with vertical mouse movement
controlling one feature dimension and horizontal movement
controlling the second feature dimension. The mapping between mouse directions and feature dimensions was randomized for each participant. After adjusting the feature values
as desired, the participant pressed the spacebar to query the
selected stimulus, after which the category label (A or B) was
displayed until the participant pressed a button to complete
the trial.

Conversely, people may be more likely to generate 2D hypotheses when the two feature values are easily compared or
combined, leading to faster learning of 2D target rules. In
both cases, a mismatch between the feature representation
and the form of the target rule (e.g., highly separable dimensions when learning a 2D rule) should lead to a longer internal
search process and slower learning.
The task involved classifying shapes defined by two continuous feature dimensions into two categories, A and B (Figure 1). Each participant was assigned to learn either a 1D or
2D rule involving one of two types of stimuli, dials or rectangles. Dials were composed of a circle that varied in radius and
a line segment that varied in orientation, whereas rectangles
were defined in terms of their height and width. Participants
learned to categorize stimuli through self-directed selection,
such that on each trial they chose a combination of features
and observed the true category label for that stimulus.
Previous studies involving dial stimuli have shown that the
two feature dimensions (radius and angle) are highly separable (Shepard, 1964), whereas rectangle stimuli are perceived
in an integral manner, with the dimensions of shape and size
more salient than width and height (Macmillan & Ornstein,
1998). Based on this perceptual distinction, participants in
the RECT conditions were expected to be more likely to generate 2D hypotheses that involved integrating both features,
and as a result, to learn 2D rules more effectively than when
stimuli are represented as dials.

Test trials In each test trial a single test item was displayed
at the center of the display. The participant categorized the
item by pressing A or B on the keyboard at their own pace. No
feedback was provided during test trials. At the conclusion of
each test block, participants were told the proportion of items
they classified correctly during that block.

Results
Classification accuracy Accuracy across blocks in shown
in Figure 2A. A 2 × 2 ANOVA on overall classification accuracy (averaged over blocks and rule variants) was performed
with stimulus (DIAL vs. RECT), rule (1D vs. 2D), and stimulus × rule interaction as factors. There was no main effect of
stimulus type (F(1, 108) = 2.4, p = .12), but there were significant effects of rule type (F(1, 108) = 22.6, p < .001) and

Table 1: Classification accuracy.

Participants and materials

Experiment 1

One-hundred twelve participants were recruited from the MPI
subject pool (66 female, 44 male, 3 no gender given; Mage =
25.1, SD = 5.2) and were paid 7A
C for participation in addition to a bonus based on their performance. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions: 1D-DIAL, 1DRECT, 2D-DIAL, or 2D-RECT. In addition, they were randomly assigned one of four possible variants of the target rule
corresponding to rotations of the rule in the stimulus space.
Test items corresponded to a grid of 256 stimuli that uni-

1D-DIAL
1D-RECT
2D-DIAL
2D-RECT
Experiment 2
1D-ABS
1D-REL
2D-ABS
2D-REL

445

M (SD)

Pairwise comparisons (Tukey HSD)
1D-RECT
2D-DIAL
2D-RECT

.94 (.04)
.81 (.08)
.71 (.09)
.88 (.09)

* .13 [.07, .19]

* .23 [.17, .29]
* .09 [.03, .15]

* .06 [.01, .12]
* .07 [.02, .13]
* .17 [.11, .23]

M (SD)

1D-REL

2D-ABS

2D-REL

.95 (.06)
.86 (.11)
.76 (.10)
.86 (.12)

* .08 [.02, .15)]

* .18 [.12, .25]
* .09 [.03, .17]

* .08 [.02, .16]
.00 [–.07, .06]
* .09 [.02, .16]

A

Experiment 1

B

Experiment 2

Figure 2: Classification accuracy in Experiment 1 (A) and Experiment 2 (B). Error bars indicate standard errors.
the stimulus × rule interaction (F(1, 108) = 94.4, p < .001).
Tukey HSD tests indicated significant pairwise differences in
accuracy between all four conditions (see Table 1).
Two-sample t-tests were used to assess effects of rule variants within each condition. For 1D rules, participants were
grouped according to the relevant feature dimension (i.e., radius, angle, width, or height). For 2D rules, participants were
grouped according to whether the target rule was positively
sloped or negatively sloped. In the 2D-RECT condition, positive and negative 2D rules are hereafter referred to as shape
and size rules, respectively. There was no difference between
rule variants in the 1D-RECT (t(11.6) = .34, p = .74) and
2D-DIAL (t(23.9) = .92, p = .36) conditions. Within the
1D-DIAL condition, participants learning a rule defined on
the angle dimension were more accurate than those learning
a rule on the radius dimension (t(19.5) = 4.2, p < .001). Finally, within the 2D-RECT condition, accuracy was higher
for participants learning a shape rule as compared to those
learning a size rule (t(13.1) = 6.9, p =< .001).

form of hypotheses generated in each condition. Bayesian logistic regression was used to estimate linear decision bounds
for each block of test responses, using the bayesglm function
within the arm R package. Four models were estimated for
each block: a 2D model with both features as predictors, two
1D models with a single feature as a predictor, and a baseline
(intercept-only) model. Decision boundaries were then classified according to the model with the lowest AIC (thirty-two
blocks, or 4%, were best-fit by the baseline model, indicating
that there were few cases in which a linear decision boundary
was not supported by participants’ responses). The proportion of 2D boundaries across blocks is shown in Figure 3A.
Logistic regression on the proportion of 2D rules revealed
significant effects of stimulus type (RECT: Wald z = 6.0, p <
.001), rule type (2D: z = 5.8, p < .001), and the stimulus
× rule interaction (z = −4.7, p < .001). As shown in Figure 3A, in the 1D-DIAL and 2D-RECT conditions, nearly all
participants respond with a rule of the correct form throughout the task. This included 2D-RECT participants learning a
size rule who responded with relatively low accuracy, indicating that the poor performance in that condition was not due
to a failure to consider 2D hypotheses. In contrast, in both

Modeling classification boundaries The goal of the second analysis was to relate classification performance to the

446

A

Experiment 1

B

Experiment 2

Figure 3: Proportion of best-fit decision boundaries classified as 2D. Within each condition, a separate line is shown for
participants learning each type of target rule.
the 1D-RECT and 2D-DIAL conditions, decision boundaries
were approximately equally divided between 1D and 2D hypotheses, suggesting that the manipulation of stimulus representation had the predicted effect on the kinds of hypotheses
that were generated during learning.

surprising given that the category boundary coincided with a
simple relational comparison of the two features (i.e., whether
the shape is taller than it is wide). The same general pattern
was reported by Ashby and Gott (1988, Exps. 1 and 2) using
similar stimuli (perpendicular line segments) under passive
training. They found that participants were close to optimal
performance when learning a positive, 2D classification rule
that required comparing the lengths of the two line segments.
When tasked with learning a 1D rule with the same stimuli,
participants still responded according to 2D rules that integrated the two features. The authors concluded that the ease
of comparing the two features led people to adopt 2D decision rules despite being able to separately attend to individual
features. The present results show that this interference generalizes to other types of stimuli, and, more surprisingly, has a
persistent effect under self-directed conditions despite learners’ control over the training experience. This effect is particularly striking in the 1D-RECT condition in which, even
on the last block of training, more than a third of participants
responded according to some form of 2D hypothesis.

Discussion
The results confirmed the hypothesis that the success of selfdirected learning depends on a match between the target rule
and salient features of the stimuli. In addition to replicating the difference in performance between 1D-DIAL and 2DDIAL accuracy observed by Markant and Gureckis (2014),
this gap in performance was reversed by changing the stimulus representation in the RECT conditions. The model-based
analysis of rule use indicates that poor performance in the
1D-RECT and 2D-DIAL conditions was due, at least in part,
to the generation of hypotheses of the wrong form.
In the 2D-RECT condition, performance diverged strongly
depending on the form of the target rule, with higher accuracy among participants learning the shape rule than the size
rule. However, rapid learning of the shape rule may be un-

447

ABS condition

REL condition

mixture applied to the soil (see Figure 4).

fertilizer
0 - 50 kg

25.2

kg

fertilizer
0 - 40 %

0.86

%

chemical
0 - 10 liters

6.12

liters

chemical
0 - 40 %

9.63

%

Test

Test items A set of 32 items were generated by tiling the
stimulus space at even intervals. Test sets were generated
by randomly perturbing the location of each coordinate by
a small amount (5% of the range on each dimension) while
ensuring a constant number of items from each category. The
order of test items and the order of the eight test blocks were
randomized for each participant.

Test

Figure 4: Example training trial displays in the ABS (left)
and REL (right) conditions in Experiment 2.

Procedure
The participants’ goal was to learn how different feature combinations affected whether a patch of farmland would experience a successful or failed crop. Aside from the cover story
and stimuli, the structure of the task was identical to that of
Experiment 1. Participants completed 8 blocks, alternating
between 16 learning trials followed by 32 test trials.

Experiment 2
The goal of the second experiment was to evaluate the generalizability of the previous findings to an abstract domain
in which perceptual biases were minimized. The task was
designed to be structually equivalent to that of Experiment
1, while involving stimuli defined by abstract numerical features. As in Experiment 1, hypothesis generation was biased
by manipulating the ease with which the two feature values
could be integrated (see Figure 4). In the relative (REL)
condition, the two features had the same range and were described in the same units. The common scale was predicted
to cause participants to generate hypotheses based on integrating information about the two features. In the absolute
(ABS) condition, the features had different ranges and were
described in terms of different units. Like the DIAL condition in Exp. 1, the ABS condition was predicted to increase
the likelihood of generating 1D rules involving a single dimension. Moreover, there should be an interaction between
the stimulus representation and the target rule, such that SDL
is most effective when the feature description facilitates the
generation of the correct form of rule.

Learning trials On each learning trial an image of an
empty plot of land appeared above two input boxes corresponding to the features. Each input was labeled with
the name of the feature, the corresponding units (“kg” and
“liters” in the absolute condition; “%” in the relative condition), and the possible range of each feature (Figure 4). Both
features were initialized with values drawn from a uniform
distribution over the corresponding ranges. Participants could
then alter the value of either dimension by entering a new
number within the allowed range. They then clicked a button
to test the chosen combination of feature values. If the combination led to a successful crop, a new image appeared with
fruit on the plot of land and the category label “Success!”. If
the combination led to a crop failure, a new image without
fruit appeared along with the category label “Failure.”
Test trials Each test trial began with the presentation of the
image of an empty plot of land and a test item. Stimulus
values were displayed in the same manner as in learning trials but could not be altered by the participant. Participants
clicked on the outcome that they predicted to occur for the
displayed feature combination. At the end of each block they
were told their proportion of correct predictions.

Participants and materials
One-hundred twenty people were recruited from the MPI participant pool (54 male, 62 female, 4 no gender given; age:
M = 25.2, SD = 3.3) and were paid in the same manner as in
Experiment 1. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
four conditions: 1D-ABS, 1D-REL, 2D-ABS, or 2D-REL.
The goal of the task was to learn how the amount of two
substances (a Chemical and a Fertilizer) affected whether a
patch of virtual farmland would experience a successful (S)
or failed (F) crop. Stimuli were defined by two continuous
dimensions corresponding to the quantities of each substance.
Within each target rule condition (1D or 2D), participants
were assigned one of four possible variants of the target rule
corresponding to different rotations of the rule in the stimulus space. In addition, the target rule was offset such that the
classification boundary did not bisect the stimulus space.
In the ABS conditions, the two substances were defined in
terms of different units (kg or liters) and had different ranges
(one feature ranged from 0 to 50 while the second ranged
from 0 to 10). In the REL conditions, both dimensions had
the same range (0 to 40) and were labeled as percentages of a

Results
Classification accuracy Accuracy across blocks in shown
in Figure 2B. Two participants (one in the 1D-ABS condition and the other in the 2D-REL condition) were excluded
from further analysis because their overall accuracy was more
than three standard deviations below the mean of their condition. A 2 × 2 ANOVA on overall classification accuracy
(collapsed across rule variants) was performed with stimulus
(ABS vs. REL), rule (1D vs. 2D) and stimulus × rule interaction as factors. There was no main effect of stimulus type
(F = (1, 114) = .09, p = .76), but there was a significant main
effect of rule type (F(1, 114) = 25.5, p < .001) and a significant stimulus type × rule type interaction (F(1, 114) = 23.6,
p < .001). Tukey HSD tests indicated significant pairwise
differences in accuracy between conditions, with the excep-

448

tion of 1D-REL and 2D-REL conditions (see Table 1).
Two-sample t-tests were used to assess effects of rule variants on overall accuracy within each condition. Overall accuracy was higher for learning rules on the Fertilizer dimension
in the 1D-ABS condition (t(19.9) = 3.2, p < .01) but the differences within the remaining conditions were not significant.

lationships (Goldstone, Landy, & Son, 2010). It is important
to note, however, that a number of other hypothesis generation mechanisms have been proposed, including processes
based on memory retrieval (Dougherty, Thomas, & Lange,
2010) and local adjustment of existing hypotheses (Bramley,
Dayan, & Lagnado, 2015). An important goal of future work
is to understand how these generation processes interact in order to guide information search during self-directed learning.

Modeling classification boundaries The same method
from Experiment 1 was used to categorize participants’ decision boundaries as 1D or 2D. Logistic regression on the
proportion of 2D rules revealed significant effects of stimulus type (REL: Wald z = 5.0, p < .001), rule type (2D: z =
8.1, p < .001), and a stimulus × rule interaction (z = −3.6,
p < .001). The proportion of 2D boundaries are shown in
Figure 3B, separated by target rule. The manipulation of feature representation had the predicted effect on the generation
of 2D rules, albeit to a lesser extent than seen in Experiment
1. In the 1D-ABS condition the proportion of 2D rules was
very low, whereas in the 2D-REL condition the proportion of
2D rules consistent with the target is high. Finally, in the 1DREL and 2D-ABS conditions, there was a higher proportion
of decision boundaries that were of a different form than the
target rule.1

Acknowledgements
The author thanks Katja Munz, Annika Walinski, Jann Wascher,
Chantal Wysocki, and Andrii Zakharov for help in translating the
experiment and data collection.

References
Ashby, F., & Gott, R. (1988). Decision rules in the perception and
categorization of multidimensional stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
14(1), 33–53.
Ashby, F., Paul, E., & Maddox, W. (2011). COVIS. In E. M. Pothos
& A. J. Willis (Eds.), Formal approaches in categorization
(pp. 65–87). Cambridge University Press.
Bramley, N. R., Dayan, P., & Lagnado, D. A. (2015). Staying afloat
on neurath’s boat–heuristics for sequential causal learning. In
Proceedings of the 36th annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 262–267).
Dougherty, M., Thomas, R., & Lange, N. (2010). Toward an integrative theory of hypothesis generation, probability judgment, and hypothesis testing. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 52, 299–342.
Goldstone, R., Landy, D., & Son, J. (2010). The education of perception. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(2), 265–284.
Gureckis, T. M., & Markant, D. B. (2012). Self-directed learning: A cognitive and computational perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(5), 464-481. doi:
10.1177/1745691612454304
Gureckis, T. M., Martin, J., McDonnell, J. V., Rich, A. S., Markant,
D., Coenen, A., . . . Chan, P. (2015). psiTurk: An opensource framework for conducting replicable behavioral experiments online. Behavior Research Methods, 1–14. doi:
10.3758/s13428-015-0642-8
Johnson, T., & Krems, J. (2001). Use of current explanations in
multicausal abductive reasoning. Cognitive Science, 25(6),
903–939.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientific
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1–48.
Macmillan, N. A., & Ornstein, A. S. (1998). The mean-integral
representation of rectangles. Perception & Psychophysics,
60(2), 250–262.
Markant, D., & Gureckis, T. M. (2014). Is it better to select or to
receive? Learning via active and passive hypothesis testing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(1), 94–
122. doi: 10.1037/a0032108
Mayer, R. (2004). Should there be a three-strikes rule against pure
discovery learning? American Psychologist, 59(1), 14–19.
Shepard, R. (1964). Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1(1), 54–87.
Trabasso, T., Bower, G., & Gelman, R. (1968). Attention in learning: Theory and research. Wiley.
Tweney, R., Doherty, M., Worner, W., Pliske, D., Mynatt, C., Gross,
K., & Arkkelin, D. (1980). Strategies of rule discovery in an
inference task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 109–123.
Wallach, L. (1962). The complexity of concept-attainment. The
American Journal of Psychology, 75(2), 277–283.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations (Vol. 3). Sage.

Summary
The present findings show that, in both perceptual and abstract domains, the efficacy of SDL is limited by biases in
the hypothesis generation process. In addition to replicating the gap in performance between 1D and 2D rules found
by Markant and Gureckis (2014) in both domains, this gap
was eliminated through simple manipulations of the stimuli.
When the stimulus representation facilitated the generation of
hypotheses consistent with the true rule, self-directed learners were more likely to classify items using a hypothesis of
the same form. When hypothesis generation was inconsistent
with the target rule, self-directed learners were less successful at learning the category structure despite their ability to
control the selection of training data. This impairment is perhaps most striking in the 1D-RECT and 1D-REL conditions,
in which the learning of simple 1D rules suffered because
participants were more likely to respond according to 2D hypotheses.
This study was motivated by one account of the hypothesis
generation process, involving the sampling of salient cues or
relations from the environment to form hypotheses about an
underlying structure or concept (Trabasso et al., 1968; Wallach, 1962). The present findings suggest that the success of
SDL depends on the way that hypothesis generation is shaped
by the environment, including how materials guide attention
and set the stage for the perception of relevant features or re1 The same analysis was performed on participants’ selections
during training (rather than test responses) to evaluate whether biased information sampling contributed to these results. However,
the proportion of best-fit 2D boundaries indicated that participants’
selections strongly supported the correct form of rule in both Exp. 1
(1D-DIAL: .08; 1D-RECT: .02; 2D-DIAL: .93; 2D-RECT: .91) and
Exp. 2 (1D-ABS: .06; 1D-REL: .08; 2D-ABS: .86; 2D-REL: .88).

449

