The effect of ”mood”: Group-based collaborative problem solving by taking
different perspectives
Yugo Hayashi (y-hayashi@acm.org)
College of Comprehensive Psychology, Ritsumeikan University,
2-150 Iwakura-cho, Ibaraki, Osaka, 567-8570, Japan

A single member with a different perspective vs.
multiple members

Abstract
Collaborative problem solving based on different perspectives
is an effective strategy for constructing new knowledge and
discoveries. It remains unclear what kind of interaction process underlies development of an abstract or integrated perspective upon experiencing conflict with different perspectives
in a group. The present study investigates two factors in an
experimental setting: (1) groups with a single opposing perspective (maverick) would hold an advantage over groups and
(2) groups with positive moods would hold an advantage over
groups with negativity. We investigate the factors influencing
perspective taking in problem-solving groups using conversational agents. Results showed that (1) a single different perspective in the group can be accepted for perspective taking
compared to several members with an opposing perspective,
and (2) positive mood generated by group members facilitating perspective taking compared to negative mood.

Studies in group problem solving have shown that conflict
may occur at several levels, such as task conflict, interpersonal conflict, and process conflicts (de Wit, Greer, & Jehn,
2011). In collaborative problem-solving settings where a
member encounters members with a different perspective, it
is likely s/he will experience conflict (Hayashi et al., 2006).
Studies from social psychology have shown that negative
moods brought on by conflicts can emerge when encountering members with different perspectives (De Dreu & Weingart, 2003). Group members become dissatisfied when they
interpret challenges to their viewpoints by other group members as a negative assessment of their own abilities and competencies (Swann, Polzer, Seyle, & Ko, 2004). Research in
social psychology has also discovered that a ”maverick” can
encourage other group members to contemplate different perspectives (Elliston, Keenan, Lockhart, & Van Schaick, 1985;
Near & Miceli, 1987). A maverick provides dissent and opposing views about the organization and the social system.
S/he can be seen as a person who may cause trouble and confusion, or can be interpreted as a person that can bring innovative ideas as a reformer in the group. Research on group dynamics shows that such mavericks can influence other group
members to reconsider different views. Members with little power and anti-normative positions can influence the majority of group members, a phenomenon called ”minority influence” (Moscovici, Lage, & Naffrechoux, 1969; Nemeth,
Brown, & Rogers, 2001). This study shows that a different
perspective can be effective when it is presented in a small
quantity. Such a minor opposing perspective can provide important information but with less conflict, thereby producing
a better outcome. Hayashi (2012) has shown that the use of a
maverick can play an important role in perspective taking in
a group problem-solving task. The study investigated these
cognitive processes through long-term verbal protocol analyses by controlling the number of partners and their utterances
in laboratory-based experiments. This previous study found
that a mere single other perspective will provide less conflict
and better accessibility to the different source of information.
However, the cognitive mechanisms involved when individuals pay attention to these mavericks and use their perspectives remains unclear. Further, in the previous study, a significant difference was not found at several levels of perspectivetaking performance between members with the same number
of different perspectives. By conducting a follow-up experiment, we may be able to clarify our hypothesis that maver-

Keywords: Collaborative problem solving; minority influence; emotion and cognition; perspective taking; conversational agents.

Introduction
Studies in collaborative problem solving have found that the
use of meta-cognition can be promoted by externalizing the
problem from different perspectives (Chi, Leeuw, Chiu, &
Lavancher, 1994; Lombrozo, 2006; Miyake, 1986) and asking reflective questions (Okada & Simon, 1997). Dunbar
(1995) investigated the use of inductive reasoning in a scientific research group and developed the concept of distributed
reasoning, in which group members achieve their goals by
taking charge of different types of inferences. New perspectives and knowledge can be discovered or generated by integrating different views and abstraction (Schwartz, 1995). The
present study focuses on collaborative problem solving based
on different perspectives in groups where individuals can discover a new solution by combining others’ knowledge and
perspectives. Past studies have shown that in such situations,
conflicts occur upon emergence of a different perspective in
the group, making problem solving difficult (Hayashi, Miwa,
& Morita, 2006). It is important to understand how individuals adopt the different perspective and generate a higher abstract understanding to solve the problem. However, it remains unclear the cognitive process underlying development
of and motivation towards this abstraction of different perspectives in collaborative problem solving. Accordingly, this
study focuses on the cognitive and affective factors, such as
the presence of a single different perspective in the group and
the affective mood, that are critical in perspective taking and
integration of perspectives.

818

icks, who produce less conflict and are accessible, bring constructive thoughts toward development of abstract perspectives(integration). Here, we conduct a new experiment by focusing on the effect of the maverick along with new aspects
that relate with cooperative thinking, such as group mood.

examine the strength of this influence on groups with several
members. Second, based on the implication above, we examine whether groups with positive feelings provide an opportunity for the whole group to think more flexibly and motivate
others to more frequently consider differing perspectives. Our
goal is to investigate the next two points:

The effect of mood in the group
In collaborative problem solving, others with different perspectives are liable to bring conflict, thereby producing negative impressions among others. Small group research has
shown that negative mood in the group suppresses productive
interaction. On the other hand, despite conflict during interaction, if members retain a positive mood within the group,
it may function to facilitate active behaviors, such as directing more attention towards different perspectives and motivating consideration of others’ perspectives. Therefore, even
if one experiences conflict with others with different perspectives, a positive mood may aid in considering an alternative
perspective. Previous studies investigating positive effects
on task performance have found that partners’ positive utterances facilitate more task engagement (Martenes, Bradley, &
Eckert, 1997) and flexible thinking (Bless, 2000). Pleasant
feelings towards others may also facilitate perspective taking
(Weinstein, Hodgins, & Ryan, 2010). It can be predicted that
even though members encounter others with opposing views,
if members are motivated to interact in a way that promotes
greater cooperative behavior, they may try to integrate different perspectives and abstraction. Such motivational effects
that are generated during interaction may play an important
role and could be a strong factor, over and above the effects
of interacting with a member with a mere different perspective.

1. Investigate the effect of a maverick(5:1) in comparison
with members with same number(3:3) of perspectives.
2. Investigate how emotional states shared by the members affect the perspective-taking process and impressions among
others.
We predict that a mere member with a different perspective will produce conflict compared to groups with several
members, and that it will be easier to access the dissenting
information. We also focus on the motivational factors based
on previous studies showing that affective mood may play a
role in facilitating cooperative behavior. Our hypotheses are
as follows.
H1: A mere different perspective in the group will facilitate
perspective taking compared to several members with an
opposing perspective.
H2: Positive mood generated by group members will motivate higher cooperative states, thereby facilitating perspective taking compared to negative mood.

Method
The rule discovery task
The current study uses an experimental paradigm designed
by Hayashi et al. (2006). In this paradigm, two participants
engage in a rule discovery task, and each of them engages
in the task with a different perspective. While solving the
task, each of the participants confronts conflict about a different perspective proposed by the other member and has to develop an abstract perspective of the self and other to discover
the rule. In this task, the participants’ goals were to count
a series of objects presented on a computer display and discover its sequential rule. However, as will be explained in the
following section, these other ”members” were manipulated
by the conversational agent to control their behavior. Materials for the objects were several sets of stimuli with white
and black unit squares randomly arranged on a 6 × 6 grid
(colored black or white; see Figure 2). In each set, a pattern
consisting of combined square blocks was shown against either a black or white background. Using the Gestalt effect
from perception psychology, the background color was controlled to change in the problem-solver’s perspective (Koffka,
1935).
Each set consisted of several ”objects”(or patterns) in black
or white, each of which consisted of a single block or multiple blocks. As shown in Figure 2, one of the paired objects
has a total of 10 ”components” (4 black and 6 white). When
a participant focuses on the white components inside a black

Figure 1: Research framework
Given the above, this study investigates two factors: (1)
groups with a single opposing perspective (maverick) and (2)
groups with a positive mood. We investigated factors influencing perspective taking in problem-solving groups.

Study goals
The first goal of the present study is to discover the power
of groups with a single different perspective (maverick) and

819

8

Partner A
(Six white objects)

(Six white objects)

10

Trial 9

1 Partner B
(Four black objects)

7
6

2
5

Participants Screen

9

trolled the trials for differentiation in responses so that participants would report different numbers. Through this manipulation, participants experience conflict. To discover the rule
for this task, the participant has to look at the different colored
objects and integrate the other two members’ perspectives.

4

3

White
(Par cipant &
PartnerA)

3

4

5

Black
(Partners B & C)

3

4

5

Sum of
Black &
white

6

8

10

Partner C

6 ...
6

...

12 ...

... 2

4

6

5

4

4

4

7

... 6

8

10

12

...

Conﬂict stage

(Four black objects)

Figure 3: Sequence of objects used in Hayashi (2013).
Figure 2: Experimental stimuli used in the study(from
Hayashi (2013)).

Experiment design
Controlled factors
The experiment has a 2 × 2 between-subjects factorial design. The two factors were number of different perspective
(single(5:1) vs. multiple(3:3)) and the mood(positive vs. negative). The first factor was controlled by arranging the number of partners(agents) looking at the different perspective.
The second factor was controlled by manipulating partners’
(agents’) conversations. In the positive mood condition, the
partner was manipulated to include messages that provides
positive phrases such as, ”I like this group” and ”It is interesting to see others with different perspectives.” On the
other hand, in the negative mood condition, the conversational agents were manipulated so that they would include
negative phrases such as ”I don’t like this group” and ”It is
quite frustrating to work with others with different perspectives.”

background, the white components become the figure, and the
six components pop out. Conversely, when a participant is
focusing on black components inside a white background, it
becomes the figure. Participants, collaborating through computer terminals, were separated so that neither could see the
partner’s display. They collaboratively worked on the task
through computer terminals connected via a local network.
All members exchanged their opinions about the number of
objects and the sequence of the target rule by text-based chat
messages. Participants were informed that they would conduct the task with real humans inside the room and were told
not to chat about anything else related to the task. As shown
in Figure 2, six members(including the conversational agents)
saw the objects with either a black background (white perspective) or a white background (black perspective). Three
members saw a black and the other three saw a white background, and each member counted the number objects that
appeared as a figure. For each trial/object, a square outer box
was shown on the display for 1 second, which was followed
by a stimulus picture presented inside the box frame. Participants were required to send one message per trial to the other
members. Participants were told that they had to count the
number of objects inside this box frame. Based on the experimental settings of Hayashi (2012, 2013), the number of white
and black components was controlled so the total number of
components presented to the participants varied between 6
and 12. The sequential pattern (target rule) of the sums of
black components and white components was repeatedly presented during each trial (i.e. 6, 8, 10, 12 or 6, 8, 10, 12; see
Figure 3). In the initial stage of the task, the local black/white
numbers were controlled to be the same. Experiments from
a previous study showed that participants are fixated to the
figure perspective, and participants try to search for the target
rule based on their perspective (Hayashi et al., 2006; Hayashi
& Miwa, 2009; Hayashi, 2012, 2013). On trial 9, we con-

Participants
Undergraduates in a psychology class participated in the experiment. All participants were randomly assigned to each
condition and participants who recognized their partner’s
(agent’s) purpose and those who did not complete the task or
refused to continue the task were excluded from analysis. After this exclusion, the following number of participants were
arranged to each condition: 5:1/positive: 40, 5:1/negative:
50, 3:3/positive:50, and 3:3/negative:37.

Procedure
Conversational agents
A text-based chat communication platform using one server
and clients, including one chat engine and five conversational
agents(Figure 4), was utilized. The system developed by
Hayashi (2012, 2013) was programmed in Java. On the server
side, a broadcast mechanism was used to distribute all the
messages simultaneously. When messages were sent to the
server, they were re-distributed to all clients and/or agents.

820



The conversational computer agents were designed by a
typical rule-based system. Based on pre-defined rules, the
system can respond to sentences that were inputted by the
participants (Figure 4).

Agent 1 (Partner A)

< Rules >
Trials < 8
(agent 1, 2)
− > numbers(white ob jects)
(agent 3, 4, 5)
− > numbers(black ob jects)
Trail > 8
(agent 1, 2)
IF : ”numbers(any)” − > numbers(white)
ELSE IF : ”colors” − > colors(white)
ELSE IF : ”rules” − > rules
ELSE − > numbers(white)
(agent 3, 4, 5)
IF : ”numbers(any)” − > numbers(black)
ELSE IF : ”colors” − > colors(black)
ELSE IF : ”rules” − > rules
ELSE − > numbers(black)

Agent 2 (Partner B)

Server

Client(Parcipant)





For example, if a sentence by the participant inputs ”I think
this is four objects,” indicating four as black objects, agent 1
will respond based on the number of objects such as ”Well, I
think this is four, too.” If the inputs such as ”Is it the black objects you are counting ?”, agent 1 will respond ”I count white
objects.” As noted in the previous section, the agents in the
positive mood conditions responded with additional positive
phrases, and negative phrases were used in the negative mood
condition.

Agent 3 (Partner C)

Figure 4: Communication platform(from Hayashi (2013)).

Dependent variables
Two variables were used to investigate the effects of the two
factors. The first index is the evaluation towards their partners(agents) to evaluate the effectiveness of the manipulation of the agents producing positive/negative mood. It assessed the degree of pleasantness and the importance of developing a solution. They were asked to rate the following
statement on a 5-point scale, ranging from 1 (extremely unpleasant/inefficient) to 5 (extremely pleasant/efficient): ”The
degree of pleasantness felt while working with this member.”
The second index asked for the description of the target rule
on an answer sheet. If their answers were in some way related to integrating the number of black or white components
of the objects, they were judged as ’integrated’ (e.g., The sum
of black and white repeat by 6, 8, 10, and 12). The difference
in the number of the black and white components is between
zero and two.) The ratio of participants in each condition was
collected.

All three agents were implemented by the rule shown below. All agents autonomously responded to each other’s text
messages as independent interlocutors, and had different expressions. The conversation agent extracts keywords from
the sentences that were distributed by the participant. The
most frequent keywords used during this task are related to
the (1) number of objects, (2) colors of objects, and (3) rules
about the sequence. The agent contains a temporary working memory storage to represent the current status of the input messages from the (1) keywords of the participant, (2)
keywords from the agents, and (3) objects presented on the
screen. A rule base, in an ”if-then” format, defined all responses from the agents. When the agent detects keywords of
(a) numbers, (b) colors, and (c) the hypothesis, working memory is updated. Then, a pattern-matching strategy is used for
binding the rules. In the present study, the agents were programmed to respond based on the numbers or colors of the
objects that were set for its perspective (Agents 1 and 2 responded based on the black objects, which was the same as
the participant. Agents 3, 4, and 5responded based on white
objects, which was different from the participant). The following shows a simple example of some of the basic rules
utilized in the study:

Results
Evaluation of others
Figure 5 indicates the results of the evaluation. A 2 × 2 × 5
mixed-effects ANOVA was conducted on the average scores
of evaluation of the partner, with perspective (5:1 vs. 3:3)
and emotion (positive vs. negative) as between-subject factors and evaluation (partner 1 vs. 2 vs. 3 vs. 4 vs. 5) as a

821

within-subject factor. The second-order interaction was not
significant (F(4, 680) = 2.06, p = .036). There was significant interaction between perspective and evaluation (F(4,
680) = 2.92, p < .05). Consequently, an analysis of the simple main effect was conducted on each evaluation. Focusing
on the affective state, the rating score towards partners 1, 2,
3, 4, and 5 in the positive condition was significantly higher
than it was in the negative conditions(F(1, 850) = 42.65, p <
.001; F(1, 850) = 18.40, p < .001; F(1, 850) = 14.86, p <
.001; F(1, 850) = 24.90, p < .001; and F(1, 850) = 18.73, p
< .001, respectively).

1

posi ve

# of par!cipants focusing on
diﬀerent perspec!ve

0.9

nega ve

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
5:1

3:3

Degree of pleasentness towards
partner

5
4.5

posi ve 5:1

posi ve 3:3

nega ve 5:1

nega ve 3:3

Figure 6: Results on perspective-taking performance.

4
3.5
3

lem solving. This result indicates that both H1 and H2 were
supported.

2.5
2

Discussion and Conclusion

1.5
1
Partner1

Partner2

Partner3

Partner4

The present study investigated the two factors that influence perspective integration in a group-based collaborative
problem-solving task. The results from the questionnaire
show that participants were influenced by the emotional state
that was constructed in the group. That is, participants engaging in a group with positive members felt more pleasant
to partners compared to those with negative members. This
was consistent even if the number of members with different perspectives increased in the group. Interestingly, even
when participants received the same amount of information
with the same rule base, with the only difference being positive/negative phrases, the impressions towards others changed
drastically. From the point of system development for using conversational agents as experimental tools, it shows new
implications that mood can be controlled when using multiple agents. This provides advanced implications from the
work by Hayashi (2012, 2013). For the main results of the
study, performance results show that both factors were effective. Participants performed better when they (1) encountered
members with different perspectives less in the group(5:1)
compared to those with several members, and (2) engaging
in a group with positive members tended to integrate different perspectives as compared to those with negative mood.
For (1), this provides stronger evidence compared to Hayashi
(2012), where there was no clear difference between the two
conditions(5:1 vs. 3:3) in terms of problem-solving performance. This is interesting in the sense that participants have
more opportunity to interact with members with the different
perspective in the 3:3 condition as compared to those with a
single member in the 5:1 condition, but integration is better
in the latter. A phenomenon found by attending to a fraction
of the available information is the discovery of ”anomalies,”
which are crucial for developing and generating new theories
under stalemated conditions (Chinn & Brewer, 1993). The
present findings could be interpreted in that individuals could

Partner5

Figure 5: Results of the evaluation of others.
These results show that only the emotional mood factor influenced evaluation of group members. This indicates that the
manipulation of collaborative members’ positive mood produced a strong effect on making the participants feel pleasant towards their partners. Next, we examine how the two
factors affected problem-solving performance and determine
whether the two hypotheses are confirmed.

Performance
Figure 6 describes the problem-solving performance. The
vertical axis represents the ratio of participants who succeeded in integrating the perspective on their final answers,
and the horizontal axis represents each experimental condition. Our interest is to investigate how the two factors influence performance. Therefore, we conducted an ANOVA
using the χ2 distribution based on the arcsine transformation
method. This method enables detecting both the main effects
and interaction of the two experimental factors. The analysis was performed by a 2 × 2 ANOVA with the perspective (5:1 condition vs. 3:3 condition) and emotion (positive
condition vs. negative condition) factors as between-subjects
variables. There was a main effect of both perspective and
emotion (χ2 (1) = 7.65, p < .001; χ2 (1) = 6.77, p < .001).
The performance in the experience condition was better than
was that in the no experience condition, and the performance
in the conversation condition was also better than was that
in the chat condition. In addition, there was no interaction
between the two factors (χ2 (1) = 0.04, p = .85).
The main effects of the two factors indicate that the single
perspective and positive mood contribute to successful prob-

822

have considered the potential of a maverick functioning as an
anomaly in problem solving. Either way, it can be pointed
out that the mere single individual with a different perspective provides less conflict and motivates others to consider
it as a potential, and that this can be related with emotional
states. For the results of (2), this indicates that under situations where members meet with conflicting perspectives,
the positive mood created by group members facilitates active behaviors and motivates consideration of their perspectives. Such results are consistent with previous work in group
studies showing the effects of group emotion (Martenes et al.,
1997; Bless, 2000; Weinstein et al., 2010). The current results
add new insight in terms of the effect of affect over conflictive
situations demonstrated in this study. This result shows how
the power of social influence plays an important role in cognitive activities and thus could influence performance. Further,
taken together with the results of the mere single member’s
effect, it is possible that two factors can produce a synergetic
effect. That is, if problem-solvers perceive the mere individual, it may produce positive mood, which could then facilitate better performance. Focusing on this point, further analysis could be conducted on verbal inputs and processes. Such
attempts could provide implications on how the emotion in
groups moderates the problem-solving process and its role in
social cognition.

Hayashi, Y. (2012). The effect of ”maverick”:a study of group
dynamics on breakthrough in collaborative problem solving. In Proceedings of the 34th annual conference of the
cognitive science society(cogsci2012) (p. 444-449).
Hayashi, Y. (2013). The effect of ”trust dynamics”: Perspective taking during collaborative problem solving. In
Proceedings of the 35th annual conference of the cognitive
science society(cogsci2013) (p. 2500-2505).
Hayashi, Y., & Miwa, K. (2009). Prior experience and communication media in establishing common ground during
collaboration. In Proceedings of the 31th annual conference of the cognitive science society(cogsci2009) (p. 526531).
Hayashi, Y., Miwa, K., & Morita, J. (2006). A laboratory
study on distributed problem solving by taking different
perspectives. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference
of the cognitive science society(cogsci2006) (p. 333-338).
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of gestalt psychology. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of explanations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(10), 1454-1463.
Martenes, B. K., Bradley, T. A., & Eckert, T. L. (1997). Effects of reinforcement history and instructions on the persistence of student engagement. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 30(3), 569-572.
Miyake, N. (1986). Constructive interaction and the interactive process of understanding. Cognitive Science, 10(2),
151-177.
Moscovici, S., Lage, E., & Naffrechoux, M. (1969). Influence
of a consistent minority on the responses of a majority in a
color perception task. Sociometry, 32(4), 365-380.
Near, J. P., & Miceli, M. P. (1987). Whistle-blowers in organizations: Dissidents or reformers? Reserch in Organizational Behavior, 9(4), 321-368.
Nemeth, C., Brown, K., & Rogers, J. (2001). Devil’s advocate versus authentic dissent: stimulating quatity and quality. European Journal of Social Psychology, 31(6), 707720.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a
scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 109-146.
Schwartz, L. D. (1995). The emergence of abstract representation in dyad problem solving. Journal of the Learning
Science, 4, 321-354.
Swann, J., W. B., Polzer, J. T., Seyle, D. C., & Ko, S. J.
(2004). Finding value in diversity: Verification of personal
and social self-views in diverse groups. Academy of Management Review, 29(1), 9-27.
Weinstein, N., Hodgins, H. S., & Ryan, R. M. (2010). Autonomy and control in dyads: Effects on interaction quality
and joint creative performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(1), 1603-1617.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported (in part) by The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan
(MEXTGrant), Grant No. 16K00219.

References
Bless, H. (2000). The interplay of affect and cognition: The
mediating role of general knowledge structures. (J. P. Forgas, Ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chi, M., Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & Lavancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive
Science, 18(3), 439-477.
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1993). The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition: A theoretical framework and implications for science instruction. Review of
Educational Research, 63(1), 1-49.
De Dreu, C. K., & Weingart, L. R. (2003). Task versus relationship conflict, team effectiveness, and team member
satisfaction: A metaanalysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(4), 741-749.
de Wit, F. R. C., Greer, L. L., & Jehn, K. A. (2011). The
paradox of intragroup conflict: a meta-analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 97(2), 360-390.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In J. R. Sternberg &
E. J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (p. 365-395).
MIT Press.
Elliston, F., Keenan, J., Lockhart, P., & Van Schaick, J. (Eds.).
(1985). Whistleblowing research: Methodological and
moral issues. New York: Praeger.

823

