The Effects of Discourse Cues on Garden-path Processing
Ana Besserman, Elsi Kaiser {pianibes, emkaiser} @usc.edu
Department of Linguistics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089
Abstract

hearers reach the verb “barked”, they must readjust to this
new piece of information – the second verb – by (i) reanalyzing “the dog” as the subject of the second clause (i.e.,
the dog barked loudly) and (ii) re-analyzing the verb
“washed” as part of a reflexive structure (While the boy
washed (himself), the dog barked loudly). The initial
misparse of the noun ‘the dog’ occurs because when
comprehenders encounter a noun phrase that can be
processed as a direct object of the preceding verb, they have
a preference for parsing it as such instead of treating it as the
subject of a new clause. That is, if possible, hearers prefer to
use available input to continue clauses they are currently
processing rather than beginning a new clause. This parsing
strategy has been termed “late closure” (Frazier & Rayner
1982). Although there are cues that can help disambiguate the
syntactic role of the temporarily ambiguous noun phrase –
such as prosody in spoken language or a comma in the written
modality (While the boy washed, the dog barked loudly, e.g.,
Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999; Christianson, Hollingworth,
Halliwell, & Ferreira, 2001) – extensive research has shown
that in the absence of these cues the human parser has a strong
bias towards late closure in these kinds of contexts, i.e.,
towards treating the ambiguous noun as the object of the
verb.
Over the last couple of decades studies have also shown
that the initial misparse (e.g. The boy washed the dog) has
persistent effects that linger even after the sentence has been
disambiguated (Christianson et al., 2001; Patson, Darowski,
Moon, & Ferreira, 2009; Slattery, Sturt, Christianson,
Yoshida, & Ferreira, 2013). Data from comprehension
questions shows that, even after processing the whole
sentence, participants often provide incorrect responses that
are compatible with the first (and incorrect) analysis. For
example, after reading the sentence “While the boy washed
the dog that was white and furry barked loudly”, participants
were asked “Did the boy wash the dog?” and over 65.6%
responded with ‘yes’ (Christianson et al., 2001), even though
the correct answer is ‘no.’
These results have been taken to show that the
interpretation from the initial parse (i.e. While the boy washed
the dog…) still lingered after reanalysis. Similar results have
been seen in various types of tasks, such as paraphrasing
(Patson et al., 2009) as well as with different verb types: Both
(i) verbs like ‘wash’ which are temporarily ambiguous
between a transitive interpretation (The boy washed the dog)
and a reflexive interpretation (The boy washed (himself)) and
(ii) verbs like ‘hunt’ which can optionally have an
unmentioned/unspecified object (The man hunted the deer vs.
The man hunted) can seemingly result in lingering
misinterpretations (e.g. Christianson et al., 2001).

We report a self-paced reading study that investigated gardenpath sentences like While the boy washed {a/the} dog barked
loudly and While the man hunted {a/the} deer ran into the
woods. In such sentences, the critical noun phrase (dog, deer)
tends to be misparsed as an object of the preceding verb, and
has to be re-analyzed as a subject of the following clause when
the disambiguating verb (e.g. barked, ran) is encountered. To
better understand how discourse level information guides realtime processing, we build on earlier corpus work in linguistics
which found a relationship between syntactic function and
information status: Entities in subject position tend to be
already-mentioned (old/given) information and definite, while
entities in object position are typically new information and
indefinite. We investigated whether the information status of
the ambiguous noun influences the extent of processing
difficulty, and whether this effect also depends on the argument
structure of the first verb. Results from self-paced reading
showed that information status matters when processing the
ambiguous NP after optionally transitive verbs (e.g. hunt) but
not after reflexive absolute verbs (e.g. wash). These results
suggest that access to discourse-level representations during reanalysis of the noun phrase is modulated by verb argument
structure.
Keywords: garden-path, information status, definiteness,
givenness, verb argument structure, sentence processing

Introduction
Research in sentence processing shows that parsing occurs
incrementally and is guided by both bottom-up and top-down
information. Indeed, interactive models of sentence
processing often assume a principle of immediacy, namely
“the idea that every source of information that constrains the
interpretation of an utterance (syntax, prosody, word-level
semantics, prior discourse, world knowledge, knowledge
about the speaker, gestures, etc.) can in principle do so
immediately” (Hagoort & Van Berkum, 2007:802). We
report a self-paced reading study that aims to shed light on
which sources of information constrain utterance
interpretation, with a focus on the interplay of discourse-level
information and syntactic information. Specifically, we use
garden-path sentences to test whether the information status
of nouns that are temporarily ambiguous between subject and
object influences how they are parsed, and if this is
modulated by verb argument structure.

Garden-Path sentences: Lingering misparses
Temporarily ambiguous sentences such as While the boy
washed the dog barked loudly have been found to cause
comprehension difficulties (e.g., Frazier & Rayner, 1982;
Ferreira & Henderson, 1991). That is because the noun phrase
“the dog” is often initially parsed as the object of the verb
“wash” (as in While the boy washed the dog). Yet, when

877

Verb Argument Structure

during reanalysis of garden-path sentences like While the boy
washed the dog barked or While the man hunted the deer ran
into the woods, comprehenders must not only re-analyze the
ambiguous noun phrase, they must also re-interpret1 the first
clause so that the verb does not have an overt object.
Crucially, we suggest that RAT verbs and OPT differ with
respect to how the covert (unpronounced) object is processed.
When RAT verbs (e.g. “wash”) have covert objects, the verb
is interpreted reflexively and its meaning is determined by the
syntactic structure of the clause: The object of “wash” is
whatever the subject of this verb is. For OPT verbs (e.g.
“hunt”), the verb has no specified object: the hearer doesn’t
know who/what is being hunted, unless they can find a
suitable reference in the discourse.
Given this difference between RAT and OPT verbs, we
hypothesize that (i) processing the patient/object of RAT
verbs operates on the syntactic and semantic levels and can
be largely independent of discourse representations, but (ii)
processing the patient/object of OPT verbs makes reference
to discourse representations and is sensitive to information
status.

One of the key issues that our experiment investigates is the
contribution that verbs make to real-time parsing – in
particular, how and whether differences in verbs’ argument
structure interact with discourse-level, information-structural
information in guiding the parsing of temporarily ambiguous
structures. Verbs have a pivotal role in sentence structure:
They are responsible for connecting syntactic representations
(through grammatical roles, such as subjects and direct
objects) to semantic representations (thematic roles, such as
agents and patients). Boland (1993:134) notes that “More
than any other word in a sentence, the matrix verb defines the
situation that sentence describes.” Indeed, prior research has
shown that verb-specific argument structure information is
used immediately during online processing (e.g., Trueswell,
Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993).
Verbs differ in how they can and/or must combine
syntactically with other words and phrases. Crucial for our
purposes is the observation that some verbs – such as “bathe”
and “hunt” – can appear either with an overt object that is
pronounced and visible in the surface structure (e.g. The man
hunted the deer. The boy washed himself.) or without an overt
object (e.g. The man hunted. The boy washed.). In this second
case, we refer to the object as covert, because it is not
pronounced but the existence of an object is still present in
the meaning of the verb. Indeed, the fact that some verbs
allow both overt and covert objects is what allows a gardenpath to emerge in sentences like While the boy washed the
dog barked, as discussed above.
Prior research on these kinds of garden-path sentences has
tested two different types of verbs: (i) Optionally Transitive
verbs (henceforth referred to as OPT, e.g. “hunt”) and (ii)
Reflexive Absolute Transitive verbs (RAT, e.g. “wash”).
While both verb types can cause garden-pathing, they differ
in fundamental ways in regards to their argument structure,
particularly when there is no overt object expressed in the
sentence. In such cases, RAT verbs are interpreted
reflexively: The interpretation of “The boy washed” is that he
washed himself. In this case, the object is known: It is
coreferential with the subject of the clause. In contrast, OPT
verbs without an overt object make reference to an
unspecified object. Thus, the interpretation of “The man
hunted” is that he must have hunted something that was left
out of the clause. This unspecified object could be interpreted
as an entity in prior or following discourse. Thus, in sentences
without overt objects, in the case of RAT verbs the referent
of the object is nevertheless known (because it is determined
by the syntactic property of reflexivity), but OPT verbs have
unspecified objects.
One of the goals of this work is to investigate the
consequences of these differences between RAT verbs and
OPT verbs for real-time sentence processing. In particular,

Information Status
Give our hypothesis that processing the covert object of OPT
verbs makes reference to discourse representations, in this
section we briefly review existing work on the question of
how discourse-level information guides sentence processing.
Earlier work has shown that there are many instances in
which the parser makes use of top-down information about
the discourse to guide processing (e.g. Kaiser & Trueswell,
2004; Boland, 2005; Delong, Urbach & Kutas, 2005).
One of the most important types of discourse-level
information has to do with information status, e.g., whether a
noun refers to an entity that is new information/being
mentioned for the first time, or an entity that has already been
mentioned in the preceding discourse (old/given
information). The garden-path ambiguity presented here
makes for an interesting testing ground of the availability of
discourse cues during parsing because the temporary
ambiguity is in the grammatical role domain: a noun phrase
that is first interpreted as a direct object must be re-assigned
to the role of subject. Crucially, studies have shown that there
is a strong relationship between syntactic function and
information status: Entities realized in subject position tend
to be already-mentioned (old/given) information and definite,
while entities realized in object position are more typically
new information (being mentioned for the first time) and
indefinite (Comrie, 1988; Prince, 1992). This is not a
surprising pattern: first, definiteness and givenness correlate
highly with one another, i.e., noun phrases that are definite
(e.g. the deer) have usually been already mentioned in the
discourse (discourse-old), whereas noun phrases that are
indefinite (e.g. a deer) are usually being introduced into the

1

There has been discussion regarding whether the first clause
remains incomplete or not, particularly due to lingering
misinterpretations. Slattery et al. (2013) argue hearers achieve
complete interpretations consistent with reanalysis of the garden-

path, and lingering misinterpretations are likely due not to
incomplete parsing but to incomplete erasure of the first erroneous
parsing. These distinctions are not central for the claims we are
making.

878

discourse for the first time (discourse-new).2 Secondly, there
is a widely recognized bias in English and other languages
for old information to precede new information sentenceinternally (e.g. Firbas, 1966; Halliday, 1967). Crucially,
English has a relatively fixed word order and a strong
preference for subjects to occur before objects (Prince, 1981).
Consequently, and following the old-before-new bias,
subjects are often old and definite, and objects often new and
indefinite.
Since syntactic function (subjecthood and objecthood, in
this case) correlates with information status (old+definite
information and new+indefinite information), one might
wonder whether the ease of re-analyzing a noun from object
to subject is sensitive to the noun’s information status.
Previous experimental work has found contrasting
evidence regarding how rapidly definiteness and givenness
information is accessed and utilized online. An ERP study by
Kirsten, Tiemann, Seibold, Hertrich, Beck, & Rolke (2014)
investigated whether participants reacted to unfelicitous uses
of definites and indefinite determiners in German (e.g., a
definite article introducing an entity that is not uniquely
identifiable and had not been previously mentioned) and
found immediate N400/P600 complex responses as
participants read the determiner. On the other hand, an ERP
study by Schlueter, Williams & Lau (2015) suggests that
hearers do not use information about definiteness online to
predict the upcoming noun based on previous mention in
English, even though there is a strong correlation between
definiteness and givenness of the noun. They only found later
effects of definiteness information during subsequent
integration processes. Thus, the question still remains as to
when and how these discourse cues are accessed and utilized
during parsing.

However, we predict the impact of information status will
be modulated by verb type. Given the differences between
RAT and OPT verbs, we hypothesize that (i) processing the
object of RAT verbs operates on the syntactic and semantic
levels and can be largely independent of discourse
representations, but (ii) processing the object of OPT verbs
makes reference to discourse representations and is sensitive
to information status. In other words, we expect OPT verbs
to show more sensitivity to the nouns’ information status.

Experiment
Methods
Participants Forty-eight college-aged
speakers participated for course credit.

English

native

Design & Stimuli We conducted a word-by-word self-paced
reading experiment using Linger3. There were 24 target
items, 12 with OPT verbs and 12 with RAT verbs. For
consistency, targets were adapted versions of the same items
used in previous studies (Christianson et al. 2001, Patson et
al. 2009). We used a 3x2x2 design where we manipulated (i)
the information status of the critical noun phrase, (ii) verb
type and (iii) whether or not the sentence was temporarily
ambiguous.
To manipulate givenness (whether the ambiguous NP has
been mentioned in prior discourse or not), we added a context
sentence that either introduced the critical entity (1b and 2b)
or didn’t introduce any entities (1a, 1c and 2a, 2c) before the
critical sentence.
Definiteness of the ambiguous NP was manipulated to
create an indefinite+new condition (1a and 2a), a definite+old
condition (1b and 2b), and a definite+new condition (1c and
2c). The definite+new condition is equivalent to prior gardenpath studies (Christianson et al. 2001, Patson 2009, Slattery

Aims of this work, predictions
Using garden-path sentences where the critical noun phrase
is temporarily ambiguous between an object
and a subject, we used self-paced reading
to investigate (i) whether the information
status of this ambiguous noun influences
the extent of processing difficulty, and (ii)
whether this is different for RAT verbs
and OPT verbs.
In light of the relationship between
subjecthood and definiteness and
givenness, we predict that re-analysis
from object to subject will be harder – as
shown by reading time slowdowns – for
nouns that are indefinite and new
information than for definite/given nouns.
This prediction is based on the corpus
finding that objects tend to be new
information and subjects to be given
information.

Figure 1. Example items

2

3

For a more in-depth analysis of definiteness and information
status, see Birner & Ward (1993).

879

D. Rohde, http://tedlab.mit.edu/~dr/Linger/

2013), which used definite NPs without prior mention.
(Indefinite+old was not tested, as it is infelicitous/unnatural.)
Lastly, ambiguity of the noun phrase was manipulated so
that every condition appeared either with a comma
(unambiguous) or without one (ambiguous, the true gardenpath). Our use of the comma for disambiguation follows
Christianson et al. (2001), Patson et al. (2009) and Slattery et
al. (2013). Fig. 1 shows examples of items in all conditions.
In addition to the 24 target items, there were 50 filler items.
After every target and filler item, participants saw a yes/no
question. For all the targets, the question probed whether the
initial misparse was still lingering in comprehenders’ minds.
For example, for “While the boy washed the dog that was
white and furry barked loudly”, participants were asked “Did
the boy wash the dog?”. If participants successfully reanalyze and ‘over-write’ the initial misparse, the correct
response to every target question is “no”. Questions about
fillers were designed to balance out the number of ‘yes’ and
‘no’ responses across the entire experiment.
In sum, we manipulated (i) information status of the
ambiguous NP type (Indefinite+New, Def+Old, Def+New),
(ii) verb type (RAT/OPT) and (iii) ambiguity (presence vs.
absence of a comma). The critical region was the
disambiguating verb (e.g. ran/barked) which immediately
followed the critical NP, and the four words after the
disambiguating verb (to detect spillover effects).

higher processing load, in particular at the disambiguation
point when re-analysis occurs. Planned pairwise comparisons
(using effects coding) of the three information status
conditions in RAT verb conditions show a significant
ambiguity slowdown at all five critical positions, starting
with the disambiguating verb (|t|>2). This is the expected
garden-path effect, which can be seen by comparing the solid
lines (ambiguous) to the dotted lines (unambiguous) in the
boxed region of Fig. 2: Ambiguous sentences, which allowed
readers to be garden-pathed, showed a relative slowdown in
reading times at and after the disambiguating verb (compared
to unambiguous sentences). This slowdown persists for
several words. However, we found no significant effects of
the critical noun’s information status.
Conditions with OPT verbs were analyzed in a parallel way
and reveal a more complex pattern. Again, there is a
significant ambiguity effect (|t|>2) at all five critical
positions: Ambiguous conditions have longer reading times
than unambiguous conditions (solid vs. dotted lines in Fig. 3).
In addition, there are significant effects involving the
information status manipulation on the second word of the
spillover region: In particular, conditions with indefinite
nouns (triangles in Fig.3) seem to show a bigger ambiguityrelated slowdown than conditions with definite nouns.
Specifically, at the second word in the spillover region,
comparisons of Indefinite+New with both Definite
conditions reveal a significant main effect of Ambiguity, a
significant main effect of Information Status, as well as a
significant interaction (|t|>2): Conditions with indefinite
nouns are slowed down by ambiguity more than conditions
with definite, previously mentioned nouns.

Data analysis
We analyzed reading times and question answer accuracy.
Reading times faster than 100ms or +/- 3 standard deviations
from the mean for any given position were excluded from
analysis.
This
affected 0.07% and
1.95% of the data,
respectively.
Reading
times
(continuous
data)
and answer accuracy
(categorical
data)
were analyzed with
mixed-effects
regression using R,
with random slopes
and intercepts for
subjects and items
when supported.

Results and
discussion
Self-paced
reading time data
We analyzed reading
times in order to see
which
conditions
resulted in relatively

880

In addition, at the first word in the spillover region, the
Definite+Old condition is read numerically faster than both
Indefinite+New and Definite+New conditions, although the
comparison did not reach significance.
Generally speaking, indefinite nouns seem to suffer a
bigger slowdown due to ambiguity than definite nouns – a
pattern which could also be rephrased as sentences with
definite nouns recovering faster from the garden-path. This
fits with our prediction that re-analysis from object to subject
will be harder for nouns that are indefinite and new
information than for definite/given nouns, which we derived
from the finding that definites are more frequent subjects than
indefinites (Prince, 1992).

Comprehension questions
In addition to reading time, we also analyzed response
accuracy to the yes/no comprehension questions for target
items (e.g. Did the man hunt the deer? Did the boy wash the
dog?). Following Christianson et al. (2001), we coded ‘no’ as
correct, as it signals that the initial misanalysis was
appropriately corrected/abandoned. Unlike reading times,
response accuracy does not provide a measure of how easy
(or hard) it is re-analyze the critical noun as a subject and is
best regarded as a measure of the extent to which the initial
Figure 4. Response accuracy: OPT verbs

noun-as-object misparse persists (or doesn’t) in participants’
final interpretation of the sentence.
In both the RAT and OPT conditions (Figures 4 and 5),
response accuracy is significantly higher with unambiguous
than ambiguous sentences (p’s<.001), as is to be expected.
Furthermore, with OPT verbs, accuracy is significantly
higher in the Indefinite+New condition than in the other two
conditions (p’s<.001). With RAT verbs, accuracy is close to
ceiling, especially in the unambiguous condition. Still,
accuracy in the Indefinite+New condition is significantly
higher than in the Definite+Old condition (p<.01) and
numerically higher than in Definite+New (p=.14).
Thus, with both verb types, nouns’ information status
influences response accuracy, i.e. whether people incorrectly
say that the ambiguous noun is the object of the critical verb.
(These effects cannot be attributed to garden-pathing; they
also appear in unambiguous conditions.) With OPT verbs,
why do definites result in more (incorrect) object
interpretations than indefinites? We suggest this is because
definites imply familiarity and are more likely to be
interpreted as coreferential with the covert object of the OPT
verb (the man hunted something). But indefinites suggest
newness and are consequently less likely to be interpreted as
referring to the covert object, causing higher accuracy.
The accuracy data for RAT verbs is harder to interpret due
to potential ceiling effects, but the general
pattern seems to follow a similar trend as
the OPT verbs, with higher accuracy in the
Indefinite+New condition. These findings
again suggest that a noun’s information
status matters. Although for RAT verbs, the
lack of an overt object should not give rise to
a search for a referent in the discourse (as
they are interpreted reflexively), the error
rate in the unambiguous condition suggests
that this does occur (similarly to other
unambiguous
RAT
conditions
in
Christianson et al. 2001).

General Discussion
We conducted a self-paced reading study
using garden-path sentences where the critical
noun phrase is temporarily ambiguous between
an object and a subject, in order to test
whether the information status of this
ambiguous noun influences the extent of
processing difficulty, and whether this effect
is modulated by verb argument structure.
As predicted, re-analysis from object to
subject was more difficult – as shown by
reading time slowdowns – for nouns that are
indefinite and new information than for
definite/given nouns. This pattern is a
reflection of earlier corpus findings showing
that objects tend to be new information and
subjects to be given information.

Figure 5. Response accuracy: RAT verbs

881

Also in line with our predictions, the influence of
information status was modulated by verb type: due to the
differences between reading times after RAT and OPT verbs,
we found that processing the object of RAT verbs operates
on the syntactic and semantic levels and can be largely
independent of discourse representations; on the other hand,
processing the object of OPT verbs makes reference to
discourse representations and thus is sensitive to information
status.
Theories of sentence processing must account for the
bottom-up and top-down sources of information utilized
during parsing. The differences found between the two verb
types (OPT and RATs) support the idea that the verbs’ lexical
and subcategorization information play a crucial role during
sentence processing, and modulate which sources of
information the processor utilizes in real time. More
specifically, verb differences guide access to different levels
of linguistic representation: in some instances the discourse
level is much more readily employed than in others. This
reinforces the idea of an economical parser, that only resorts
to information that is relevant in constraining sentence
interpretation.
Moreover, the response accuracy data contributes to a
fruitful line of research on lingering misinterpretations,
suggesting that misinterpretations can also result from
discourse-level coreference relations. Definiteness and
givenness cues influenced the offline interpretation of the
while-clause, which we interpret as evidence that discourse
representations affect the likelihood that a noun will be
interpreted as coreferring with a preceding covert object.

Firbas, J. (1966). Non-thematic subjects in contemporary
English. Travaux Linguistiques de Prague, 2, 239-56.
Frazier, L., & Rayner, K. (1982). Making and correcting
errors during sentence comprehension: Eye movements in
the analysis of structurally ambiguous sentences. Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 178–210.
Givon, T. (1976). Topic, pronoun, and grammatical
agreement. In Li, C., (Ed.) Subject and topic. (pp. 149-58).
NY: Academic Press.
Hagoort, P., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2007). Beyond the
sentence given. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society. Series B: Biological Sciences, 362, 801-811.
Halliday, M. (1967). Notes on transitivity and theme in
English, Part 2. Journal of Linguistics, 3, 199-244.
Kaiser, E., & Trueswell, J. (2004). The role of discourse
context in the processing of a flexible word-order
language. Cognition, 94(2), 113–147.
Kirsten, M., Tiemann, S., Seibold, V. C., Hertrich, I., Beck,
S., & Rolke, B. (2014). When the polar bear encounters
many polar bears: event-related potential context effects
evoked by uniqueness failure. Language, Cognition and
Neuroscience, 29(9), 1147–1162.
Kjelgaard, M. M., Speer, S. R. (1999). Prosodic Facilitation
and Interference in the Resolution of Temporary Syntactic
Closure Ambiguity. Journal of Memory and Language,
40(2), 153–194.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1975). Sentence perception as an
interactive parallel process. Science, 18, 226-228.
Patson, N. D., Darowski, E. S., Moon, N., & Ferreira, F.
(2009). Lingering misinterpretations in garden-path
sentences: evidence from a paraphrasing task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 35(1), 280–285.
Prince, E. F. (1981). Towards a taxonomy of given-new
information. In P. Cole (Ed.), Radical pragmatics (pp. 223233). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Prince, E. F. (1992). The ZPG letter: Subjects, definiteness
and information status. In S. Thompson & W. Mann (Eds.),
Discourse description: Diverse analyses of a fundraising
text (pp. 295-325). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Rohde, H. & Horton, W. (2014). Anticipatory looks reveal
expectations about discourse relations. Cognition, 133(3),
667-691.
Schlueter, Z., Williams, A., Lau, E. (2015). How quickly is
definiteness information incorporated into comprehender
expectations? CUNY poster. University of Southern
California, Los Angeles.
Slattery, T., Sturt, P., Christianson, K., Yoshida, M., and
Ferreira F. (2013). Lingering Misinterpretations of garden
path sentences arise from competing syntactic
representations. Journal of Memory and Language, 69,
104-120.
Trueswell, J.C., Tanenhaus, M.K., Kello, C. (1993). VerbSpecific Constraints in Sentence Processing: Separating
Effects of Lexical Preference From Garden-Paths. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 19(3), 528-553.

References
Altmann, G. T. M. & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with
context during human sentence processing. Cognition, 30,
191-238.
Birner, B., & Ward, G. (1993). Uniqueness, familiarity, and
the definite article in English. Berkeley Linguistics Society,
20, 93–102.
Boland, J. E. (1993) The role of Verb Argument Structure in
Sentence Processing: Distinguishing between Syntactic
and Semantic Effects. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 22(2), 133-152.
Boland, J. E. (2005). Visual arguments. Cognition, 95, 237–
74.
Christianson, K., Hollingworth, A., Halliwell, J.F., &
Ferreira, F. (2001). Thematic roles assigned along the
garden path linger. Cognitive Psychology, 42(4), 368-407.
Comrie, B. (1989). Language Universals and Linguistic
Typology, 2nd ed. Blackwell, Cambridge.
Delong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2005).
Probabilistic word pre-activation during language
comprehension inferred from electrical brain activity.
Nature Neuroscience 8.1117–21.
Ferreira, F., & Henderson, J. M. (1991). Recovery from
misanalyses of garden-path sentences. Journal of Memory
and Language, 30, 725–745.

882

