The Permeability of Fictional Worlds
Meghan M. Salomon (msalomon@u.northwestern.edu)
Lance J. Rips (rips@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University,
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA
Abstract
Real people sometimes appear in fiction, for example,
Napoleon in War and Peace. Readers may also believe that a
person who never actually appears in a novel could
potentially appear there. In two experiments, we find evidence
that readers think that a real person could appear in specific
novels and physically interact with a character. This effect is
magnified when the person and character share spatial and
temporal elements of their setting.
Keywords: fictional worlds; world knowledge; novels

Fictional Worlds
Just as people develop and maintain representations of
real-world situations (e.g., Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998),
previous research has established that children and adults
keep track of fictional worlds: They possess mental
representations of the universe in which a fictional work
plays out. Investigators have argued that these
representations portray a fictional world as discrete, selfcontained, and distinct from the real world and from other
fictional worlds. For example, preschoolers know that
fictional characters like Batman can’t touch or see them and
can’t touch or see characters like Elmo, indicating that these
fictional worlds are distinct (Skolnick & Bloom, 2006;
Skolnick-Weisberg & Bloom, 2009). Children can also
extrapolate information from fictional situations and
generalize them as “fantasy rules,” using those rules to
predict future fictional events (Van de Vondervoort &
Friedman, 2014). In this way, children can learn from
fantasy and use that information in fantastical settings.
However, children tend not to transfer fictional ideas to real
world situations (Richert, Shawber, Hoffman, & Taylor,
2009).
Fictional worlds aren’t impermeable, however. Readers
approach fictional stories with assumptions based on their
knowledge of reality (Gerrig, 1993; Gerrig & Allbritton,
1990; Pollard-Gott, 1993; Gerrig & Rapp, 2004). Readers
know to import general truths of reality, such as gravity and
physiology, into a fictional text (Lewis, 1978; SkolnickWeisberg & Goodstein, 2009). They assume that Jay Gatsby
can sit upright in his chair and that Scarlett O’Hara breathes.
Authors also rely on readers’ knowledge of reality in
importing more specific details into their fiction (Fillmore,
1981). For example, real people sometimes turn up in
novels. Napoleon appears in War and Peace and Houdini in
Ragtime (see Foulds, 2015). People may also believe that
although a real individual doesn’t actually appear in a
fictional context, she potentially could. Queen Victoria

never explicitly graces a Sherlock Holmes story, but readers
may recognize this as possible.
What principles govern readers’ judgments about whether
real and fictional people can mingle? We report two
experiments that examine the idea of “one-way
permeability”: People should be more apt to think that a real
person could appear in a fictional world than the reverse.
Perhaps paradoxically, Sherlock Holmes could potentially
meet Queen Victoria, but Queen Victoria could hardly meet
Sherlock Holmes. What is true in a fictional world may
depend on the similarity in time and space between the
fictional setting and the real one (Lewis, 1978), but in an
asymmetric way. Experiment 1 looked at the effect of
spatial distance on permeability, and Experiment 2 at
temporal distance.1

Methodology
Participants in both studies read brief descriptions of
novels, such as Jane Eyre and The Great Gatsby, that
specified their author, protagonist, and publication date. The
description also mentioned real people (e.g., Calvin
Coolidge), along with a brief identifier for each. Participants
then answered questions of the type: “Consider the world of
Jay Gatsby [Calvin Coolidge]. Would Calvin Coolidge [Jay
Gatsby] also exist in the same world?” The instructions
stated that “being in the same world” means the individuals
“could, at least in theory, meet and physically interact with
one another.” Participants were also cautioned, “… we do
not want you to think of a person that merely has the same
characteristics as that character…[n]or … a picture, movie,
or other representation of the character. Rather you should
think of the character him- or herself.”

Experiment 1: Spatial Proximity
We expect that people will agree that real individuals
could appear in a novel, even though they never actually
appear there. But we also expect important restrictions to
govern these cases. Just as two real people from the same
1

Although the experiments we report here focus on simple
overlap in space and time, we don’t mean to imply that these are
the only variables that affect readers’ judgments of permeability.
Many factors could have such an effect, including ideological,
cultural, and technological ones. For example, our intuition is that
a Russian czar of the 18th Century is less likely to appear in an 18th
Century American novel than a Russian premier of the 20th
Century in a 20th Century American novel. We leave these
possibility for further research.

2111

country are more likely to interact than two real people from
different countries, a real person and a fictional character
from the same country are more likely to interact than a
similar pair from different countries. For example, although
Calvin Coolidge could turn up in the world of Jay Gatsby, it
is less likely that Joseph Stalin would appear there. Of
course, crossings in the opposite direction should be even
more limited, in line with one-way permeability: Coolidge
could appear in Gatsby’s world, but Gatsby could hardly
appear in Coolidge’s.

leader preceding the less famous one within each cell of
columns 2 and 3.

Results and Discussion

Method
Participants We recruited 30 participants (18 female),
aged 18-63, (M=39.17, SD=12.34) through Mechanical
Turk.
Procedure Participants in this study answered a series of
questions about the novels that appear in Table 1. At the
beginning of each block of trials, they read information
about one of these novels (author, publication date, and
protagonist). The preliminary information also described
four real people—political leaders—two from the same
country in which the novel was set, and two from a different
country. Within each pair, one leader was relatively well
known; the other less well known (see Table 1 for a
complete list). Participants were given brief descriptions of
the leaders and were told that all of them were alive at the
time the novel was set.
Following the preliminary briefing, participants answered
eight questions about the relations between the fictional
characters and the real people. Participants decided whether,
for example, Calvin Coolidge [Jay Gatsby] would exist in
the world of Jay Gatsby [Calvin Coolidge], and whether
Joseph Stalin [Jay Gatsby] would exist in the world of Jay
Gatsby [Joseph Stalin]. For example, one question read,
“Consider the world of Jay Gatsby. Would Calvin Coolidge
also exist in the same world?”
There were seven blocks of trials, corresponding to the
seven novels of Table 1. The blocks appeared in a random
order, as did the eight questions within each block. After
completing the questions, participants indicated which of
the Table 1 books they had previously read. The experiment
took approximately 20 minutes to complete.
Design The questions varied direction (could a fictional
person appear in the real world vs. a real person in a
fictional world), location (were the fictional character and
the real person from the same country vs. a different
country), and fame of the real-world individual (more
famous vs. less famous). All factors varied within-subject.
To confirm our judgments of which individuals were
more famous, we conducted a norming study. Thirty-one
Mechanical Turk participants rated the fame of each realworld political leader from Table 1, on a scale from 1 (“least
famous”) to 7 (“most famous”). Those we designated more
famous received a mean rating of 3.99, and those we
designated less famous a mean rating of 1.75, F(1,30) =
307.72, p < .001. The names of the more and less famous
political leaders appear in Table 1, with the more famous

Participants were significantly more likely to say that a
real person exists in a fictional world (M=67% “yes”
responses, SE=3%) than that a fictional person exists in the
real world (M=38%, SE=3%), F(1, 29) = 13.91, ηp2= .32,
p < .001. For example, participants were more likely to say
that JFK exists in the world of Atticus Finch than that
Atticus Finch exists in JFK’s world. This supports the idea
that fictional worlds are more permeable than the real world
and, further, that readers can equip the fictional world of a
novel with real people, even though the novel never
explicitly mentions them. This main effect is shown in
Figures 1a and 1b as the difference between the left- and the
right-hand sides of the graphs.
Participants were also more likely to say that
people/characters from the same country exist in the same
world (M=59% “yes” responses, SE=3%) than that
people/characters from different countries exist in the same
world (M=46%, SE=3%), F(1,29) = 23.02, ηp2= .44,
p < .001. For example, participants were more likely to say
that JFK exists in the world of Atticus Finch than that
Khrushchev exists in that world. Thus, readers take
geographical distance into account in determining whether
fictional and real-world individuals can intermingle. This
suggests that participants interpreted our question (e.g.,
Would Calvin Coolidge exist in the world of Jay Gatsby?)
in a probabilistic way (depending on spatial distance and
other relevant factors) rather than in an absolute way (e.g.,
that it is not impossible that Coolidge could exist in
Gatsby’s world). Just as people think that the chance of two
real-world people meeting is greater the smaller their spatial
separation, people think that the chance of a fictional and a
real-world person being in the same world is greater the
smaller the distance between their spatial locations.
But although participants believed that spatial distance
was relevant to whether real and fictional people could
coexist, they did not believe that the real person’s fame
affected this issue, F(1, 29) = 0.18, ηp2= .006, p = .678.
Participants’ judgments did not depend on whether a real
person was very well known or less well known. Even a
lesser-known real person of the appropriate place and era is
a candidate for existing in a fictional world. No interactions
with fame were significant in these data.
Finally, we compared responses from participants who
had read a book to those of participants who hadn’t. We
wanted to ensure that participants who had read, for
example, Jane Eyre answered questions about this book in
the same way as other participants. The results of this
comparison for the main conditions appear in Table 2 and
indicate very similar findings for readers and nonreaders.
Reader or nonreader status did not significantly interact with
either the effect of country or the effect of direction of
transfer (all F’s < 1). This similarity suggests that the
descriptions of the novels in the instructions (or

2112

participants’ general knowledge about the novels) provided
nonreaders with enough information to make sensible
judgments.
Although participants judged real people more likely to
appear in fiction than fictional characters in the real world,
we did not find an absolute ban on fiction-to-real-world
transfers. Participants judged that a fictional character could
appear in the world of a real political leader on nearly 40%
of trials. Some of these responses might be due to simple
misreading or other low-level errors. For example,
participants may have failed to distinguish the direction of
the question (real-to-fiction vs. fiction-to-real). However,
some participants may actually believe that the characters
could surface in the real world, and we discuss this
possibility in the General Discussion.
These results support our hypotheses in two ways. First,
readers do import more into fiction than just (causally)
necessary truths of reality. Their willingness to do so,
however, depends on geographic relevance. Readers are
likely to import real people into fictional worlds who are
relevant to the novel’s setting, even when these people are
never mentioned in the text. This indicates that readers are
attuned to the relevance of space, not only within the world
(Zwaan & Radvansky, 1999), but also across worlds.

Table 1: Novels used in Experiment 1
Novel
Jane Eyre
(Jane Eyre)
Moby Dick
(Captain Ahab)
Sherlock Holmes
(Sherlock Holmes)
The Great Gatsby
(Jay Gatsby)
A Christmas Carol
(Ebenezer Scrooge)
Breakfast at Tiffany's
(Holly Golightly)
To Kill a
Mockingbird
(Atticus Finch)

William Gladstone;
Charles Parnell
Calvin Coolidge;
Charles Evans Hughes
Prince Albert;
Lord Melbourne
Dwight Eisenhower;
Estes Kefauver
John Kennedy;
Edmund Brown

Real Person
(Different Location)
James Polk;
John Calhoun
Napoleon;
General Jacques Leroy
de Saint Arnaud
Grover Cleveland;
Levi Morton
Joseph Stalin;
Nikolai Bukharin
Louis Philippe;
Francois Guizot
Queen Elizabeth II;
Harold Macmillan
Nikita Khrushchev;
Georgy Malenkov

Table 2: Percentage of Readers’ and Nonreaders’
Agreement that Real and Fictional People could be in the
Same World, Experiment 1

Figure 1a: Real people and characters in different countries

1
Proportion 'Yes' Responses

Real Person
(Same Location)
Queen Victoria;
Earl Russell
Millard Fillmore;
Stephen Douglas

Direction of transfer

Spatial
separation

Nonreaders

Readers

Fiction-to-real

Different
countries

33.2%

30.1%

Same country

45.1

43.2

Different
countries

61.5

58.5

Same country

75.4

71.6

0.8
0.6

Real-to-fiction

0.4
0.2
0
Appearance in Fiction Appearance in Reality
More Famous

Less Famous

Figure 1b: Real people and characters in same country

Proportion 'Yes' Responses

1
0.8

Experiment 2: Temporal Proximity
Experiment 1 showed that spatial restrictions govern how
easily a real person can appear in a novel. Temporal factors
should produce similar effects, perhaps in a more dramatic
way. Although Robert E. Lee might appear in a novel set
during the Civil War, such as Gone with the Wind, we
would not expect Franklin Roosevelt to appear there. Time
travel occurs in some science fiction and fantasy, but in the
more realistic novels we used here, we don’t expect to find
real people from a different era.

0.6

Method

0.4
0.2
0
Appearance in Fiction Appearance in Reality
More Famous

Less Famous

Participants We recruited 32 participants (14 female),
aged 22-62 (M=37.16, SD=10.29) through Mechanical Turk.
One subject was eliminated for answering “no” to all
questions.
Materials. In Experiment 2, we paired novels published
in the same year, one set in the past (e.g., Gone with the
Wind) and the other set at about the time of publication

2113

(e.g., In Dubious Battle). For each pair, we chose one
political leader who was alive at the time of the earlier
setting (e.g., Robert E. Lee) and one who was alive at the
time of the later setting (e.g., Franklin Roosevelt). We then
asked about the relationship between these real and fictional
characters (in both orders), as in Experiment 1. For
example, participants decided whether Robert E. Lee would
exist in the world of Scarlett O’Hara, whether FDR would
exist in the world of Scarlett O’Hara, whether Robert E. Lee
would exist in the world of Jim Nolan, and whether FDR
would exist in the world of Jim Nolan. We also asked the
reverse of each of these questions (e.g., whether Scarlett
O’Hara would exist in the world of Robert E. Lee). The
question wording was the same as in Experiment 1 (e.g.,
“Consider the world of Scarlett O'Hara. Would Robert E.
Lee also exist in the same world?”). Table 3 lists the full set
of novels, characters, and real people. At the end of the
experiment, participants indicated which of the novels
mentioned in the experiment they had read.
Procedure Apart from these differences in materials, the
experiment proceeded in the same way as did Experiment 1.
Design The questions varied direction (could a fictional
person appear in the real world vs. a real person in a
fictional world), era of the fictional character (historical vs.
modern, relative to the date of publication), and era of the
real person (historical vs. modern, relative to the date of
publication). All factors were within-subject.

Results and Discussion
Participants were much more likely to say that two people
exist in the same world if they were from the same era
(M=82% “yes” responses, SE=2%) than if one person
existed before the other (M=26%, SE=2%). The results are
shown in Figures 2a and 2b: “Yeses” were more common
when the time of the real people and characters matched
than when their times mismatched, F(1,28) = 88.53,
p <.001. For example, participants thought that Robert E.
Lee was more likely than FDR to exist in the same world as
Scarlett O’Hara.
As in Experiment 1, participants judged it easier for real
people to appear in fiction than for fictional characters to
appear in the real world. In the present experiment,
however, this effect appeared only for situations in which
the person and the character were from the same era
(M=88%, SE=2% for real-to-fiction direction vs. M=76%,
SE=2% for fiction-to-real direction). When the eras of the
character and the real person mismatched, participants were
unlikely to say that either could exist in the world of the
other (M=26%, SE=2% for both the real-to-fiction and the
fiction-to-real directions). This produced a three way
interaction of direction, era of the fictional character, and
era of the real person that was on the cusp of significance,
F(1,28) = 4.02, p = .05. These results echo those of
Experiment 1 in suggesting that participants were not just
considering whether real people could appear in fiction in an
all-or-none way. Instead, their decisions depended on
probability or relevance, based on temporal overlap.

Although both Robert E. Lee and FDR could appear in the
world of Gone with the Wind in a logical or metaphysical
sense of “could,” participants were also taking into account
the relative likelihood of such an appearance, based on
temporal distance.
As in Experiment 1, we compared responses from
participants who had read a given book to those from
participants who hadn’t. Although there were too few
readers for some of the books to permit a meaningful
statistical analysis, the trends for readers and nonreaders are
quite similar, as Table 4 shows.
In Experiment 1, we found that participants believed real
people were more likely to be present in fictional worlds
when the real people were in the same locale as the
characters. The data from Experiment 2 reinforce the
importance of setting by showing that readers believe that
real people are more likely to exist in a fictional world when
the time of the novel aligns with that of the real person.
When the times mismatch, there’s little possibility of world
crossing in either direction.

General Discussion
Both experiments confirmed one-way permeability:
Participants in Experiment 1 were more likely to agree that
a real person could exist in the world of a fictional character
than that a fictional character could exist in the world of a
real person. In Experiment 2, this difference appeared when
the time of the real and fictional people matched, but not
when it mismatched.
Permeability was also greater in the second experiment
when both the characters and real people were from the past
than when both were from the time the novel was written.
Participants agreed on 86% of trials that two individuals
from the past could inhabit the same world, but agreed on
79% of trials that two individuals from the time of
publication could inhabit the same world, F(1,28) = 5.74,
p = .024, by a planned comparison. This is a possible effect
of genre: Historical novels may be more permeable than
contemporary ones. The author of a historical novel
typically has in mind a definite real-world place and time,
and the importance of this setting (and accompanying
realism) may invite readers to believe that aspects of that
setting carry over to the world of the novel. For example,
the importance of the Civil War milieu to Gone with the
Wind may be a pragmatic indication that the reader should
incorporate real-world facts from that milieu into the novel
(see Byrne, 1993). By contrast, a particular time and place
may be less crucial to contemporary novels, providing
readers with fewer guidelines about which aspects of reality
will continue to hold in the fictional world.
In thinking about the match between fictional worlds and
the real world, however, we should be careful to observe
that similar settings may be effective because they
determine which causal influences from the real world could
penetrate the fictional world. For example, readers believe it
is unlikely that Jay Gatsby would encounter Abraham

2114

Acknowledgments
We thank three anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments on this paper. Work on the paper is due in part to
the US Department of Education, Institute of Education
Sciences, Multidisciplinary Program in Education Sciences,
Grant Award # R305B140042.

Figure 2a: Historical Novels

Proportion 'Yes' Responses

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Appearance in Reality Appearance in Fiction
Contemporary
Real Person

Historical
Real Person

Figure 2b: Contemporary Novels

Proportion 'Yes' Responses

Lincoln due to the temporal discrepancy. But the temporal
mismatch may be important because of causal laws that
govern people’s lifetimes, not because of the absolute
difference in era. It could well be that the Emancipation
Proclamation influences the world of Jay Gatsby, despite
the difference in time between the issuing of the
Proclamation and the Jazz Age.
We noted that participants in Experiment 1 sometimes
judged that fictional characters could appear in the real
world. Figures 2a and 2b show that the same was true in
Experiment 2, especially when the eras of the characters and
real people matched. In line with one-way permeability,
these judgments were less common than those in which real
people were deemed part of a fictional world, but what
prompted these decisions? One possibility is a confusion
between different categories of hypothetical people.
Consider a couple who decides to have a family and even
decides on a name for their first-born daughter, say,
“Olivia” (cf. Perry, 2001). If the couple happens to break up
before they can start their family, then we might say that
Olivia would have existed in the real world, but for the
unfortunate break up. This case differs, however, from that
of hypothetical people who are parts of a fictional work, like
the Olivia in Twelfth Night or the characters in our
experiments. The fictional status of these individuals
prohibits them from being part of the real world (a
prohibition that applies to Shakespeare’s Olivia but not to
the couple’s Olivia), and enforces one-way permeability. It
seems possible, however, that some participants answered
the questions about whether a fictional character would have
existed in the real world in a way that is appropriate to a
merely hypothetical person. These participants may decide
on the basis of the character’s realistic qualities that he or
she would have existed under the right circumstances,
ignoring the character’s fictional status. In this vein, one
participant commented, “A well written character, if they
could come out of the pages, would be able to interact with
a real person in their era.”
In sum, fictional worlds are not completely isolated.
People believe that real-world figures (and presumably other
real-world objects and events) could potentially appear in
fictional worlds, even if they don’t appear overtly. While
readers sometimes export information from a fictional text
(e.g., Gerrig & Prentice, 1991), these results indicate they
also import people from reality.

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Appearance in Reality Appearance in Fiction
Contemporary
Real Person

Historical
Real Person

Table 3: Novels used in Experiment 2
Historical
Novel
Gone with the
Wind
(Scarlett O'Hara)
Cold Mountain
(W. P. Inman)
The French
Lieutenant's
Woman
(Sarah Woodruff)
War and Peace
(Pyotr Kirillovich
Bezukhov)
Blood Meridian
(The Kid)

2115

Contemporary
Novel
In Dubious
Battle
(Jim Nolan)
The Partner
(Patrick
Lanigan)
Travels with
my Aunt
(Henry Pulling)

Historic
Figure
Robert E.
Lee

Contemporary
Figure
Franklin Delano
Roosevelt

Abraham
Lincoln

Bill Clinton

Queen
Victoria

Queen Elizabeth II

The Idiot (Lev
Nikolayevich
Myshkin)
White Noise
(Jack Gladney)

Alexander
I

Alexander II

Andrew
Jackson

Ronald Reagan

Table 4: Percentage of Readers’ and Nonreaders’
Agreement that Real and Fictional People could be in the
Same World, Experiment 2

Direction of
transfer
Fiction-to-real

Real-to-fiction

Temporal relation
Modern character
Modern real person
Modern character
Historical real person
Historical character
Modern real person
Historical character
Historical real person
Modern character
Modern real person
Modern character
Historical real person
Historical character
Modern real person
Historical character
Historical real person

Nonreaders
71.5%

Readers

26.9

26.7

24.4

23.1

79.0

88.5

86.2

80.0

29.2

40.0

20.2

23.1

88.2

100.0

Skolnick-Weisberg, D., & Bloom, P. (2009). Young
children separate multiple pretend worlds. Developmental
Science,
12,
699-705.
doi:
10.1111/j.14677687.2009.00819.x
Weisberg, D. S., & Goodstein, J. (2009). What belongs in a
fictional world? Journal of Cognition and Culture, 9, 6978.
Van de Vondervoort, J. W., & Friedman, O. (2014).
Preschoolers can infer general rules governing fantastical
events in fiction. Developmental Psychology, 50, 1594.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models
in language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin,
123,
162-185.
doi:
10.1037/00332909.123.2.162

80.0%

References
Byrne, A. (1993). Truth in fiction: the story continued.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 71, 24 – 35.
Fillmore, C. J. (1981). Ideal readers and real readers. In D.
Tannen (Ed.), Analyzing discourse: Text and talk (pp.
248-270). Washington D. C.: Georgetown University
Press.
Foulds, A. (2015). Writing real people. In Z. Leader (Ed.),
On life-writing (pp. 99-111). Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Gerrig, R. J. (1993). Experiencing narrative worlds: On the
psychological activities of reading. Yale University Press.
Gerrig, R. J., & Allbritton, D. W. (1990). The construction
of literary character: A view from cognitive psychology.
Style, 24, 380-391.
Gerrig, R. J., & Prentice, D. A. (1991). The representation
of fictional information. Psychological Science, 2, 336340. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.1991.tb00162.x
Gerrig, R. J., & Rapp, D. N. (2004). Psychological
processes underlying literary impact. Poetics Today, 25,
265-281.
Lewis, D. (1978). Truth in fiction. American Philosophical
Quarterly, 15, 37-46.
Perry, J. (2001). Reference and reflexivity. Stanford, CA:
CSLI Publications.
Pollard-Gott, L. (1993). Attribution theory and the novel.
Poetics, 21, 499-524.
Richert, R. A., Shawber, A. B., Hoffman, R. E., & Taylor,
M. (2009). Learning from fantasy and real characters in
preschool and kindergarten. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 10, 41-66.
Skolnick, D., & Bloom, P. (2006). What does Batman think
about SpongeBob? Children's understanding of the
fantasy/fantasy distinction. Cognition, 101, B9-B18. doi:
10.1016/j.cognition.2005.10.001

2116

