The Variable Relationship Between On-Task Behavior and Learning
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Howard Seltman (hseltman@cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Statistics
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Ma. Victoria Q. Almeda (victoriaalmeda@gmail.com)
Department of Human Development, Teachers College Columbia University
525 W. 120th St., New York NY 10027 USA

Shimin Kai (shimin.kai@gmail.com)
Department of Human Development, Teachers College Columbia University
525 W. 120th St., New York NY 10027 USA

Ryan S. Baker (ryanshaunbaker@gmail.com)
Department of Human Development, Teachers College Columbia University
525 W. 120th St., New York NY 10027 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

detrimental to learning (Carroll, 1963). Carroll’s Time-onTask hypothesis spurred a great deal of research attempting
to show that learning is directly related to the amount of
time one spends on a particular task (Cobb, 1972;
Lahaderne, 1968; McKinney, Mason, Perkerson, & Clifford,
1975; Samuels & Turnure, 1974; Frederick, Walberg, &
Rasher, 1979).
Given that predictors of achievement are often intractable
(see Karweit & Slavin, 1980 for discussion), identifying
factors that are malleable is of particular importance for
practitioners. Thus, time is a factor that is of great interest as
it is largely a malleable factor. If time is shown to be a
meaningful determinant of learning, then interventions can
be created that increase time or that optimize how existing
instructional time is utilized.
Despite considerable work in this area, the understanding
of the relationship between time and learning remains
limited, as the existing literature has yielded conflicting
results. To date, the available research suggests a generally
positive relationship between the amount of time spent ontask and achievement. However, the strength of the
correlations fluctuate widely, ranging between 0.10 and 0.70
(Karweit, 1984; for more recent examination of the
relationship between on-task behavior and learning see:
Baker, Corbett, Koedinger, & Wagner, 2004; Fisher,
Godwin, & Seltman, 2014; Gobel, 2008; Godwin & Fisher,
2014; Kovanovic et al., 2015).
While a full account of the factors driving the variability
in the relationship between time and learning is needed,

The Time-on-Task hypothesis asserts that learning is a
function of time one allocates to a learning task. Thus, time
off-task reduces learning opportunities and is therefore
thought to be detrimental to learning. To date, the available
research suggests a positive relationship between time on-task
and achievement; however, the strength of the correlation
fluctuates dramatically. One potential explanation that has
been put forth to account for the mixed results is differences
in the operational definition of time. The present study tests
this hypothesis by examining whether a more stable
relationship between on-task behavior and learning can be
obtained if time is operationalized in a uniform way. The
results of the present study indicate that while on-task
behavior was positively correlated with learning outcomes
overall, marked variability was still found across classrooms
suggesting that the divergent results obtained in previous
research are not driven solely by differences in how time is
measured.
Keywords: On-task
Achievement

behavior;

Attention;

Learning;

Introduction
In education a common assumption is that the more time
children attend to something, the better they should learn the
material. This tenant of conventional wisdom was
formalized by Carroll (1963) and has become known as the
Time-on-Task hypothesis. The Time-on-Task hypothesis
asserts that learning is a function of the amount of time one
allocates to a particular learning task. Thus, time off-task
reduces learning opportunities and is therefore thought to be

812

some potential explanations have been put forth in the
literature. One possible explanation for the mixed findings
is the variety of ways in which time has been
operationalized. Indeed, Karweit and Slavin (1982) suggest
that differences in operational definitions, as well as
methodological and procedural differences, may contribute
to the mixed results across the existing literature. Although
establishing precise operational definitions is important for
all research, it may be particularly pertinent in this context
given that time has been defined in many different ways
across a multitude of studies (for discussion see Caldwell,
Huitt, & Graeber, 1982; Frederick & Walberg, 1980;
Goodman, 1990; Karweit & Slavin, 1981; Wiley &
Harnischfeger, 1974). For example, in the prior literature
time has been equated with attention and thus it has been
defined at the student level as looking time, on-task
behavior, and engaged time (e.g., Choudhury & Gorman,
2000; Cobb, 1972; Fisher, Godwin, & Seltman, 2014;
Godwin & Fisher, 2014; Lahaderne, 1968; Lee, Kelly, &
Nyre, 1999). Other researchers have defined time at a
classroom level in which time is indexed by the amount of
time allocated, or the amount of time actually spent on an
instructional activity or a particular subject area (e.g., Arlin
& Roth, 1978; Baker, Fabrega, Galindo, & Mishook, 2004).
Still other researchers have equated time with the amount of
schooling and operationalized time as the length of the
school day, length of the school year, total number of school
days attended, or even years of schooling (e.g., Agrawal,
Smith, & Wick, 1977; Coleman et al., 1966; Cooper, Allen,
Patall, & Dent, 2010; Hough & Bryde, 1996; Hyman,
Wright, & Reed, 1975; Karweit, 1973; Wiley &
Harnischfeger, 1974). With such a wide variety of
definitions of time, it is perhaps not surprising that
discrepant results have been obtained.
In an influential study with elementary school students,
Karweit and Slavin (1981) tested the hypothesis that the
manner in which time is operationalized (among other
factors) influences the relationship between time and
learning. A small subset of children from 18 elementary
school classrooms participated in the study. The sample
consisted of two age groups: second/third graders and
fourth/fifth graders. In this observational study, several
measures of time were collected during mathematics
instruction in order to assess whether time (in any form) was
a significant predictor of children’s achievement scores on
the Mathematics Computation and Mathematics Concepts
and Applications subscales of the Comprehensive Test of
Basic Skills (CTBS). The authors focus on four central
measures of time which include: Total scheduled time (i.e.,
the amount of time allocated to math instruction), Total
instructional time (i.e., the amount of time actually spent on
math instruction subtracting time for procedural activities),
Engaged time (i.e., the amount of time students spent
engaged with the instructional activity/ time-on-task), and
rate of engagement (engaged time/total instructional time).
Karweit and Slavin (1981) found mixed results as a
function of how time was measured and as a function of

grade level. For second and third grade students, only
engaged time and rate of engagement were found to be
significant predictors of children’s CTBS post-test scores.
All other measures of time (i.e., total scheduled time and
instructional time) were not significantly related to second
and third grade children’s CTBS scores. In contrast, for
older children none of the measures of time (i.e., total
scheduled time, total instructional time, engaged time, nor
rate of engagement) were found to be significant predictors
of their CTBS scores.
Karweit and Slavin (1981) concluded that measures of
time which focus more closely on the amount of time
students spend on-task or measures that are more indicative
of how students utilize instructional time are stronger
predictors of achievement compared to measures which
operationalize time more generally such as time allocated
for instruction or even total instructional time. Thus, the
manner in which time is operationalized is thought to
influence whether a relationship between time and learning
is found as well as the strength of that relationship.
Additionally, the authors point out that the inconsistency in
the relationship between time and learning across grade
levels has been observed in other studies and highlights the
need to examine individual difference factors (e.g., interest
in the subject matter, student aptitude) which will likely
contribute to the amount of time needed to master course
content.
Although the work of Karweit and Slavin (1981) suggests
that using a uniform measure of time, and in particular using
measures such as time on-task or engaged time (compared
to more global measures) should reduce variability and
increase the strength of the relationship between time and
learning, this issue remains unresolved and continues to be
an important area of inquiry today (see Kovanovic et al.,
2015). The present study continues to explore the
relationship between time and learning by examining
whether the variability in the prior literature is merely an
issue of measurement inconsistency. Specifically, we
investigate whether a positive relationship between on-task
behavior and learning is consistently obtained when utilizing
a uniform measure of time (i.e., for all participating
classrooms the fraction of students’ on-task behavior was
recorded) in a large sample of elementary school students.
The present work makes an important contribution to the
literature as it examines this question with a larger sample
of elementary school children and examines possible
individual characteristics (i.e., gender, grade level) and
school based factors (i.e., school type: private, public
charter schools) which may contribute to the observed
variability in the prior literature.

Method
Participants
Twenty classrooms participated in the present study.
However, one classroom was excluded from analyses for
reasons discussed below. The classrooms were recruited

813

from 7 schools which included 4 charter schools and 3
private schools. Participating schools were located in or near
a medium-sized city in the Northeastern United States of
America. In order to obtain a representative sample,
different grade-levels were recruited. Four grade-levels
participated in the present study: kindergarten, first-grade,
second-grade, and fourth-grade. The distribution across the
four grade-levels was as follows: 5 kindergarten classrooms,
5 first-grade classrooms, 7 second-grade classrooms, and 3
fourth-grade classrooms. Despite efforts to recruit a
balanced sample, third-grade teachers did not volunteer to
participate in the present study. The sample consisted of 375
children (177 males, 198 females). The average number of
children observed in a single observation session was 17.6
children. The number of children observed per session
ranged from 10 to 23 children. These children were also part
of a larger study examining patterns of attention allocation
in elementary school. The results of that study are reported
elsewhere (Godwin et al., In Press).

Coders classified children’s behavior as on- or off-task
using the direction of the child’s eye gaze. Contextual clues,
such as teacher instructions, were also considered in order to
disambiguate between on- and off-task behaviors. If the
child was looking at the teacher or the instructional
materials they were categorized as on-task. If the child was
looking elsewhere, they were categorized as off-task. For
each child the fraction of children’s on-task behavior was
then calculated by taking the number of times each child
was on-task divided by the total number of observed
behaviors (i.e., on-task and off-task behaviors).
Learning Measures All of the learning measures were
administered by the teachers as part of their standard
practice. As a consequence of collecting genuine learning
measure that are used in practice, there was variability in the
types of learning measures that were administered in each
classroom (an issue we return to in the Discussion Section).
Learning measures included: quizzes, report cards, and/or
fall and winter MAP (Measure of Academic Progress)
scores from a computerized adaptive assessment program.

Design & Procedure
Each classroom was observed two times in order to obtain
more stable estimates of children’s on-task behavior. The
average delay between observation sessions was 3.05
calendar days (the delay ranged from 1 day to 7 days). Each
observation session lasted approximately one-hour. All
observations occurred during mathematics instruction. The
average number of observations per session was 249.6 and
the average number of observations per child within a
session was 15.5. The classroom observations occurred
between October 2012 and December 2012.

The distribution of available learning outcomes was as
follows: 4 students had learning outcomes which consisted
of fall and/or winter MAPs, 203 students had learning
outcomes which consisted of quiz scores and fall and winter
MAPs; 132 students had learning outcomes which consisted
of report cards and quiz scores; and 17 students had learning
outcomes which consisted of report cards. Quiz scores were
excluded from analysis due to low information content. One
classroom utilized letter grades for their report cards (as
opposed to percentages); consequently, this classroom was
dropped from the analysis. As a result, both classroom
observations and learning outcomes were available for 356
students from 19 classrooms.

Coding Behavior Coders utilized the Baker-Rodrigo
Observation Method Protocol (BROMP) for coding
behavioral data in field settings (Ocumpaugh, Baker, &
Rodrigo, 2015). Training consisted of coding videotapes
and live observation sessions. In order to establish interrater reliability Cohen’s Kappa was calculated. Values
ranged from 0.79 to 0.84 which exceeds the 0.75 threshold
which Fleiss (1981) refers to as “excellent” in field settings.
A round-robin coding strategy was utilized in order to
reduce the tendency of observers to attend to salient
instances of off-task behavior. Prior to beginning the
observation session, the observation order was determined.
Each observation period lasted up to 20 seconds. The first
unambiguous behavior observed during the 20 second
period was recorded. Then the coder would observe the next
child in the rotation. This process repeated for the duration
of the observation. Thus, every child was observed multiple
times throughout the observation session. During
observations peripheral vision was utilized in order to make
it less apparent to the child that he or she was being
observed. This procedure has been employed successfully in
prior research to reliably code middle and high school
students’ behavior and affect (e.g., Ocumpaugh et al., 2012).

The learning measures were converted into Z-scores and
averaged together to create the composite variable Total
Learning Outcome for each student. The composite variable
Total Learning Outcome was computed separately for each
classroom in an attempt to correct for different grading
practices across schools and classrooms. This approach
obviates the need for hierarchical modeling. It is important
to note that hierarchical linear models were also tested;
however, the estimate of the random intercept was 0
indicating that a hierarchical approach was not necessary.
This finding is expected given that Z-scores were created
separately for each classroom.

Results
On-Task Behavior
Consistent with estimates reported in the prior literature (5075%, Karweit & Slavin, 1981), children were largely ontask. On average .75 (SD = .13) of children’s behaviors
were categorized as on-task. The fraction of children’s ontask behavior ranged widely with some children exhibiting
minimal rates of on-task behavior while other children were

814

consistently on-task (fraction of on-task behaviors ranged
from: .27 to 1.0).

exhibited significantly higher rates of on-task behavior (M =
.76, SD = .13) compared to males (M = .73, SD = .13);
t(355) = 2.40, p = .017. However, the relationship between
on-task behavior and Total Learning Outcome scores was
not moderated by gender (t(352) = .90, p = .367).

Learning Outcomes
Recall that children’s learning scores (report cards and MAP
scores) were converted into Z-scores and averaged together
to create the composite variable Total Learning Outcome for
each student. This procedure was repeated for each
classroom. Learning Z-scores ranged from -2.82 to 2.03.

Effect of Grade In order to examine whether the
relationship between on-task behavior and learning varied as
a function of grade-level, a moderation analysis was
performed. The relationship between on-task behavior and
children’s Total learning Outcome score was moderated by
grade-level, although the effect was marginally significant
(F(3, 348) = 2.25, p = .08). The relationship between
fraction of on-task behavior and learning was smaller
among first graders (β = -1.41) than it was for
kindergartners (β = 1.87, p =.014), second graders (β = 1.11,
p = .033), or fourth graders (β = 1.29, p = .036) [all p-values
are for slope differences compared to first grade]. In future
research it will be important to test the generalizability of
this finding by sampling a larger number of classrooms per
grade-level from a larger sample of schools in order to
determine if the observed grade-level effects are consistent
across samples.

Effect of On-Task Behavior on Learning Outcomes
Linear models were fit to assess whether students with a
greater fraction of on-task behavior tended to perform better
on the learning outcomes relative to their classmates. Total
Learning Outcome was entered as the dependent variable.
Four predictors were included in the model: fraction of ontask behavior, gender, school type (private, charter), and
grade level (Kindergarten, First, Second, Fourth grades).
On-task behavior was found to be a significant predictor
of children’s Total Learning Outcome, while controlling for
gender, school type, and grade level (β = 1.00, t = 2.60, p =
.01). However, the relationship between on-task behavior
and learning was weak (see Figure 1), with Total Learning
Outcome increasing by 0.20 SD for every 20% rise in ontask behavior. Furthermore, on-task behavior only
accounted for 1.8% of the variability in children’s learning
scores (R2 = 0.018, p =.012).

Effect of School Type Lastly, a moderation analysis was
conducted to investigate whether the relationship between
on-task behavior and learning varied as a function of the
type of school children attended (i.e., private school or
public charter school). The results mirrored those of gender;
the relationship between on-task behavior and Total
Learning Outcome scores was not moderated by school type
(t(352) = -1.32, p = .19).
Effect of Classroom Despite measuring time in the same
manner across each classroom (i.e., for all classrooms in the
present study, time was operationalized as the fraction of
on-task behaviors), only a weak relationship between ontask behavior and learning was found (r = .13).
Additionally, there was considerable variability across
classrooms (see Figure 2). Indeed the slope estimates
obtained when modeling the relationship between on-task
behavior and learning were positive for 11 classrooms,
while eight classrooms had negative slope estimates (see
Figure 2). Furthermore, only three of the 19 classrooms had
slope estimates that reached significance: a kindergarten
classroom, second grade classroom, and a fourth grade
classroom (ps ≤ .025). All three of the classrooms were
from charter schools. It is important to note that for all three
classrooms, the direction of the effect is positive
(kindergarten class β = 4.54, second grade class β = 2.46,
fourth grade class β = 3.51); thus, higher rates of on-task
behavior were associated with better learning outcomes.
After correcting for multiple comparisons using the
Bonferroni correction, the relationship between fraction of
on-task behavior and Total Learning remained significant
for one classroom, the kindergarten classroom (p = .0013).

Figure 1. Scatter plot depicting the relationship between the
fraction of on-task behavior and the composite variable
Total learning Outcome (Z-score).

Moderation Analyses
Next, we examined whether the relationship between
children’s on-task behavior and learning was moderated by
gender, grade level, and school type. The results of the
moderation analyses are reported below.
Effect of Gender Prior research has found that in
elementary school, females typically exhibit more on-task
behavior than males (e.g., Godwin et al., In Press; Marks,
2000). Consistent with prior research, we found that females

815

While the present study provides important insights into
the nuanced relationship between on-task behavior and
learning several limitations should be noted. First, the
learning measures are variable across classrooms and
schools. Additionally, we were able to obtain standardized
learning measures for a small subset of the participating
schools - gathering standardized learning measures should
be a focus of future research. Due to the inherent nature of
the available learning measures some of the learning
measures are more closely linked to the classroom
observations (e.g., quiz scores vs. grades and MAP scores).
One possibility that can be tested in future research is to
assess if a stronger relationship between on-task behavior
and learning can be obtained when using learning measures
that are closely yoked to observations of student behavior
(e.g., class assignments, unit test scores, homework grades)
compared to more general measures of achievement (e.g.,
standardized tests). Some insights into this question have
already been obtained. For example, prior research has
begun to investigate this question by comparing the
relationship between time and a subset of dependent
learning measures (e.g., standardized test scores vs. chapter
tests; Karweit & Slavin, 1981). Additionally, recent research
has aimed to reduce potential confounds introduced by
delays between observations of student behavior and the
collection of students’ learning outcome data by yoking
observations of students’ on and off-task behavior with their
immediate learning outcomes (Godwin & Fisher, 2014).
However, more systematic research is needed. Future
research should also incorporate students’ pre-test scores as
a covariate in order to take students’ level of prior
knowledge into account, particularly if the lesson content is
not entirely novel. As discussed previously, it is likely that
students’ familiarity with the material and aptitude will
influence the relationship between time and learning. Lastly,
the generalizability of the present results should be assessed
by examining the relationship between time and learning
across multiple subject areas.
In conclusion, the present work suggests that obtaining a
consistent relationship between time and learning is likely
not merely an issue of measurement and highlights the need
for future work to be conducted that is able to identify the
circumstances in which increasing time on-task actually
results in improved learning outcomes.

Figure 2. Displays the regression estimates for the
relationship between the fraction of on-task behavior and
Total Learning Outcome Z-scores for each classroom (each
line represents a classroom).
The considerable variability observed across classrooms
in the strength and the direction of the effect between ontask behavior and learning points to the possibility that the
relationship between time and learning may be determined
in part by classroom level factors. Teacher effectiveness
may be one such factor. For example, high levels of on-task
behavior and high learning outcomes might be indicative of
classrooms with very experienced or high quality teachers,
whereas high levels of on-task behavior but low learning
may reflect lower quality instruction in which teachers
might be engaging, but perhaps not very effective.
Additionally, the composition of students within a
classroom might influence the relationship between time and
learning. For example, students who are struggling
academically may need to spend large quantities of time ontask in order to obtain average learning scores whereas their
high achieving peers might be able to excel academically
even with minimal amounts of time spent on-task. To the
extent that certain classrooms might have differing
compositions of low and high achieving students one might
expect that the relationship between on-task behavior and
learning may be muted or even negative (for discussion see
Frederick & Walberg, 1980).

Discussion

Acknowledgments

In the present study the variability in the strength of the
relationship between on-task behavior and learning as well
as the direction of the effect suggest that the divergent
results obtained in the previous literature are not driven
solely by differences in how time is measured. Instead, it
appears that differences in the observed relationship
between on-task behavior and learning may arise from other
factors at the classroom level (e.g., teacher quality, years of
experience, classroom size, etc.) as well as from other
pertinent individual differences factors (e.g., student
aptitude). However these possibilities remain to be explored
further in future research.

We thank Megan Miller, Laura Pacilio, and Jessica Meeks
for their help collecting data. We also thank the children,
parents, and teachers who made this project possible. This
work was supported by a Graduate Training Grant awarded
to Carnegie Mellon University by the Department of
Education (R305B090023) and by the Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education (R305A110444).
The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not
represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of
Education.

816

References

Karweit, N. (1973). Rainy days and Mondays: An analysis
of factors related to absence from school. Report 162.
Baltimore: Center for Social Organization of Schools. The
Johns Hopkins University.
Karweit, N. (1984). Time-On-Task reconsidered: Synthesis
of research on time and learning. Educational Leadership,
41(8), 33-35.
Karweit, N. & Slavin, R. E. (1981). Measurement and
modeling choices in studies of time and learning.
American Educational Research Journal, 18(2), 157 171.
Karweit, N. & Slavin, R. E. (1980). Time-On-Task: Issues
of timing, sampling, and definition. Baltimore: Center for
Social Organization of Schools. The Johns Hopkins
University.
Karweit, N. & Slavin, R. E. (1982). Time-On-Task: Issues
of timing, sampling, and definition. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 74(6), 844-851.
Kovanovic, V., Gasevic, D., Dawson, S., Joksimovic, S.,
Baker, R.S., Hatala, M. (2015) Penetrating the Black Box
of Time-on-task Estimation. Proceedings of the 5th
International Learning Analytics and Knowledge
Conference, 184-193.
Lahaderne, H. M. (1968). Attitudinal and intellectual
correlates of attention: A study of four sixth-grade
classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 59(5),
320-324.
Lee, S. W., Kelly, K. E., & Nyre, J. E. (1999). Preliminary
report on the relation of students’ on-task behavior with
completion of school work. Psychological Reports, 84,
267 - 272.
Marks, H. (2000). Student engagement in instructional
activity: patterns in elementary, middle, and high school
years. American Educational Research Journal, 37(1),
153-184.
McKinney, J.D., Mason, J., Perkerson, K., & Clifford, M.
(1975). Relationship between classroom behavior and
academic achievement. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 67, 198 - 203.
Ocumpaugh, J., Baker, R.S., & Rodrigo, M.M.T.
(2015). Baker Rodrigo Ocumpaugh Method Protocol
(BROMP) 2.0. Technical and Training Manual. Technical
Report. Manila, Philippines: Ateneo Laboratory for the
Learning Sciences.
Samuels, S. J. & Turnure, J. E. (1974). Attention and
reading achievement in first-grade boys and girls. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 66(1), 29 - 32.
Wiley, D. E., & Harnischfeger, A. (1974). Explosion of a
myth: Quantity of schooling and exposure to instruction,
major educational vehicles. Educational Researcher, 3,712.

Agrawal, K., Smith, J., & Wick, J. W. (1977). Achievement
in relation to school characteristics. Chicago Department
of Research and Evaluation, Board of Education.
Arlin, M. & Roth, G. (1978). Pupils’ use of time while
reading comics and books. American Educational
Research Journal, 15, 201-216.
Baker, R.S., Corbett, A.T., Koedinger, K.R., Wagner, A.Z.
(2004) Off-Task Behavior in the Cognitive Tutor
Classroom: When Students “Game the System”.
Proceedings of ACM CHI 2004: Computer-Human
Interaction, 383-390.
Baker, D. P., Fabrega, R., Galindo, C., & Mishook, J.
(2004). Instructional time and national achievement:
Cross-National evidence. Prospects, 34(3), 311-334.
Carroll, J. (1963). A Model of School Learning. Teachers
College Record, 64, 723-733.
Cobb, J.A. (1972). Relationship of discrete classroom
behavior to fourth-grade academic achievement. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 63, 74-80.
Cooper, H., Allen, A. B., Patall, E. A., & Dent, A. L.
(2010). Effects of full-day kindergarten on academic
achievement and social development. Review of
Educational Research, 80(1), 34-70.
Caldwell, J.H., Huitt, W.G., & Graeber, A.O. (1982). Time
spent in learning: Implications from research. The
Elementary School Journal, 82, 470-480.
Fleiss, J.L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and
proportions (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley.
Frederick, W. C. & Walberg, H. J. (1980). Learning as a
function of time. Journal of Educational Research, 73,
183-194.
Frederick, W.C., Walberg, H.J., & Rasher, S.P. (1979).
Time, teacher comments, and achievement in urban high
schools. Journal of Educational Research, 73 (2), 63 - 65.
Gobel, P. (2008). Student Off-task behavior and motivation
in the CALL classroom, International Journal of
Pedagogies and Learning, 4(4), 4-18.
Godwin, K. E. & Fisher, A.V. (2014). Selective sustained
attention, the visual environment, and learning in
kindergarten-age children: Preliminary results of an
individual difference study. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M.
McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
541-546). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Godwin, K. E., Almeda, M. V., Seltman, H., Kai, S.,
Skerbetz, M. D., Baker, R. S., & Fisher, A. V. (In Press).
Off-task behavior in elementary school children. Learning
& Instruction.
Goodman, L. (1990). Time and learning in the special
education classroom. SUNY Press.
Hough, D. & Bryde, S. (1996). The effects of full-day
kindergarten on student achievement and affect. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the AERA, New York.
Hyman, H. H., Wright, C. R., & Reed, J. S. (1975). The
enduring effects of education. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

817

