The Plausible Impossible: Causal Constraints on Magical Reasoning
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Caitlin Morgan (cmorgan@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 90041

Abstract
A common intuition, often captured in fiction, is that some
impossible events (e.g., levitating a stone) are “more
impossible” than others (e.g., levitating a feather). We
investigated the source of this intuition, hypothesizing that
graded notions of impossibility arise from explanatory
considerations logically precluded by the violation at hand but
still taken into account. Studies 1-2 involved college
undergraduates (n = 192), and Study 3 involved preschool-aged
children (n = 32). In Study 1, participants saw pairs of magical
events (spells) that violated one of 18 causal principles—six
physical, six biological, and six psychological—and were
asked to indicate which spell would be more difficult to learn.
Both spells violated the same causal principle but differed in
their relation to a subsidiary principle. Participants’ judgments
of spell difficulty honored the subsidiary principle, even when
participants were given the option of judging the two spells
equally difficult. Study 2 replicated the effects of Study 1 with
Likert-type ratings, and Study 3 replicated those effects in
children. Taken together, these findings suggest that events that
defy causal explanation are interpreted in terms of explanatory
considerations that hold in the absence of such violations.
Keywords: causal inference, explanation, imagination

Introduction
The animator Walt Disney began his career making cartoons
of a very different style than those he made at the end of his
career. Disney’s early cartoons were surreal: clothes jumped
from clothes lines and ran around the yard; sausages jumped
from grills and danced in a kick line; pianos turned insolent
and bit their players. Before making feature-length films,
Disney decided that his cartoons had to be “plausibly
impossible”: they could violate some of the audience’s realworld expectations but not too many. In the movie Snow
White, for instance, it was deemed plausibly impossible for
forest animals to communicate with Snow White but
implausibly impossible for them to double in size or to ooze
through keyholes (Lane, 2006).
The idea that something could be plausibly impossible is
paradoxical. An impossible event, from a psychological point
of view, is one that violates an expectation about the world
deemed true by necessity—an expectation that holds in all
conceivable permutations of reality (Nichols, 2006;
Shtulman & Carey, 2007; Shtulman, 2009). Violations of this
nature are presumably black-and-white; an event either
violates a “law of nature” and cannot occur in the real world
or it violates no such law and can occur in the real world,
whatever the likelihood. Considerations of plausibility—or
subjective probability of occurrence—make sense when
applied to events that can occur but makes much less sense
when applied to events that cannot.

Still, fictional narratives frequently make distinctions
between impossible events that are plausible and those that
are not. In the fictional world of Star Wars, for instance, the
Jedi master Yoda teaches the Jedi apprentice Luke Skywalker
to levitate stones before he teaches him how to levitate an
entire starship. In the fictional world of Harry Potter, the
potions instructor Severus Snape teaches his students how to
brew forgetfulness before he teaches them how to brew
endurance. And in the fictional world of Cinderella,
Cinderella’s fairy godmother turns a pumpkin into a
stagecoach and a horse into a coachman rather than turning a
horse into a stagecoach and a pumpkin into a coachman.
Starships are heavier than rocks; endurance is less
attainable than forgetfulness; and pumpkins resemble
stagecoaches more than they resemble coachmen. But why
should these considerations influence our perception of
patently impossible events? The magic of levitation severs
the connection between weight and liftability; the magic of
potions severs the connection between hard work and
attainability; and the magic of transfiguration severs the
connection between physical resemblance and mutability.
Nevertheless, the genre of magical realism is full of
impossible events that honor severed connections like these.
Honoring such connections is arguably what constitutes the
“realism” in magical realism.
What psychological principles might account for graded
notions of impossibility, as exemplified by the popular
fictional narratives above? Psychologist interested in the
mental representation of impossible events have typically
analyzed such events in terms of ontological violations. An
ontology is a basic category of existence (e.g., “object,”
“animal,” “number”), and an ontological violation is a
violation of one of those categories’ core properties (e.g., that
objects are solid or that animals can die). Ontological
violations have been shown to affect an event’s memorability
(Boyer, 1999). Concepts that violate one or two ontological
commitments (e.g., a talking tree) are more memorable than
those that violate several (e.g., a talking tree that floats in the
air and never dies) or those that violate none (e.g., a flowering
tree), which presumably affects how often, and how reliably,
these concepts are passed from one person to another and
from one generation to another.
Such memory effects have been documented both for
artificial materials, constructed in the lab (Barrett & Nyhof,
2001), and for more authentic materials, like Aesop’s fables
(Upal, 2011) and Grimm’s fairytales (Norenzayan, Atran,
Faulkner, Schaller, 2006). These effects tell us that an event’s
memorability is determined by its conformity to our
ontological commitments, but they tell us less about an
event’s plausibility. Indeed, memorability and plausibility

2099

Table 1: The six pairs of spells in each domain, grouped by the (irrelevant) causal constraint they exemplify.
Domain
Physics

Biology

Psychology

Causal constraint
Object size
Object weight
Object shape
Object complexity
Object density
Object value
Evolutionary similarity
Developmental similarity
Ailment severity
Organ size
Organ complexity
Organ plasticity
Knowledge entrenchment
Knowledge complexity
Skill difficulty
Affect intensity
Trait stability
Language comprehension

Spell
Making a (bush, tree) invisible
Making a (basketball, bowling ball) float in the air
Turning a broom into a (shovel, bucket)
Shrinking a (chair, computer) to half its size
Walking through a wall made of (wood, stone)
Turning a lump of coal into a lump of (silver, gold)
Turning a person into a (monkey, pig)
Turning an adult back into a (teenager, child)
Curing a person’s (hiccups, arthritis)
Mending a broken (finger, arm)
Growing an extra (toe, eye)
Making a person’s (hair, teeth) grow longer
Making a person forget his own (phone number, name)
Teaching a monkey to do (arithmetic, calculus)
Teaching a cow how to (skip, tap dance)
Making someone (smile, laugh)
Increasing a person’s (memory, intelligence)
Teaching a person to (read, speak) a foreign language

may be driven by independent factors. Impossible events that
violate a minimal number of ontological commitments are
not always plausible (in the sense of being believable), and
impossible events that are plausible do not always violate a
minimal number of ontological commitments (Gervais &
Henrich, 2010). For example, fictional characters like
vampires and zombies violate a “cognitively optimal”
number of ontological commitments but are not commonly
believed to exist, whereas religious entities like the
Abrahamic God—an omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent,
omnibenevolent, invisible, and immortal being—violate
several ontological commitments but are commonly believed
to exist (Shtulman, 2008; Shtulman & Lindeman, 2016).
Here, we explore another property of conceptual
representations that may account for graded notions of
impossibility: the interconnectedness of causal knowledge.
Recent research on the structure of causal knowledge
suggests that much of this knowledge is organized in abstract,
coherent networks of directed causal relations, both for
children (Gopnik, Glymour, Sobel, Schulz, Kushnir, &
Danks, 2004) and for adults (Steyvers, Tenenbaum,
Wagenmakers, & Blum, 2003). These networks are derived
from patterns of covariation between putative causes and
putative effects and can be used to generate explanations,
predictions, interventions, and counterfactuals.
Critically, with respect to the phenomena of interest
(plausible impossibility), these networks involve multiple
relations among multiple concepts. A network that represents
our knowledge of physical objects, for instance, might have
links between concepts as varied as mass, weight, volume,
density, buoyancy, solidity, cohesion, contact, and support.
Given a representation of this nature, we suspect that severing
one connection in the network, as done when contemplating
magic, would leave other connections intact. Severing the
connection between contact and support, for instance, would

leave the connection between weight and support intact, thus
yielding the intuition that levitating a starship would be more
difficult than levitating a stone.
In the studies that follow, we test this idea across multiple
tasks and multiple domains, on the prediction that what
makes a magical event plausibly impossible is its conformity
to a larger network of causal expectations of which the
violated expectation is just one constituent. The cover story
for all studies was that participants were reviewing the
curriculum for Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry,
the fictional school in J. K. Rowling’s “Harry Potter” series.
Participants were asked to evaluate the difficulty of various
spells on the Hogwarts curriculum. In all studies, we found
that participants relied on explanatory considerations relevant
to the spells’ outcomes but precluded by the spells’ causal
structure nonetheless.

Study 1
Method
The participants in Studies 1 through 3 were undergraduates
at Occidental College. They were recruited from introductory
psychology courses and compensated for their participation
with extra credit in those courses. They completed the study
in the form of an online questionnaire.
Sixty-four undergraduates participated in Study 1. They
were shown 18 pairs of spells, ostensibly culled from the
Hogwarts curriculum, and asked to determine which spell in
each pair would be more difficult to learn. The pairs were
constructed such that both spells violated the same deepseated causal principle—and were thus impossible for the
same reason—but differed from in surface-level properties
relevant to a subsidiary principle. For instance, the pair
“making a basketball float in the air” and “making a bowling
ball float in the air” both violate the principle that

2100

unsupported objects fall, but they differ in relation to the
subsidiary principle that weight affects an object’s liftability.
Of interest was whether participants’ responses would honor
causal principles not explicitly suspended in the spell
descriptions but dependent on the suspended principles
nonetheless.
Six pairs of spells involved physical principles, six
involved biological principles, and six involved
psychological principles. All 18 pairs can be found in Table
1. Within each pair, the spells were designed to differ as
minimally as possible. Basketballs and bowling balls, for
instance, differ substantially in weight but do not differ
substantially in size or shape (both of which might also
influence an object’s liftability). Also, it should be noted that
the outcome of each spell was not always impossible, but it
would be impossible to produce that outcome instantaneously
or extemporaneously. For example, “making someone laugh”
and “making someone smile” are not impossible in principle
but are impossible to do instantaneously.
Participants received the 18 pairs of spells in one of two
random orders. Half of the participants were asked to indicate
which spell would be more difficult to learn (Study 1a), and
half were asked to do the same but were given the option of
indicating that both spells were “equally difficult” to learn
(Study 1b).

represented a greater departure from reality as “more
difficult” in all three domains. Might these findings be an
artifact of the task? The task was designed, after all, to
highlight a single difference between each pair of spells, and
participants may have heeded that difference only because it
was highlighted for them.
One point against this interpretation is that participants
continued to heed that difference even when given the option
of indicating that both spells would be equally difficult to
learn (Study 1B). Nevertheless, we attempted to provide
stronger evidence of causality-based reasoning in Study 2, by
asking participants to evaluate the 36 spells from Study 1 as
individuals rather than as members of a pair.

Study 2
The goal of Study 2 was to replicate the findings of Study 1
using Likert-like ratings of spell difficulty rather than
pairwise comparisons. We collected those ratings in one of
three ways: by asking participants to rate the two versions of
each spell back-to-back (Study 2A), by asking participants to
rate the two versions of each spell intermixed with the other
spells (Study 2B), and by asking participants to rate either the
more-extreme version of each spell or the less-extreme
version but not both (Study 2C).

Method
Results
In Study 1A, participants’ judgments of spell difficulty
aligned with the spells’ implicit causal ordering 85% of the
time for physical spells, 86% of the time for biological spells,
and 82% of the time for psychological spells. All three
percentages were significantly greater than expected by
chance (50%): physics: t(31) = 10.88, p < .001; biology: t(31)
= 14.04, p < .001; psychology: t(31) = 10.86, p < .001. In
addition, most participants (88%) demonstrated the
anticipated effect for a significant number of spells (13 or
more, binomial probability < .05), and all spells elicited the
anticipated effect for a significant number of participants (21
or more, binomial probability < .05).
In Study 1B, participants’ judgments of spell difficulty
aligned with the spells’ implicit causal ordering 57% of the
time for physical spells, 72% of the time for biological spells,
and 66% of the time for psychological spells. These
percentages are lower than those in Study 1A, but participants
were given three response options rather than two.
Accordingly, all three percentages were significantly greater
than expected by chance (33%): physics: t(31) = 5.49, p <
.001; biology: t(31) = 11.67, p < .001; psychology: t(31) =
9.38, p < .001. Most participants (72%) demonstrated the
anticipated effect for a significant number of spells (10 or
more, binomial probability < .05), and most spells (78%)
elicited the anticipated effect for a significant number of
participants (15 or more, binomial probability < .05).

Discussion
Participants demonstrated a statistically reliable sensitivity to
the spells’ implicit causal ordering, judging spells that

The participants in Study 2 were 128 undergraduates; 32
participated in Study 2A, 32 participated in Study 2B, and 64
participated in Study 2C. Each rated the difficulty of the
spells presented in Table 1 on a seven-point scale, from
“slightly difficult” to “extremely difficult.” Studies 2A and
2B employed within-participants design, whereas Study 2C
employed a between-participants design.

Results
In Study 2A, participants’ difficulty ratings for the moreextreme spells were significantly higher than their difficulty
ratings for the less-extreme spells in all three domains
(physics: M = 4.1 vs. 3.6, t(31) = 4.95, p < .001; biology: M
= 4.7 vs. 4.0, t(31) = 7.56, p < .001; psychology: M = 4.2 vs.
3.6, t(31) = 7.21, p < .001).
These differences remained significant even when the two
versions of each spell were randomly intermixed with other
spells (Study 2B), making their comparison less explicit
(physics: M = 4.3 vs. 3.8, t(31) = 5.75, p < .001; biology: M
= 5.3 vs. 4.4, t(31) = 11.29, p < .001; psychology: M = 4.5 vs.
3.8, t(31) = 7.65, p < .001). And they remained significant
even when participants rated the less-extreme version of each
spell or the more-extreme version but not both (Study 2C), as
assessed with independent-samples comparisons (physics: M
= 4.1 vs. 3.4, t(62) = 3.02, p < .01; biology: M = 5.1 vs. 3.8,
t(62) = 6.64, p < .001; psychology: M = 4.4 vs. 3.2, t(62) =
5.30, p < .001).
These effects were observed at the item level as well. In
Study 2A, participants rated the more-extreme spell in each
pair as significantly more difficult than the less-extreme spell
for 94% of pairs (17 of 18). This was true for 78% of pairs

2101

(14 of 18) in Study 2B and for 83% of pairs (15 of 18) in
Study 2C. All three percentages were significantly greater
than expected by chance (binomial probability < .05).

Discussion
Participants’ intuitions about spell difficulty honored causal
principles precluded by the spell’s causal structure even when
those intuitions were assessed spell-by-spell, rather than in
comparison to its causal match. These effects have proven
robust across tasks and across domains, but they have only
been documented, to this point, among adults. It is possible
that adults have come to perceive magic as causallyconstrained through exposure to magical narratives in books,
shows, or films. Study 3 explores this possibility by testing
participants who have acquired significantly less exposure to
such narratives: preschool-aged children.

Study 3
The question of interest in Study 3 was whether four- and
five-year-old children view magical events through a causal
lens, similar to adults. Children of this age are adept at
distinguishing possible events from impossible events,
labeling only impossible events as “magic” (see Woolley,
1997, for a review), but it is unclear how they reason about
the content of such events. Do they, like adults, believe that
some impossible events are more impossible than others?

Method
Thirty-two children between the ages of four to five (M age
= 4 years, 8 months) participated in Study 3. Approximately
half were male, and half were female. They were recruited
from a preschool in Southern California and tested on site.
Participants were shown the same 18 pairs of spells used in
Studies 1 and 2. Each spell was visually depicted on an index
card. Participants were presented the cards in pairs and asked
to sort them into each of two containers. One container was
labeled with a picture of Harry Potter and the other was
labeled with a picture of Professor Dumbledore. Participants
were instructed on how to use the containers as follows:
“Have you ever heard of Harry Potter? Harry Potter is a
boy in a story who has magical powers and goes to a school
called Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, where
he learns how to cast different spells. Here are two buckets
with pictures of wizards on them. This bucket shows Harry
who is a young wizard and not very good at magic yet, and
this one shows Professor Dumbledore, one of Harry’s
teachers at the school. He is an older wizard who is much
better at magic. Over here I have a pile of cards with different
spells on them. Some of the spells are easy, which means that
even young wizards can do them, but some of the spells are
hard, which means that only older wizards can do them. Can
you help me figure out which spells are easy and which spells
are hard? You will put the easy spells in this bucket that
shows Harry, and you will put the hard spells in this bucket
that shows Dumbledore.”
The experimenter verified that participants understood the
instructions by asking them to point to the bucket for the easy

spells and then point to the bucket for the hard spells. The
experimenter then presented participants with each pair of
spells in one of two random orders. Feedback was not
provided during the sorting process, though participants who
struggled with the task were assured that there are no correct
answers and encouraged to try their best.

Results
Participants sorted the spells in accordance with their implicit
causal ordering significantly more often than expected by
chance (M = 10.7, t(31) = 4.14, p < .001). This effect was
obtained for each domain (physics: M = 3.7, t(31) = 2.96, p <
.01; biology, M = 3.5, t(31) = 2.22, p < .05; psychology, M =
3.5, t(31) = 1.96, p < .05) and for at least three of the six spells
within those domains.
The effect was smaller for children than it was for adults
(Cohen’s d = 0.74 vs. 2.70), but it was present and increasing
with the age. Indeed, the older a child was (in months), the
more likely he/she sorted the less-extreme spell into the
Harry-Potter container and the more-extreme spell into the
Dumbledore container (r(30) = 0.44, p < .05).

Discussion
By age five, children appear to hold causality-based intuitions
regarding the plausibility of impossible events, assessing how
difficult it would be to bring about a magical event on the
basis of causal principles that should not logically pertain to
that event. These intuitions are in place not only before
children have received formal instruction on causal principles
but also before they have received much exposure to the
genre of magical realism. Certainly, children of this age have
had some exposure—they were, after all, familiar with the
story of Harry Potter—but it is unlikely that such exposure
could account for our findings, as our spells were novel and
our task was novel as well.
That said, children’s sensitivity to the causal structure of
our stimuli increased over the ages sampled, from 3 years and
10 months to 5 years and 7 months. This is a period over
which children are becoming increasingly sensitive to
another aspect of magical phenomena: the difference
between a magic trick and “real” magic (Chandler &
Lalonde, 1994; Rosengren & Hickling, 1994). That is, fiveyear-olds tend to recognize that visual illusions, like the
illusion of one object passing through another or the illusion
of one object turning into another, are brought about by
sleight of hand or trick apparatuses, whereas four-year-olds
tend to claim that such illusions are genuine instances of
magic. This developmental change, from identifying illusions
with magic to identifying illusions with trickery, is
presumably driven by an increased awareness of the causal
constraints on real-world events, and our task may have
tapped into the same change, albeit less directly.

General Discussion
In three studies, we found that participants used real-world
causal expectations to interpret events that presumably fall
outside those expectations: magical events. We obtained

2102

these findings regardless of whether our task involved forcedchoice comparisons, opt-out comparisons (in which ties were
allowed), or Likert-type ratings; regardless of whether our
stimuli involved physical principles, biological principles, or
psychological principles; and regardless of whether our
participants were preschoolers or college-educated adults.
As a whole, these finding imply that causal knowledge is
not easily suspended. Events that explicitly violate everyday
causation still elicit causal inferences, possibly because
severing one link in a causal network still leaves the rest of
the network intact. Events like “walking through a wall made
of wood” and “walking through a wall made of stone” have
no explanation—they are deemed impossible by the laws of
nature—but we still rely on explanatory considerations like
hardness and density to interpret those events, perceiving the
latter as more difficult to achieve than the former.
Our findings accord with a growing body of literature
demonstrating that products of the imagination—fiction,
fantasy, pretense, superstition, ritual—are structured by
causal constraints on reality. For instance, it’s been shown
that we prefer stories in which humans transform into animals
(a close ontological match) to stories in which humans
transform into plants (Kelly & Keil, 1985), and we prefer
stories in which animals transform into humans (an
ontological promotion) to stories in which humans transform
into animals (Griffiths, 2015). We prefer stories that violate
contingent truths (e.g., that Washington DC is the capital of
the US) to those that violate mathematical truths (e.g., that
two plus two equals four; Weisberg & Goodstein, 2009). We
prefer extraterrestrial creatures that honor the biological
properties of terrestrial creatures—e.g., bilateral symmetry,
cephalization—to those that do not (Ward, 1994). And we
prefer divine agents (gods) that honor the properties of human
psychology—e.g., that knowledge depends on perception,
that perception depends on attention, that attention depends
on interest—to those that violate such expectations (Lane,
Evans, Brink, & Wellman, 2016; Purzycki, 2013).
Our findings also accord with the emerging consensus that
causal constraints on imagination operate even in young
children (Buchsbaum, Bridgers, Weisberg, & Gopnik, 2012).
For instance, two-year-old children recognize that, when
pretending to pour tea from an empty teapot into an empty
cup, tea has been transferred from the teapot to the cup and
tea will spill out of the cup if the cup is overturned (Harris,
Kavanaugh, & Meredith, 1994). Four-year-old children can
distinguish the properties of one pretend world (the world of
Batman) from another (the world of SpongeBob) and keep
those properties separate when drawing inferences about
what is likely to be true in those worlds (Skolnick & Bloom,
2006). And four-year-old children distinguish fictional
stories that resemble reality (stories about finding ladybugs
and climbing trees) to those that do not (stories about finding
fairies and talking to trees), privileging the former as a more
secure source of information than the latter (Richert & Smith,
2011; Walker, Gopnik, & Ganea, 2015).
Our findings extend this literature by highlighting a
property of causal knowledge whose effects on imagination

have yet to be explored: its interconnectedness. Causal
knowledge is organized in abstract, coherent networks, and
our findings suggest that this form of organization constrains
our interpretation of events that violate such knowledge. Of
course, our findings provide only indirect evidence of the
influence of causal structure on the interpretation of causal
violations. Future research could explore that influence more
directly by measuring or manipulating the causal knowledge
relevant to a particular causal violation. For instance, a child
who has yet to discern the relation between density and
buoyancy should have no expectations regarding the role of
density in magical events pertaining to buoyancy (e.g., a spell
for making aluminum float in water vs. a spell for making
lead float in water), whereas a child who has discerned the
relation between density and buoyancy should hold such
expectations.
Our findings also highlight a quirk in how we reason about
physical possibility. Reasoning about physical possibility is a
form of modal cognition. Reasoning about moral
permissibility is also a form of modal cognition. The two
forms of reasoning share a number of similarities (Perkins,
1983; Sinnott-Armstrong, Raffman, & Asher, 1995). Both
are concerned with what is normatively true about the world
rather than what is descriptively true; both entail the
application of preexisting commitments (moral rules,
physical laws) to hypothetical situations; and both can be
expressed with the same modal verbs (“can,” “could,”
“might,” “must,” “should”). Indeed, studies that have
explored the two forms of reasoning in conjunction have
found parallels between them—developmental parallels in
the types of events judged impossible or impermissible
(Browne & Woolley, 2004; Chernyak, Kushnir, Sullivan, &
Wang, 2013) and cognitive parallels in the considerations
underlying those judgments (Shtulman & Tong, 2013).
That said, there is a key difference between the two forms
of reasoning: impermissibility comes in degrees but
impossibility does not—at least not on the surface. We
regularly rank some impermissible actions (e.g., murder) as
“more wrong” than others (e.g., stealing), and when
describing impermissible events, we use hedges like “a little
wrong,” “sorta wrong,” or “mostly wrong.” We tend not to
use hedges when describing impossible events, though; the
phrases “a little impossible,” “sorta impossible,” or “mostly
impossible” generate a tenth as many Google hits as
generated by their moral counterparts. Thus, what is odd
about the phenomenon at hand is not just that we apply causal
expectations to a-causal events but also that we treat the
distinction between possibility and impossibility as binary
rather than graded.
In conclusion, children and adults alike have consistent
expectations about the plausibility of magical events.
Suspending disbelief in one causal violation does not lead to
widespread suspension of disbelief; other causal expectations
are maintained, even if those expectations are no longer
appropriate. When Walt Disney specified that his featurelength films had to be plausibly impossible, he pinpointed an
intuition that is consistently honored in fiction but not well

2103

understood from a psychological point of view, even today.
Future research on graded notions of impossibility promises
to shed light both on the structure of causal cognition and the
structure of imagination.

References
Barrett, J. L., & Nyhof, M. A. (2001). Spreading non-natural
concepts: The role of intuitive conceptual structures in
memory and transmission of cultural materials. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100
Boyer, P. (1999). Cognitive tracks of cultural inheritance:
How evolved intuitive ontology governs cultural
transmission. American Anthropologist, 100, 876-889.
Browne, C. A., & Woolley, J. D. (2004). Preschoolers’
magical explanations for violations of physical, social, and
mental laws. Journal of Cognition and Development, 5,
239-260.
Buchsbaum, D., Bridgers, S., Weisberg, D. S., & Gopnik, A.
(2012). The power of possibility: Causal learning,
counterfactual reasoning, and pretend play. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B, 367, 2202-2212.
Chandler, M. J. & Lalonde, C. E. (1994). Surprising,
magical, and miraculous turns of events: Children’s
reactions to violations of early theories of mind and matter.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 12, 83-95.
Chernyak, N., Kushnir, T., Sullivan, K. M., & Wang, Q.
(2013). A Comparison of American and Nepalese
Children's Concepts of Freedom of Choice and Social
Constraint. Cognitive Science, 37, 1343-1355.
Gervais, W. M., & Henrich, J. (2010). The Zeus problem:
Why representational content biases cannot explain faith in
gods. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 10, 383-389.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets.
Psychological Review, 111, 3-32.
Griffiths, T. L. (2015). Revealing ontological commitments
by magic. Cognition, 136, 43-48.
Harris, P. L., Kavanaugh, R., & Meredith, M. (1994). Young
children’s comprehension of pretend episodes: Integration
of successive actions. Child Development, 65, 16-30.
Kelly, M. H., & Keil, F. C. (1985). The more things change...:
Metamorphoses and conceptual structure. Cognitive
Science, 9, 403-416.
Lane, A. (2006, Dec. 11). Wonderful world: What Walt
Disney made. The New Yorker.
Lane, J. D., Evans, E. M., Brink, K. A., & Wellman, H. M.
(2016). Developing concepts of ordinary and extraordinary
communication. Developmental Psychology, 52, 19-30.
Nichols, S. (2006). Imaginative blocks and impossibility: An
essay in modal psychology. In S. Nichols (Ed.), The
architecture of the imagination (237-255). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Norenzayan, A., Atran, S., Faulkner, J., & Schaller, M.
(2006). Memory and mystery: The cultural selection of
minimally counterintuitive narratives. Cognitive Science,
30, 531-553.

Perkins, M. (1983). Modal expressions in English. London,
UK: Pinter.
Pieraut-LeBonniec, G. (1980). The development of modal
reasoning: Genesis of necessity and possibility notions.
London, UK: Academic Press.
Purzycki, B. G. (2013). The minds of gods: A comparative
study of supernatural agency. Cognition, 129, 163-179.
Richert, R. A., & Smith, E. I. (2011). Preschoolers’
quarantining of fantasy stories. Child Development, 82,
1106-1119.
Rosengren, K. S. & Hickling, A. K. (1994). Seeing is
believing: Children’s explanations of commonplace,
magical, and extraordinary transformations. Child
Development, 65, 1605-1626.
Shtulman, A. (2008). Variation in the anthropomorphization
of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive
theories of religion. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1123-1138.
Shtulman, A. (2009). The development of possibility
judgment within and across domains. Cognitive
Development, 24, 293-309.
Shtulman, A., & Carey, S. (2007). Improbable or impossible?
How children reason about the possibility of extraordinary
events. Child Development, 78, 1015-1032.
Shtulman, A., & Lindeman, M. (2016, in press). Attributes of
God: Conceptual foundations of a foundational belief.
Cognitive Science.
Shtulman, A., & Tong, L. (2013). Cognitive parallels
between moral judgment and modal judgment.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20, 1327-1335.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W., Raffman, D., & Asher, N. (1995).
Modality, morality, and belief. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Skolnick, D., & Bloom, P. (2006). What does Batman think
about SpongeBob? Children’s understanding of the
fantasy/fantasy distinction. Cognition, 101, B9-B18.
Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., Wagenmakers, E. J., &
Blum, B. (2003). Inferring causal networks from
observations and interventions. Cognitive Science, 27, 453489.
Upal, M. A. (2011). Memory, mystery and coherence: Does
the presence of 2‐3 counterintuitive concepts predict
cultural success of a narrative? Journal of Cognition and
Culture, 11, 23-48.
Walker, C. M., Gopnik, A., & Ganea, P. A. (2015). Learning
to learn from stories: Children’s developing sensitivity to
the causal structure of fictional worlds. Child
Development, 86, 310-318.
Ward, T. B. (1994). Structured imagination: The role of
category structure in exemplar generation. Cognitive
Psychology, 27, 1-40.
Weisberg, D. S., & Goodstein, J. (2009). What belongs in a
fictional world? Journal of Cognition and Culture, 9, 6978.
Woolley, J. D. (1997). Thinking about fantasy: Are children
fundamentally different thinkers and believers from adults?
Child Development, 68, 991-1011.

2104

