The Determinants of Knowability
Samuel G. B. Johnson1, Kristen J. Kim2, & Frank C. Keil1
(samuel.johnson@yale.edu, kjkim@princeton.edu, frank.keil@yale.edu)
1
Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520 USA
2
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA
Abstract

amenable to empirical inquiry, it is seen as a more
appropriate domain for faith (Preston & Epley, 2009). We
spend our days pursuing the knowable, even as the
unknowable keeps us up at night.
Here, we ask what leads people to perceive a
phenomenon as knowable. Our strategy is to examine
those factors that practicing scientists and philosophers
have considered relevant to assessing knowability,
anticipating that laypeople may use similar reasoning.
Much evidence has accumulated that adults, and even
children, come to understand the world much as scientists
do (e.g., Carey, 1985; Gopnik, Meltzoff, & Kuhl, 1999;
Keil, 2003). This is not necessarily surprising: To the
extent that evolution has endowed us with reasoning
mechanisms that track reality, and to the extent that
culture has invented scientific methods that track reality,
one would expect those methods to converge. Thus,
laypeople and scientists potentially share idealized
methods for generating and assessing knowledge claims.
This approach led us to consider six factors, divisible
into methodological, intrinsic, and relational factors.
Methodological factors. The first two factors concern
the applicability of the (scientific or folk-scientific)
methods by which propositions are assessed:
Reducibility. According to classic definitions (e.g.,
Putnam, 1973), a higher-level proposition is reducible to
lower-level propositions (such as the facts of fundamental
physics) if the higher-level can be deduced from the
lower-level or, especially, if the higher-level can be
explained in terms of the lower level. If all phenomena
can be reduced to fundamental physics, this reduces the
burden of science to understanding the physics and its
implications. Arguably, then, to the extent that a
proposition is reducible to propositions about fundamental
physics, it should be more knowable.
Although the doctrine that all sciences can be reduced
to fundamental physics is controversial among
philosophers of science (e.g., Putnam, 1973; Strevens,
2009), it is plausible that laypeople see phenomena as
knowable to the degree they are reducible. This is in part
because laypeople are themselves reductionists: They
prefer lower-level explanations of higher-level
phenomena, within limits (Burke, Johnson, & Keil, 2016).
Falsifiability. The most well-known doctrine of
scientific knowability is certainly Popper’s theory of
falsificationism (Popper, 1959/1934). The idea is that a
proposition counts as scientific only if it can be proven
false by an empirical test. This proposal has likely
received such widespread influence among scientists
because it resonates with intuitive notions of how

Many propositions are not known to be true or false, and
many phenomena are not understood. What determines
what propositions and phenomena are perceived as
knowable or unknowable? We tested whether factors
related to scientific methodology (a proposition’s
reducibility and falsifiability), its intrinsic metaphysics (the
materiality of the phenomena and its scope of
applicability), and its relation to other knowledge (its
centrality to one’s other beliefs and values) influence
knowability. Across a wide range of naturalistic scientific
and pseudoscientific phenomena (Studies 1 and 2), as well
as artificial stimuli (Study 3), we found that reducibility
and falsifiability have strong direct effects on knowability,
that materiality and scope have strong indirect effects (via
reducibility and falsifiability), and that belief and value
centrality have inconsistent and weak effects on
knowability. We conclude that people evaluate the
knowability of propositions consistently with principles
proposed by epistemologists and practicing scientists.
Keywords: Lay epistemology; folk science; experimental
philosophy; psychology of religion.

Introduction
Facts and falsehoods abound in both lay and scientific
discourse. There are facts about the relationship between
electricity and magnetism, and the possibility of multiple
universes; about the mechanisms of cell division, and the
origins of life; about the relationship between supply and
demand, and the causes of crime. Beyond science,
ordinary humans debate, both with one another and with
themselves, questions about the existence of God, the
afterlife, and the beginning of the universe.
Science aims to separate the true from the false, as does
everyday cognition. Yet, sometimes it is unclear how to
determine what is true: Cognitive science, for example, is
much closer to understanding early vision than the nature
of conscious experience. Indeed, some view the latter
question as essentially unknowable (e.g., Chalmers, 1996;
cf. Dennett, 1991).
The question of what is knowable and what is
unknowable has important implications for individuals
and for society. Humans have a strong drive to understand
the world and explain their lives (e.g., Gopnik, 1998;
McAdams, 1993), filling in gaps in their understanding
using whatever means are available (Johnson, RajeevKumar, & Keil, 2015). Even though much is unknown,
we have developed various strategies for resolving this
ignorance. We allocate science funding not only on the
basis of what discoveries would be important, but also
what discoveries are feasible. And when a topic is not

1577

evidence relates to hypothesis (in philosophy, see Mill,
1967/1843; in psychology, see White, 1990).
Intrinsic factors. The next two factors concern the
intrinsic nature or content of the phenomenon itself:
Materiality. Some (alleged) phenomena manifest in the
realm of material things; that is, they affect entities
composed of physical particles. For instance, electricity is
a material phenomenon because it concerns the motions
of electrons, whereas the soul (if it existed) would be
immaterial by definition. Debates over the knowability of
how conscious experiences arise, for example, revolve
largely around the question of whether the mind is
material or immaterial (Chalmers, 1996).
Scope. Whereas phenomena in physics seem highly
knowable because they are highly material and reducible,
they also seem unknowable because they have an
extremely wide scope of application. For example,
consider the gravitational force. On the one hand, a
phenomenon such as gravity that impinges on everything
in the universe will present no difficulty to scientists in
terms of finding material to test. But on the other hand,
the scientific method is intrinsically comparative (e.g.,
Mill, 1967/1843). One cannot, for example, compare
those bits of matter that are subject to gravity from those
that are not. Perhaps in part for this reason, gravity is still
poorly understood among physicists.
Relational factors. Finally, we consider two factors
that concern the ways that propositions relate to each
other in one’s broader system of beliefs:
Belief Centrality. Some propositions are central to our
conceptions of the world; if we no longer believed that
2+3=5, for instance, the world would have to be
constituted in a wholly different way (if this is even
conceivable). To the extent that a proposition is
foundational to our other knowledge, that other
knowledge can act as evidence in favor of that
proposition. To some degree, this mirrors the approach to
epistemology taken by rationalist philosophers such as
Descartes. In the Meditations, Descartes is able to justify
knowledge of the external world only on the basis of
God’s existence (Descartes, 2013/1641).
Although laypeople probably would not endorse
rationalist approaches to knowledge justification, they
may nonetheless see epistemically central propositions as
more certain than less central propositions. For this
reason, such propositions may be seen as less falsifiable
and, perhaps counterintuitively, as less knowable. Put
differently, some beliefs are axiomatic or basic: They are
not susceptible to contradiction from other knowledge
sources because those other sources are themselves
dependent on that knowledge (a view known as
foundationalism; e.g., Plantinga, 1981). Yet, if people are
both foundationalists and falsificationists, then basic
beliefs may actually be seen as fundamentally
unknowable because they are unfalsifiable.
Value Centrality. Finally, some propositions are not
central to one’s other beliefs, but instead to one’s values.

For some (e.g., Kant, 2002/1785; Lewis, 1952), our moral
sense is the most compelling evidence for God’s
existence. In addition to reasons of epistemic justification,
people may also have motivational reasons to believe in
propositions that justify their values: “If there is no God,”
said Jean-Paul Sartre, “then everything is permitted.”
Whereas Sartre was an atheist, and hence accepted the
nihilist conclusion of this conditional, many people who
accept the conditional are more likely to infer the
contrapositive: Since some things are not permitted, God
must exist. Such motivated reasoning may relegate highly
value-laden beliefs to the realm of unknowability.
The Current Work. On the basis of the idea that
laypeople and scientists may share idealized standards for
generating and assessing knowledge, we predicted that
reducibility and falsifiability would be especially
important, as these criteria govern the methodological
basis on which knowledge is achieved. The psychology
literature makes less clear predictions about the intrinsic
or relational factors. One possibility we explore is that the
intrinsic factors are relevant insofar as they are relevant to
the methodological factors (e.g., material things lend
themselves more to reduction and falsification.)
We test these six potential factors in three studies. First,
we measure judgments of each factor for various
scientific items (e.g., consciousness, economic cycles) in
Study 1, and various pseudoscience items (e.g.,
clairvoyance, karma) in Study 2. Then, Study 3 adopts an
experimental approach, attempting to replicate the
patterns from Studies 1 and 2 using controlled stimuli.

Studies 1 and 2
In our initial studies, we tested the relationships among
the six methodological, intrinsic, and relational factors for
a set of 40 scientific and 30 pseudoscientific phenomena.

Method
Participants. We recruited 350 participants from
Amazon Mechanical Turk, who were randomly assigned
to complete the science items of Study 1 (N = 176) or the
pseudoscience items of Study 2 (N = 174).
Items. We developed 40 science items for Study 1 and
30 pseudoscience items for Study 2. For each item,
participants were asked to “consider the topic below.”
The topic was presented in a box, together with a brief
parenthetical description. For example, one of the items in
Study 1 read “Determinism (i.e., the idea that all events
are the results of prior conditions, such as the movement
of atoms or previous physical events)” and another read
“The determinants of economic cycles (i.e., the causes
behind economic recessions, depressions, etc.).” In Study
2, one item read “Clairvoyance (i.e., being able to know
things about objects, people, or events without using the
senses)” and another read “Karma (i.e., the moral sum of
a person’s actions that determines his or her future fate).”
Measures. Between-subjects, participants completed a
measure of either knowability, reducibility, falsifiability,

1578

materiality, scope, belief centrality, or value centrality (N
= 50 per condition) for either the 40 science or the 30
pseudoscience items. The scales were phrased as follows:
Knowability. “To what extent do you think it would be
possible for scientists to attain a complete understanding
of this topic?” from 0 (“Not at all”) to 10 (“Completely”).
Reducibility. “To what extent do you think a complete
understanding of this phenomenon would invoke only
facts about the movement of particles and purely physical
components?” from 0 (“Not at all material”) to 10 (“Very
material”).
Falsifiability. “Suppose one scientist made a claim
about the above topic, and another scientist wanted to
design an experiment to find out whether the claim is true
or false. To what extent do you think it is possible to
design such an experiment?” from 0 (“Not at all
possible”) to 10 (“Completely possible”).
Materiality. “How much do you think the above topic is
within the material realm?” from 0 (“Not at all material”)
to 10 (“Very material”).
Scope. “Consider everything in the universe. How
many of these things does the above topic apply to?” from
0 (“Very few”) to 10 (“Very many”).
Belief Centrality. “Consider all the things you could
know about the topic above. If all of this knowledge
turned out to be wrong, how many other things that you
know would also turn out to be wrong?” from 0 (“Very
few”) to 10 (“Very many”).
Value Centrality. After reading each topic description,
participants were asked: “How important is the above
topic to your moral beliefs or values?” from 0 (“Not at all
important”) to 10 (“Very important”).
K

R

R .44*** —
.84*** .10
F
M .75*** .47***
–.07
S
.63***
BC .22º
.22º
VC .39*** .27*
C .33**
.26*
º < .10
* < .05

F

M

S

BC

—
.61***
–.34**
–.02
.12

—
.01
.19
.38**

—
.52***
.47***

—
.79***

.06

.31**
** < .01

Correlations. The first-order correlations among the
measures are given in Table 1.
Both methodological factors were associated with
knowability. There was a moderately strong relationship
between knowability and reducibility, r = .44, such that
phenomena were seen as more knowable when reducible
to fundamental physics. There was also a very strong
relationship between knowability and falsifiability, r =
.84, such that phenomena were seen as more knowable to
the extent that disagreements could be resolved in terms
of empirical tests. These correlations are both consistent
with popular views among scientists and philosophers of
science. Interestingly, falsifiability and reducibility were
almost completely uncorrelated, r = .10, suggesting that
people conceptualize these as independent dimensions.
The intrinsic factors also seem to have a relationship
with knowability and with the methodological factors.
Materiality was a consistent predictor not only of
knowability, r = .75, but also of reducibility, r = .47, and
of falsifiability, r = .61. One possible interpretation of this
pattern is that more material things are seen as more
knowable because they are more reducible and more
subject to empirical falsification. We test this possibility
using regression analyses below.
Although scope was not associated with knowability, r
= –.07, it was associated with both falsifiability and
reducibility: Phenomena that applied to very many things
were seen as more reducible, r = .63 (perhaps because the
most general phenomena tend to be lower on the
reductionist hierarchy), but as less falsifiable, r = –.34
(perhaps because there are few opportunities to observe
the absence of something that is ubiquitous). Thus, scope
may have an indirect relationship with knowability, via
these two opposite pathways (see regressions below).
The results for the relational factors are somewhat less
clear. Because these measures were highly correlated with
each other, r = .79, we averaged them to form a composite
Centrality measure. This measure was a significant
predictor of knowability, r = .33, although the reason is
less clear from the data. We had hypothesized that highly
central beliefs might be seen as less falsifiable (and hence
less knowable), but this was not borne out by the data. We
further analyze and discuss this effect below.
Regression Models. Table 2 shows regression
coefficients for a model predicting knowability judgments
from just the methodological factors (reducibility and
falsifiability) in Step 1, and from all factors in Step 2.
(The composite centrality measure was used to avoid
multicollinearity.) This reveals that the methodological
factors (reducibility and falsifiability) were strong
predictors of knowability (b = 0.58 and 0.66, respectively,
in Step 2), even after adjusting for the other predictors.
Although reducibility and falsifiability seem to
completely screen off materiality (b = 0.09, ns), there
does seem to be a residual effect of scope (b = –0.27),
such that wider scope phenomena were seen as less
knowable, even after accounting for the other factors.

.52*** —
*** < .001

Note. Entries correspond to knowability (K), reducibility
(R), falsifiability (F), materiality (M), scope (S), belief
centrality (BC), value centrality (VC), and a composite
measure averaging belief and value centrality (C).
Table 1: First-order correlations (combined dataset).

Results
For each item, we calculated the mean score on each
judgment, across all participants making that judgment for
the item. Analyses are all at the item level. (However,
Study 3 will rely on a subject-level analysis.)

1579

Finally, centrality seems to be associated with
knowability, such that more phenomena more central to
beliefs and values are seen as more knowable (b = 0.45).

This analysis revealed that even within each item set,
the relationship between reducibility and falsifiability was
robust. There was again no consistent relationship with
materiality once the other factors are accounted for, and
the relationship with scope held up only for the science
items. The most substantial divergence between the
combined and more fine-grained analyses was for
centrality: Whereas centrality was a significant positive
predictor on the combined dataset, it does not have any
consistent relationship with knowability within either
dataset. This suggests that this effect was spurious, caused
by differences across (rather than within) datasets.
We can also use these data to look at what predicts the
methodological factors themselves, using regressions to
predict reducibility (Table 5) and falsifiability (Table 6).

DV: Knowability
Step 1
R
F
M
S
C
R2

.45 (.06)***
.83 (.05)***

.827

Step 2
.58 (.09)***
.66 (.06)***
.09 (.10)
–.27 (.07)***
.45 (.08)***
.898

Table 2: Unstandardized bs and SEs (combined dataset)

DV: Reducibility

One concern about these analyses, however, is that they
collapse across the science and pseudoscience items,
which may differ in a variety of ways. Indeed, even at a
gross level, the means significantly differed between these
item sets on all measures (Table 3).

K***
R***
F***
M***
S*
BC***
VC***

Study 1
(Science)
5.90 (1.16)
5.10 (1.50)
5.97 (1.70)
5.22 (1.01)
4.95 (2.39)
5.54 (1.19)
5.51 (1.21)

Step 1
F
M
S
C
R2

Study 2
(Pseudoscience)
2.91 (1.16)
3.41 (0.82)
4.22 (1.46)
3.59 (0.73)
3.95 (1.43)
4.43 (0.86)
3.44 (1.19)

DV: Falsifiability
Step 1
R
M
S
C
R2

Thus, correlations between knowability and the other
measures could potentially be driven by gross differences
between item sets rather than meaningful differences
among items. To address this concern, we repeated the
regression of knowability judgments on the predictors,
separately for Studies 1 and 2 (Table 4).

.92 (.13)***
–.30 (.08)***
.496

Step 2
.16 (.18)
.78 (.19)***
–.43 (.14)**
.16 (.17)
.505

Table 6: Model predicting falsifiability (Studies 1 and 2).
The intrinsic factors both had large and consistent
influences on the methodological factors. Materiality had
a strong, positive effect on both reducibility and
falsifiability judgments (b = 0.63 and 0.78, respectively).
This indicates that the strong correlation between
materiality and knowability is due to the effects of
materiality on reducibility and falsifiability, rather than
any direct effect on knowability.
Consistent with the first-order correlations, scope had a
strongly positive effect on reducibility but a strongly
negative effect on falsifiability (b = 0.59 and –0.43,
respectively), indicating opposite indirect effects on
knowability. That is, to the extent that a phenomenon
applies to many things in the universe, it is seen as more
reducible to physics but less falsifiable. These two
pathways seem to largely cancel out, leading to a weak
relationship between scope and knowability overall.

DV: Knowability

R
F
M
S
C
R2

.606

.07 (.08)
.63 (.12)***
.59 (.07)***
–.38 (.10)***
.678

Table 5: Model predicting reducibility (Studies 1 and 2).

Table 3: Descriptive statistics (Studies 1 and 2)

Study 1
(Science)
.45 (.13)**
.68 (.07)***
–.23 (.14)º
–.25 (.09)**
.16 (.10)
.823

.57 (.10)***
.45 (.06)***

Step 2

Study 2
(Pseudoscience)
.47 (.18)*
.35 (.10)**
.46 (.27)
–.03 (.16)
–.34 (.26)
.848

Table 4: Unstandardized bs and SEs (Studies 1 and 2)

1580

Centrality appears to have a negative association with
reducibility (b = –0.38), after adjusting for the other
factors, such that phenomena more central to one’s beliefs
and values tend to be less reducible to physics. However,
centrality seems more likely to be an effect of reducibility
than a cause, particularly because centrality has no clear
relationship with knowability, whereas reducibility does.
Centrality also has no relationship with falsifiability (b =
0.16, ns), consistent with the idea that centrality is not a
key driver of knowability.

that (for example) “Currently, the biological phenomenon
of zenilan synthesis is not understood.” After a brief
description of the item (varying across conditions; see
below), participants were asked to rate “To what extent do
you agree with the claim that someday in the future,
scientists will understand everything there is to know
about zenilan synthesis?” on a scale from 0 (“Strongly
Disagree”) to 10 (“Strongly Agree”).
Manipulations. There were 12 within-subjects
conditions in a 6 (factor: Reducibility, Falsifiability,
Materiality, Scope, Belief Centrality, Value Centrality) x
2 (High, Low) design. (We refer to these conditions by
the initial letter of the factor, with a ‘+’ or ‘–’ sign; e.g.,
high materiality is denoted ‘M+’.) Only the target factor
was described for each item. Each description began with
“Although zenilan synthesis is not understood, it is widely
believed that…” followed by phrasing varying across
conditions. In the R+/R– conditions:
…a complete understanding would invoke [only facts
about / facts that cannot be reduced to] the movement
of particles and purely physical components.
In the F+ and F– conditions:
…if a scientist wanted to make a claim about it, it
would [not] be possible for another scientist to design
an experiment to find out whether the claim is true or
false.
In the M+ and M– conditions:
…it is [not] within the material realm.
In the S+ and S– conditions:
…it [applies to many / does not apply to most] things in
the universe.
In the BC+ and BC– conditions:
…if everything you could know about zenilan synthesis
was wrong, very [many / few] other things that you
know would also be wrong.
In the VC+ and VC– conditions:
…it is [very / not at all] important to many moral
beliefs and values.
The 12 conditions were balanced with the 12 items for
each participant. The ‘+’ and ‘–’ versions of each factor
were always adjacent in the presentation order and
matched for domain (physical, biological, or
psychological). The order of the 6 factor conditions was
randomized, as was the order of the ‘+’ and ‘–’ versions.

Discussion
Overall, these results paint a consistent picture of what
determines knowability. Across many ways of looking at
the data, the methodological factors of reducibility and
falsifiability play a large role, accounting for the majority
of the variance in knowability. The intrinsic factors
(scope and materiality) appear to have indirect effects on
knowability via reducibility and falsifiability, but little or
no direct effect. Finally, centrality appears to be
associated with reducibility, but is more likely an effect
than a cause. These folk-scientific methods appear to
closely mirror the way that professional scientists and
philosophers think about what is knowable.
Despite these consistent findings across very different
sets of items, and despite the good model fits (accounting
for 80–90% of the variance in knowability, and 50–70%
of the variance in reducibility and falsifiability), these
results are correlational. Thus, conjectures about the
direct and indirect causal relationships are difficult to
assess. We therefore adopted an experimental approach
for converging evidence.

Study 3
In Study 3, we used artificial stimuli to look more directly
at the relationships of the six factors with knowability.
We would predict that the methodological factors should
have strong relationships with knowability, consistent
Studies 1 and 2. We would also expect a relationship with
at least materiality (given its positive effects on both
reducibility and falsifiability) and perhaps scope (given its
positive effect on reducibility and negative effect on
falsifiability). We would not predict a relationship with
belief or value centrality, since these factors did not seem
to play a causal role in Studies 1 and 2.

Results and Discussion

Method

The results were consistent with the patterns of influence
uncovered in Studies 1 and 2 (see Table 7). Propositions
high in reducibility and falsifiability were rated more
knowable than propositions low on these factors [t(98) =
4.42, p < .001 and t(98) = 7.34, p < .001], consistent with
the direct effects of these factors in Studies 1 and 2. In
addition, propositions corresponding to phenomena that
were highly material and wide in scope were rated more
knowable than propositions low on these factors [t(98) =
8.01, p < .001 and t(98) = 5.58, p < .001], consistent with
the indirect effects of these factors uncovered in Studies 1

Participants. We recruited 100 participants from
Amazon Mechanical Turk; 1 was excluded from analysis
due to missing data.
Items. Participants completed 12 novel items (4
concerning physical phenomena [e.g., nerium force], 4
concerning biological phenomena [e.g., zenilan
synthesis], and 4 concerning psychological phenomena
[e.g., perception cavelation]). For each item, participants
were told that “There are many unknown phenomena in
our universe that scientists are trying to understand” and

1581

and 2, via reducibility and falsifiability. However,
centrality to beliefs and values did not influence
knowability judgments [t(98) = –0.52, p = .61 and t(98) =
1.32, p = .19], again consistent with Studies 1 and 2,
where these factors appeared to be correlated with, but not
causally antecedent to, knowability.

ways. First, we are expanding on Studies 1 and 2 to test
other factors, such as domain (an intrinsic factor), that
might be associated with knowability and might also help
to explain some of the variance in the other intrinsic and
methodological factors. Second, we are expanding on
Study 3 to further test the relationships among factors
(e.g., the indirect effects via falsifiability and
reducibility). Third, we are looking at individual
differences that might predict perceptions of knowability
(e.g., religiosity, trust in science, and need for cognitive
closure). Finally, we are testing real-world applications of
these findings, such as ways to frame real phenomena so
as to influence their perceived knowability and potential
downstream consequences.

DV: Knowability
R ***
F ***
M ***
S ***
BC
VC

+

–

6.05 (2.45)
6.54 (2.52)
6.45 (2.20)
6.30 (2.48)
5.28 (2.94)
5.82 (2.68)

5.19 (2.53)
4.30 (2.94)
4.16 (2.81)
4.88 (2.69)
5.37 (2.56)
5.50 (2.67)

References
Burke, N., Johnson, S.G.B., & Keil, F.C. (2016). Folk
reductionism. Manuscript in preparation.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. MIT
Press.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The conscious mind. Oxford
University Press.
Dennett, D.C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Boston,
MA: Little Brown.
Descartes, R. (2013/1641). Meditations on First
Philosophy. Cambridge University Press.
Gopnik, A. (1998). Explanation as orgasm. Minds &
Machines, 8, 101–118.
Gopnik, A., Meltzoff, A.N., & Kuhl, P. (1999). The
scientist in the crib. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Johnson, S.G.B., Rajeev-Kumar, G., & Keil, F.C. (2015).
Sense-making under ignorance. Manuscript under
review.
Kant, I. (2002/1785). Groundwork for the metaphysics of
morals. Yale University Press.
Keil, F.C. (2003). Folkscience: Coarse interpretations of a
complex reality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 368–
373.
Lewis, C.S. (1952). Mere Christianity. New York, NY:
HarperCollins.
McAdams, D.P. (1993). The stories we live by. New
York, NY: Guildford Press.
Mill, J.S. (1967/1843). A system of logic ratiocinative and
inductive. London, UK: Longmans.
Plantinga, A. (1981). Is belief in God properly basic?
Noûs, 15, 41–51.
Preston, J., & Epley, N. (2009). Science and God: An
automatic opposition between ultimate explanations.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 238–
241.
Popper, K. (1959/1934). The logic of scientific discovery.
London, UK: Routledge.
Putnam, H. (1973). Reductionism and the nature of
psychology. Cognition, 2, 131–146.
Strevens, M. (2008). Depth. Harvard University Press.
White, P.A. (2009). Ideas about causation in philosophy
and psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 3–18.

Table 7: Means (SDs) in Study 3.
These results are consistent with the picture that
knowability is determined directly by methodological
factors, and indirectly by intrinsic factors. One concern is
that we cannot fully rule out the possibility that relational
factors (belief or value centrality) also have an influence
on perceived knowability, because merely describing a
proposition as central would not manipulate that
proposition’s actual centrality relative to one’s other
beliefs (especially given that these stimuli were artificial).
That said, our manipulations were strong enough to
produce effects of the other factors. In conjunction with
the naturalistic (but correlational) results of Experiments
1 and 2, we think it unlikely that centrality plays a key
role in perceived knowability for most phenomena.

General Discussion
When is a proposition knowable (even if unknown), or a
phenomenon understandable (even if not understood)?
Consistent with the idea that people act as intuitive
scientists, people adopt some of the same epistemological
principles as philosophers and practitioners of science:
Propositions are knowable to the extent that they can be
reduced to more fundamental facts and to the extent that
they are subject to empirical falsification. These
methodological factors depend in turn on facts about the
intrinsic physics or metaphysics of the underlying
phenomena: They are seen as more reducible to the extent
that they are material and wider in scope, and as more
falsifiable to the extent that they are material and
narrower in scope. Although relational factors (centrality
to one’s beliefs and values) were sometimes associated
with knowability (and also with some of the other
factors), these associations do not appear to be causal. We
nonetheless regard the issue of belief and value centrality
(both their causes and their consequences) as an intriguing
direction for future work.
We are currently building on these findings in several

1582

