Think Fast! Mental-state Language is Related to the Speed of False-belief Reasoning
in Adulthood
Erin Roby (eroby2@ucmerced.edu)
Psychological Sciences, 5200 Lake Rd.
Merced, CA 95343 USA

Rose M. Scott (rscott@ucmerced.edu)
Psychological Sciences, 5200 Lake Rd.
Merced, CA 95343 USA

Abstract
When tested appropriately, infants appear to demonstrate
false-belief understanding in the first year of life. Some have
argued that this is inconsistent with the well-established
relationship between social experience and preschoolers’
false-belief performance. We argue that these two sets of
findings are not inconsistent because the ability to attribute
false beliefs to others is necessary but not sufficient for falsebelief performance, and we propose several ways that one
social factor, hearing and using mental-state language, might
relate to false-belief performance throughout the lifespan. We
tested this account by examining the relationship between
adults’ use of mental-state language and their false-belief
understanding. Participants’ use of mental-state language was
related to how quickly they could accurately predict the
behavior of agents on the basis of desires and beliefs. These
findings provide the first evidence that mental-state talk and
false-belief performance are related into adulthood.
Keywords: false-belief understanding; theory of mind;
mental-state reasoning; social cognition

Introduction
As members of a social species, much of our everyday life
involves predicting and interpreting the behavior of other
individuals. Adults often do this by attributing to others
unobservable mental states such as goals and beliefs.
Researchers have long been interested in the nature and
development of this psychological reasoning ability.
In particular, considerable research has focused on the
ability to understand that others can be mistaken, or hold
false beliefs, about the world. False-belief understanding
provides evidence of the ability to recognize that mental
states are internal representations of the world and thus they
can be false. For several decades, false-belief understanding
was primarily investigated using elicited-response tasks,
which require children to answer direct questions about the
behavior of a mistaken agent (for a review, see Wellman,
Cross, & Watson, 2001). In one such task (Baron-Cohen,
Leslie & Frith, 1985), children hear a story enacted with
props: Sally puts a marble in a basket and then leaves; in her
absence, Anne moves the marble to a nearby box. Children
are then asked where Sally will look for her marble when
she returns. Beginning around age 4, children typically
indicate that Sally will look in the basket, where she falsely
believes the marble to be. In contrast, younger children

incorrectly respond that Sally will look in the marble’s
actual location. This widely replicated finding suggested
that the capacity to attribute false beliefs to others did not
emerge until at least age 4 (e.g., Wellman et al., 2001).
However, a growing body of evidence suggests that this
ability might be present much earlier than previously
thought: when tested via other means, infants appear to
demonstrate false-belief understanding as early as 6 months
of age (for a review, see Baillargeon, Scott, & Bian, 2016).
For instance, infants visually anticipate where a mistaken
agent will search for an object (e.g., Southgate, Senju, &
Csibra, 2007; Surian & Geraci, 2012), look reliably longer
when an agent’s actions are inconsistent with her false belief
(e.g., Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Träuble, Marinović, &
Pauen, 2010), and use an agent’s false belief to guide their
own responses to that agent (e.g., Buttelmann, Carpenter, &
Tomasello, 2009; Southgate, Chevallier, & Csibra, 2010).
These positive findings have led many researchers to
conclude that the capacity to attribute false beliefs to others
emerges in the first year of life (e.g., Baillargeon et al.,
2016; Buttelmann et al., 2009; Carruthers, 2013; Kovács,
Téglás, & Endress, 2010, Southgate et al., 2007).
Some researchers have challenged accounts that ascribe
false-belief understanding to infants on the grounds that
they fail to address the role of social factors in the
development of this ability (e.g., Ruffman, 2014; San Juan
& Astington, 2012). Considerable research has shown that
preschoolers’ performance on elicited-response false-belief
tasks is correlated with individual differences in their social
experience (e.g., McAlister & Peterson, 2007; Meins et al.,
2003; Ruffman, Slade & Crow, 2002). In particular, there is
a robust relationship between preschooler’s performance on
elicited-response false-belief tasks and their exposure to and
personal use of mental-state language – utterances that refer
to psychological states such as think, know, and believe (e.g.
Ensor & Hughes, 2008; Ruffman et al., 2002). It has been
suggested that if the capacity to represent false beliefs is
present in the first year of life, there is “little room for social
factors to play a direct role” in children’s false-belief
performance (p. 110, San Juan & Astington, 2012), and thus
the reason for these associations is unclear (e.g. Ruffman,
2014; San Juan & Astington, 2012).
However, many researchers have argued that the capacity
to represent false beliefs does not guarantee successful

2525

performance in false-belief tasks (e.g., Baillargeon, Scott, &
He, 2010; Bloom & German, 2000; Carruthers, 2013; Roth
& Leslie, 1998). Studies have identified several factors that
impact children’s performance in both elicited-response and
non-elicited-response false-belief tasks (e.g., Lewis &
Osborne, 1990; Rubio-Fernández & Geurts, 2013; Scott &
Roby, 2015; Yazdi et al., 2006) If, as these findings suggest,
the capacity to represent beliefs is not sufficient for
successful false-belief reasoning, then there is opportunity
for social factors to impact false-belief performance.
Specifically, we propose that hearing and using mentalstate language might be related to false-belief performance
in several ways. First, individuals who frequently engage in
conversations about mental states may more readily attend
to and consider the mental states of others. Second, such
conversations provide practice inhibiting one’s own beliefs
and desires in order to focus on those of another. Third,
individuals who often discuss others’ mental states may be
more practiced at inferring others’ mental states based on
the (sometimes limited) information available. Finally,
individuals who frequently hear and use mental-state
language may more rapidly retrieve information about
others’ mental states from memory when necessary.
This account predicts that the relationship between
mental-state talk and false-belief understanding should not
be confined to performance on elicited-response tasks in the
preschool years: it should be evident across the lifespan.
Support for this prediction comes from recent evidence that
parents’ use of mental-state language is associated with 2.5year-olds’ performance on an anticipatory-looking falsebelief task (Roby & Scott, 2015). In addition, deaf infants
raised by hearing parents are exposed to significantly fewer
mental-state references than their hearing counterparts
(Morgan et al., 2014) and fail anticipatory-looking falsebelief tasks (Meristo et al., 2012). These findings suggest
that exposure to mental-state language is related to falsebelief understanding prior to the preschool years.
Here we sought complementary evidence for this account
by examining the relationship between personal use of
mental-state language and false-belief performance in
adults. To our knowledge, no prior studies have examined
this relationship in adulthood. Although adults are certainly
able to represent mental states, their mental-state reasoning
exhibits considerable within- and between-individual
variability (e.g., Brown-Schmidt, 2009; Harkness et al.,
2010; McKinnon & Moscovitch, 2007). For instance, adults
are faster at predicting the behavior of an agent who wishes
to approach rather than avoid an object (e.g., Apperly et al.,
2011), and adults from collectivist cultures exhibit faster
and more accurate perspective taking than adults from
individualistic cultures (e.g., Wu & Keysar, 2007). If, as we
argue, personal use of mental-state language is related to
greater attention to and consideration of others’ mental
states, then adults’ use of such language should be related to
their performance on false-belief tasks.
The present study tested this prediction. Adult
participants described images of people or physical objects

and then completed speeded and unspeeded mental-state
reasoning tasks. We predicted that the extent to which
participants used more mental-state language when
discussing people than when describing objects (i.e.
situations in which mental states were not relevant) would
be related to their false-belief performance, and that this
relationship might be most apparent when participants were
required to quickly and accurately predict another
individual’s behavior under time pressure.

Method
Participants
71 adults (62 females) participated for course credit. An
additional 4 adults were tested but excluded, 1 because she
withdrew from the study, 2 because their vocabulary scores
were below the 10th percentile, and 1 because he did not
describe the images aloud in the picture-description task.

Materials and Procedure
All participants first completed a picture-description task.
Stimuli consisted of 27 images of people or objects. Images
were presented one at a time on a computer screen.
Participants were instructed to describe aloud what they
thought was happening in each picture. Once participants
finished describing an image, they pressed a button on the
keyboard to advance to the next image. Participants were
told to take as much time as they needed to complete the
task. During the task, audio and video were recorded to disk
using the computer’s built-in microphone and camera.
Participants next completed a speeded belief-desire task, a
Strange Stories task, a stroop task, and a digit-span task in a
randomized order.
The speeded belief-desire task was administered using
PsychoPy (Peirce, 2007). On each trial, a short story about
an agent was presented in the center of the computer screen.
Once participants read the story, they pressed any key. The
story was then replaced by a question about what the agent
would do next. After 1s, two response options appeared, one
in each of the bottom corners of the screen. Participants
pressed either the left or right arrow key to select a
response. Participants were told to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible.
Participants first viewed two practice trials in which they
read a story about an agent (e.g., Dennis loves pizza and
hates vegetables. He is hungry and goes to the store.) and
then answered a question about what the agent would do
next (e.g., What will he buy?). Participants then completed
12 test trials; the stories in these trials were adapted from
prior research (e.g., Bennett & Galpert, 1992; Leslie &
Polizzi, 1998; Roby & Scott, 2015; Scott & Roby, 2015;
Setoh, Scott, & Baillargeon, 2011; Yazdi et al., 2006). In
each story, an agent held either a true or a false belief about
the location of an object. In half the stories, the agent
wanted to approach the object and in the other half the agent
wanted to avoid the object. We varied the agent’s desire
because, as mentioned previously, adults find situations in

2526

which an agent wants to avoid an object more challenging to
reason about than those in which an agent wants to approach
an object (Apperly et al., 2011). We therefore expected that
we would be maximally likely to see individual differences
in performance in avoidance situations. Belief (true, false)
and desire (approach, avoid) were crossed to create four
story types; participants read three stories of each type.
The Strange Stories Task (White, Hill, Happé, 2009)
consisted of 14 stories: 8 described social situations
(mental-state stories), 3 described events with physical
causes (e.g. an old woman slips on her icy doorstep, causing
her to need an X-ray; physical stories), and 3 described
natural phenomena (e.g. Sun melting snow causes the
formation of puddles; nature stories). Stories were presented
in one of four orders; each order was randomized with the
constraint that no more than 2 stories of a given type
occurred in a row. Once participants finished reading the
story, it was removed and they were asked to provide a
written response to a question about what happened in the
story. For example, in one mental-state story, a nervous
woman mistakes an innocent man for a robber. She tells him
to take her purse and asks him not to hurt her. The question
asked, “Why did she say that?” Participants were told to
take as much time as they needed to complete the task.
The stroop task (Stroop, 1935) was administered using
Inquisit 4.0.3 (2004). The task consisted of 56 experimental
and 28 control trials. In experimental trials, participants saw
one of 4 color words (red, blue, green, black); in half the
trials the color of the text matched the word (congruent
trials) while in the remaining trials it did not (incongruent
trials). In control trials, participants saw a box displayed in
one of the four colors. Participants were asked to respond to
the color of the stimulus as quickly and accurately as
possible by pressing a corresponding arrow key.
The digit-span task was also administered using Inquisit
(e.g., Woods et al., 2011). On each trial, participants viewed
a series of digits one at a time on the screen. The digits then
disappeared, and after 1s a box appeared. Participants were
instructed to type the digits they had seen in either forwards
or backwards order using the keyboard. They completed 14
forward trials followed by 14 backwards trials.
The stroop and digit-span tasks were included to control
for differences in inhibitory control and working memory,
which correlate with adults’ mental-state reasoning (e.g.
German & Hehman, 2006, McKinnen & Moskovitch).
Finally, participants completed the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Task (PPVT-4; Dunn & Dunn, 2012). On each
trial, participants indicated which of four images
corresponded to a spoken word. This measure was included
to control for differences in English fluency, which could
impact participants’ picture descriptions or comprehension
of the stories in the mental-state reasoning tasks.

Coding and Analysis
Picture-description task We transcribed participants’
descriptions of each image and then used the Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC; Pennebaker, Booth, &

Francis, 2007) program to identify utterances that included
mental-state terms. These terms were divided into 5
categories: cognition (e.g., think, know), desire (e.g., want,
need), emotion (e.g., happy, angry), modulations of
assertion (e.g., maybe, might), and other mental-state words
(e.g., remember, wonder). The mental-state words included
words from previous work investigating parental mentalstate talk during parent-child interactions (e.g., Ruffman et
al., 2002) as well as synonyms for those words that are not
generally used in child-directed speech (e.g., devastated,
pondering). We omitted the word “like” because adults use
it in several ways that are unrelated to mental states (e.g.
“It’s, like, two people at the beach”).
For each participant, we calculated the percentage of
utterances in each description that contained each category
of word. For each category, we then averaged across all the
pictures of a given type (i.e. people, objects). Next, we
calculated difference scores for each category of mentalstate talk by subtracting the percentage of mental-state
utterances made in reference to object scenes from the
percentage of mental-state utterances made in reference to
images of people (see Table 1). This difference score thus
reflected the extent to which participants selectively used
mental-state language when discussing other individuals.
Table 1: Mean (SD) percentage of utterances in the picturedescription task containing mental-state terms by image
type, as well as difference scores (people – object)
People

Object

Difference
Score

Cognitive

5.6 (4.4)

4.8 (5.9)

.9 (6.0)

Desire

1.3 (1.7)

.2 (.6)

1.2 (1.8)

Emotion

11.2 (5.7)

.8 (2.2)

10.4 (5.7)

Modulations
of assertion

22.3 (12.2)

18.0 (15.0)

4.3 (11.9)

Other

2.9 (3.0)

1.3 (2.9)

1.5 (3.2)

Total

36.2 (13.0)

23.8 (15.4)

12.5 (14.2)

Belief-desire Task One story was eliminated because more
than 50% of participants responded incorrectly, suggesting a
problem with the item. For the remaining 11 items, we
eliminated responses with reaction times less than .15s or
more than 3 standard deviations above the mean (n = 20).
For each participant, we calculated the percentage of correct
responses and average reaction time across all items, as well
as separately for each story type (true-belief approach, truebelief avoid, false-belief approach, false-belief avoid).
Strange Stories Task Consistent with previous research
(e.g. White et al., 2009), responses were scored on a 3-point
scale. Participants received 0 points for responses that
involved irrelevant or incorrect facts, 1 point for responses
that were factually correct but failed to acknowledge key
elements that were necessary for interpreting the story, and

2527

2 points for fully correct responses that were factually
correct and referenced the components of the story
necessary for accurate interpretation. We calculated
participant’s average score for each story type (i.e. mental
state, physical, and nature).
Inhibitory Control Trials in the stroop task with reaction
times less than .15s or 2.5 standard deviations above the
mean were excluded. We then subtracted participants’
average reaction time on congruent trials from their average
reaction time on incongruent trials.
Working Memory Consistent with prior work (German &
Hehman, 2006), we used participants’ backwards digit span
(i.e. the highest number of digits participants recalled
backwards correctly before producing two consecutive
errors) as a measure of their working memory.
Receptive Vocabulary The PPVT was scored according to
published procedures for this measure (Dunn & Dunn,
2012). Participants’ raw scores were converted to
standardized scores for analysis.

Results
Table 2: Mean (SD) percentage of correct responses and
reaction times in seconds on the belief-desire task,
separately by story type
Percent Correct

Table 3: Partial correlations between mental-state difference
scores and reaction times (correct responses only) on the
belief-desire task

Reaction Time

True
Belief

False
Belief

True
Belief

False
Belief

Approach

90 (21)

95 (30)

1.4 (.6)

1.4 (.7)

Avoid

79 (23)

78 (28)

1.7 (.9)

1.6 (.9)

report p-values corrected for multiple comparisons ( = .05
one-tailed; Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995).
Participants’ percentage of correct responses on the
belief-desire task was significantly partially correlated with
their performance on the mental-state stories, r = .31, p =
.03, but not the physical stories, r = .20, p = .15, or nature
stories, r = .12, p = .25. This suggests that the belief-desire
task and mental-state stories assessed a common mentalstate reasoning ability.
We next examined relationships between participants’
mental-state language and their performance on the beliefdesire task. We specifically examined correlations with the
cognitive and total difference scores, as these categories are
related to preschoolers’ false-belief performance.
There were no significant relationships between
participants’ percentage of correct responses on the beliefdesire task (overall or by story type) and their difference
scores for either cognitive or total mental-state terms, all ps
> .45. However, both difference scores were significantly
negatively correlated with participants’ reaction times on
false-belief avoid stories (Table 3). Participants who used
more cognitive and total mental-state terms in situations
where mental states were relevant (to discuss people rather
than objects) were significantly faster to respond correctly
in situations where they needed to simultaneously consider
an agent’s false belief and desire to avoid an object.

True Belief

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for participants’
performance in the belief-desire task. An ANOVA on the
percentage of correct responses with desire (approach,
avoid) and belief (true, false) as within-subject factors
revealed a significant effect of desire, F(1, 69) = 20.78, p <.
001. No other effects were significant, all Fs < 1. A
corresponding ANOVA on participants’ reaction times
revealed a significant effect of desire, F(1, 69) = 9.92, p =
.002; no other effects were significant, all Fs < 1. Consistent
with prior findings (Apperly et al., 2011), participants were
slower and less accurate when the agent wished to avoid
rather than approach an object.
An ANOVA on participants’ performance on the Strange
Stories task with story type as a within-subject factor
revealed no effect of story type, F(2, 140) = 1.31, p = .27.
Participants performed equally well on mental-state stories
(M = 1.52, SD = .26), physical stories (M = 1.61, SD = .39),
and nature stories (M = 1.54, SD = .34).
To examine relationships between tasks, we computed
partial correlations controlling for participants’ inhibitory
control, working memory, and receptive vocabulary. We

False Belief

Approach

Avoid

Approach

Avoid

Cognitive

-.09

-.17

-.07

-.28*

Total

.09

-.01

.00

-.25*

Note: In line with Apperly et al., 2011, only reaction times
for correct responses were included. df = 63; * p < .05.
Finally, there were no significant relationships between
participants’ difference scores for cognitive or total mentalstate terms and their performance on the Strange Stories
task, all ps > .18.

General Discussion
Recent evidence suggests that the ability to attribute false
beliefs to others may emerge in the first year of life.
However, some have challenged this conclusion on the
grounds that it is at odds with the well-established
associations between social factors and preschoolers’ falsebelief performance (e.g. Ruffman, 2014; San Juan &
Astington, 2012). If infants understand false beliefs, then
why would social experience predict preschooler’s
performance on elicited-response false-belief tasks? We
proposed that these two sets of findings are not inconsistent
because the ability to attribute false beliefs to others is

2528

necessary but not sufficient for false belief performance, and
thus social experience might very well facilitate the latter
throughout the lifespan. For instance, individuals who hear
and use more mental-state language might more readily
attend to, infer, and retrieve others’ mental states.
Here we tested this claim by examining the relationship
between mental-state language and false-belief performance
in adults. Participants described images of people and
objects and then completed two mental-state reasoning
tasks. Participants who exhibited a greater tendency to use
mental-state terms (and cognitive terms in particular) when
discussing people rather than objects were significantly
faster at correctly predicting the behavior of an agent who
held both a false belief and a desire to avoid an object.
These findings constitute the first evidence that personal
use of mental-state language is related to false-belief
performance in adulthood. The fact that this relationship
was specific to false-belief avoidance situations likely
reflects the fact that these situations impose greater
cognitive load than those involving true beliefs or approach
desires (e.g., Apperly et al., 2011; Leslie & Polizzi, 1998).
In particular, false-belief avoidance stories require ‘double
inhibition’: participants must inhibit their own knowledge
about the location of an object in order to appreciate the
agent’s false belief while also recognizing the agent’s desire
to not approach that object. Individuals who engage in more
discussions of others’ mental states may have more practice
inhibiting their own beliefs and desires while focusing on
those of another, allowing them to more rapidly predict an
agent’s behavior in this particular context.
Adults’ use of mental-state language was not related to
the accuracy of their responses on either mental-state
reasoning task. This suggests that use of mental-state
language is related to how quickly one attends to, encodes,
and retrieves mental-state information rather than one’s
ability to generate correct predictions or explanations based
on that mental-state information. This might explain why
several prior studies have failed to find associations between
school-aged children’s use of mental-state language and
their performance on the Strange Stories task (e.g. Charman
& Shmueli-Goetz, 1998; Meins, et al., 2006).
This pattern of findings is also consistent with recent
work examining the relationship between parental mentalstate talk and toddlers’ false-belief performance. Roby and
Scott (2015) tested 2.5-year-olds on a false-belief task with
two consecutive test trials: an anticipatory-looking trial
followed by a preferential-looking trial. Parental use of
mental-state language predicted children’s performance on
the anticipatory-looking trial but not the preferential-looking
trial. This difference could reflect the fact these two trials
had different requirements for successful performance
(prediction vs. post hoc analysis). However, our results
suggest that this difference may instead reflect trial order. If
exposure to mental-state language is related to how quickly
children are able to attend to, encode, and retrieve mentalstate information, then this would lead to stronger
associations on the first test trial than the second.

Our findings complement recent findings suggesting that
parental mental-state talk is associated with infants’ and
toddlers’ false-belief performance (e.g. Meristo et al., 2012;
Morgan et al., 2014; Roby & Scott, 2015). Together, these
results suggest that the relationship between mental-state
language and false-belief performance is not constrained to
the preschool years or to elicited-response tasks: hearing
and using mental-state talk facilitates the ability to reason
about mental states throughout life.

References
Apperly, I. A., Warren, F., Andrews, B. J., Grant, J., &
Todd, S. (2011). Developmental continuity in theory of
mind: Speed and accuracy of belief–desire reasoning in
children and adults. Child Development, 82, 1691-1703.
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief
understanding in infants. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
14, 110-118.
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & Bian, L. (2016).
Psychological reasoning in infancy. Annual Review of
Psychology, 67, 159-186.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does
the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition, 21,
37-46.
Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false
discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to
multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series B, 57, 289-300.
Bennett, M., & Galpert, L. (1992). Complex belief‐desire
reasoning in children. Social Development, 1, 201-210.
Bloom, P. & German, T. P. (2000). Two reasons to abandon
the false-belief task as a test of theory of mind. Cognition,
77, B25-B31.
Brown-Schmidt, S. (2009). The role of executive function in
perspective
taking
during
online
language
comprehension. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 893900.
Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).
Eighteen-month-old
infants
show
false
belief
understanding in an active helping paradigm.
Cognition, 112, 337-342.
Carruthers, P. (2013). Mindreading in infancy. Mind &
Language, 28, 141-172.
Charman, T., & Shmueli-Goetz, Y. (1998). The relationship
between theory of mind, language and narrative
discourse:
An
experimental
study. Cahiers
de
Psychologie Cognitive, 17, 245-271.
Draine, S. C. (2004). Inquisit 2.0. 50401 [Computer
software]. Seattle, WA: Millisecond Software.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, D. M. (2012). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test, (PPVT-4). Johannesburg: Pearson
Education Inc.
Ensor, R., & Hughes, C. (2008). Content or connectedness?
Mother-child talk and early social understanding. Child
Development, 79, 201-216.
German, T. P., & Hehman, J. A. (2006). Representational
and executive selection resources in ‘theory of mind’:

2529

Evidence from compromised belief-desire reasoning in
old age. Cognition, 101, 129-152.
Harkness, K. L., Jacobson, J. A., Duong, D., & Sabbagh, M.
A. (2010). Mental state decoding in past major
depression: Effect of sad versus happy mood
induction. Cognition and Emotion, 24, 497-513.
Kovács, Á. M., Téglás, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010). The
social sense: Susceptibility to others’ beliefs in human
infants and adults. Science, 330, 1830-1834.
Leslie, A. M., & Polizzi, P. (1998). Inhibitory processing in
the false belief task: Two conjectures. Developmental
Science, 1, 247-253.
Lewis, C., & Osborne, A. (1990). Three-year-olds’
problems with false belief: Conceptual deficit or linguistic
artifact? Child Development, 61, 1514-1519.
McAlister, A., & Peterson, C. (2007). A longitudinal study
of
child
siblings
and
theory
of
mind
development. Cognitive Development, 22, 258-270.
McKinnon, M. C., & Moscovitch, M. (2007). Domaingeneral contributions to social reasoning: Theory of mind
and deontic reasoning re-explored. Cognition, 102, 179218.
Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Johnson, F., & Lidstone, J.
(2006). Mind-mindedness in children: Individual
differences
in
internal-state
talk
in
middle
childhood. British
Journal
of
Developmental
Psychology, 24, 181-196.
Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Wainwright, R., Clark-Carter,
D., Das Gupta, M., Fradley, E. & Tuckey, M. (2003).
Pathways to understanding mind: Construct validity and
predictive validity of maternal mind-mindedness. Child
Development, 74, 1194–1211.
Meristo, M., Morgan, G., Geraci, A., Iozzi, L., Hjelmquist,
E., Surian, L., & Siegal, M. (2012). Belief attribution in
deaf and hearing infants. Developmental Science, 15, 633640.
Morgan, G., Meristo, M., Mann, W., Hjelmquist, E., Surian,
L., & Siegal, M. (2014). Mental state language and
quality of conversational experience in deaf and hearing
children. Cognitive Development, 29, 41-49.
Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old
infants understand false beliefs? Science, 308, 255-258.
Peirce, JW (2007). PsychoPy - Psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162, 8-13.
Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J., & Francis, M. E. (2007).
Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC [Computer
software]. Austin, TX: liwc.net.
Roby, E. M. & Scott, R. M. (2015, March). How does social
input influence false-belief reasoning? Parent mentalstate language and toddlers’ false-belief understanding.
Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for
Research in Child Development, Philadelphia, PA.
Roth, D., & Leslie, A. M. (1998). Solving belief problems:
Toward a task analysis. Cognition, 66, 1-31.
Rubio-Fernández, P. & Geurts, B. (2013). How to pass the
false-belief task before your fourth birthday.
Psychological Science, 24, 27-33.

Ruffman, T. (2014). To belief or not belief: Children’s
theory of mind. Developmental Review, 34, 265-293.
Ruffman, T., Slade, L., & Crowe, E. (2002). The relation
between children's and mothers’ mental state language
and theory‐of‐mind understanding. Child Development,
73, 734-751.
San Juan, V., & Astington, J. W. (2012). Bridging the gap
between implicit and explicit understanding: How
language development promotes the processing and
representation of false belief. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 30, 105-122.
Scott, R. M., & Roby, E. (2015). Processing demands
impact 3-year-olds’ performance in a spontaneousresponse task: New evidence for the processing-load
account of early false-belief understanding. PloS ONE,
10, e0142405.
Setoh, P. Scott, R. M., & Baillargeon, R. (March, 2011).
False-belief reasoning in 2.5-year-olds: evidence from an
elicited-response low-inhibition task. Paper presented at
the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Montreal, Canada.
Southgate, V., Chevallier, C., & Csibra, G. (2010).
Seventeen‐month‐olds appeal to false beliefs to interpret
others’ referential communication. Developmental
Science, 13, 907-912.
Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007). Action
anticipation through attribution of false belief by 2-yearolds. Psychological Science, 18, 587-592.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662.
Surian, L., & Geraci, A. (2012). Where will the triangle
look for it? Attributing false beliefs to a geometric shape
at 17 months. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 30, 30-44.
Träuble, B., Marinović, V., & Pauen, S. (2010). Early
theory of mind competencies: Do infants understand
others’ beliefs? Infancy, 15, 434-444.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child Development, 72, 655-684.
White, S., Hill, E., Happé, F., & Frith, U. (2009). Revisiting
the strange stories: revealing mentalizing impairments in
autism. Child Development, 80, 1097-1117.
Woods, D. L., Kishiyama, M. M., Yund, E. W., Herron, T.
J., Edwards, B., Poliva, O., ... & Reed, B. (2011).
Improving digit span assessment of short-term verbal
memory. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 33, 101-111.
Wu, S., & Keysar, B. (2007). The effect of culture on
perspective taking. Psychological Science, 18, 600-606.
Yazdi, A. A., German, T. P., Defeyter, M. A., & Siegal, M.
(2006). Competence and performance in belief-desire
reasoning across two cultures: The truth, the whole truth
and
nothing
but
the
truth
about
false
belief? Cognition, 100, 343-368.

2530

