“This problem has no solution”: when closing one of two doors results in failure to
access any.
Hippolyte Gros (hippolyte.gros@cri-paris.org) (1,2,3)
(1) University Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
12 Rue de l’École de Médecine, 75006 Paris, France.

Emmanuel Sander (emmanuel.sander@univ-paris8.fr)
(2) Paragraphe Lab, EA 349, University Paris 8, Department of Psychology,
2 Rue de la Liberté, 93526 Saint-Denis Cedex 02, France.

Jean-Pierre Thibaut (jean-pierre.thibaut@u-bourgogne.fr)
(3) LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, UB, Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comté,
Pôle AAFE – Esplanade Erasme, 21065 Dijon. France.
Abstract
We investigated what happens when the spontaneous
encoding of a problem is incongruent with its solving
strategy. We created word problems from which two distinct
semantic representations could be abstracted. Only one of
these representations was consistent with the solving strategy.
We tested whether participants could recode a semantically
incongruent representation in order to access another, less
salient, solving strategy. In experiment 1, participants had to
solve arithmetic problems and to indicate which problems
were unsolvable. In experiment 2, participants received
solved problems and had to decide whether the solution was
appropriate or not. In both experiments, participants had more
difficulties acknowledging that problems inducing an
incongruent representation could be solved than they had for
problems inducing a congruent representation. This was
confirmed by response times. These results highlight how
semantic aspects can lead even adults to fail or succeed in the
solving of arithmetic problems requiring basic mathematical
knowledge.
Keywords: arithmetic problem solving; semantic
structures; semantic encoding; strategy choice.

Introduction
The view that solvers build an abstract problem schema
that guides a solving strategy free of contextual effects such
as the semantic content of the problem has been challenged
by recent investigators (e.g. Kotovsky & Simon, 1985;
Bassok & Olseth, 1995). They have argued that the
representation of the situation (objects, relations between
objects) of a problem influences the solving procedure by
reference to mental models (Reusser, 1990) that are mental
constructs analogous to the situation depicted in the
problem. Further work has shown that elements that are
irrelevant from a mathematical point view (e.g. the type of
objects referred to in the problems) were taken as cues while
constructing an interpreted structure that solvers were using
as a frame during the solving process (Bassok, Wu &
Olseth, 1995). Recent studies have highlighted the
importance of such a framework (Bassok, DeWolf &
Holyoak, 2015; Lee, DeWolf, Bassok, Holyoak, 2016). The
existence of an abstract interpreted structure raises the

question of its congruence with the algorithm relevant for
the solution. For example it has been shown that
spontaneously, additions are associated with objects
belonging to the same level of categorization, such as
oranges and apples, and not to functionally connected
objects such as oranges and baskets, even though there is no
mathematical reason why one would not add these two types
of objects (Bassok, 2001). To what extent can the algorithm
be used when the interpreted structure is not congruent with
the mathematical one? To date, it remains an open issue to
show whether an incongruence between the representation
abstracted from the wording and the mathematical structure
will lead the solver to a dead end, even if the solving
algorithm is one which only requires mathematical skills
already mastered by the solver.
In order to investigate the representational issues, recent
studies focused on problems that were solvable by
alternative strategies, each one relying on a specific
representation (Thevenot & Oakhill, 2005, Coquin-Viennot
& Moreau, 2003, Gros, Thibaut & Sander, 2015). They
showed that the strategy that was used to solve the problem
was strongly constrained by the representation solvers were
relying on. The present study is based on this type of
problems. The main question addressed regards what
participants do when the solving strategy associated with the
representation spontaneously evoked by the problem is
prohibited due to the lack of some necessary information. In
other words, what happens when the “door” the participants
usually use is blocked? Will solvers switch to an alternative
representation congruent with the other strategy, which is
still practicable, or will they remain stuck to their initial
representation and think that the problem has no solution? In
the latter case, it would mean that their initial representation
of the problem is so constraining that they became blind to
the alternative one and to the strategy associated with it. The
solvers would thus be incapable of noticing and using the
other “door”, yet wide open and leading to the solution.

Content effects
The characteristics of the situation depicted in a word
problem have been shown to influence the solver’s ability to

1271

find the correct solution of a problem. Isomorphic problems
sharing the same mathematical structure can thus have
different levels of difficulty depending on their wording (De
Corte, Verschaffel, De Win, 1985).
More specifically, the influence of a wide range of
abstract semantic properties on the encoding of word
problems has been highlighted in different studies:
continuous versus discrete property of a constant change
(Bassok & Olseth, 1995), continuous versus discrete
property of the entities of a problem (DeWolf, Bassok &
Holyoak, 2015), symmetrical versus asymmetrical property
of a relation (Bassok, Wu & Olseth, 1995), categorical
versus functional property of an association between
elements (Bassok, Chase & Martin, 1998) have all been
shown to influence the solving strategies used by the
solvers.
Overall, the crucial role of such abstract semantic features
on the representations involved in problem solving
demonstrates that any solving task necessarily depends on
the solver knowledge regarding the elements included in the
problem. This world knowledge can ease the solving
process when the semantic information is congruent with it,
or it can inversely impair the solving of a problem if the
available information leads to a representation that is not
congruent with the solving strategy.

showed that the comparison strategy is only scarcely used
(4% of the situations) on problems similar to the problem A,
which evoke a cardinal part/whole representation, whilst
this strategy is widely used (64% of the problems) to solve
the problems comparable to the problem B, in which the
difference between the duration of the two classes is directly
encoded in the ordinal representation of the problems. On
the other hand, using the comparison on problem A requires
to identify that the difference between the total amount paid
by Paul and by John is equal to the price difference between
the pen and the exercise book. The price of the scissors
doesn’t need to be calculated to solve the problem.
In order to gain a better understanding of these two types
of induced representations, it is possible to draw a schema
of their structure. Regarding the problem A, Gamo et al.
(2010) suggested that the interpreted representation is
cardinal. We can thus represent the different elements of the
problem as depicted in figure 1.a.

Multiple-strategy word problems
In order to address this issue, Gamo, Sander & Richard
(2010) studied multiple-strategy word problems in which
the solution could be found in two different ways: either a 3steps strategy requiring to perform a complementation
inference (where the value of the difference between a set
and a whole is calculated), or a 1-step strategy based on a
comparison inference (requiring the calculation of the
difference between two homologous quantities). According
to Bosc-Miné and Sander (2007), it is easier to make a
complementation inference when the context highlights the
part/whole relation between the elements, as is the case in
problems featuring cardinal values. On the other hand, an
ordinal representation of the values usually highlights the
comparison relations between the featured values, and thus
promotes comparison inferences. This effect is fairly
intuitive when we consider prototypes of these two
categories of problems:
Problem A: “John bought a 5€ exercise book and
scissors. He paid 14€. A pen costs 3€ less than the exercise
book. Paul bought scissors and a pen. How much did he
pay?”
Problem B: “Antoine took painting classes for 5
years, and stopped when he was 14 years old. Jean began at
the same age as Antoine and took the course during 3 fewer
years. At what age did Jean stop?”
Both types of problems can be solved using two identical
strategies, namely the complementation-difference strategy
(14-5=9 then 5-3=2 then 9+2=11, in which 11 is the answer)
and the comparison-difference strategy (14-3=11, in which
11 is the answer). Yet, data collected by Gamo et al. (2010)

Figure 1.a: Cardinal representation of headcount problems
such as those found in Gamo, Sander & Richard (2010).
It is then clear that the representation promotes the
calculation of the intersection (Part 2) between Whole1 and
Whole2 in order to get the value of Whole2, thus favoring
the complementation strategy. The corresponding
calculations are as follows: Whole1 – Part1 = Part2, then
Part1 – Difference = Part3, then Part2 + Part3 = Whole2.

Figure 1.b: Ordinal representation of age problems such as
those found in Gamo, Sander & Richard (2010).
Now regarding problem B, the expected representation
has an ordinal nature, and can be drawn as on Figure 1.b.
The ordinal representation of problem B values puts forward
the fact that the difference between Whole1 and Whole2 is
equal to the difference between Part1 and Part3. It is
straightforward to deduct that the quickest solving strategy

1272

is the 1-step comparison strategy: Whole1 – Difference =
Whole2.
The solving strategy thus is directly encoded in the
representation built, despite the fact that these two problems
are isomorphic. Only an expert able to have a more
exhaustive comprehension of the mathematical relations
between the elements of these problems could access an
abstract representation subsuming the other two, as detailed
in Figure 1.c.

lead to failure to solve the problems when only one of the
two strategies was available.
We thus created two types of problems: (i) solvable
problems, in which we removed the “part 1” value, making
it impossible to use the 3-steps complementation strategy
(see left part of figure 2), and unsolvable problems, where
the value of Whole1 was not given, making it impossible to
solve the problems using any strategy (see right part of
figure 2). The latter were used as distractors.

Figure 1.c: Abstract representation of the mathematical
structure of the problems found in Gamo et al. (2010).

Figure 2: Structure of both solvable and unsolvable
problems. Underlined values are those given in the problem.
The goal was in both cases to find the value of Whole 2.

This structure can equally depict both problems, and
makes it possible to use both solving strategies. The
variations observed in the choice of one strategy over the
other clearly indicate that the participants only abstracted
intermediate, context-specific representations (with either
ordinal or cardinal structure) instead of the abstract
mathematical structure of the problems. It therefore seems
that the semantic nature of the quantities used has a major
impact on the type of representation being evoked, and
subsequently on the type of solving strategy being used.
In what follows, we used the two types of problems
described above. The above analysis shows that the
quantities grounding each solving strategy differ. We gave
participants problems in which one quantity was missing.
As a result, they could not be solved according to one
strategy (the 3-steps strategy) while remaining solvable
according to the other. The issue was whether participants
would use the other solving strategy (the 1-step strategy) in
all cases or, by contrast, whether they would more often fail
to solve them when their spontaneous strategy depended on
knowing the value of the missing data than when the
missing data was not necessary for making use of their
spontaneous solving strategy.

Experiment 1
Materials
We created a set of problems which shared the same
mathematical structure as described in figure 1.c, with one
notable exception: we removed one of the numerical values
so that participants could not access the 3-steps
complementation strategy anymore, and solely had to rely
on the 1-step matching strategy in order to solve the
problems. Instead of asking participants to solve the
problems with the fewest possible steps, we tested whether
the preference for the semantically congruent strategy could

We implemented those two types of problems with
different quantities inducing either an ordinal representation
or a cardinal representation. Six different quantities were
used in total; three ordinal quantities (duration, height, and
number of floors) and three cardinal quantities (weight,
price, number of elements). For each quantity, we created
two different problems so as to make sure that the effects
measured could not be attributed to one specific context.
Those 12 problems were present in both forms: solvable
problems and unsolvable problems, making a total of 24
problems in the pool. Finally, the problems were all written
in the same way: the same number of sentences was used,
and the numerical values (each below 15 so as to limit the
calculus induced difficulties) were presented in the same
order.

Procedure and experimental design
Each participant was presented with 12 different problems:
2 for each quantity, a solvable problem and an unsolvable
one. The 6 unsolvable problems acted as distractors since
we tested our hypotheses with the solvable problems. The
order in which the problems were presented was
randomized for each participant, and so were the two
different versions of each problem.
The experiment took place online, on the survey platform
Qualtrics. Participants who agreed to participate in the
experiment were asked to complete the entire survey. On the
first page, the following instructions were given: “You will
find an arithmetic problem on each page of this survey.
Please take the time to read and understand each of these
problems, as this is not a speed test. Your task is to identify
which problems can be solved and to indicate for each of
them the operation you used to solve them as well as the
solution you found. Be careful: some of the problems cannot
be solved with the available information.”

1273

On each page of the survey, a problem was displayed with
the following question below it “Given the data provided, is
it possible to find the solution?” with two buttons “Yes” and
“No”. When the participants pressed “Yes”, two new
questions appeared, asking them to indicate both the
operation needed to solve the problem and the result of the
operation. Participants used the keyboard to write down
their answers. After participants answered all 12 problems, a
new page was displayed asking them for their gender, date
of birth, and whether they took any break during the
completion of the experiment.

Participants
A total of 89 adults completed our experiment. We removed
from the analyses 15 participants who either mentioned
taking a break during the test or answered at least one of the
questions in less than 5 seconds or more than 5 minutes,
which gave 74 participants (44 females, M=33.8 years,
SD=13.4 years). Subjects were all fluent French speakers
and were recruited through social networks and emails.

Hypotheses
Our first hypothesis regarded the ability to correctly solve
the problems that induced a representation which was
semantically incongruent with the solving strategy. We
hypothesized that participants would have a better rate of
success on solvable problems with ordinal quantities
compared to solvable problems with cardinal quantities,
because participants whose first spontaneous representation
was associated with a 3-step strategy would fail to switch to
a representation of the problem associated with the 1-step
strategy.
Our second hypothesis regarded the situations in which
participants overcame the difficulty related to an
incongruent representation and managed to find the correct
solution of a cardinal problem. We hypothesized that higher
response times would be recorded on successfully solved
cardinal problems compared to successfully solved ordinal
problems.

Results

In order to test our first hypothesis, we analyzed the ratio of
correct answers on solvable problems, depending on the
cardinal or ordinal nature of the quantities used. Ordinal
solvable problems were successfully solved in 91.9% of the
trials, and cardinal solvable problems in only 68.5% of the
trials (see Figure 3). A paired t-test was performed on
participants’ mean rate of success for cardinal and ordinal
problems and showed that the difference was statistically
significant (t(73)=6.38, p<0.001), therefore confirming our
first hypothesis.
We then studied the response times on correctly solved
problems, depending on the nature of the quantities in the
problems. We wanted to see whether accessing the correct
1-step matching strategy on problems inducing a
semantically incongruent cardinal representation would
require a higher time than needed for problems inducing an
ordinal representation. We removed from the analysis 4
participants who did not manage to correctly solve at least 1
cardinal problem and 1 ordinal problem. On average,
participants took 68.7 seconds to successfully solve cardinal
problems, against 49.8 seconds for ordinal problems (see
Figure 4). A linear mixed model applied to the response
times of successfully solved problems confirmed that the
difference was significant (F(1,7369)=20.38, p<0.001), thus
verifying our second hypothesis.

Figure 4: Mean response time on correctly solved problems.
Vertical bars denote 0.95 confidence intervals.

Discussion

Figure 3: Rate of correct solving on solvable problems.
Vertical bars denote 0.95 confidence intervals.

The results obtained confirmed that depending on the
semantic nature of the quantities present in arithmetic word
problems, participants induced a semantic representation
which was either semantically congruent (ordinal) or
semantically incongruent (cardinal) to the only solving
strategy available. The fact that the rate of success was
significantly different between these two types of problems
showed that the semantic congruence does not just promote
one strategy over the other (see also Gamo, Sander &
Richard, 2009; Gamo, Taabane & Sander, 2011), but can
actually lead participants to failure when only one strategy
is available. Therefore, a semantically incongruent
representation can significantly impair the solver’s ability to
find the solution of a problem if no semantic recoding takes
place.

1274

The study of the response times gave us insights into the
need of such a recoding process. The longer time needed to
solve cardinal problems suggested the existence of an extra
reasoning step which allowed the solver to access a
semantically incongruent solving strategy. The fact that the
response rates were different for cardinal and ordinal
problems suggested that such a process does not
systematically happen and the longer RTs showed that this
recoding step was a costly one.
In order to better understand these processes, in a second
experiment, we explicitly gave the answer to the
participants, and asked them to evaluate its validity. The
goal was to go beyond the first experiment by evaluating
whether the difficulty lied in the ability to discover the
solution, or in the capacity to recognize it as a valid one.
We made the hypothesis that, even when presented with the
complete solution, participants would tend to refuse it more
often if the representation they inferred from the problem
was semantically incongruent with the solution. They would
essentially refuse to use the door presented in front of them,
because of their semantically biased representation of the
situation.

Results
As in the previous experiment, we first analyzed the ratio of
correct answers on solvable problems depending on the
semantic nature of the quantities used. The results detailed
in Figure 5 showed that the solvable cardinal problems did
indeed lead to a lower rate of success (63.6%) than the
solvable ordinal problems (88.4%).

Figure 5: Rate of correct answers on solvable problems.
Vertical bars denote 0.95 confidence intervals.
A paired t-test performed on the participants’ mean rate of
success confirmed that this difference was significant
(t(195)=9.26, p<0.001).

Experiment 2
Procedure
The only aspect in which this experiment differed from the
previous one was the nature of the task proposed to the
participants. Instead of telling them to solve the problems
themselves, we proposed a potential solution for each
problem, and asked them to identify whether the solution
was a valid one, or whether the problem could not be
solved. For every problem, the question “Given the data
provided, is it possible to find the solution?” was displayed,
and below two choices were available: “No, we do not have
enough information to solve this problem.” and “Yes:
numerical value 1 – numerical value 2 = answer. Sentence
presenting the answer”. For example, on one of the “number
of floors” problems, the following solution was given: “Yes:
11-2=9. Karine arrives at the 9th floor.”

Participants
A total of 223 adults completed our experiment. 27 of them
were removed from the analysis according to the same
criteria as in the previous experiment, and the analyses were
performed on the remaining 196 participants (135 females,
M=34.5 years, SD=14.8 years). Subjects were native French
speakers recruited through social networks and emails.

Hypotheses
We expected to find the same results as in the previous
experiment. Even though the solution was directly given to
the participants, we hypothesized that they would still refuse
it more often for problems with cardinal quantities than for
ordinal problems. Similarly, we hypothesized that the
correct identification of a solution would require more time
for cardinal problems than for ordinal ones.

Figure 6: Mean response time on problems where the
solution was correctly identified. Vertical bars denote 0.95
confidence intervals.
In order to assess the validity of our second hypothesis,
we then studied the response time associated with the
correct answers on solvable problems, thanks to a linear
mixed model. We removed from the analysis the 26
participants who did not manage to correctly solve at least 1
cardinal problem and 1 ordinal problem. Figure 6 shows that
getting a correct answer required a shorter reasoning time
for ordinal (38.6 seconds) than for cardinal problems (51.4
seconds). This difference was statistically significant
(F(1,169)=30.28, p<0.001), thus confirming our hypothesis.

Discussion
This task of solution validity assessment confirmed the
effects observed on the first experiment, which involved a
task of solution discovery. Even when participants were
given the correct answer as well as the operation used to
calculate it, they tended in more than 35% of the cases to

1275

reject it if the problem induced a representation that was
semantically incongruent with it.
Similarly, even when participants managed to
successfully identify the correct answers of cardinal
problems, they needed more time than for ordinal problems,
which, we believe, indicates semantic recoding.
These results suggest that the semantic congruence effects
that have been previously highlighted are not restricted to
the spontaneous access to a solving strategy, but also to the
evaluation of a given solving strategy.

Conclusion.
These two experiments confirmed that the process to
overcome a semantic incongruence between an interpreted
representation and a solving algorithm is a costly one. Both
the success rates and the response times were influenced by
the incongruence, therefore showing the prevalence of
semantic aspects over mathematical ones when faced with a
situation from which we do not spontaneously abstract a
solving-relevant representation.
We believe that these results pave the way for the
emergence of a new approach to problem solving,
integrating the three main components of any problem
solving activity: the procedural aspects (the algorithms), the
representations inferred from the solver’s knowledge about
the world, and the mathematical structure of the problems.
We think that characterizing the way these three levels of
description interact would deeply contribute to the
understanding of the underlying cognitive processes. In this
study, we tried to describe how a representation inferred
from the world semantics can prevent the solver from
accessing the relevant solving algorithm. Even when this
algorithm only consists in a mere subtraction.
This underlines the importance to conduct extensive work
on mathematical reasoning from an educational perspective
in order to help the learners overcome semantic congruence
effects. The robustness of these processes among adults
suggest that they cannot spontaneously disappear, and
instead need to be the target of a substantial and focused
teaching so as to be reduced. As it has already been
highlighted (Bassok, Chase & Martin, 1998; Lee, DeWolf,
Bassok, & Holyoak, 2016), mathematics textbooks tend to
preferably use semantically congruent examples when
teaching a specific arithmetic concept. Yet, our study seems
to indicate that people face greater difficulties when trying
to solve incongruent problems compared to congruent ones.
Would it not be preferable, then, to teach students how to
specifically address these situations, and how to resort to a
semantic recoding of their initial representations? Maybe
then, the remaining door would be available to them.

References
Bassok, M. (2001). Semantic alignments in mathematical
word problems. The analogical mind: Perspectives from
cognitive science, 401-433.

Bassok, M, Chase, V. M, & Martin, S. A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99-134
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K., (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between cases of continuous and
discrete models of change. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 15221538.
Bassok, M., Wu, L., & Olseth, L. K. (1995). Judging a book
by its cover: interpretative effects of content on problemsolving transfer. Memory and Cognition, 23, 354 e 367.
Bosc-Miné, C., & Sander, E. (2007). Effets du contexte sur
la mise en œuvre de l’inférence de complément. L’Année
psychologique, 107(03), 397–425.
Coquin-Viennot, D., & Moreau, S. (2003). Highlighting the
role of episodic model in the solving of arithmetical
problems. European Journal of Psychology and
Education, 18, 267-279.
DeCorte, E., Verschaffel, L., & De Win, L. (1985).
Inﬂuence of rewording verbal problems on children’s
problem representations and solution. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 77, 460-470.
DeWolf, M., Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (2015).
Conceptual structure and the procedural affordances of
rational numbers: Relational reasoning with fractions and
decimals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
144(1), 127-150.
Gamo, S., Sander, E., & Richard, J.-F. (2010). Transfer of
strategy use by semantic recoding in arithmetic problem
solving. Learning and Instruction, 20(5), 400–410.
Gros, H., Thibaut, J.-P., & Sander, E. (2015). Robustness of
semantic encoding effects in a transfer task for multiplestrategy arithmetic problems. Proceedings of the 37th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Los
Angeles, USA.
Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). Why
are some problems hard? Evidence from Tower of Hanoi.
Cognitive psychology, 17(2), 248–294.
Lee, H. S., DeWolf, M., Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2016). Conceptual and procedural distinctions between
fractions and decimals: A cross-national comparison.
Cognition, 147, 57-69.
Rapp, M., Bassok, M., DeWolf, M., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2015). Modeling discrete and continuous entities with
fractions and decimals. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 21(1), 47.
Reusser, K. (1990). From text to situation to equation:
Cognitive simulation of understanding and solving
mathematical word problems. in H. Mandle. De Corte, N.
Bennett, & H. F. Friedrich (Eds), Learning and instruction
in an international context (Vol. II). New York: Pergamon
Press.
Thevenot, C., & Oakhill, J. (2005). The strategic use of
alternative representations in arithmetic word problem
solving. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section A, 58(7), 1311-1323.

1276

