Three barriers to effective thought experiments, as revealed by a system that
externalizes students’ thinking
Miki Matsumuro (muro@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University
Fro-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan
Özdemir, 2014). They found differences between the TEs
conducted by physics experts and novices. They also elucidated the TE process and its role in the scientific reasoning.

Abstract
This study aimed to develop a Thought Experiment Externalizer (TE-ext) and to apply it in order to observe barriers to
problem solving. TE-ext enables students to visualize a problem situation. Users of TE-ext can implement changes in the
situation and see the result as an animation. Experimental
use of TE-ext identified three barriers to conducting an effective thought experiment (TE). First, participants tended not to
change the situation from the original one; second, incorrect or
inappropriate knowledge was applied to the situation; third, the
participants did not apply the results of their TE to other situations. These factors prevented participants from rejecting their
initial incorrect model and finding a new one through TEs.
Keywords: Thought experiment; scientific reasoning; science
education system; problem solving

Summary of Knowledge of Thought Experiments Here,
we briefly summarize the knowledge gained from these previous studies. There is no exact and agreed-upon definition
of a TE, but Brown (2006) and Reiner (2006) proposed an
operational definition. Their proposals were summarized by
Kösem and Özdemir (2014) in terms of four steps, as illustrated below using the example of Galileo’s TE that caused
him to reject Aristotle’s theory.
Step 1: Visualize a situation
(I am at the top of the tower with a heavy ball and a light
ball)
Step 2: Carry out operation
(Connect each other ball and drop it from the tower)
Step 3: Apply background information
(Based on Aristotle’s theory)
Step 4: See the result
(The theory leads to two contradictory results)

Introduction
Interest in thought experiments (TEs) has increased in recent
decades (Matthews, 2014; Nersessian, 1992). A TE is an experiment conducted in one’s mind. In this paper, we describe
an effort to externalize TEs through a system that we call a
Thought Experiment Externalizer (TE-ext). Initially, we review previous studies and identify research needs. Next, we
introduce the TE-ext and our experiments using this system.
Finally, we discuss the potential of TE-ext as an educational
system.

A TE involves visualizing a situation in one’s mind and
then imagining the result. It is a kind of mental simulation,
which is a strategy in mechanical reasoning (Hegarty, 2004).
The key step in the TE is the selection of the operation to
be carried out in Step 2. Appropriate operations enable the
reasoner to access implicit knowledge in Step 3, leading to a
useful result in Step 4. Finally, a conclusion is drawn from
the results of the TEs.

Previous Studies
Previous studies can be divided into three categories based on
their methods of collecting data.
Historical Research Some studies, particularly in the field
of philosophy of science, have focused on specific historical cases (Brown, 1991, 2006; Nersessian, 2002). There are
many renowned examples of TEs in history, such as those
conducted by Galileo, Newton, and Einstein. Using these
cases, the studies developed a definition of TEs and argued
for their importance in the history of science.

Justification for the Present Research
In this section, we describe what we consider to be the necessary research task from two perspectives.
Science Education Few studies have attempted to facilitate
students’ performance of TEs or to enable them to understand the benefits of TEs. Previous studies have been limited
to examining the use of TEs by teachers and students in a
daily classroom (Lattery, 2001; Stephens & Clement, 2010).
Monaghan and Clement (1999) successfully facilitated mental simulation by means of a computer simulation. However,
their face-to-face method would not be suitable for use with
a large class.
Our TE-ext, which will be described below, has advantages
for science education. Students can easily carry out operations because the available operations are visible. Additionally, the externalization of the TE reduces the cognitive load,

Fieldwork Other studies have investigated the nature of
TEs by collecting data in laboratories or classrooms (Lattery,
2001; Stephens & Clement, 2010). These studies have provided evidence that TEs are used not only by famous thinkers
but by researchers, teachers, and students in their daily activities. Furthermore, they proposed cues to identify TE use and
the types of situations wherein reasoners tended to conduct
TEs.
Protocol Research Some researchers gave participants a
physics problem and collected protocol data as the participants solved the problem (Clement, 2009; Kösem &

176

making additional cognitive resources available for reasoning.

step could be associated with particular responses to the yoyo
problem (see the discussion on barriers below).

Psychological Research Almost all previous studies involved no experimental operations, as they focused on reasoning in a naturalistic situation. Protocol analysis has been a
prominent method in these studies, since TEs are conducted
in the reasoners’ mind. These studies have contributed to our
knowledge of the process and nature of TEs. Based on this accumulated knowledge, we can learn more about TEs through
experimental operations.
Our TE-ext is a useful tool for psychological experimentation because it provides us with quantitative data, such as
sequences of operations. In this study, we use TE-ext and
some experimental operations to investigate barriers preventing students from conducting an effective TE.

System’s Function
TE-ext externalizes Steps 1, 2, and 4 of the TE. Figure 2
shows sample screenshots of important parts of TE-ext. The
properties of the yoyo shown in Figure 2(a) represented the
problem situation, which was the initial state of TE-ext. The
students could observe the yoyo from the side. Since TE-ext
visualizes a problem situation on a PC monitor, users do not
have to carry out the visualization in their mind in Step 1.
The students could carry out some operations on the yoyo
in the TE-ext system, thereby externalizing Step 2 of the TE
process. They could change the size and shape of the yoyo,
the location of the end of the string, the width of the string,
and the amount of string wound around the yoyo. The size
and location of the end of the string could be changed by
dragging the red and black rectangles, respectively. Other
properties could be selected on the option panel (Figure 2(b)).
The students could then see the result (Step 4) in TE-ext
by selecting a direction and clicking the “move” button. The
direction of movement and rotation were selected using the
animation buttons (movement: up, down, right, left; rotation:
clockwise, counterclockwise). The yoyo in TE-ext moved in
accordance with the selected buttons, even if such movement
violated physical laws. The role of TE-ext was not to provide
new knowledge but to externalize TEs; the animations were
consistent with the fact that, in a TE, any prediction is possible. We then investigated barriers preventing students from
conducting an effective TE using TE-ext.

TE-ext
Material
We used the yoyo problem from Anzai and Yokoyama (1984).
The problem was to predict the movement of the yoyo in Figure 1. In our study, students had to decide in which direction
the yoyo would move (left, right, or staying in place) and
in which direction it would rotate (clockwise, counterclockwise, or remaining still). The correct answer was that the
yoyo would rotate clockwise and roll to the right. The direction of rotational momentum caused by the tension force
in the string and the center of rotation at the yoyo’s point of
contact with the floor determine the movement.
The yoyo problem had three advantages. First, Anzai and
Yokoyama (1984) defined students’ internal models. In the
students’ naı̈ve model, they believed that the yoyo’s axis was
the center of the rotation. Based on this model, they answered
that the yoyo would rotate counterclockwise and roll to the
left. The second advantage was that a cue capable of causing the students to shift to a correct model had already been
demonstrated. When asked to think about a square object instead of a round yoyo, the students predicted that it would
be dragged to the right and realized where the center of the
rotation was (Anzai & Yokoyama, 1984). This insight led
them to the correct answer. Therefore, to solve the problem
through TEs, it was important to carry out the mental operation of changing the yoyo’s shape into a square and pulling
the string. Finally, the effects of the predicted barriers at each

Three Barriers
We defined an effective TE as one that causes students to shift
their mental model. In scientific reasoning and problem solving, it is important to reject an incorrect model or concept and
to find a new correct one (Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992). We
predicted three barriers to an effective TE, or to achieving a
shift in one’s mental model through TEs, in alignment with
the thinking steps described by Kösem and Özdemir (2014).
The first barrier would exist at Step 2, during which the
students carry out operations. To conduct an effective TE,
they have to change a situation into one invoking implicit
knowledge that they could not apply to the initial situation.
In the case of the yoyo problem, an operation to give the
yoyo wheels a square shape is crucial. However, people are
apt to avoid testing a situation that would violate their model
(Wason, 1960). It would be difficult for most people to carry
out an operation that makes the situation different from the
initial one. Thus, students could be expected to conduct TEs
in the original situation with round yoyos.
The second barrier would exist at Step 3. Even if students
create a good experimental situation, they cannot always apply appropriate background information or knowledge. In
this case, they may not be able to imagine the square-shaped
yoyo being dragged to the right. It is easy for students to rely
instead on the knowledge already in their mind. Therefore,

Figure 1: The yoyo problem.

177

(a) The yoyo in TE-ext

(b) Option panel and animation buttons

Figure 2: Sample screenshots of TE-ext. Figure (a) shows the yoyo on the table; figure (b) shows the option panel and the
animation buttons. The right and clockwise animation buttons are selected in the figure. Each shot captures important parts in
TE-ext. The other part of the screen is used to display the yoyo’s movement.
they may apply their incorrect model to the situation, leading
to an inappropriate result.
The third barrier would exist at Step 4. The students have to
derive a conclusion from the results of their TE. However, the
results violating their current model are not easily applied to
the solution of the original problem. In the yoyo problem, this
would mean that the students, although they understand that a
square-shaped yoyo is dragged to the right, would not be able
to apply this result to the original round yoyo. Some previous
studies have revealed that even when participants or scientists
confronted contradictory data, they did not change their initial model (Chinn & Brewer, 1993; Dunbar, 1995). Instead,
to retain their model, they reinterpreted the data or added peripheral explanations. The results of these studies suggest that
the students cannot easily change their initial model, even if
they see the appropriate results of a TE.
Using TE-ext, we investigated whether these barriers exist
and whether we could eliminate them.

ment and rotation. Additionally, they were asked to write
down the reason for their decision.
Phase 0 included only the test. The aim here was to confirm
that the students would answer “left and counterclockwise,”
which meant that they had the incorrect initial model. After
Phase 0, the experimenter instructed the students on how to
use TE-ext.
Following the introduction of TE-ext, Phase 1 was used to
confirm the presence of the first barrier. During this phase,
the students were asked to work on the yoyo problem for 10
minutes using TE-ext freely (i.e., thinking time) and then to
answer the test question again. If the first barrier existed, it
would prevent the students from carrying out suitable operations to change the situation from the original one. Therefore,
they would conduct more animations with the round yoyo
during their thinking time and therefore end up with the same
result as in Phase 0.
We aimed to break the first barrier in Phase 2 by providing
instruction along with thinking time and the test. First, the
experimenter instructed the students, as a means of solving
the yoyo problem, to change the properties in TE-ext to make
the situation different from the original one. Additionally,
she showed some examples of possible situations, including
the square-shaped yoyo. After this instruction, the students
worked on the yoyo problem for 10 minutes and then took
the test again. If the instruction had overcome the first barrier, the students would conduct animations with yoyos of
various shapes including a square one, during their thinking
time. However, even if the first barrier was gone, the students
would still be likely to select the answers of left and counterclockwise on the test due to the second and/or third barriers.
Phase 3 had two purposes. First, we investigated whether
the second or third barrier prevented the students from reconsidering their thinking; second, we tried to break the third

Methods
Participants
Nineteen undergraduate students participated in the experiment. Their major fields included literature, education, law,
and economics. All students had basic knowledge of elementary physics from junior high school. Eleven of them
had studied physics in high school; none had taken a physics
course at the university level.

Procedures and Predictions
The experiments were composed of four phases. Procedures,
aims, and predictions in each phase are summarized in Table
1. The students answered the same question in each phase.
They observed a picture of the yoyo, read the problem as presented in Figure 1, and then selected the direction of move-

178

Table 1: Procedures, aims, and predictions.
Phase

Procedure
Step involved

Phase 0
Phase 1

Phase 2

Test
Thinking time
Test
Instruction
Thinking time
Test
Additional test
Instruction

Phase 3
Thinking time
Test

Aim
Identify the students’
initial model
Confirm the existence
of the first barrier
Break the first barrier

Confirm the existence of
the second and third
barriers
Break the third barrier

Prediction
Students will select “left and counterclockwise” based on their
incorrect model.
If the first barrier exists:
→ Students will conduct more animations with the round
yoyo and select “left and counterclockwise.”
If the first barrier is broken:
→ Students will conduct animations with various yoyo shapes.
If the second barrier exists:
→ The expected combinations, “right and still,” will not be
selected on the additional test.
If the third barrier exists:
→ Students will not arrive at reach the correct model even if
they do not have the second barrier.
If the third barrier is broken:
→ Students will select “right and clockwise” on the test.

Figure 3: An image showing the mental process of solving the yoyo problem by using the additional test and the support sheet.
barrier. (Breaking the second barrier was outside the scope of
our study, as the second barrier exists at Step 3, which TEext did not externalize.) Phase 3 included an additional test,
instruction, thinking time, and the original test.
In the additional test, the students were asked to indicate
the movement of the square-shaped yoyo (shown at the far
left in Figure 3) just as they had done for the round yoyo on
previous tests. We conducted this additional test to investigate
the existence of the second barrier (i.e., the first purpose).
If the second barrier prevented the students from using their
knowledge appropriately, they would not select the expected
choices (movement to the right, remaining still with regard to
rotation).
To address the second purpose of Phase 3 (trying to break
the third barrier), we targeted those students who selected incorrect combinations on the original test in Phase 2 and “right
and still” on the additional test. They must have been prevented from shifting their model during Phase 2 by the third
barrier. The additional test served as a cue for them, as suggested by Anzai and Yokoyama (1984).
We gave these students an additional “support sheet” including choices of movement for hexagonal, octagonal, 10sided, and 12-sided yoyos. This bridged the gap between the
square-shaped yoyo and the original round yoyo, as shown
in Figure 3. We instructed the students to make predictions

about the yoyos on the support sheet and then to solve the
original yoyo problem based on their predictions for 4- to 12sided yoyos. With this assistance, the students were given
another 10 minutes of thinking time to use the TE-ext, the
additional test, and the support sheet. Finally, they took the
original test one more time. If we had successfully broken
the third barrier by this point, they would imagine a correct
model and select “right and clockwise.”

Results
Model Shift
In Figure 4, we show the students’ selections in each phase
of the test. The correct answer is “right and clockwise.” No
student selected the correct combination, except for one student in Phase 0 who then changed his answer in Phase 1. In
all phases, the selection was not equally distributed (Fisher’s
exact test ps < .05). The number of students who selected
“left and counterclockwise” was significantly larger than the
expected value in all phases (ps < .002). These results show
that the shift to a correct model did not occur.

First Barrier
Figure 5 shows a ratio that indicates how frequently each
shape was selected when the “move” button was clicked.

179

<+."=7>?.("4@"A,7B.8,0!

'$"
'#"
'!"
&"
%"
$"
#"
!"

:+10."!"
:+10."'"
:+10."#"
:+10.";"

()*+,"

-./"

0,12"

()*+,"

3-4356)0."

-./"

0,12"

()*+,"

3478,.(3-4356)0."

-./"

0,12"

09--"

Figure 4: The student’s selections on the test in each phase.

/+01!

!#'"

third barriers.

)*+,-"("
)*+,-"$"
)*+,-"."

!#&"

Second Barrier
Figure 6 shows the selections made on the additional test and
the support sheet. In the additional test, the selections were
not equally distributed (Fisher’s exact test p = .024). The
number of students who selected the expected answer, “right
and still,” was significantly larger than the expected value (p =
.002). This means that about half of the students who selected
“right and still” did not have the second barrier. However,
other students selected unexpected combinations. Although
we cannot know why they did so, their incorrect model must
have affected their selection. This result shows that half of
the students could not arrive at the correct model because of
the second barrier.

!#%"
!#$"
!"
61725!
!"
%"

&"

'"
(!"
23,45-5!

($"

Figure 5: The ratio of the number of animations with each
shape to all animations (bar represents standard error).

=+.">7?@.("4A"B,7<.8,0!

We conducted a 3 (phase) × 6 (shape) ANOVA. There was
a significant interaction between the phase and shape factors (F(10, 180) = 13.84, p < .001). Here we focused on
the effect of the shape factor according to our purpose. In
Phase 1, a simple main effect of the shape factor was significant (F(5, 90) = 26.412, p < .001). The round yoyo was
selected more frequently than other shapes were (ps < .05).
In Phase 2, there was no significant effect of the shape factor
(F(5, 90) = 1.376, p = .241). In Phase 3, the simple main effect was significant again (F(5, 90) = 2.826, p = .020). The
only difference was that the hexagonal yoyo was selected
more frequently than the round yoyo was (p = .050). A
main effect of the shape factor was significant (F(5, 90) =
7.567, p < .001). The preference for the round yoyo in Phase
1 means that the first barrier prevented the student from
changing the situation from the original one. The instruction
in Phase 2 broke this barrier, so that the preference disappeared. However, the various situations, including the squareshaped yoyo, did not lead the students to the correct model
(Figure 4). This failure must be due to the second and/or

Third Barrier Half of the students did not have the second
barrier. However, in the test in Phase 2, they were still unable
to select the correct combination (Figure 4). This implies the
existence of the third barrier.
In Phase 3, we attempted to break the third barrier using
some supportive information. Despite these efforts, no student was able to select the correct combination on the original
test (Figure 4). The reasons given for their decisions reveal
that they added inappropriate or incorrect explanations to justify retaining their initial model. For example, a student who
selected the expected combination on the additional test but
stuck with “left and counterclockwise” on the original test
wrote, “a round shape is easier to roll [to the left than other
shapes] because of the small friction force.” These results
mean that our supportive assistance could not break the third
barrier.

0:71(."
%C0)<.<!
+.;1*48"
&C0)<.<!
43,1*48"
'!C0)<.<!
<.31*48"
'#C0)<.<!
<4<.31*48"

'$"
'#"
'!"
&"
%"
$"
#"
!"
()*+,"

-./"
3-4356)0."

0,12"

()*+,"

-./"

0,12"

3478,.(3-4356)0."

()*+,"

-./"

0,12"

09--"

Figure 6: The number of students selecting each combination on the additional test and the support sheet.

180

General Discussion

Brown, J. R. (1991). The laboratory of the mind: Thought
experiments in the natural sciences. New York, NY: Routledge.
Brown, J. R. (2006). The promise and perils of thought experiments. Interchange, 37, 63–75.
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1993). The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition: A theoretical framework and implications for science instruction. Review of
Educational Research, 63, 1–49.
Clement, J. J. (2009). The role of imagistic simulation in scientific thought experiments. Topics in Cognitive Science,
1, 686–710.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J. Sternberg &
J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 365–395).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental simulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 280–285.
Kösem, Ş. D., & Özdemir, O. F. (2014). The nature and
role of thought experiments in solving conceptual physics
problems. Science & Education, 23, 865–895.
Lattery, M. J. (2001). Thought experiments in physics education: A simple and practical example. Science & Education, 10, 485–492.
Matthews, M. R. (2014). Science teaching, 20th anniversary
revised and expanded edition. New York, NY: Routledge.
Monaghan, J. M., & Clement, J. J. (1999). Use of a computer
simulation to develop mental simulations for understanding
relative motion concepts. International Journal of Science
Education, 21, 921–944.
Nersessian, N. J. (1992). In the theoretician’s laboratory:
Thought experimenting as mental modeling. In Proceedings of the biennial meeting of the philosophy of science
association (pp. 291–301). Philosophy of Science Association.
Nersessian, N. J. (2002). The cognitive basis of model-based
reasoning in science. In P. Carruthers, S. Stich, & M. Siegal (Eds.), The cognitive basis of science (pp. 133–153).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (2009). How do engineering scientists
think? model-based simulation in biomedical engineering
research laboratories. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 730–
757.
Reiner, M. (2006). The context of thought experiments in
physics learning. Interchange, 37, 97–113.
Stephens, A. L., & Clement, J. J. (2010). Documenting the
use of expert scientific reasoning processes by high school
physics students. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics
Education Research, 6, 020122.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of the
earth: A study of conceptual change in childhood. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535–585.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses
in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 129–140.

In this study, we developed TE-ext, a system that permits observation of individuals’ thought experiments, and used it to
investigate the three barriers to an effective TE. We found that
none of the students could make the shift to a correct model.
All students experienced the first barrier, and half of them exhibited the second barrier. Even when students did not have
the second barrier, the third barrier prevented them from shifting to a correct model. Although we successfully broke the
first barrier by means of our instruction, the support sheet designed to break the third barrier did not have sufficient effects.
Almost all students continued to hold to their initial, incorrect model. They added inappropriate or incorrect peripheral
explanations, as is typical of people dealing with information contrary to their beliefs (Chinn & Brewer, 1993; Dunbar,
1995). We need to break the third barrier to use TE-ext as an
educational system.
One possible reason why our supports had no effect on the
third barrier is that the students had incorrect models that differed from what we anticipated. Our students had different
academic majors from the science and engineering students
who participated in Anzai and Yokoyama (1984)’s study. The
reasoning given for their selections on the test showed their
belief that when the string was pulled, a force unwinding the
wound string was present and the yoyo rolled in reaction to
this force. Our supportive information in Phase 3 did not focus on this point, so it had little effect on this belief.
Regarding the potential educational use of TE-ext, we expected that the students would realize the benefits of TE by
solving the yoyo problem successfully using TE-ext. Unfortunately, no one was able to shift to a correct model in our
experiment. The following improvements, suggested by the
results of our experiment, could make TE-ext a more powerful educational tool.
Improvement of TE-ext to help students visualize situations in daily life would be effective to break the second barrier. In such situations, they can draw on their own experience to see the result. Kösem and Özdemir (2014) showed
that novices tended to use their own experiences as resources
when conducting TEs.
Adaptive supports causing each student to conduct TEs
suitable for his or her own incorrect model would help break
the third barrier. In this study, our supports were not effective in modifying the students’ initial model. If TE-ext could
be improved by incorporating each student’s cognitive model,
it could adaptively provide TE situations suitable to instruct
that student.
Additionally, TE-ext could work more effectively in a
group setting. Students could share their TEs with each other
by using TE-ext. TE-ext would serve as a hub connecting the
students and their thought processes (Nersessian, 2009).

References
Anzai, Y., & Yokoyama, T. (1984). Internal models in physics
problem solving. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 397–450.

181

