Transfer of Cognitive Skills in Developmental Tasks
Sarah Rupp (srupp@uos.de)
Niels A. Taatgen (n.a.taatgen@rug.nl)
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 9,
9747 AG Groningen, Netherlands
Abstract
The main question we try to answer in this paper is whether
stage-like progression in cognitive development can be
explained by transfer of cognitive skill among tasks. We
focus on the following question: To what extent does training
on one task improve the performance on another task? The
tasks are Piaget’s (1959) Balance Scale Task and Number
Conservation Task, and a task that we will call the UneSentence Task, which is taken from Karmiloff-Smith's (1979)
experiment on the acquisition of determiners in French. We
re-implemented already existing models within the
framework of the PRIMs cognitive architecture (Taatgen,
2013). Each task was subdivided in certain stages related to
the complexity of the problem-solving strategies. We show
that mastery of a certain stage of a problem becomes easier if
a higher stage of another task is mastered first.
Keywords: Transfer, PRIMs, Cognitive
Developmental Tasks, Cognitive Modeling

Architecture,

Introduction
A central topic of debate in developmental psychology is
whether children develop in stages, or if development is a
gradual monotonic process. The idea of stages was
originally introduced by Piaget in his theory of cognitive
development (1959). The claim about stages of development
from early childhood up to adulthood is still influential,
even though the idea of across-the-board stage transitions is
unlikely to be true. Nevertheless, it is quite plausible that
progress in a certain domain can also support or enable
progress in another domain. In this paper we will explore
this idea in the context of concrete cognitive models that
learn developmental tasks that need similar strategies.
The key idea in the modeling effort is that progress on a
certain task leads to new cognitive skills that might provide
the key missing piece that is necessary for progress on
another task. If the new skill is applicable in multiple
domains, this may give the impression of a stage-like
transition, even though specific learning has to be done
within each of the individual tasks.
To identify phases or stages in performance, Siegler
introduced the rule-assessment approach (Siegler, Strauss,
& Levin, 1981; Siegler, 1976). The assumption of that
approach is that a certain set of rules produces a particular
strategy that can later be identified in behavior. For
example, in the balance scale task that we will discuss in
more detail later on, both weight and distance have to be
taken into account to determine the correct answer.
However, early in development children only take weight
into account. This produces a characteristic pattern of errors

that uniquely identifies the strategy. Siegler's assumption is
that progress from one stage or phase to the next was
produced by general problem solving strategies. In other
words, progress is independent of progress on other tasks,
but only dependent on knowledge that doesn't change.
Differently but also similarly, Alison Gopnik advocates
the theory-theory (Gopnik, 2003). This theory assumes
children use reasoning methods similar to what scientists
use to generate and refine their knowledge about the world.
The theory-theory integrates the process of scientific
research and children’s ability to construct new knowledge.
An alternative mechanism to explain developmental
progress is transfer from other tasks. The idea of transfer
was first introduced by Thorndike and Woodworth (1901).
Their conclusion, however, was that there is in fact very
little evidence for transfer, and that people have to discover
a strategy for a new problem all over again even if it is very
similar to a problem they just solved. Only when the
knowledge needed for the task is identical to knowledge
from another task will there be transfer: the identical
elements theory, which is still assumed to be the dominant
explanation for transfer (or, lack thereof).

The PRIMs Theory
The PRIMs theory (Taatgen, 2013) offers an alternative to
both the identical elements theory, and approaches that
assume that new skills are produced by general immutable
strategies. The assumption of PRIMs is that general
cognitive skills are learned as a byproduct of learning
specific tasks. PRIMs builds on the successful ACT-R
(Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational) architecture
(Anderson, 2007), and inherits most of its principles.
However, the key difference is the basic building block of
skill. In PRIMs these are Primitive Information Processing
Elements (hence PRIMs). PRIMs are clustered together into
cognitive operators that carry out the skill.
This method allows you to construct nearly any task from
a fixed set of building blocks. PRIMs compare information
between different cognitive modules (vision, memory, etc.)
or move that information from one module to another. If a
particular combination of PRIMs is used more often, they
will be compiled into a single unit that can be used in any
situation that that combination can be used. This means that
if a particular combination of PRIMs is useful and is trained
in a particular task, but that combination is also useful for
another task, that other task can be learned faster because it
already has some of the necessary building blocks. This
mechanism can explain effects of transfer, even though the
process does not actually transfer knowledge from one task

2621

to another. Instead general knowledge (the useful
combinations of PRIMs) is generated by learning one task,
and reused by another task. For example, a task in which a
letter is displayed on the screen, and a judgment has to be
made whether the letter is a vowel requires transforming a
perceptual input into a memory query with a task-specific
component (vowelness). This step takes four PRIMs, which
can be reused for a task in which a number is displayed and
the subsequent number has to be named.

shown in Figure 1, the children had to predict to which side
the scale would tilt, or if it would stay balanced, taking into
account the distance to the fulcrum and the weight of the
stacks.

Goal of this paper
This paper builds on Gittelson & Taatgen (2014), who
modeled stages in the balance scale task and a decision
making task. The limitation of that study was that the
decision making task was not a typical developmental task.
In this paper we will examine three developmental tasks in
which multiple stages have been identified. The three tasks
have a common strategic element: handling multiple aspects
or dimensions of a particular problem. Typical stage 1
behavior is to only take one dimension into account. In a
later stage, two dimensions are recognized, but are only
handled one at a time. In the final stages information from
multiple dimensions is integrated to reach a decision.
The approach is to build separate PRIMs models of all
three tasks for each of their stages, so in total 11 models.
The main question we want to answer is how easy it is to
learn a new stage of a task given different types of prior
knowledge. We will do this by determining the amount of
transfer between combinations of models. First, we will
examine how a lower stage can support a higher (typically
more complex) stage. For example, to what extent is
mastery of stage 1 helpful in learning stage 2. We will
examine a more interesting question next: to what extent is
knowledge of stage 2 of another task helpful in learning
stage 2. So, is mastery of stage 2 in task A helpful in getting
to stage 2 of task B. Finally, we will look at the "stagetransition" question: if you have mastered stage 1 of a task
A, and stage 2 of task B, is this combination a better support
to learn stage 2 of task A than just mastery of stage 1? If this
is the case, progress in stage 2 in any task can trigger
progress in many other tasks that are still in stage 1,
producing a more general stage-like transition.

Developmental Task and Model
In the following section we will explain the three tasks we
used: the Balance Scale Task (further on also Balance Task
called), the Number Task and the Une-Sentence Task. We
will also explain the structure of the models for each of the
tasks. The first two tasks are mainly based on Siegler’s
(Siegler et al., 1981; Siegler, 1976) work and is reimplemented for our purposes in PRIMs. The third task was
already implemented by Zondervan and Taatgen (2003),
which is the basis for the PRIMs implementation.

Balance Scale Task
The Balance Task was originally described by Inhelder and
Piaget (1959) and used by several other researchers. As

Figure 1: Balance Scale Task
Siegler labeled weight as the dominant dimension and
distance as the subordinate (Siegler et al., 1981). He
implemented each of the stages by a set of decision rules.
For our model we re-implemented these rules directly into
PRIMs. In correlation to the real world experience and
according to the Piagetian stages, children need to learn to
integrate multiple dimensions of the problem. In the
beginning they typically only consider a single dimension.
In the second stage they will consider more dimensions –
but only one at a time. In the third stage they take multiple
dimensions into account, and learn to weigh the dimensions
properly. But there are still cases where there is a need of
the proper combination of both dimensions and will always
lead to the correct solution. This is what we call stage four.
There is a debate going whether children even ever reach
that stage without being taught explicitly. As it is proposed
by Inhelder and Piaget (1959), children will reach that stage,
but it has been even rejected by the findings from Siegler
(1976). As we will see this is only an issue in the Balance
Task, so it will not play a major role in our discussion.
In the model the first stage of the Balance Scale Task will
decide just on the basis of the dominant dimension. In the
second stage, the model will work just as the first stage, but
in cases of equal values on the dominant dimension the
model will take the subordinate dimension into account and
decide on that one. In the third stage the model will take the
subordinate dimension into account either way. So even in
the case of different dominant dimension, it will now also
take the subordination into account. If the subordinate
dimension is equal, the decision is based on the dominant
dimension. If both the dominant and the subordinate
dimension differ, the model will guess (Siegler called this
case ‘Muddle through’). The fourth stage will solve the
‘Muddle through’ problem, with taking the dominant and
the subordinate dimension comparable into account, which
arises with an algebraically combination of the distance and
the weight on each side (the torque law).

Number Conservation Task
Another developmental task we used is the Number
Conversation Task. Like the Balance Task, it has its roots in
the Piagetian account, and was also discussed by Siegler. In
the number conservation task children have to decide which

2622

of two rows has more coins. The task itself concerns two
phases. The first phase consists of the initial position of the
coins, which are two rows of equal length and quantity. In
phase two the experimenter performs a transformation to the
lower row and the participant has to determine which row
contains more coins. A transformation can consist of
lengthening or shortening the row, and/or adding or
subtraction coins from the row. This makes the task very
similar to the Balance Task: both the length and numerosity
are dimensions to be considered, and length is initially
dominant. The difference is, of course, that the solution only
involves numerosity, the subordinate dimension.

Figure 2: Number Conservation Task (Phase one is the left
cluster and phase two the right cluster.)
Because of the similarity, the models for the task are very
similar to the Balance Task models. Children start to learn
to make the decision based on a single dimension, length.
After that they will take a second dimension into account,
but again only in case where the first dimension leads to a
non-sufficient solution, which is the case if the values for
the dominant dimension are equal, therefore considering the
second dimension will help to decide. Next step is to
consider both stages at any time. But in cases of two
ambiguous outcomes for each dimension, children will
guess. The final stage 4 rule is of course different, and
similar again to stage 1, except with a different dimension.

Une - Sentence Task
The third task we modeled is based on Karmiloff-Smith's
experiment on the acquisition of the function of determiners
in French (Karmiloff-Smith, 1979). The French feminine
word for "a", "une", has different meanings. It can be used
to introduce a new item ("a balloon"), but also to indicate a
specific number ("one balloon"). To assess the reasoning
process that children to determine the meaning of "une",
Karmiloff-Smith showed them pictures of two playgrounds,
one with a girl and the other with a boy (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Playgrounds

Those playgrounds were constructed precisely; e.g. if the
boy had three balloons the girl would have one. The
experimenter always ‘talked’ to either the boy or the girl
and the child had to decide to which one the experimenter
was talking. Questions were of the form: ‘Please lend me
the X.’ or ‘Please lend me a X’. The word ‘la’ is the French
word for ‘the’. The French word ‘une’ is translated in
English ‘one’ (number) and ‘a’ (indefinite article).
Therefore by hearing ‘Please lend me a box’ (consider a
playground situation as in Figure 3), the correct response of
the child would be: ‘You are talking to the girl’. However, if
the child would answer ‘boy’, it would indicate they
interpret ‘une’ as ‘one’.
The task was constructed to test whether children are able to
distinguish between ‘une’ and ‘la’ sentences. Results
revealed that there did almost perfectly fine on ‘la’
sentences, but there appeared a U-shaped performance curve
for ‘une’ sentences. At younger ages (3-4 year olds) they do
well on ‘une’ sentences. Then there a low point at the age of
5. And then at rising ages (the testing was up to the age of
10) the performance on ‘une’ sentences was nearly perfect
again.
Taatgen and Zondervan presented a model of the
performance curve of the indefinite French article ‘une’
(2003) based on the representational redescription (RR)
theory (Karmiloff-Smith, 1992). Generally the stages
describe, as well as the stages of the other two tasks, the
cognitive development. The main idea of the performance
drop and the rise of performance is, that children first
consider only the one dimension they know, which would
be ‘une’ as an indefinite article – which indeed leads to the
correct answer if they have to make a choice between two
playgrounds: they pick the playground with multiple items.
The subsequent drop is explained by a switch to the other
dimension. The theory is that they now consider ‘une’ as a
number, which leads to an incorrect response. In the final
stage the children learn how to differentiate between the two
interpretations by taking into account another dimension of
the problem, in this case whether or not the object in
question is already the focus of the discussion. If boxes are
already to topic of conversation, the ‘one’ interpretation is
correct, but if they are not, the ‘a’ interpretation is correct.
This means that in stage 3 the decision process consists of
two steps: first settle the topic question, and based on that
make the right choice between the two playgrounds.
Similar to the other task and their stages, for the first stage
of the Une-Sentence Task, the decision is based on one
dimension (you might call it the dominant dimension). The
first stage decides correctly with the information of the
dominant dimension. The second stage also only take
dominant dimension into account, but decides strictly
incorrectly (in the context of this test, normally interpreting
‘a’ as ‘one’ does not lead to many problems). In the third
stage in the task two dimensions have to be taken into
account in a way that is similar, but not identical to the
stages 3 in the other two tasks.

2623

Method

Within-task transfer
We will first examine the transfer of a lower stage to a
higher stage within a task. Figure 5 shows percentages for
each of the three tasks. The arrow indicates the testing
direction. For example: Balance Task, Stage 1 to Stage 2
has the value 46 – which indicates the transfer from stage 1
to stage 2. What we can see is that lower stages typically
support the next stage fairly well. The most difficult
transition seems to be from stage 1 to 2 (or 2 to 3 in the
Sentence Task). Noticeable for the Number Task is that the
transfer of the third stage to the fourth is not as high as the
other values. The reason is that stage 4 is in fact a lot
simpler than stage 3, whereas is most of the other cases a
higher stage is an extension of the lower stage. Another
point of notice for the Sentence Task is the transfer value for
the first to the second stage, which is around 100% (noise in
the simulation explains the deviance from 100%). This
indicates that the structure of the solution is identical
between the two stages. This problem arises again in the
next part. The 100% does not mean that mastery of stage 1
automatically leads to mastery of stage 2 in the sentence
task. The model still has to discover that it has to use a
different dimension in stage 2 than in stage 1, and aspect we
have not modeled here (but see Zondervan & Taatgen,
2003).

To assess the amount of transfer between (stages of) tasks,
we used the methodology developed by Katona (1940). This
involves a comparison of two training situations. The first
step is to train the model just on the task in question (let us
call it task T1), and see how much progress is made after a
certain amount of training (200 trials in our case). In the
second step (after cleaning the environment and staring of
with no prior knowledge) training of a different task will be
performed. There are two cases: In the first case the model
is trained on only one different task T2, which I called one
task training. In the other case it will be trained on two
different tasks (in the figure noted as T2 and T3), this will
be mentioned as (two task) shared training. Afterwards the
model is always tested on T1. We can express the benefit of
T2 (or the combination T2 and T3) on T1 by comparing
performance after training (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Illustrates the different training procedures
necessary to assess transfer from task T2 to task T1, or from
the combination of T2 and T3 to T1.
The transfer calculation is as follows:
transfer =
𝑇2training

𝑇1training

!!training
!!training

∗ 100%

Difference of average time of the first
model (without any training) and average
time after the training session on a second
model (in case of shared training: the
training session includes two different
models)
(𝑇1without_training − 𝑇1with_training_T2 )
Difference of average time of the first
model (without any training) and average
time after the training session on itself.
(𝑇1without_training − 𝑇1with_training_T1 )

Results
The results are separated into three parts, as indicated in the
introduction.

Figure 5: Within-task transfer

Transfer between almost identical tasks
The Balance Task and the Number Conservation Task are
almost identical in their decision structure for each of the
different stages. We therefore would expect that if a
particular stage is mastered in one of the tasks, this would
transfer perfectly or almost perfectly to the other task in the
same stage.
Figure 6 shows that this indeed the case: transfer between
the first three stages is in all cases very high. This means

2624

that after a stage is mastered in one of the stage, the
cognitive skills are available to also learn that stage in a
different task.

Figure 7: Shared training session. Left: repeats the withintask task transfer chart; Middle: indicates shared training
with the first model of the sentence task and each model of
the Balance task respectively; Right: similar to the middle
column, but this time a shared training with the third model
of the sentence task and each balance model.

Figure 6: Transfer between the Balance and Number Task
The only exception is stage 4, but there the two tasks
differ: whereas the Balance Task requires a complex
multistep decision, the solution for the Number Task is quite
simple, and only requires the skills learned for stage 1.

The additional support for the stage 1 to 2 transition is
particularly encouraging, because that is the hardest step to
make (Figure 5). Training on stage 3 of the Sentence task is
also helpful for the later transitions in de Balance task,
although the effect is smaller.

Shared Training
The most interesting case of transfer is when the model has
mastered a certain stage in task A, but has already
progressed to a higher stage at task B. Will skill in task B
help progress on task A? To examine this we tested progress
on the Balance Task given different levels of training on the
Sentence task, two tasks that have similarities but are not
identical in strategy.
Figure 7 shows the results. They reveal that there can be
more transfer with shared training. As shown in the middle
panel of the figure, training on both sentence stage 1 and
balance stage 1 leads to the same transfer to balance stage 2
as just training on balance stage 1 (even though the total
number of training trials is the same). Even better is the
performance after shared training with the stage 3 of the
sentence task: this leads to much better (62% vs. 46%)
transfer than training on just stage 1 of the Balance Task.
The shared training is extra effective because stage 3 of the
sentence task includes skills that can handle multiple
dimensions in a problem, something that is required for
stage 2 of the Balance Task but that is not part of stage 1 of
the Balance Task.

Discussion
The main question of this paper is whether stage-like
progress in development can be explained by the discovery
of general cognitive skills. In the example we discussed
here, the general skill is how different dimensions of a
decision tasks are integrated. All three tasks we have looked
at start with a strategy that only takes a single dimension
into account, and then progress to more advanced strategies
that integrate multiple dimensions. As we have seen in the
simulations, different tasks can support each other. In the
case of the Balance Task and the Number Conservation
Task the underlying structure was almost identical. This
means that progressing on one of the two tasks should make
it really easy to progress to the next stage at the other task.
Even when two tasks only overlap in structure, like is the
case in the Balance Task and the Sentence Task, can
progress on the other task help the other task. For example:
We are testing the model of the second stage of the Balance
Task, and train on the second stage of the Number Task, the
transfer achievement is around 96 %. So we could conclude
that mastery of a certain stage of task A, basically makes
you are able to master another task at the same stage. If we
call the mastery of a stage of a task, a skill that we achieved,
we could talk about an emergent property. This holds at

2625

least for tasks that share many similar structural elements.
Therefore new strategies allow you to be better at all tasks
(so all tasks within that 'strategy-level'), which would be
then something similar to a so-called 'stage'. These findings
do not support the idea of a sudden jump from stage to
stage. It rather supports the idea of a relatively fast transition
from one stage to another because of the replicated use of
elements, structures or strategies of a task. Also
interestingly is the fact that a shared training setting does
support the performance of the tested task sometimes even
better. For example: We are testing the model of the
Balance Scale Task of the second stage. And we train on the
model of the Balance Task stage 1 and the model of the
Sentence Task stage 3. We do see, that this combination
gives a better result (62 % transfer), than training only on
the lower stage of Balance Task stage 2, which would be
Balance Task stage 1 (which is 46 %). We can conclude
from this observation that it could be the case, that training
on different tasks result in better performances, than only
training on one specific task.
A limitation of this study is that the actual transitions
between stages are not modeled, although ACT-R models of
such progress are available for both the Balance task (van
Rijn, van Someren & van der Maas, 2003) and the Sentence
task (Zondervan & Taatgen, 2003). What this study shows,
however, is a limitation of those models, and many other
models that simulate developmental tasks, in that they
describe progress on a task in isolation. What we shown
here is the possibility that skills in general are interconnected, and that progress on them should be studied in a
broader context than just a single task.
In the end this is a theoretical account. The simulations
were performed in an isolated environment and the tasks
were modeled arbitrarily, of course with regard to earlier
work that has been done on this field. Therefore the models
were still plausible constructed based on already existing
models of that kind of task. Furthermore the data we
showed are theoretical predictions, but it is indeed
interesting if this would be tested and be compared to
empirical data. And if our prediction turn out to be true, or
partially true, it would be interesting to look at possible
implications for education, in a sense of teaching procedures
or methods that are commonly used. At the very least this
study suggests that diversity in training has benefits over
just singular training.

Acknowledgments

References
Anderson, J.R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe? New York: Oxford University
Press..
Gopnik, A. (2003). The theory theory as an alternative to the
innateness hypothesis. In L. Antony & N. Hornstein
(Eds)., Chomsky and His Critics (pp. 238-254). New
York: Basil Blackwell
Gittelson, L. & Taatgen, N.A. (2014). Transferrring
primitive elements of skill within and between tasks.
Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting of the cognitive
science society (pp. 529-534). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1959). The growth of logical
thinking from childhood to adolescence: An essay on the
construction of formal operational structures (Vol. 84).
Routledge.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1979). A functional approach to child
language. A study of determiners and reference.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A
Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 17, 693–745.
Katona, G. (1940). Organizing and memorizing. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Siegler, R. S. (1976). Three aspects of cognitive
development. Cognitive Psychology, 8(4), 481–520.
Siegler, R. S., Strauss, S., & Levin, I. (1981).
Developmental Sequences within and between Concepts.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 46(2), 1–84.
Taatgen, N. A. (2013). The nature and transfer of cognitive
skills. Psychological Review, 120(3), 439–471.
Thorndike, E. L., & Woodworth, R. S. (1901). The
influence of improvement in one mental function upon the
efficiency of other functions: III. Functions involving
attention, observation and discrimination. Psychological
Review, 8(6), 553–564.
Van Rijn, H., Van Someren, M., & Van der Maas, H.
(2003). Modeling developmental transitions on the
balance scale task. Cognitive Science, 27(2), 227-257.
Zondervan, K., & Taatgen, N. A. (2003). The determiners
model: a cognitive model of macro development and Ushaped learning in a micro domain. Proceedings of the
Fifth International Conference on Cognitive Modeling,
(pp. 225–230).

This research was funded by ERC-StG grant 283597
awarded to Niels Taatgen.

2626

