Translating testimonial claims into evidence for category-based induction
Tamar Kushnir (tk397@cornell.edu)
Cornell University, Department of Human Development, Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Susan A. Gelman (gelman@umich.edu)
University of Michigan, Department of Psychology, 530 Church Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA
Abstract
Inductive generalizations about the properties of kinds are
based on evidence. But evidence can come either from our
observations, or from the testimony of knowledgeable
informants. The current study explores how we combine
information from these two sources to make inductive
inferences. Participants learned about a novel object category,
and observed the property occur with some frequency in a
sample of category members. Different groups of participants
also heard an informant making either Generic, Quantified, or
Specific claims about the prevalence of the property.
Participants who heard generic claims were more resistant to
a straightforward use of statistical evidence in their
generalizations. Moreover, participants who rated the
informant as more knowledgeable (across conditions) gave
higher prevalence estimates. The results suggest two
pathways through which testimony translates into evidence
for category learning, and raise questions on how to best
combine evidence from these different sources into a
common representational form.
Keywords:
category-based
induction;
probabilistic
reasoning; generics; rational models; testimony; epistemic
trust

Introduction
It’s nearly impossible to learn something new without in
some way generalizing what you learned. This core feature
of cognition – that our experiences teach us about kinds of
things and not just individual instances – supports the
inferences, predictions, and explanations that help us make
sense of the world around us. Much empirical research –
guided by formal models based on Bayesian inference –
suggests that these generalizations are principled and
rational (Gopnik & Wellman, 2012; Oaksford & Chater,
2007; Schulz, 2012; Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001); that is,
they are both based on our current conceptual knowledge
and appropriately responsive to new evidence. This process
of rational (i.e. Bayesian) updating is how we are able to get
so much inductive power from so little new information.
The rational models approach has empirical support from
concept learning studies in infants (Denison, Trikutam &
Xu, 2014; Teglas et al, 2011), children (Kushnir & Gopnik,
2007; Schulz, Bonawitz & Griffiths, 2001), and adults
(Griffiths et al, 2011; Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2009). In all
of these studies, evidence presented to participants is
statistical (associations that are observed to occur with some
frequency) and as such can be represented as probability

distributions. But new information comes to us in many
forms, and, as human learners, the process of translating
evidence into probabilistic representations may not always
be as straightforward as these studies would imply.
Consider the following example. My best friend just
visited an exotic island and brings back with her two YlangYlang seeds. One seed grows into fragrant flowers, and the
other grows into flowers with no smell at all. A reasonable
generalization, based on my observations and no other
information, might be to assume that these plants (in their
natural habitat) are fragrant about half of the time.
Consider, instead, what would happen if she brought
home stories from her travels instead of seeds, and told me
about the Ylang-Ylang flowers she saw with an amazing
fragrance. What can I conclude from these stories? Based on
her general description, and the fact that I trust my friend is
telling the truth, I’d probably assume that all (or most) of
the plants had a lovely smell.
The example illustrates two very different ways of
translating information about a new category and its
properties into probabilities: One is by sampling from the
category and observing the prevalence of that property in
the sample (i.e., the statistical likelihood of a member of the
sample having said property) then treating the sample as
representative of the population. Both adults and children do
this (Gweon, Tenenbaum & Schulz, 2010; Xu &
Tenenbaum, 2007).1
Another is by believing the testimony of trusted sources.
Especially when we are young, but also when we are older,
we rely on others to impart generalities by making kindbased claims (Cimpian & Markman, 2009; Gelman et al,
1998; Koenig et al., 2015). Arguably, much of our
conceptual knowledge is acquired in this way, rather than
through direct sampling, because many of the deep, nonobvious, and essential properties of categories are not
directly observable (Gelman, 2003). Thus, it remains a
1

We leave aside for now, specifics on the way the sample was
generated. In our example, it could have been a random sample
(she happened to pick some flowers while on vacation), a sample
chosen intentionally (she liked those flowers specifically, so she
picked them) or a sample chosen pedagogically (she wanted to
share information about their fragrant properties, so she picked an
representative set to show me). For details on how rational models
account for the sample-generating process in inductive
generalization, see Shafto, Goodman & Frank, 2012; Shafto,
Goodman & Griffiths, 2013.

1307

critical question: does it make sense to straightforwardly
translate new information about kinds garnered through
testimony into probability estimates?
There is some evidence that generic claims (“YlangYlang flowers have a lovely smell”) can be used as the basis
for probability estimates. Novel generic claims lead people
to make high estimates of the prevalence of a property in the
category, and to generalize broadly to new category
members (Brandone, Gelman & Hedglen, 2015, Cimpian,
Brandone & Gelman, 2010; Rhodes, Leslie & Tworek,
2010). However, there are plenty of cases in which generic
claims could lead to estimates of low probability (as in the
claim “Mosquitoes carry West Nile virus”). Morover, both
children (Brandone, Cimpian, Leslie, & Gelman, 2012) and
adults (Cimpian, Gelman, & Brandone, 2010; Prasada,
Khemlani, Leslie & Glucksberg, 2013) view generic claims
as distinct from claims about quantities. Thus, with the
addition of even a little prior knowledge (such as the fact
that West Nile is a rare disease) it is easy to see how a
generic claim could be recast as a probability estimate.
Are more precise, quantified (“some/most/all YlangYlang flowers have a lovely smell”) statements about kinds
easier to translate into probabilities? Perhaps. But logically,
absolute claims (“all Ylang-Ylang flowers have a lovely
smell”) fail to be true after even one exception, and, a
discovery of that exception may call into question the
credibility of the person making the claims. This would
present its own complication: how do we create probability
estimates from unreliable testimony?
The current study represents a first attempt at addressing
these less-than-straightforward cases. We use a simple
design to teach participants about a novel object category
and a property (a causal property, discoverable, but not
immediately obvious) of a sample of category members.
Participants observed the property occur with some
frequency in the sample. Two groups also heard an
informant making category-based claims – either Generic or
Quantified (i.e. “all”) – about the property. We compared
these two groups with a group of participants who heard the
informant make a Specific (and accurate) claim about the
property of only one of the objects in the sample.
Our central aim was to investigate how participants would
integrate the statistical data with category-based testimonial
claims into estimates of property prevalence. Most
straightforwardly, participants should take the observed
frequency of the property in the sample as representative of
the prevalence of the property in the category as a whole.
However, based on prior work, we might expect two
differences unique to generic testimonial claims. On one
hand, given the flexibility of generic claims (that they allow
for exceptions, and can be true for low-prevalence
properties), participants who hear generic claims may not
rely as much on observed frequency in their prevalence
estimates. On the other hand, given that generic claims are
often taken as indicating high prevalence, participants who
hear generic claims may over-estimate the prevalence of the
property across the range of observed frequencies.

Our second aim was to investigate how knowledge
attributions are influenced by the nature of the testimonial
claims made, and in turn how these attributions influence
inferences about the category and its properties. In our
study, observed frequencies afford participants the
opportunity to verify testimonial claims. Thus, most
straightforwardly, specific (and verifiably accurate) claims
made about a single object should lead to high knowledge
attributions. On the other hand, category-based claims that
are not well-matched by observed frequencies (e.g. a
general claim about the property, but a low observed
frequency in the sample) may lead to low knowledge
attributions. This might be particularly true when the
observations logically contradict the claim (as in the
absolute, quantified “all” claims). But, it may also be true of
generic claims (as they suggest high prevalence). On the
other hand, given the flexibility of generic claims to varying
interpretations, knowledge attributions following such
claims may remain high. These knowledge attributions may
be an additional pathway through which category-based
claims influence prevalence estimates; perhaps leading
people to assign greater weight to testimony that is seen as
coming from a knowledgeable source.

Methods
Participants
Nine-hundred-and-thirty-three adults (512 female, 412 male,
age range 16yrs – 86yrs, mean age = 37.37, SD = 12.16)
participated in the study through Amazon Mechanical Turk
in exchange for monetary compensation. Data was collected
on US participants only. Participants were majority white
(79%) and non-Latino/a (92.9%). A majority had attended
college (35% with a 4-year degree, 12.9% with a 2-year
degree, 27.5% some college).

+

Figure 1: A sample of the video seen by participants on trial 1 in
the Generic Language condition. In this condition, the cartoon
figure on the right, a character named “Zorg,” makes a claim about
the objects before they enter the “special music machine.”

Procedure
A random number generator assigned each participant to
one of 30 conditions, for a total of 30-33 participants per
condition. Each condition combined one of 3 types of
testimonial claims (Specific, Generic, Quantified) and one

1308

of 10 observed frequencies of the novel causal property
(ranging from 1/10 to 10/10 inclusive).
The procedure consisted of two trials, each with the same
characters, observed frequency, and testimony, but with
different objects (Trial 1: “blickets” and Trial 2: “midos”)
and a differently-colored machine. On each trial,
participants first watched a short video then answered a set
of questions. A screen shot of the first video is shown in
Figure 1. The video began with a girl who introduced the
“special music machine,” her friend Zorg, and an array of
objects on a shelf that she labeled (e.g. “Here are some
blickets” in Trial 1). Zorg then made one of the following
testimonial claims, depending on condition:
Specific claim: “I know something about this blicket.
This blicket makes the machine go.”2
Generic claim: “I know something about blickets.
Blickets make the machine go.”
Quantified (“All”) claim: “I know something about all
blickets. All blickets make the machine go.”
After hearing Zorg’s claim, the video showed the 10
objects passing through the machine (they went into the top
and came out of the bottom) one at a time. When the
machine “activated” it changed color and made a loud
trumpeting sound. The first object always had the property
of activating machine insuring that, in the Specific
condition, Zorg’s claim was accurate. After the first object,
a random subset of the remaining objects activated the
machine depending on the observed frequency assigned.
Following the video, participants made two knowledge
attribution ratings: A Category Knowledge Attribution
(How much do you think Zorg knows about blickets?) and a
Machine Knowledge Attribution (How much do you think
Zorg know about the machine?). Answer choices for both
were on a three-point scale: 0 – Nothing, 1 – A little bit, 2 A lot. Participants also answered a Property Prevalence
Estimate: “Imagine there were more blickets here. What
percentage of these blickets would make the machine go?
Participants were allowed to enter numbers ranging from
from 0-100. Following the questions for Trial 1, participants
began Trial two by watching the second video and
answering the same set of questions about “midos.”

frequency of activation increased, regardless of the type of
testimony heard. There was also a main effect of Testimony
(F(2,1836)=96.4, p<.001). Prevalence estimates were on
average highest after hearing Quantified (i.e. “All”) claims
(Mean=58%, SD=31%), and on average 3.3% above than
the observed frequencies in each condition (SE=1.16, t(297)
= 2.84, p<.01). Estimates were next highest after hearing
Generic claims (Mean=54%, SD=30%) and were not
different on average from observed frequencies in each
condition (M=-.12, SE=1.33, t(311) = -0.09, ns). Estimates
were lowest after hearing Specific claims (Mean=52%,
SD=30%) and were on average 4.18% lower than the
observed frequencies in each condition (SE=1.06, t(302) = 3.94, p<.001).
Finally, there was a significant interaction between
Testimony and Frequency (F(2,1836)=4.8, p<.01). An
illustration of this interaction can be seen in the graph of the
model predicted values in Figure 2. In the Generic
conditions, the slope of prevalence estimates was
significantly flatter than in the other two conditions (see
parameter estimate in bold in Table 1): they were on
average higher for low-frequency properties than in the
Specific condition and lower for high-frequency properties
than in the Quantified condition.
Table 1: Parameter Estimates of the mixed model predicting
Prevalence Estimates by condition
Parameter
Estimate
SE
t
Intercept
5.01
1.91 2.62**
Slope of Specific condition
.84
.03
27.38***
Intercept difference between 10.13
2.67 3.79***
Generic and Specific
Intercept difference between
Quantified and Specific
Slope difference between
Generic and Specific
Slope difference between
Quantified and Specific

7.08

2.70

2.62**

-.12

.04

-2.69**

.00

.04

.02

*p<.05; **p<.01, ***p<.001

Results
Property Prevalence Estimates: We examined the
influence of Trial (within participants), Observed Frequency
(between participants), Testimony (between participants),
and the interaction of the two manipulated variables on
Prevalence Estimates using a linear mixed effects model.3
Parameter estimates for the model are shown in Table 1.
There was no significant effect of Trial (F(1,1836)=.02, ns).
There was a significant main effect of Observed Frequency
(F(1,1836)=2034.6, p<.001) such that estimates increased as
2

In the Specific claim condition, the blicket Zorg refers to is
always the one closest to him, and as he speaks he “points” to it
with a dashed line connecting his hand to the object.
3
A Q-Q plot of the prevalence estimates showed that they were
approximately normally distributed.

1309

Figure 2: An illustration of the main effects of Frequency,
Testimony, and interaction between the two on participants’
estimates of property prevalence.

Object Knowledge Attributions: We then examined the
influence of Trial, Observed Frequency, Testimony, and
their interaction on attributions of Category Knowledge (e.g.
“How much does Zorg know about blickets?”) using an
ordinal logistic GEE. There was no significant effect of
Trial (Wald χ2 (1) = 2.5, ns). There was a significant main
effect of Observed Frequency (Wald χ2 (1) = 59.4, p<.001),
such that attributions of knowledge increased as the
frequency in the sample increased. There was also
significant main effect of Testimony (Wald χ2 (2) = 38.2,
p<.001): attributions of knowledge were highest in the
Specific condition (Mean = 1.34, SD= .55), next highest in
the Generic condition (Mean=1.25 SD=.54) and lowest in
the Quantified condition (Mean=1.09 SD=.58).

Figure 3: Average knowledge attributions (Category and Machine
Knowledge Questions, Trials 1 and 2) by Observed Frequency and
type of Testimony. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals
of the mean.

was not significantly different from 0 (Wald χ2 (1) = 1.8, ns)
the slopes in the Generic and Quantified conditions were
significantly different from the Specific condition (Generic
vs Specific: Wald χ2 (1) = 9.3, p<.01; Quantified vs
Specific: Wald χ2 (1) = 8.8, p<.01) and significantly
positively correlated with Observed Frequency.
Together these results suggest that, when Zorg made
claims about a specific object, participants’ knowledge
attributions did not depend on observed frequency.
However, when Zorg made category-based claims about the
properties of the objects, participants’ knowledge attribution
ratings increased as observed frequency of the property in
the sample increased. This interaction is illustrated in a
graph of the average knowledge attributions across both
types of questions (Figure 3).
Knowledge Attribution Influences on Prevalence
Estimates: Our final question concerned the influence of
knowledge attributions on inductive generalizations. We
addressed this question by adding knowledge attributions to
our mixed effects model from Table 1 to see if either type of
knowledge attribution (Category Knowledge or Machine
Knowledge) predicted prevalence estimates above and
beyond the main effects and interactions shown. Only the
main effect of Category Knowledge attributions was
significant (F(2,1832)= 23.16, p<.001). An illustration of
the knowledge attribution effect is shown in Figure 4.
Participants who rated Zorg as less knowledgeable about
blickets/midos gave lower than average prevalence
estimates. Participants who rated Zorg as more
knowledgeable about blickets/midos gave higher than
average prevalence estimates. Partial correlations,
controlling for observed frequencies, show that the
relationship was strongest in the Quantified (r=.45, p<.001)
and Generics conditions (r=.40, p<.001), and still
significantly positive but less strong in the Specific
condition (r=.14, p<.05).

Critically, there was a significant interaction between
Observed Frequency and Testimony (Wald χ2 (2) = 17.2,
p<.001). Parameter estimates reveal the nature of the
interaction: while the slope in the Specific condition was not
significantly different from 0 (Wald χ2 (1) = 2.1, ns) the
slopes in the Generic and Quantified conditions were
significantly different from the Specific condition (Generic
vs Specific: Wald χ2 (1) = 15.3, p<.001; Quantified vs
Specific: Wald χ2 (1) = 9.6, p<.01) and significantly
positively correlated with Observed Frequency.
Object Knowledge Attributions: We ran the same analysis
on attributions of Machine Knowledge (“How much does
Zorg know about the Machine?”). There was no significant
effect of Trial (Wald χ2 (1) = .2, ns). There was again
significant main effect of Observed Frequency (Wald χ2 (1)
= 46.1, p<.001), a significant main effect of Testimony
(Wald χ2 (2) = 26.8, p<.001), and a significant interaction
(Wald χ2 (2) = 12.2, p<.01). The interaction followed the
same pattern as above: the slope in the Specific condition

1310

Figure 4: An illustration of the effect of Category Knowledge
Attributions on prevalence estimates. Y axis shows the difference
between actual estimates and the condition average (to account for
condition differences found in prior analyses).

General Discussion
New information comes to us in different ways; we may
make our own observations, or we can believe what others
tell us. How do we integrate evidence from these different
sources into a common representational form? The present
study begins to address this broad question. We designed a
category learning study in which participants heard a
testimonial claim about a category and one its properties.
They then observed the property with some frequency in a
sample of category members. Participants were asked to
translate this evidence into an estimate of the prevalence of
the property in the category as a whole, and also asked to
attribute knowledge to the informant who made the
testimonial claim.
To begin with, it should be noted that participants in our
study responded rationally to the statistical evidence from
the sample they observed. Low observed frequencies led to
low prevalence estimates, and high observed frequencies led
to high prevalence estimates.
However, testimony
influenced this basic and well-replicated result.
Generic claims (“blickets make the machine go”) had a
unique influence on prevalence estimates compared to the
other types of testimony. After hearing generic claims
about the category and its novel property, participants’
estimates of low prevalence properties were higher, and
their estimates of high prevalence properties were lower.
This explains why the estimates were, on average, wellmatched to the observed frequencies. But it also suggests
that, at the extremes, these claims would be less well
matched. Thus, we offer one intriguing interpretation of this
“flattened” relationship: that generics have the effect of
making people resistant to straightforward use of statistical
evidence in their inductive inferences about categories.
Generic claims also led to some degree of skepticism
about the knowledge of the informant, in particular when
the observed frequency of the property was low. This is
consistent with prior work suggesting that generic claims
are often interpreted as indicating high prevalence (Cimpian
et al., 2010). So, observing high frequencies helps verify the
credibility of these claims, and observing low frequencies
calls their credibility into question.
Quantified, absolute claims (“all blickets make the
machine go”) led to prevalence estimates that were on
average higher than straightforwardly predicted by the
sample. Absolute claims also led to the greatest degree of
skepticism about the knowledge of the informant. But this
skepticism did not seem to be based on a straightforward
logical relation between the sample and the claim; if it were,
then any frequency of less than 100% would have
overwhelmingly led to responses that Zorg knows “nothing”
or “little” about the category (which it did not). Rather, the
relation between knowledge attributions and frequency
paralleled the results in the Generic condition, suggesting
that perhaps a documented tendency to interpret quantified
claims as generic (Leslie & Gelman, 2012) played a role.
This possibility, and other potential influences on how we

use frequency evidence to verify the reliability of logical
claims, would be interesting to explore in future work.
Non category-based claims about a specific object (“this
blicket makes the machine go”) also influenced prevalence
estimates; they led to estimates lower than straightforwardly
predicted by the observed frequency.
Knowledge
attributions in this condition tended to be high, and were
independent of the observed frequencies. This suggests that
participants based their knowledge attributions on the
accuracy of the specific claim, disregarding evidence (i.e.
the properties of the remaining objects) irrelevant to
verifying them.
The final result was that, across all types of testimony and
all observed frequencies, knowledge attributions positively
influenced prevalence estimates. Thus, all else equal,
participants who were skeptical gave lower prevalence
estimates relative to others in the same condition, and
participants who were convinced gave higher relative
prevalence estimates.
All together, the results suggest two pathways through
which testimony translates into evidence for category
learning. Claims about categories and their properties lead
to adjustments to the way observed frequencies translate
into general category knowledge. And, the credibility of
claims about categories and their properties themselves can
be verified through observation, and subsequent skepticism
or belief in these claims leads to further adjustments to
inductive generalizations.
The influence of generic testimony in our study has
particularly important implications for a principled, rational
account of category learning, inductive inference, and belief
revision. Generics may, as stated, make us resistant to
straightforward interpretations of probabilistic data. They
may also, by extension, lead to a greater resistance to
counter-evidence in belief revision. Generic speakers also
have the advantage of being judged as knowledgeable
despite counter-evidence. In support of this idea, other work
has shown that generic claims lead to high estimates of
knowledge even when they are not verifiable (Koenig et al.,
2016). Thus, what may make generics so influential in
category learning is that they are resistant to statistical
evidence by both pathways.
Do these findings pose a problem for the rational view?
Not necessarily. Our preliminary findings suggest that
evidence from testimony doesn’t completely discount our
own observations, but rather can be integrated with them.
The details of the integration may depend in part on the type
of testimony (Generic, Specific, and Quantified among
others). It may also be expected to interact with domainspecific knowledge, and additional types of evidence. Many
of these details could be worked out in future empirical and
computational work.
Our data suggests that perhaps not all of the interesting
nuances in human learning and inductive inference are
explained by differences in prior knowledge, or by
assumptions made about the evidence-generating
mechanism (e.g. strong vs. weak sampling, teacher vs.

1311

learner driven, intervention vs. observation). Instead we
suggest that evidence from what people say is not
straightforwardly reducible to these distinctions. When we
relax our assumption that evidence comes in only one form,
we can come closer to understanding the potential of human
learning.

Acknowledgments
We’d like to thank Alexandra Was and Natalie Davidson for
help creating stimuli and with data collection. Thanks to
three anonymous reviewers, and to Felix Thommes for
helpful comments on the revised version. This research was
supported by funding from NSF (DLS #1023179) to T.K.
and NICHD grant HD-36043 to S.G.

References
Brandone, A. C., Cimpian, A., Leslie, S., & Gelman, S. A.
(2012). Do lions have manes? For children, generics are
about kinds rather than quantities. Child Development,
83(2), 423-433.
Brandone, A. C., Gelman, S. A., & Hedglen, J. (2015).
Children's developing intuitions about the truth conditions
and implications of novel generics versus quantified
statements. Cognitive Science, 39(4), 711-738.
Cimpian, A., Brandone, A. C., & Gelman, S. A. (2010).
Generic statements require little evidence for acceptance
but have powerful implications. Cognitive Science, 34(8),
1452-1482.
Cimpian, A., Gelman, S. A., & Brandone, A. C. (2010).
Theory-based considerations influence the interpretation
of generic sentences. Language and Cognitive Processes,
25(2), 261-276.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2009). Information
learned from generic language becomes central to
children’s biological concepts: Evidence from their openended explanations. Cognition, 113(1), 14-25.
Denison, S., Trikutam, P., & Xu, F. (2014) Probability
versus representativeness in infancy: Can infants use
naïve physics to adjust population base rates in
probabilistic inference? Developmental Psychology.
50(8):2009-19.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D., Rosengren, K. S., Hartman, E.,
Pappas, A., & Keil, F. C. (1998). Beyond labeling: The
role of maternal input in the acquisition of richly
structured categories. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, i-157.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Gopnik A, & Wellman H. M. (2012). Reconstructing
constructivism: causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 138(6), 1085-1108.
Griffiths, T. L., Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gopnik,
A. (2011). Bayes and blickets: Effects of knowledge on
causal induction in children and adults. Cognitive Science,
35, 1407-1455.

Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theory-based
causal induction. Psychological Review, 116, 661-716.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J., & Schulz, L. E. (2010). Infants
consider both the sample and the sampling process in
inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(20), 9066-9071.
Koenig, M. A., Cole, C. A., Meyer, M., Ridge, K. E.,
Kushnir, T., & Gelman, S. A. (2015). Reasoning about
knowledge: Children’s evaluations of generality and
verifiability. Cognitive Psychology, 83, 22-39.
Leslie, S., & Gelman, S. A. (2012). Quantified statements
are recalled as generics: Evidence from preschool
children and adults. Cognitive Psychology, 64(3), 186214.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007) Bayesian rationality:
The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford
University Press.
Prasada, S., Khemlani, S., Leslie, S., & Glucksberg, S.
(2013). Conceptual distinctions amongst generics.
Cognition, 126(3), 405-422.
Rhodes, M., Leslie, S., & Tworek, C. M. (2012). Cultural
transmission of social essentialism. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109(34), 13526-13531.
Schulz, L. (2012). The origins of inquiry: Inductive
inference and exploration in early childhood. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 16, 382-389.
Schulz, L.E., Bonawitz, E. B., & Griffiths, T. (2007). Can
being scared make your tummyache? Naive theories,
ambiguous evidence and preschoolers' causal inferences.
Developmental Psychology, 43(5), 1124-1139.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D., & Griffiths, T. L (2014). A
rational account of pedagogical reasoning: Teaching by,
and learning from, examples. Cognitive Psychology, 71,
55-89.
Teglas, E., Girotto, V., Gonzalez, M., & Bonatti, L. (2007).
Intuitions of probabilities shape expectations about the
future at 12 months and beyond. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104, 19156–19159.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2007) Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114, 245-272.

1312

