Understanding “almost”: Empirical and computational studies of near misses
Tobias Gerstenberg (tger@mit.edu) & Joshua B. Tenenbaum (jbt@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract
When did something almost happen? In this paper, we investigate what brings counterfactual worlds close. In Experiments 1 and 2, we find that participants’ judgments about
whether something almost happened are determined by the
causal proximity of the alternative outcome. Something almost
happened, when a small perturbation to the relevant causal
event would have been sufficient to bring it about. In contrast
to previous work that has argued that prior expectations are
neglected when judging the closeness of counterfactual worlds
(Kahneman & Varey, 1990), we show in Experiment 3 that
participants are more likely to say something almost happened
when they did not expect it. Both prior expectations and causal
distance influence judgments of “almost”. In Experiment 4, we
show how both causal proximity and beliefs about what would
have happened in the absence of the cause jointly explain judgments of “almost caused” and “almost prevented”.
Keywords: causality; counterfactuals; almost; mental simulation; intuitive physics.
“We have come to think of the actual as one among many
possible worlds. We need to repaint that picture. All possible
worlds lie within the actual one.” – Goodman (1983, p. 57)

Contemplating what could or should have been is a pervasive feature of human cognition (Kahneman & Miller, 1986;
Reid, 1986; Roese, 1997; Teigen, 1996). As the quote above
suggests, our actual world is infused with different possible
worlds. Despite the appeal of dozens of self-help books to
live in the “now”, we often cannot help but dwell on how
the “now” could have turned out differently (Johnson, 1986).
The word “almost” provides a window into counterfactual
thoughts (cf. Kahneman & Varey, 1990). Actual and counterfactual worlds can come dangerously close, such as when a
researcher almost missed her plane, or a dentist almost drilled
the wrong tooth. The goal of this paper is to better understand
when it is that something almost happened. By investigating
what factors influence whether people agree with the statement that something almost happened, we learn more about
people’s concept of “almost” specifically, as well as about
counterfactual thinking more generally.
A linguistic analysis of the word “almost” yields two key
results (cf. Nouwen, 2006; Penka, 2006): first, almost q implies that q did not actually happen and, second, that the actual outcome p was close to q on some dimension, such as its
probability of occurrence. For q to have almost happened, its
probability must now be zero, but its (subjective) probability
at some earlier stage must have been high. In their investigation of close counterfactuals, Kahneman and Varey (1990)
distinguish two different kinds of probabilities: dispositions
and propensities. A disposition is the prior probability of the
outcome before the relevant episode started to unfold. A reliable penalty taker has a strong disposition to score a goal.
Propensities express dynamic updates to the outcome probability as the episode unfolds. When the penalty taker’s ball is

headed toward the post, it now has the propensity to miss the
goal.
When judging propensity we need to assess the causal
proximity of different possible outcomes. One way of doing
so is through the process of mental simulation (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1982). In the penalty example above, we mentally
extrapolate the trajectory of the ball to estimate whether it is
going to hit or miss (cf. Gerstenberg, Goodman, Lagnado, &
Tenenbaum, 2012, 2014). The outcome was close if a small
perturbation to the relevant causal event would have been
sufficient to bring about the alternative outcome (cf. Gerstenberg, Goodman, Lagnado, & Tenenbaum, 2015). If the
penalty taker had kicked the ball slightly differently, then the
ball would have missed the goal. We investigate the influence
of causal as well as spatial proximity on people’s judgments
about whether something almost happened in Experiment 1.
Kahneman and Varey (1990) argued that whether something almost happened is more strongly influenced by propensity than by disposition. In fact, dispositions are thought to be
neglected entirely when they are not supported by the propensities of the situation. Accordingly, whether the penalty taker
is normally good or bad should not make much of a difference
for whether we think that the player almost missed. What
matters is how close the ball came to the post.
We believe that there is more to “almost” than propensity,
and that prior expectations matter. Imagine the following scenario: The first author plays a one-on-one basketball game
against Michael Jordan. Whoever scores 11 points wins the
game. Let’s say that the outcome of Game 1 is 11 (Jordan) to
10 (Gerstenberg). Here, it would sound fine to say that “Gerstenberg almost beat Jordan”. The outcome of Game 2 is 11
(Gerstenberg) to 10 (Jordan). Now, it would sound strange
to say that “Jordan almost beat Gerstenberg” even though he
came very close to doing so. We would be more inclined to
say that (wow!) “Jordan lost to Gerstenberg”.
The asymmetry between these two situations is difficult to
accommodate by considering causal proximity only. If anything, the counterfactual world in which Gerstenberg would
have won in Game 1 seems further away from what actually happened than the counterfactual world in which Jordan would have won in Game 2. Intuitively, what seems to
be driving the difference between these two situations is our
prior expectation: we expected that Jordan would beat Gerstenberg. We look at the influence of prior expectations on
people’s judgments of “almost” in Experiments 2 and 3.
In Experiment 4, we examine in what situations people say
that something “almost caused” an outcome to happen or “almost prevented” it from happening. In previous work (Gerstenberg et al., 2012, 2014, 2015), we have developed the
counterfactual simulation model of causal judgment which

2777

predicts that people make causal judgments by comparing
what actually happened with what would have happened if
the candidate cause had been absent or different. Here, we
apply and extend this model to capture people’s judgments
about “almost caused”.

Methods

Experiment 1: Causal distance
For an outcome to have almost happened it has to be close
to what actually happened. But close in what sense? Consider the scenarios depicted in Figure 1. In each scenario, a
boy tries to toss a ball far enough to reach a target region. In
some of the situations, the spatial distance to the target region
is large, and sometimes it is small. If spatial distance matters,
then participants should be more likely to say that the character’s ball almost reached the target region in situations c) and
d) than in situations a) and b).
The situations also differ in whether the character throws
the ball at a low or high angle, and whether there is a wall in
front of the target region. If participants only cared about the
spatial distance between the ball’s final location and the target region then these aspects should not matter. However, if
they care about causal distance, these aspects should matter.
Recall that to estimate causal distance, we imagine what perturbation to the relevant causal event would have been sufficient to generate the counterfactual outcome (cf. Gerstenberg
et al., 2015). More precisely, we can quantify the distance
between the actual and counterfactual outcome by looking at
how much more force the character’s throw would have required to be to get the ball into the target region (Stocker,
2014; Wolff, 2007).
Consider situations c) and d). In both situations the ball
comes to a stop at the exact same location. Thus, spatial distance to the target is identical. However, the two situations
differ in terms of the causal distance to the counterfactual
outcome. In situation d) the boy’s ball could have reached the
target region if he had thrown the ball just a little bit harder. In
contrast, in situation c) the boy’s throw would have needed to
be substantially harder for the ball to reach the target region.
Since the causal distance to the alternative outcome is closer
in d) than it is in c), we predict that participants are more
likely to say that the boy’s ball almost reached the target region in d) than in c). Note that the difference between the two
situations disappears if we remove the wall in front of the tarball’s trajectory
ball’s trajectory

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows participants’ mean agreement ratings for
the eight different situations. There was a main effect of
throw; agreement ratings were higher for longer throws than
for shorter throws (F(1, 39) = 132.24, p < .0001, η2p = .77).
There was also a main effect of wall; ratings were higher
when the wall was absent (F(1, 39) = 49.37, p < .0001, η2p =
.56). There was no main effect of the angle in which the
ball was thrown. However, there was an interaction between
angle and wall (F(1, 39) = 11.37, p < .001, η2p = .23). The
presence of the wall reduced participants’ agreement ratings
more strongly for the low angle throws (e.g. situation 7 vs.
8 in Figure 2) than for the high angle throws (e.g. situation
5 vs. situation 6). There was also a significant interaction
between throw and wall. The presence of the wall reduced
participants’ agreement ratings more for long throws rather

high grass

(the ball doesn’t roll
on high grass)

Chris

low grass

(the ball rolls
on low grass)

Participants Participants in each experiment of this paper
were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk and compensated at a rate of $6 per hour. No participant took part in
more than one experiment. 40 participants (Mage = 33.8,
SDage = 11.6, Nfemale = 14) completed Experiment 1.
Design We manipulated three factors within participants: (1)
How far the character threw the ball (throw: short vs. long),
(2) at what angle the ball was thrown (angle: high vs. low),
and (3) whether there was a wall in front of the target region
(wall: present vs. absent). Figure 1 shows four examples of
the stimuli shown to participants.
Procedure After having received instructions, participants
saw eight the different situations presented in randomized order. Participants were asked to what extent they agreed with
the sentence that “Max’s ball almost reached the target region.” They indicated their response on a sliding scale with
the endpoints labeled “I completely disagree” (-50) and “I
completely agree” (50). A different character name was used
on each trial. It took participants 2.4 minutes (SD = 1.8) on
average to complete the experiment.

wall
target region

(a) short throw, low angle, wall absent

mean agreement rating

Max

get region. Now both situations are similar in their causal distance to the counterfactual outcome – the target region would
have been reached if each character had just tossed the ball
a little harder. Thus, we expect participants’ judgments to be
similarly high for these two situations.

target region

(b) short throw, high angle, wall present
ball’s trajectory

John

high grass

ball’s trajectory

Mike

low grass

(the ball rolls
on low grass)

wall

(the ball doesn’t roll
on high grass)

wall
target region

(c) long throw, low angle, wall present

target region

1

2

3

4

5

6

●

25

●

●

7

●

8

●
●

●
●

0

●

●
●

●

●

●

−25

●

legend

●

●
●

−50
throw: short short
angle: high
high
wall: absent present

(d) long throw, high angle, wall present

Figure 1: Example of stimuli presented in Experiments 1 and 2.
Note that the character throws the ball at a high angle when then
grass is high and the ball does not roll (b and d), and at a low angle
when the grass is low and the ball rolls (a and c).

50

short
low
absent

short
low
present

long
high
absent

spatial distance model (r = 0.82)
causal model (r = 0.94)
long
high
present

long
low
absent

long
low
present

Figure 2: Experiment 1: Mean agreement ratings for each of the 8
different stimuli together with the predictions of the spatial model
(gray points) and the causal model (black points). Note: Error bars
in all figures indicate 95% confidence intervals.

2778

Experiment 1 showed that people’s concept of “almost”
implies that the counterfactual outcome was causally close
to what actually happened. In Experiment 2, we investigate
how prior expectations influence participants’ judgments. As
argued in the introduction, we expect that in addition to considering causal distance, participants are more likely to say
that a counterfactual outcome almost happened when they
had low prior expectations for that outcome to occur, and that
it didn’t happen when they had high prior expectations.

Methods
Participants 40 participants (Mage = 31.3, SDage =
10.8, Nfemale = 14) completed this experiment.
Design and Procedure The design was identical to Experiment 1 except for two changes: First, we introduced information about the character’s usual performance as an additional
factor. For each of the eight different situations used in Experiment 1, participants were either told that the character normally gets his ball in the target region, or does not. The experiment follows a 2 (throw: short/long) × 2 (angle: high/low) ×
2 (wall: absent/present) × 2 (norm: positive/negative) withinsubjects design. Participants saw the 16 trials in randomized
order. The information about the character’s normal performance (“Normally, Max does / doesn’t get his ball into the
target region.”) was provided in large font underneath the
same stimuli images that were used in Experiment 1.
Second, participants were asked to indicate their agreement
with two different statements on independent sliding scales.
The statements were “This time, Max’s ball almost reached
the target region.” and “This time, Max’s ball didn’t reach the
target region.” The order of the statements was counterbalanced between participants. It took participants 4.6 minutes
(SD = 1.9) on average to complete the experiment.
1 Here is a link to the model:
http://web.mit.edu/tger/www/demos/almost/

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

short
low
absent

short
low
present

long
high
absent

long
high
present

long
low
absent

long
low
present

normal performance
mean agreement rating

25

positive
negative

0
−25
−50
50
25

didn't reach

Experiment 2: Expectations

50

almost reached

than short throws (F(1, 39) = 12.66, p < .001, η2p = .25).
We implemented a causal model by recreating the diagrammatic stimuli with the physics engine Box2D.1 For each situation, we determined the minimum additional impulse to
the throw that would have been required to get the ball into
the target region. We contrast the causal model with a spatial distance model that predicts participants’ ratings based
on the geometrical distance between the final position of the
ball and the target region. As Figure 2 shows, participants’
mean agreement ratings are better accounted for by the causal
model (r = .94) than the spatial distance model (r = .82). The
causal model correctly captures that the presence of the wall
makes a bigger difference when the character tossed the ball
at a low angle, as the throw would have needed to be substantially harder in these situations to reach the target region. Participants’ judgments of whether the boy’s ball almost reached
the target region are determined by the causal rather than the
spatial distance between the actual and the counterfactual outcome.

0
−25
−50
throw: short short
angle: high high
wall: absent present

Figure 3: Experiment 2: Mean agreement ratings with the “almost
reached” sentence (top panel) and the “didn’t reach” sentence (bottom panel) as a function of each character’s normal performance (bar
color) for each of the 8 different types of stimuli (x-axis).

Results and Discussion
Participants’ responses to the “almost reached” question
closely mirrored the pattern of responses in Experiment 1
(Figure 3). Again, there was a main effect of throw
(F(1, 39) = 12.17, p < .01, η2p = .24), a main effect of wall
(F(1, 39) = 10.27, p < .01, η2p = .21), and interaction effects
between throw and wall (F(1, 39) = 6.56, p < .05, η2p = .14),
and between angle and wall (F(1, 39) = 4.69, p < .05, η2p =
.11).
In general, participants tended to disagree with the “almost reached” statements in situations in which the throw
was short, and tended to agree with the statement when the
throw was long. In contrast, participants never disagreed with
the “didn’t reach” statements. There was a strong negative
correlation between participants’ agreement ratings with the
“almost reached” and “didn’t reach ” statements (r = −.72).
The more participants agreed that the character’s ball almost
reached the target region, the less they agreed that the character’s ball didn’t reach the target region. In contrast to what
we hypothesized, manipulating the character’s normal performance did not affect participants’ agreement ratings. There
was neither a main effect of norm nor any interaction effects
involving norm.
Why did the norm manipulation fail to influence participants’ judgments? The Jordan vs. Gerstenberg scenario mentioned above strongly suggests that prior expectations matter.
We believe that the manipulation may have failed for the following reasons: First, in none of the situations does the character actually succeed in getting his ball into the target region.
Participants may have simply ignored the information about
normal performance since it was not indicative for how the
character actually performed. Second, the norm manipulation
was rather weak – we merely presented text underneath the
figure stating what the character’s normal performance was.
Participants may have focused on the image and ignored the
text underneath. However, it is also possible that our intuition
was wrong and prior expectations do not influence people’s
belief that something almost happened.

2779

Experiment 3: Expectations revisited
missed vs. almost hit

50

Experiment 2 found no influence of prior expectations. In
this experiment, we made the norm manipulation stronger.
We used a different scenario in which participants were presented with outcomes of a darts game (see Figure 4, cf. Gerstenberg, Ejova, & Lagnado, 2011). The darts scenario gives
us a nice way of visually manipulating prior expectations. In
the experiment, participants were shown an image that summarized the character’s practice performance. Some characters had performed poorly in the practice (Figure 4a) while
others had done well (Figure 4b). On the same screen that
showed the practice performance, we also presented the character’s shot in the crucial test trial. Some characters’ test shots
just missed the center region (Figure 4c) while other characters’ shots were further off (Figure 4d). We hypothesized that
both practice performance and closeness of the test shot to the
center region would influence participants’ judgments that the
character almost hit the center region. We expected that participants’ agreement with the “almost” statement would be
greater for test shots that were close and for characters who
had performed poorly in the practice.

−50

Practice Trials

Practice Trials

Test Trial

Test Trial

(a) bad practice
performance

(b) good practice
performance

(c) close shot

(d) far shot

Figure 4: Stimuli manipulating the practice trial performance, and
the distance of the test trial shot.

practice performance
good
bad
close

far

distance to center region

Figure 5: Experiment 3: Mean agreement ratings as a function of
how close the test shot was to the center region (x-axis), and of how
well the character had performed in the practice (bar color).

Participants 40 participants (Mage = 31.4, SDage = 8.7,
Nfemale = 16) completed this experiment.
Design The experiment follows as 2 (practice performance:
good/bad) × 2 (test shot: close/far) within-subjects design.
Procedure After having received instructions, participants
saw four trials in randomized order. On each trial, participants viewed the practice performance on the left and the test
shot on the right. We generated different practice trial and test
shot stimuli by simply rotating the dots around the dart board
center. Participants were asked to indicate on a sliding scale
which statement better describes what happened on the test
trial. The left endpoint of the scale was labeled “This time,
Max missed the center region.” (-50), the right endpoint was
labeled “This time, Max almost hit the center region.” (50),
and the center was labeled “unsure”. It took participants 2.2
minutes (SD = 1.6) on average to complete the experiment.
Figure 5 shows participants’ agreement ratings as a function of practice performance and the distance of the test shot
to the center region. There was a main effect of distance
(F(1, 39) = 78.25, p < .0001, η2p = .67). When the test shot
was close, participants tended to say that the character almost
hit the center region (M = 19.61, SD = 34.24). When the
test shot was far, participants tended to say that he missed the

0

−25

Methods

Results and Discussion

25

center region (M = −23.74, SD = 28.67).
Importantly, there was also a main effect of practice performance (F(1, 39) = 12.76, p < .0001, η2p = .25). When the
character had performed poorly in the practice, participants
tended to say that he almost hit the center region (M = 7.67,
SD = 36.90), whereas when the character had performed
well, they tended to say that he missed the center region
(M = −11.80, SD = 37.31). There was no significant interaction between practice performance and distance of the test
shot.
The results of this experiment show that in line with the
intuition motivated by the Jordan vs. Gerstenberg scenario,
judgments about whether something almost happened are affected by prior expectations. Participants agreed more with
the statement that the character almost hit the center region
when he had failed to do so in the practice. The results
nicely demonstrate how both causal proximity to the counterfactual outcome, as manipulated by the test shot’s distance
to the center region, as well as prior expectations influence
participants’ judgments of “almost”. Interestingly, 15 out of
40 participants tended to say that the character almost hit the
center region (i.e. their rating was above 0) even when the
distance to the center was far, provided that the character’s
performance in the practice had been poor (only 5 participants’ ratings were above 0 for a far shot when the practice
performance was good). If our prior expectation is very low,
then we may say that a counterfactual outcome almost happened even if the distance between actual and counterfactual
outcome was still relatively big. If Michael Jordan threw an
air ball, we would not say that he almost scored. However,
if a small child who never even came close to the basket so
far, finally made a shot that was close to the rim, we would be
happy to say that she almost scored this time.

Experiment 4: Almost caused
The results of Experiments 1–3 show that people’s judgments of whether something almost happened are sensitive
to the causal distance between the actual and counterfactual
world (Experiments 1 and 2), as well as prior expectations
about what will happen (Experiment 3). In this experiment,
we investigate what it means for something to have “almost
caused” an outcome to happen, or “almost prevented” it from
happening.

2780

Clip 1

Clip 2

Clip 3

Clip 4

Clip 5

Clip 6

Clip 7

Clip 8

Clip 9

Clip 10

Clip 11

Clip 12

Clip 13

Clip 14

Figure 6: Stimuli used in Experiment 4. The top row shows clips in which the black ball (B) misses the gate. The bottom row shows clips in
which the black ball goes through the gate. Note: Solid lines show the balls’ actual paths, dotted lines show the black ball’s trajectory if the
white ball (W) had been absent.

We showed participants video clips of colliding billiard
balls (see Figure 6). In half of the clips, the black ball (B)
did not go through a red gate (top row), while in the other
half, B went through the gate. The clips also differed in a)
how close the outcome actually was, b) whether the outcome
would have been different if the white ball (W) had not been
present in the scene, and c) whether the outcome would have
been different if W’s trajectory had been a little different from
what it actually was.
For example, in Clip 1, B clearly missed the gate. It would
also have missed the gate if W had not been present in the
scene, or if W’s trajectory had been slightly different from
what it actually was. In Clip 9, B almost missed the gate. It
would not have gone through the gate if W had been absent,
and it could well have missed the gate if W’s trajectory had
been somewhat different. In some of the clips, the two balls
did not collide at all. For example, in Clip 5, W just misses
B. If W’s trajectory had been a little different, it could have
knocked B into the gate.
Based on what we found in Experiments 1–3, we expected
that participants agreement ratings with the “almost caused”
or “almost prevented” statements, would be influenced by the
perceived closeness of the counterfactual outcome, as well
as their prior expectation about what would happen. Specifically, we hypothesized that participants would say that W
almost caused B to go through the gate when 1) the actual
outcome was close, and 2) it was clear that B would have
missed the gate if W had been absent (cf. Gerstenberg et
al., 2012, 2015). Conversely, we predicted that participants
would agree with the “almost prevented” statement, if the
outcome was close, and it was clear that B would have gone
through the gate if W had not been there.

gate.” (when the black ball went through the gate). Participants in the counterfactual condition (N = 40) indicated to
what extent they agreed with three different statements about
the clip: 1) “The black ball almost went through the gate.”,
2) “The black ball would have gone through the gate if the
white ball had not been present in the scene.”, and 3) “The
black ball would have gone through the gate if the white ball’s
path had been slightly different from what it actually was.”
The statements were adapted based on whether the black ball
went through or missed the gate. The endpoints of the sliders for all of the statements were labeled “not at all” (-50)
and “very much” (50) and the order of the statements was
randomized between participants. The clips and statements
were shown on the same page. Each clip was played in a loop
so that participants were able to watch a clip as many times
as they wanted while making their judgments. Two practice
clips were presented at the beginning of the experiment. It
took participants 7.2 minutes (SD = 3.5) on average to complete the experiment.

Results and Discussion
We will discuss the results from the counterfactual and
causal condition in turn.
Counterfactual condition Figure 7 shows participants’
mean agreement ratings for the three different questions they
were asked for each clip. Participants judged that B almost
went through the gate in Clips 2 and 4, and that it almost
missed the gate in Clips 9 and 11. Participants had no trouble simulating what would have happened if W had been removed from the scene. They correctly believed that the outcome would have been different from what it actually was if
W had been removed for Clips 3, 4, 8 and 9. Finally, they
believed that the outcome would have been different if W’s

Participants 80 participants (Mage = 31.6, SDage = 10.2,
Nfemale = 33) completed this experiment.
Design and Procedure We manipulated what questions participants were asked to answer between conditions. Participants in the cause condition (N = 40) indicated on a sliding scale to what extent they agreed with the statement that
“The white ball almost caused the black ball to go through
the gate.” (when the black ball missed), or that “The white
ball almost prevented the black ball from going through the

mean agreement rating

Methods

black ball didn't go through

black ball went through

50
25
0
−25
−50
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

clip
question

1) almost

2) white ball absent

3) white ball different

Figure 7: Experiment 4: Mean agreement ratings for the different
counterfactual questions. Note: The question labels 1), 2), and 3)
correspond to the questions as written in text.

2781

mean agreement rating

almost caused

almost prevented

50
data
model

25
0

−25
−50
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

clip

Figure 8: Experiment 4: Mean agreement ratings (white bars) and
model predictions (gray bars, r = .95) for the “almost” statements.

trajectory had been somewhat different for Clips 2, 3, 4, 5, 8,
9, 11, and 12. While the answers to questions 1) and 3) were
highly correlated (r = .77), there were situations in which
they came apart. For example, for clips in which B missed
the gate and the two balls did not collide (Clips 5–7), participants disagreed that B almost went through the gate. However, they tended to agree that B would have gone through the
gate if W’s trajectory had been somewhat different.
Causal condition Figure 8 shows participants’ agreement
ratings with the “almost caused” and “almost prevented”
statements. Participants agreed that W almost caused B to
go through the gate for Clip 2, and that it almost prevented B
from going through for Clip 11. In all other situations, participants tended to disagree with the statement.
To explain people’s agreement ratings in the causal condition, we use participants’ responses from the counterfactual condition. The model that best accounts for participants’
judgments in the causal condition combines participants’ answers to questions 1) and 2) in the counterfactual condition
[Model R2 =.90; question 1 (β = .96, p < .001); question 2
(β = −0.79, p < .001); interaction (β = −0.26, p = .046)].
Question 3) was not a significant predictor of participants’
causal judgments.
These results confirm our hypotheses: Participants say that
W almost caused B to go through the gate when i) B actually
missed the gate, ii) it was clear that B would have missed if W
had not been present, and iii) B was actually close to going
in. Interestingly, in situations in which W failed to collide
with B, participants tended to disagree with the statement –
even when a small perturbation to W’s path would have been
sufficient to bring about the alternative outcome (e.g. Clips 5
and 12). Thus, W must have actually made a difference for
participants to say that it almost caused (or prevented) the
alternative outcome. W only “almost caused” B to go through
when the counterfactual outcome was close.

General discussion
When do people say that something almost happened? In
this paper, we have expanded on previous work that has investigated when counterfactual worlds come close (Kahneman
& Miller, 1986; Kahneman & Varey, 1990; Teigen, 1996). In
line with Kahneman and Varey (1990), Experiments 1 and
2 showed that the perceived causal distance between actual
and counterfactual world affects participants’ judgments that
something almost happened. If a small perturbation to the

relevant causal event would have been sufficient to generate the alternative outcome, then that outcome almost happened. In contrast to Kahneman and Varey (1990), Experiment 3 showed that participants’ “almost” judgments were,
in addition to causal distance, significantly influenced by manipulating prior expectations. Participants were more likely
to say that an event almost happened, when their prior expectation was low. Finally, Experiment 4 extended these
findings to modeling people’s judgments about causation. In
line with the counterfactual simulation model (Gerstenberg et
al., 2015), participants judged that a candidate cause “almost
caused” an event to happen when the cause actually made a
difference to the outcome, it was clear that the outcome would
not have happened had the cause been absent, and when the
counterfactual outcome was close.
Goodman’s (1983) quote at the beginning of this paper
states that all possible worlds lie within the actual one. In
this paper, we have shown what makes some worlds lie a little closer to the actual world than others (cf. Phillips, Luguri,
& Knobe, 2015). One of the key questions for future research
is to study in more detail how prior expectations and causal
proximity to the counterfactual outcome help us to bring order into possible worlds.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Center for
Brains, Minds & Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF STC award
CCF-1231216 and by an ONR grant N00014-13-1-0333.

References
Gerstenberg, T., Ejova, A., & Lagnado, D. A. (2011). Blame the skilled. In C. Carlson,
C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 720–725). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Gerstenberg, T., Goodman, N. D., Lagnado, D. A., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2012). Noisy
Newtons: Unifying process and dependency accounts of causal attribution. In
N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 378–383). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Gerstenberg, T., Goodman, N. D., Lagnado, D. A., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2014). From
counterfactual simulation to causal judgment. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane,
& B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 523–528). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Gerstenberg, T., Goodman, N. D., Lagnado, D. A., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2015). How,
whether, why: Causal judgments as counterfactual contrasts. In D. C. Noelle et al.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 782–787). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Goodman, N. (1983). Fact, fiction, and forecast. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Johnson, J. T. (1986). The knowledge of what might have been: Affective and attributional consequences of near outcomes. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
12(1), 51–62.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological Review, 93(2), 136–153.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic. In D. Kahneman &
A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 201–
208). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Varey, C. A. (1990). Propensities and counterfactuals: The loser that
almost won. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology; Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1101–1110.
Nouwen, R. (2006). Remarks on the polar orientation of almost. Linguistics in the
Netherlands, 23(1), 162–173.
Penka, D. (2006). Almost there: The meaning of almost. In Proceedings of Sinn und
Bedeutung (Vol. 10, pp. 275–286).
Phillips, J., Luguri, J., & Knobe, J. (2015). Unifying morality’s influence on non-moral
judgments: The relevance of alternative possibilities. Cognition, 145, 30–42.
Reid, R. L. (1986). The psychology of the near miss. Journal of Gambling Studies,
2(1), 32–39.
Roese, N. J. (1997). Counterfactual thinking. Psychological Bulletin, 121(1), 133–148.
Stocker, K. (2014). The elements of cause and effect. International Journal of Cognitive
Linguistics, 5(2), 121–145.
Teigen, K. H. (1996). Luck: The art of a near miss. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 37(2), 156–171.
Wolff, P. (2007). Representing causation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136(1), 82–111.

2782

