Using Violations of Fitts’ Law to Communicate during Joint Action
Cordula Vesper (VesperC@ceu.edu)
Laura Schmitz (Schmitz_Laura@phd.ceu.edu)
Günther Knoblich (KnoblichG@ceu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Central European University
Október 6 utca 7, Budapest 1051, Hungary

Abstract
When people perform joint actions together, task knowledge
is sometimes distributed asymmetrically such that one person
has information that another person lacks. In such situations,
interpersonal action coordination can be achieved if the
knowledgeable person modulates basic parameters of her
goal-directed actions in a way that provides relevant information to the less knowledgeable partner. We investigated
whether systematic violations of predicted movement
duration provide a sufficient basis for such communication.
Results of a joint movement task show that knowledgeable
partners spontaneously and systematically violated the predictions of Fitts’ law in order to communicate if their partners
could not see their movements. Unknowing partners had a
benefit from these violations and more so if the violations
provided a good signal-to-noise ratio. Together, our findings
suggest that generating and perceiving systematic deviations
from the predicted duration of a goal-directed action can
enable non-conventionalized forms of communication during
joint action.
Keywords: Joint action; signaling; coordination strategy;
cooperation; communication; social cognition.

Introduction
When two or more people perform joint actions together,
communication is often key to successful coordination. An
obvious case is having a conversation (Clark, 1996), for
instance, discussing the steps necessary to prepare dinner.
But communication can also occur non-verbally, such as
when someone waves to inform another of her presence or
when nodding to indicate approval. These gestures are, like
spoken language, purely communicative because they do
not serve to achieve a specific action outcome – their exclusive purpose is to inform another person. However, there are
many cases where the same action serves an instrumental
purpose and informs another person at the same time: If a
passenger occupying the window seat on a train starts stands
up in a demonstrative way, then the instrumental purpose of
her action is to leave her seat. At the same time she informs
the person occupying the aisle about her intention to leave.
Thus, there is a class of actions that concurrently serve
instrumental as well as communicative goals (Pezzulo,
Donnarumma, & Dindo, 2013).
What are the specific circumstances that trigger this class
of actions? Previous studies have focused on joint actions
where communication is needed because one person lacks
information required to achieve a joint goal and therefore
requires a knowledgeable partner to provide this information. It has been shown that knowledgeable partners

exaggerate grip aperture (Sacheli, Tidoni, Pavone, Aglioti,
& Candidi, 2013) or modulate kinematic properties such as
movement amplitude or direction (Pezzulo et al., 2013;
Vesper & Richardson, 2014) to convey knowledge their
partners lack, even in interaction with young infants
(‘motionese’; Brand, Baldwin, & Ashburn, 2002).
There is also evidence that unknowledgeable partners
perceive such modulations. For instance, it has been demonstrated that observers are sensitive to subtle kinematic
differences in performance (Becchio, Sartori, Bulgheroni, &
Castiello, 2008; Sartori, Becchio, & Castiello, 2011). However, in order to understand that a movement modulation is
communicative, an observer will also need to understand the
intended meaning of the modulation. Whereas verbal
language and most gestures are conventional and thus based
on associations between an arbitrary (linguistic) code and its
meaning (Scott-Phillips, 2015), this may not be required to
understand communicative modulations of instrumental
actions. Instead, observers may understand kinematic
signals by making use of their own motor system to predict
the unfolding action of a communicator (Pezzulo et al.,
2013; Wilson & Knoblich, 2005; Wolpert, Doya, & Kawato,
2003). Systematic deviations from these predictions may be
taken as conveying particular meaning.
The aim of the present study was to ask whether movement duration provides a basis for establishing communication between a Leader and a Follower in this way. We
hypothesized that Leaders should modulate movement
speed to indicate target locations unknown to a Follower
and that Followers should be able to use this information to
choose where to move. Such communication should not
depend on the Follower having visual access to the Leader’s
actions if the task context is shared. The reason is that motor
simulation can be used to predict movement duration even
in the absence of visual input (Umiltà et al., 2001; Vesper,
van der Wel, Sebanz, & Knoblich, 2013).

Present study
We investigated whether and how people would communicatively modulate movement duration in a joint setting.
Previous research demonstrated that observers can estimate
with some precision the duration of (partially) hidden
actions. For instance, observers can accurately predict when
someone will re-appear behind an occluding object (Graf,
Reitzner, Corves, Casile, Giese, & Prinz, 2007; Sparenberg,
Topolinski, Springer, & Prinz, 2011). Here, we tested the
hypothesis that joint action partners would use this temporal

2219

prediction ability in the service of communication. Specifically, we hypothesized that actors would convey distance
information by systematically modulating movement
duration.
To this end, we instructed pairs of participants to perform
goal-directed hand movements from a starting location to
one of three target locations (Figure 1), where matching
targets was the goal of the joint action. One member of the
dyad was the ‘Leader’ and knew the target location; the
other member was the ‘Follower’ and did not know the
target location. The task was sequential. First the Leader
moved to the target, then the Follower attempted to move to
the same target. Importantly, an externally triggered tone
marked the start of a new trial and a second tone was
triggered when Leaders arrived at the target location. There
were three different joint conditions (Table 1): In ‘Vision’,
Leaders and Followers could see each other. In ‘Pitch’, coactors could not see each other but a tone of different pitch
for each of the three locations sounded when the Leader
arrived at a particular target location. In ‘None’, no such
immediate source of information was available as Followers
could not see the Leaders and Leaders’ target hits always
produced tones with the same pitch.
For the None condition, we predicted that Leaders would
communicatively use the interval between start and arrival
tone to create a source of information that would help
Followers perform their task. For the two baseline conditions Vision and Pitch, we did not expect any communicative modulation of movement speed from Leaders since
both conditions contained explicit target information (either
in visual or auditory form) to be picked up by Followers,
making additional communication irrelevant (Wilson &
Sperber, 2004). Thus, we expected Followers to make use of
the respective source of information by simply observing
Leaders’ movements or by discriminating the different
target pitches.
The distance of target locations from the starting point
and the target size was chosen so that the duration of
Leaders’ movements was expected to be equal to all three
target locations according to Fitts’ law (Fitts, 1954).
Building on this law, that defines a tradeoff between
distance and target size, the targets were proportionally
larger for longer distances between start and target location.
Previous research has shown that Fitts’ law holds in
performance and motor imagery (Decety & Jeannerod,
1995) and also in action observation (Grosjean, Shiffrar, &
Knoblich, 2007).
We expected Leaders to strategically modulate their
movements to create distinguishable time intervals for the
three different target distances in order to provide target
information to Followers. Leaders’ communication could be
quantified as systematic violations of Fitts’ law. We
expected that such violations would occur in the None
condition but not in the other two conditions. An alternative
possibility for communication in the None condition is that
Leaders delay initiation of their movement and keep movement duration unchanged. To tease apart these two possi-

bilities, we analyzed the movement onset (interval between
the external tone and the start of the movement) separately
from the movement time (interval between the initiation of
the movement and arriving at the target). If participants
modulated movement time rather than movement onset this
would imply that they chose to convey communicative
information via the same channel used for the instrumental
action, although other options are available that clearly
separate communicative and instrumental information.
Table 1: Design and main hypotheses.
Vision Pitch
Visual information available?
No
Yes
Pitch information available?
No
Yes
Modulation of Leader’s action No
No
duration expected?

None
No
No
Yes

Method
Participants
Eleven women and thirteen men participated in randomlymatched pairs (three women only pairs, four men only
pairs). Participants were between 21 and 33 years old (M =
26.4 years, SD = 3.0 years), right-handed and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. The members of three pairs
knew each other before the experiment. They gave prior
written informed consent, received monetary compensation
and were debriefed about the study purpose at the end of the
experiment. The experiment was performed in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki. In each pair, one
participant was randomly assigned to the experimental role
of ‘Leader’ and the other to the role of ‘Follower’.

Figure 1: A: Schematic drawing of the experimental setup.
Only Leaders received target information on the computer
screen. B: Placement of the motion capture sensor.

Apparatus
An interactive real-time motion-capture setup was created
for the purpose of the present experiment (Figure 1A). It

2220

consisted of a table with a row of four circles on each long
side. The circle diameters were 4.8 cm for the start locations
and 1.6 cm, 3.2 cm and 4.8 cm for the three targets. All
circles were centrally aligned with a center-to-center
distance of 20 cm. The index of difficulty (ID) according to
Fitts’ law (Fitts, 1954; ID = log2(2A/W) with A: movement
amplitude, W: target width) was 4.64 for all three targets.
The two participants were seated comfortably at the table.
A cardboard partition in the middle of the table had an
opening in the middle (85 cm long, 35 cm high) that could
be covered with a black opaque cloth to prevent visual contact between participants. The partition also separated the
stimulus display on a 24” Asus computer screen (resolution
1920 x 1080 pixels, refresh rate 60 Hz) such that Leaders
and Followers could be presented with different information. The interactive setup was controlled online with a
Polhemus G4 electro-magnetic motion capture system
(www.polhemus.com) that recorded participants’ movement
data with a constant sampling rate of 120 Hz. Movement
sensors were taped centrally onto the nail of each
participant’s right index finger (Figure 1B). The experimental procedure and data recording was controlled by
Matlab 2014a.

Procedure
Participants received written instructions, which were
verbally repeated before each block of the experiment.
Leaders were explicitly made aware that they would need to
help their partner: “Your partner will not know which target
position is the correct one. For your partner, the only
information about the target can come from your action.
Your goal is to help your partner such that she/he will be
able to reach the correct target position as fast as possible.”
Correspondingly, the Followers’ instructions emphasized
that their partner would have relevant task information:
“Your partner will know which target position is the correct
one, but you will not know this in advance – for you, the
only information about the target can come from your
partner’s action. Your partner’s goal is to help you such that
you will be able to reach the correct target position as fast as
possible.” Participants were also informed that they were
not allowed to speak to each other.
The first block, an individual training (‘Individual’), was
completed only by the participant with the Leader role,
while the Follower waited in a separated part of the room.
Afterwards, both participants performed three blocks of
trials together with short breaks in between (Table 1). In the
‘Vision’ block, co-actors could see each other’s hand movements. In the ‘Pitch’ block, visual access was prevented but
Leaders’ target arrival triggered differently pitched tones. In
the ‘None’ block, neither visual access nor pitch
information was available. The order of the three joint
blocks was counterbalanced across participant pairs.
Each block began with a short calibration procedure to
acquire the spatial coordinates of participants’ finger
positions at start and targets to guide the online control of
the experiment by the motion capture system. Then, after

three training trials to allow participants to get acquainted
with the block’s specific procedure, 72 experimental trials
were performed (24 trials per target, in random order). The
experiment took about one hour in total.
All trials followed the same procedure: Participants first
moved with their index finger to the starting location as
prompted on the computer screen. Once the Leader
(individual training) or both Leader and Follower (joint
conditions) were in the start location, the Leader’s side of
the computer screen displayed the target location and a short
tone was played (80 ms, 659 Hz). The Leader now moved to
the target at her own speed. Upon target arrival, which was
detected by online evaluation of the real-time motion
tracking data, a second short tone was played. Its frequency
depended on the respective condition: In Individual, Vision
and None, the same tone was played for all targets (659 Hz).
In Pitch, the frequency varied for the three targets (1109 Hz
for the first target, 1319 Hz for the second target, 1661 Hz
for the third target). The Follower’s task was to then
perform a speeded hand movement from her own starting
location to the same target as the Leader. Subsequently, the
screen would turn green or red (for 300 ms), indicating
whether Leader and Follower had moved to matching or
non-matching targets, respectively. After an inter-trial
interval of 700 ms, the next trial began.
In all blocks, Leaders were instructed to not touch the
target locations directly and instead end their movements at
a point slightly above the table. This was done to prevent
any noise when Leaders hit a target which could potentially
give directional auditory cues to Followers. Followers were
instructed to touch the targets directly.

Data preparation and analysis
From Leaders’ movement time series, three time intervals
were extracted. ‘Time-to-target’ (TT) was defined as the
interval between the computer-generated start tone and
Leaders’ movement offset, i.e. the moment when they
reached a target position (offset criterion based on the
measured calibration points: horizontally inside a radius of
0.8 cm / 1.6 cm / 2.4 cm and vertically below 1 cm).
‘Movement onset’ (MO) was defined as the interval
between the computer-generated start sound and the
Leaders’ movement onset (onset criterion based on the
measured calibration points: horizontally outside of a 2.4
cm radius or vertically above 1 cm), while ‘movement time’
(MT) was defined as the interval between Leaders’ movement onset and offset. Thus, TT equaled the sum of MO and
MT. All trials in which Leaders moved to the wrong target
or in which TT exceeded two standard deviations around the
mean were excluded per Leader and condition from further
analysis (4.1 % of all data).
From the remaining trials, we calculated signal-to-noise
ratios (SNR) as measures for Leaders’ signal clarity.
Specifically, the SNR of TT combines the difference
between the mean TTs for the three different targets and the
variability of these TTs. Thereby, it captures in one measure
how distinct Leaders’ timing (= signal) is in relation to its

2221

variability (= noise). SNR was calculated for each
participant and each condition as the averaged difference
between mean TTs for adjacent targets, divided by the overall standard deviation of all TTs (across targets), as
described by the equation

where M designates the mean, SD the standard deviation,
and tg1 to tg3 refer to the three target locations. Higher SNR
values indicate a clearer signal. In order to test which part of
the movement was modulated, we calculated a SNR not
only for TT (SNRTT) but correspondingly also for MO
(SNRMO) and MT (SNRMT).
For the analysis of movement velocity, we first filtered all
trajectories using a 4th-order Butterworth digital filter with
cut-off at 10 Hz and then calculated Leaders’ mean velocity
along the horizontal axis on which the targets were aligned.
Finally, to assess joint task performance, trials in which
Followers moved to the same target as the Leaders were
classified as a match and when they moved to a different
target as a mismatch. Based on this, a percentage of target
matches per total number of trials was calculated. All data
preparation was done with Matlab 2015a and significance
testing with IBM SPSS 22.

Results

(SNRMO) and the movement time (SNRMT) to determine
whether they rather chose to wait longer before moving or
to slow down their movements. For SNRMO (Figure 2A),
None (.7) was not significantly different from Vision (.55),
t(11) = 1.36, p > .2, Cohen’s d = .82, or from Pitch (.47),
t(11) = 1.25, p > .2, Cohen’s d = .75. In contrast, for SNRMT
(Figure 2B), None (1.23) was significantly larger than
Vision (.12), t(11) = 5.89, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 3.55, and
also than Pitch (.28), t(11) = 4.55, p < .001, Cohen’s d =
2.75. Thus, Leaders adapted the execution part of their
movements to provide a communicative signal instead of
waiting longer before initiating the movement.

Violation of Fitts’ law
Given that Leaders chose to provide a communicative signal
by changing their movement time, we tested the follow-up
hypothesis that they would do so by moving with constant
mean velocity irrespective of the target location, which
would effectively create a violation of Fitts’ law. To this
end, we compared Leaders’ movement times and mean
velocities in None to baseline performance acquired from
Leaders’ individual training, for which, based on previous
research, we expected Fitts’ law to hold. Accordingly, we
conducted within-subjects ANOVAs to test whether there
were significant interactions of the factors condition
(Individual, None) and target (first, second, third).

Modulation of action duration
To investigate whether Leaders adapted their action performance to inform Followers about the target location, we
first compared the signal-to-noise ratio for the overall timeto-target (SNRTT; corresponding to the complete interval
between the two tones) in the three joint conditions. As
predicted, the SNRTT was significantly higher in None
(2.33) compared to Vision (.86), t(11) = 4.89, p < .001,
Cohen’s d = 2.95, and Pitch (1.04), t(11) = 4.71, p < .001,
Cohen’s d = 2.84. This indicates that Leaders provided a
clearer (i.e. more distinct and more consistent) signal when
Followers did not have other means to determine to which
target they should move.

Figure 3: A: Movement times and B: time-normalized
grand-average velocity profiles in Individual and None
conditions, shown separately for each target.
Figure 2: Results of the signal-to-noise ratio analysis for A:
movement onset (SNRMO) and B: movement time (SNRMT).
Error bars show the standard error.
In a next step, we performed the same analyses separately
for Leaders’ signal-to-noise ratios of the movement onset

In line with our predictions, there was a significant interaction of condition and target for movement time (Figure
3A), F(2,22) = 11.76, p < .01, ηp2 = .52, indicating that MT
was more strongly influenced by the target position in None
than in Individual. There was also a main effect of target,
F(2,22) = 14.92, p < .001, ηp2 = .57, and a close-to-significant effect of condition, F(1,11) = 4.66, p = .054, ηp2 = .3.

2222

The analysis of mean velocity (Figure 3B) showed a corresponding pattern of results, suggesting that Leaders indeed
created duration differences between targets. In particular,
there was a significant interaction effect of condition and
target, F(2,22) = 16.46, p < .001, ηp2 = .6, as well as main
effects for target, F(2,22) = 33.4, p < .001, ηp2 = .75, and
condition, F(1,11) = 5.03, p < .05, ηp2 = .31. Further
separate one-way ANOVAs for each condition confirmed
that velocity was significantly different for the three targets
in the individual baseline, F(2,22) = 52.06, p < .001, ηp2 =
.83 (all pair-wise comparisons p < .001), but not for None,
F(2,22) = 3.07, p > .07, ηp2 = .22 (all pair-wise comparisons
p > .2).

Joint task performance
Finally, we analyzed the effects that Leaders’ signaling performance had on the joint task accuracy, i.e. on how well
Followers understood the communicative signal and moved
to the correct target location. An analysis of the percentage
of target matches showed that dyads’ performance suffered
from the lack of immediately available perceptual information: Dyads had significantly fewer target matches in
None (63.1 %) than in Vision (94.1 %), t(11) = -6.87, p <
.001, Cohen’s d = -4.14, or Pitch (80.4 %), t(11) = -3.87, p <
.01, Cohen’s d = -2.33.

Figure 4: Leaders’ signaling behavior as indicated by the
signal-to-noise ratio of time-to-target (SNRTT) plotted
against dyads’ joint performance, i.e. how well Followers
managed to move to the corresponding target. The dotted
line shows chance performance at 33%.
In the next step, we tested whether those dyads whose
Leader provided a better signal in the None condition also
succeeded better in moving to the same target locations. To
achieve this we correlated pairs’ percentage of target match
with Leader’s signal-to-noise ratio of the overall time-totarget, expecting a positive correlation of the two. Although
the correlation (Figure 4) did not reach significance, r =
.521, p = .08, the rather high correlation coefficient suggests
a relationship between how good a Leader signals and how
well a Follower understands and uses the given information.

Discussion
To increase our understanding of how communication based
on instrumental actions is created and used, the present

study investigated whether movement duration provides a
basis for establishing communication between a Leader and
a Follower in a joint action. In our task, Leaders performed
movements to target locations unknown to Followers who
then attempted to quickly move to the same target location.
Crucially, by adjusting target sizes and distances according
to Fitts’ law (Fitts, 1954), we effectively created a situation
in which information could not be transmitted directly via
the visual or auditory modality and where established communication systems could not be used. We hypothesized
that Leaders would create a new communication system by
modulating movement duration to inform Followers and
that Followers would be able to use this information to
choose which location to move to.
In line with our predictions, we found that Leaders
modulated the duration of their movements to indicate
different target locations but only if the Follower had no
direct visual or pitch information about their actions. This
finding demonstrates the specificity of Leaders’ communication to contexts in which receiving information was
relevant for the joint action partner (Wilson & Sperber,
2004). The present study extends previous work on
signaling in interaction contexts that highlighted the role of
spatial movement parameters (Pezzulo et al., 2013; Sacheli
et al. 2013; Vesper & Richardson, 2014) by demonstrating
that movement duration provides a further potential
communication channel. Possibly, both producing and
understanding communicative signals with action duration
is based on motor simulation processes (Wolpert et al.,
2003) in which differences between internally predicted and
actual action duration would be taken as communicative
deviations from natural performance.
Our task was designed such that Leaders had two options
of modulating movement duration – either by waiting longer
before initiating their movement or by slowing down the
movement. The results show that Leaders chose the latter
option. This is important for two reasons: First, this result
supports the idea that signaling is based on generating
predictions and exaggerating aspects of motor performance
to allow another person to distinguish between action alternatives. Rather than strategically delaying action onset,
Leaders’ ongoing actions were systematically sped up or
slowed down, although the Follower could not perceive the
movements themselves. Second, informing Followers
required Leaders to accept a violation of Fitts’ law for their
own movement execution in order to create distinguishable
action durations. An analysis of the velocity profile of
Leaders’ movements confirmed this by showing that
Leaders kept their mean velocity to all targets constant,
although the targets greatly differed in size. In fact, keeping
velocity constant across targets may have been the most
straightforward way to create distinct movement durations
for different target locations.
Successful communication presupposes that recipients
benefit from the information that was communicated. This
was clearly the case for the Followers in our experiment
who benefitted from the Leaders’ communication when

2223

trying to match the target location. Although dyads’ task
accuracy was lower compared to the conditions where
explicit visual or pitch information about the target location
was available, all pairs except one managed to perform
better than chance. Note that the chance performance in one
pair is entirely due to a Follower who, throughout the entire
interaction, failed to understand signals with a very good
signal-to-noise ratio (see Figure 4). Although follow-up
studies would be required to characterize good Leaders and
Followers, mentalizing and perspective-taking abilities are
likely to play an important role as both informing and
understanding modulations of movement as a communicative act likely requires taking the partner’s task
knowledge and access to perceptual information into
account (see also Volman, Noordzij, & Toni, 2012).
Were Leaders aware of their signaling strategy? Although
we do not have quantitative evidence, it is likely that actors
in the present study were indeed aware that they modulated
movement duration to communicate target location to
Followers. Most Leaders reported during debriefing that
they distinguished between different targets by using
different movement times. Similarly, Follows were aware of
what feature of the Leaders’ action they used to decide to
which target they would move. However, there is a possibility that awareness is not always necessary to be successful with the type of communication observed here: Because
communication is embedded into the execution of a joint
action, people may not always realize that they facilitate
performance for a partner as long as the partner detects
deviations from standard performance and effectively uses
the information to achieve the jointly planned outcome.
Taken together, the present study provides evidence that
joint action coordination can benefit from communicative
modulations that violate predictions about instrumental
actions. Generating and perceiving systematic deviations
from the predicted duration of a goal directed action was
sufficient to enable an effective non-conventionalized form
of communication during joint action.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the European Research
Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework
Program (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement n°
[609819], SOMICS, and by ERC grant agreement
n°616072, JAXPERTISE.

References
Becchio, C., Sartori, L., Bulgheroni, M. & Castiello, U.
(2008). The case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde: A kinematic
study on social intention. Consciousness and Cognition,
17, 557-564.
Brand, R. J., Baldwin, D. A. & Ashburn, L. A. (2002).
Evidence for `motionese': modifications in mothers'
infant-directed action. Developmental Science, 5, 72-83.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Decety, J., & Jeannerod, M. (1995). Mentally simulated
movements in virtual reality: Does Fitts’ law hold in
motor imagery? Behavioral Brain Research, 72, 127–134.
Fitts, P. (1954). The information capacity of the human
motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, 381-391.
Graf, M., Reitzner, B., Corves, C., Casile, A., Giese, M. &
Prinz, W. (2007). Predicting point-light actions in realtime. NeuroImage, 36, T22–T32.
Grosjean, M., Shiffrar, M., & Knoblich, G. (2007). Fitt’s
law holds in action perception. Psychological Science, 18,
95-99.
Pezzulo, G., Donnarumma, F. & Dindo, H. (2013). Human
Sensorimotor Communication: A Theory of Signaling in
Online Social Interactions. PLoS ONE, 8, e79876.
Sacheli, L., Tidoni, E., Pavone, E., Aglioti, S. & Candidi,
M. (2013). Kinematics fingerprints of leader and follower
role-taking during cooperative joint actions. Experimental
Brain Research, 226, 473-486.
Sartori, L., Becchio, C., & Castiello, U. (2011). Cues to
intention: the role of movement information. Cognition,
119, 242–252.
Scott-Phillips, T. C. (2015). Speaking Our Minds. Palgrave
Macmillan.
Sparenberg, P., Springer, A. & Prinz, W. (2011). Predicting
others’ actions: evidence for a constant time delay in
action simulation. Psychological Research, 76, 41-49.
Umiltà, M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga,
L., Keysers, C. & Rizzolatti, G. (2001). “I know what you
are doing”: a neurophysiological study. Neuron, 32, 91101.
Volman, I., Noordzij, M. L. & Toni, I. (2012). Sources of
variability in human communicative skills. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 6, 310.
Vesper, C. & Richardson, M. (2014). Strategic
communication and behavioral coupling in asymmetric
joint action. Experimental Brain Research, 232, 29452956.
Vesper, C., van der Wel, R. P. R. D., Knoblich, G., &
Sebanz, N. (2013). Are you ready to jump? Predictive
mechanisms in interpersonal coordination. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 39(1), 48-61.
Wilson, D., & Sperber, D. (2004). Relevance Theory. In
Horn, L.R. & Ward, G. (eds.) The Handbook of
Pragmatics. Oxford: Blackwell, 607-632.
Wilson, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005). The case for motor
involvement in perceiving conspecifics. Psychological
Bulletin, 131(3), 460–473.
Wolpert, D. M., Doya, K., & Kawato, M. (2003). A
unifying computational framework for motor control and
interaction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B, 358, 593–602.

2224

