Variability in category learning:
The Effect of Context Change and Item Variation on Knowledge Generalization
Dustin D. Finch (ddfinch@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, IN, 47401 USA

Paulo F. Carvalho (pcarvalh@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, IN, 47401 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, IN, 47401 USA

Abstract
We explore how context change and item variation during
natural category learning influence memory and generalization
to new examples. Participants studied either images of the same
bird or varied birds from each of several categories. These
images could be presented in a constant background color or
different background colors. During test, birds were presented
in only one of the studied background colors. Performance at
test depended on the context overlap between study and test,
with better performance when there was minimal context
change during study. Also, contrary to previous findings, we
found that learners generalized better when items were
repeated during study and remembered old items better when
items were varied during study. When there is a moderate
degree of context change, there is no benefit of repetition or
variation for either novel or old items. These results indicate
that context change and item variation have complementary
effects on learning.
Keywords: concept learning, memory, context, variability,
repetition.

Introduction
In our every-day life, we have all recognized someone
without being able to “place” the person or remember their
name. For example, even though we may have been visiting
their office for years, we might fail to remember the name of
our dentist when we see her at the grocery store. A related
feeling is reported by students in preparation for exams. They
are able to effectively remember the content the night before
the exam in their dorm room, but that knowledge seems to
have vanished when they are tested in an exam context
different from their dorm room study context.
These are real-life examples of a property of our memory
system – context dependency. When trying to remember
something, reinstating the conditions of the encoding
situation (i.e., the context) helps retrieve the memory. For
example, Godden and Baddeley (1975; see also, Godden &
Baddeley, 1980; Smith, Glenberg, & Bjork, 1978) had people
learn a list of words in one of two contexts: either underwater
or on land. When asked to recall this list, people recalled

more words when the testing context was the same as the
study context (e.g., study done underwater and recall done
underwater as well), compared to when the testing context
was different (e.g., study done underwater and recall done on
land). This effect has been repeatedly found across different
tasks, paradigms and labs (see Smith, 2013 for a recent
review and Smith & Vela, 2001 for a meta-analyses),
including educational settings (Abernethy, 1940; but see
Saufley, Otaka, & Bavaresco, 1985).
Why is memory context dependent? One leading theory is
that as memories are created, background information (e.g.,
how you feel, the smell, sounds, or the room you are in) is
encoded into that memory. This background information can
then be used as cues to retrieve that memory (Hintzman,
1986; Bjork and Bjork, 1992; Smith 2013). Reinstating the
study conditions at test makes these cues available,
improving recall.
However, context dependency can have negative
consequences, because a specific memory might become too
tied to a specific context. For example, a student might study
the mitochondrial structure in their room while listening to
Pearl Jam. When later testing themselves on the
mitochondrial structure while listening to Pearl Jam and still
in their room, they are able to successfully retrieve the
information studied. However, when asked to write about the
process in a quiet classroom surrounded by 30 other students,
retrieving this memory might be difficult. One possible
solution to this issue is to decontextualize the specific
memory.
Memory is considered to be decontextualized when
removing the contextual cues associated with it does not
affect retrieval. As the example above shows,
decontextualization is particularly important when the test
situation is different from the study situation. One way to do
this is by varying study context and then testing people’s
memory in a new context (Smith et al., 1978; Smith, 1979;
Smith & Handy, 2014; for evidence in classroom settings see
Smith & Rothkopf, 1984). Smith et al. (1978) tested this by
having a group of people learn a list of words in two separate

2327

rooms and a different group who studied the words in one
room only (both groups of learners were asked to leave the
room and return during learning). All participants were tested
in a novel room. People recalled more words when they
studied in two different rooms compared to studying in one
room only. Studying in two different contexts led to the
creation of decontextualized memories that were more easily
retrieved in a new context.
Thus, previous research has demonstrated that our memory
includes information about the learning situation, which can
have a positive or negative effect on later retrieval. A possible
explanation for this effect is derived from the MINERVA 2
model (Hintzman, 1986). This model suggests that every
memory is encoded into its own memory trace which includes
both target and context information. When accessing
previous memories, common properties between the traces
will be more salient at retrieval. In this way, when
information is studied in one context only, all encoded
information (both contextual information as well as target
content) are highly salient at retrieval. Conversely, if the
target information is studied across several contexts, it will
be more salient because it is the only common information
across all contexts. This will contribute to good recall, even
when context cues are not available at retrieval.
A similar idea has been proposed in the context of
generalization of category learning to new items (Hintzman,
1984). A goal of most category learning is to extend a
category learning experience to novel items (Goldstone,
Kersten, Carvalho, 2013). One way to improve category
generalization is by increasing the variation across the
studied items. When people study a category by seeing
several different examples of the category, they are better at
generalizing this knowledge to new items of the category
compared to when they see only a few items repeated
(controlling for total exposure time; e.g., Homa, Cross,
Cornell, Goldman, & Shwartz, 1973; Posner & Keele, 1968;
Wahlheim, Finn, & Jacoby, 2012). For example, learning the
category dog by seeing examples of German Shepherds,
Bulldogs, Chihuahuas, and Poodles would result in better
generalization to new members of the category dog (e.g.,
Pugs) compared to studying only examples of Chihuahuas.
Seeing several different items allows people to notice and
extract the overlapping properties among all examples. This
allows for better subsequent generalization (Hintzman,
1984).
In sum, both context change and item variation can be seen
as different, perhaps complementary, ways of increasing
study variability with positive results. Here we propose to
extend previous research on context dependent memory and
item variation to a situation where generalization of the
knowledge is required. We analyze two main questions: (1)
can context change improve not only memory retrieval but
also knowledge generalization to novel items, and (2) can
context change and item variation work together to result in
improved generalization or is this high level of combined
variability detrimental for memory and generalization?

We analyze these two questions by having learners learn
bird species by studying examples of each species and
manipulating the number of different items studied as well as
the study context of the items. According to previous research
with memory tasks, and the predictions of MINERVA 2, we
expect to see better generalization in situations for which
there is a high congruency between study and test contexts.
Moreover, previous research suggests that both item variation
and context variation will promote better generalization to
new items at test, by increasing study variability and the
detection of the category-relevant properties shared by
members of a category (Hintzman, 1984).

An Experiment
In this experiment participants learned twelve different
species of birds by studying examples of each species. We
manipulated the context of study by changing the color of the
background on which the bird was presented. In addition to
manipulating the context of study we also manipulated the
amount of item variation presented within each category.

Methods
Participants. A total of 238 undergraduate students at
Indiana University volunteered to participate in this
experiment in return for partial course credit. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of the following conditions:
No Context Change (N = 73), Medium Context Change (N =
82), and High Context Change (N = 83).

Figure 1: Examples of the birds shown during the study.
The first row shows the same bird with the same background
color, illustrating what participants would see in the
Repetition and No Context Change Condition. The second
row shows a different bird with the same background color,
illustrating the Variation and No Context Change Condition.
The third row shows a different bird in two different
background colors, illustrating the Variation and Medium
Context Change Condition. The last row shows different
birds with different background colors, illustrating the
Variation and High Context Change condition.

2328

Stimuli & Materials. The stimuli were 72 images of birds
from twelve different species (6 images from each bird
species; see Figure 1 for examples), available as part of a
database of bird images (Wahlheim, Dunlosky, & Jacoby,
2011). We selected the species Black-headed Grosbeak (P.
melanocephalus), Blue Jay (C. cristata), American
Goldfinch (S. tristis), American Tree Sparrow (S. arborea),
Bank Swallow (R. riparia), American Robin (T.
migratorius), Blue Bunting (C. parellina), Clark’s
Nutcracker (N. columbiana), Brambling (F. montifringilla),
Bachman’s Sparrow (P. aestivalis), Brown-chested Martin
(P. tapera), and Bluethroat (L. svecica).
During the task, participants classified the images using the
scientific classification of the species. We created four
different versions of each image by changing the background
color to one of the following: red, green, blue, pink (see
Figure 1). Thirty different images were chosen to be
presented during the study phase, and the remaining 42
images were presented only during test. Which images were
chosen to be used during study and test was counterbalanced
across participants. The stimuli were presented and responses
from the participates were collected using a web-browser and
the experiment software Collector (a free and open-source
platform to run experiments using a web-browser available
from https://github.com/gikeymarcia/Collector).
Procedure. An overview of the procedure used in this
Experiment is presented in Figure 2. There were two phases
to the experiment: Study and Test. Participants completed 48
study trials and 72 test trials.
During the study phase a picture of a bird and its species
name would appear on the screen for eight seconds.
Afterwards, the name was replaced by a Judgment of
Learning prompt. Participants were asked to provide a
judgment of learning on a 0 (0% confidence of correct
classification)-100
(100%
confidence
of
correct
classification) scale and were told to try to use the whole scale
while providing their judgments.
Immediately following the Study phase participants played
Tetris for one minute until starting the test phase. During the

Test phase, on each trial a bird was presented in the center of
the screen, along with the name of the twelve species
participants had studied. Participants were asked to click on
the species name to which they believed the bird belonged.
No feedback was given during the test.
For study and test, one third of the participants saw the
images presented to them always in the same background
color (No Context Change). The color of the background was
counterbalanced across participants. Another third of the
participants saw the images in two background colors
(Medium Context Change). Half of the items in each category
were in one color (e.g., red) and the other half in another color
(e.g., green). Which two colors were selected was
counterbalanced across participants. The last third of the
participants always had a new background color for the items
studied in each category (High Context Change). Participants
never saw a repeated background color within each category,
but colors were repeated across categories. Test items were
presented always in the same background color – a color
chosen from one of the studied colors and counterbalanced
across participants.
During study we manipulated the number of different items
participants saw for each category. For six out of the twelve
categories, one item from each category was repeated four
times (Repetition Condition). The other six categories had
item variation in which each category had four different
studied items (Variation Condition). Which item was
repeated was counterbalanced across participants.
During Test we manipulated whether the item was old
(studied) or was novel. For categories studied in the
Repetition Condition participants saw one old item and five
novel items. For categories studied in the Variation
Condition, participants saw four old items and two novel
items. This was done in order to keep constant the total
number of test items across conditions. For both the study and
test phases, trials were presented in random order.

Figure 2: Schematic representation of the experimental design for study of the categories in each of the study conditions.
Each square represents one example of a bird in the species. The color of the square represents the background color in which
the bird was presented.

2329

Results
Judgments of Learning Participants were more confident on
their ability to correctly classify repeated items (M = 53.48,
SD = 22.46) at test compared to varied items (M = 47.92, SD
= 21.48), F (1,235) = 38.61, p < .0001. Moreover,
participants’ Judgments of Learning for repeated and varied
categories were influenced by the degree of context change
presented, F (2,235) = 5.52, p = .005. When participants
studied in the No Context Change and Medium Context
Change conditions, they were more confident in their ability
to correctly classify repeated items (M = 55.91, SD = 21.06,
and M = 55.95, SD = 22.71, respectively; both ps < .0001)
compared to varied items (M = 47.59, SD = 20.80, and M =
48.80, SD = 21.85). However, when there was High Context
Change, participants rated their ability to later classify both
types of items equally (M = 48.90, SD = 22.94, and M =
47.35, SD = 21.93 for repeated and varied items, respectively;
p = .349).
Test Performance We started by looking at the effect that
changing backgrounds had on overall test performance (see
Figure 3). The results show that the amount of Context
Change had an overall effect on test performance, F (2,235)
= 3.61, p = .029. Planned comparison tests indicate that
studying items with four different backgrounds (M = 65.27,
SD = 30.31) worsens performance compared to two
backgrounds (M = 69.41, SD = 30.62; p < .0001), or one
background (M = 69.76, SD = 30.41; p = .001). Participants’
performance was equivalent when comparing one
background to two backgrounds (p = .531).
Moreover, participants are better at classifying old items
(M = 0.51, SD = 0.50), compared to novel items (M = 0.43,
SD = 0.50), F (1,235) = 97.09, p < .0001 (see Figure 3).
Importantly, item variation and repetition had different
effects for old and novel items, F (1,235) = 42.36, p < .0001.
When classifying novel items, participants are better for
categories studied with item repetition (M = 0.45, SD = 0.50)
compared to categories studied with item variation (M = 0.41,
SD = 0.49; p = .026). Conversely, the opposite pattern is seen
for old items (M = 0.47, SD = 0.50, and M = 0.54, SD = 0.50,
for repetition and varition respectively; p < .0001).

Lastly, the effect of item variation depends on the
background change condition and whether the stimulus is old
or novel, F (2,235) = 14.14, p < .0001. To investigate this
three-way interaction, we calculated the difference between
performance for categories studied with variation and
categories studied with repetition (Variation – Repetition).
We used this score to investigate differences when
classifying old and novel items and among different
background change conditions (see Figure 4).

Figure 4: Difference in test performance for novel and old
items between categories studied with variation and
categories studied with repetition (Variation – Repetition).
Positive values represent better categorization with item
variation while negative values represent better
categorization with item repetition. Error bars represent
standard errors of the mean.
The results indicate that when studying items in the No
Context Change or High Context Change conditions,
pariticipants performed better at classifying novel items for
categories studied with repetition, while for old items they
performed better for categories studied with variation (both
ps < .0001). However, when studying the species in the
Medium Context Change condition, participants’
performance was equivalent for old and novel items (p =
.720), and equivalent for categories studied with repetition
and variation for both old (t-test comparing with 0: t (81) =
0.72, p = .469), and novel items (t-test comparing with 0: t
(81) = 1.08, p = .282).

Novel Items
Mean Accuracy

1

repetition

Old Items
1

variation

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

repetition

variation

0

0
No Context Change

Medium Context
Change

No Context Change

High Context
Change

Medium Context
Change

High Context
Change

Figure 3: Performance during the test phase by amount of context change during study and item novely at test. Change
performance in task is 0.08. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.

2330

Discussion
In this study we investigated how context change and item
variation during study of natural categories (bird species)
influence later memory and generalization to new examples.
We found evidence for context dependency in a
generalization task. Learners performed better when there
was No Context Change and Medium Context Change. As
the overlap between study and test conditions (background
colors) increased so did test categorization performance. For
No Context Change and Medium Context Change conditions
there was a high degree of overlap between study and test
contexts. For High Context Change there is only a small
degree of overlap between study and test. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first demonstration of this context
reinstatement effect in a categorization task, and is in
agreement with previous research showing a positive
relationship between increased overlap of study and test
conditions and memory performance (e.g., Smith et al.,
2014). Moreover, it extends previous evidence to
performance in classification of novel items (generalization)
that go beyond remembering specific instances.
As mentioned in the introduction, previous research has
shown that adding item variation improves both recognition
memory for old items placed in new contexts and
categorization of novel items. (e.g., Wahlheim et al., 2012).
However, contrary to previous evidence, here we found that
learners generalized better when items were repeated during
study and remembered the categories of old items better when
items were varied during study. There are several reasons for
these results. It is possible that the context change
manipulation and the fact that participants are studying
categories with and without variation simultaneously might
have impacted the results. It is possible that the change in
contexts lead learners to try to group items into categories by
background color, leading to overall lower attention to the
similarities between items of the same category but with
different background colors. However, the fact that we saw
similar results for participants who studied the categories in
one context only indicates that this might not be the only
factor influencing these results.
Another possibility is related to the high degree of
similarity within items of each category and between the
studied items and the novel items presented at test. It has been
proposed before that the benefits of item variation during
study are related to the degree of dissimilarity within the
category and between the studied and test items (Hahn,
Bailey, & Elvin, 2005; Stewart & Chater, 2002). In our study,
the items within each category were highly similar (see
Figure 1). Moreover, the novel items used at test were very
similar to the studied items as well. This high level of
similarity might have reduced the possible benefits of
increased item variation at study, because it is relatively easy
to identify similarities across items of the same category
during study and to extend this knowledge to very similar
items at test. It is possible that if more dissimilar items had
been used at test and/or during study the results would have

been different. Post-hoc analyses looking at the effect of item
similarity on test performance suggest that this might be the
case. We used an indirect measure of category similarity, how
confusable a category is with another category, based on
participants’ Reponses to compare similar and dissimilar
categories. When we compared test performance between
categories frequently confused with another category (e.g., C.
parallina and C. cristata) and categories that were not
confused with each other (e.g., L. svecica and N.
columbiana), we see that the pattern of results described is
reversed only when the categories are easier to discriminate
(not as frequently confused). For these categories,
participants remember better the categories of old items
repeated during study and generalized the categories to novel
items better when items were varied during study.
It is, however, interesting to note that item variation
improved memory for old items in this experiment relative to
repeating the old items. To our knowledge, this is the first
demonstration of such an effect. Item variation might have
worked to promote more efficient episodic memory for each
of the items presented, making them more distinct and
therefore more memorable (Nairne, 2006; Rawson & Van
Overschelde, 2008; Schmidt, 1985; von Restorff, 1933).
Congruent with this hypothesis, the benefit of item variation
is numerically larger when there is No Context Change
during study, compared to when there is High Context
Change, perhaps because context change in itself would also
work to make items more memorable by increasing attention
to the item. However, learners seem to be unaware of the
potential benefits of variation, generally showing higher
degrees of confidence in their ability to later categorize items
studied repeatedly than varied items, similar to what has been
shown in previous research (e.g., Wahlheim et al., 2012).
Finally, the relative benefit of item repetition compared to
item variation when classifying old and novel items at test is
modulated by the amount of context change present during
study. We found that when there is a medium degree of
context change (i.e., half the trials were presented in one
context and the other half in another context), there is no
benefit of repetition or variation for either novel or old items.
One possible reason for these results is that the partial context
overlap led participants to ignore the context changes
occurring as they presented a source of confusability,
focusing instead on the properties of the items presented. In
these conditions, both repetition and variation would work to
promote better episodic memory allowing for an efficient
generalization at test as well.
Overall, these results are preliminary evidence that context
change and item variation influence learning with
consequences for knowledge generalization. Moreover, it
provides initial evidence of an interaction between the effects
of context change and item variation during study on
learners’ ability to subsequently generalize their knowledge.
An effect that students seem unware of. This has potential
implications for educational settings, where context change
(e.g., lecture classroom, laboratory section, library) and the
examples given during study (e.g., different examples of the

2331

same concept or repeated examples across contexts) are
frequent occurrences that can be combined for the best
learning.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by National Science
Foundation REESE grant 0910218 and Department of
Education IES grant R305A1100060 to RLG, and Graduate
Fellowship SFRH/BD/78083/2011 from the Portuguese
Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) to PFC.
Stimuli images courtesy of the Aging, Memory, & Cognitive
Control Lab (http://psych.wustl.edu/amcclab/AMCC). We
thank Alifya Saify for her help with stimuli creation.

References
Abernethy, E. M. (1940). The effect of changed
environmental conditions upon the results of college
examinations. The Journal of Psychology, 10(2), 293-301.
Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (1992). A new theory of disuse
and an old theory of stimulus fluctuation. From learning
processes to cognitive processes: Essays in honor of
William K. Estes, 2, 35-67.
Homa, D., Cross, J., Cornell, D., Goldman, D., & Shwartz, S.
(1973). Prototype abstraction and classification of new
instances as a function of number of instances defining the
prototype. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 101(1),
116.
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Contextdependent memory in two natural environments: On land
and underwater. British Journal of psychology, 66(3), 325331.
Godden, D., & Baddeley, A. (1980). When does context
influence recognition memory? British Journal of
psychology, 71(1), 99-104.
Goldstone, R. L., Kersten, A., Carvalho, P. F. (2013).
Concepts and Categorization. In Healy, A. & Proctor, R.
Handbook of Psychology Vol. 4: Experimental Psychology
(pp. 607-630). New York City, NY: Wiley.
Hahn, U., Bailey, T. M., & Elvin, L. B. (2005). Effects of
category diversity on learning, memory, and
generalization. Memory & Cognition, 33(2), 289-302.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model
of human memory. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 16(2), 96-101.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). “Schema abstraction” in a multipletrace memory model. Psychological Review, 93, 411–428.
Nairne, J. S. (2006). Modeling distinctiveness: Implications
for general memory theory. Distinctiveness and memory,
27-46.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
77(3p1), 353.
Rawson, K. A., & Van Overschelde, J. P. (2008). How does
knowledge promote memory? The distinctiveness theory
of skilled memory. Journal of Memory and Language,
58(3), 646-668.

Saufley, W. H., Otaka, S. R., & Bavaresco, J. L. (1985).
Context effects: Classroom tests and context
independence. Memory & Cognition, 13(6), 522-528.
Schmidt, S. R. (1985). Encoding and retrieval processes in
the memory for conceptually distinctive events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 11, 565-578.
Smith, S. M. (1979). Remembering in and out of context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 5(5), 460.
Smith, S. M. (2013). Effects of environmental context on
human memory. In T. Perfect & D. Lindsay (Eds.). The
SAGE Handbook of Applied Memory (pp. 162-182).
London, UK: Sage Publications.
Smith, S. M., & Handy, J. D. (2014). Effects of varied and
constant environmental contexts on acquisition and
retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 40(6), 1582.
Smith, S. M., & Rothkopf, E. Z. (1984). Contextual
enrichment and distribution of practice in the classroom.
Cognition and Instruction, 1(3), 341-358.
Smith, S. M., & Vela, E. (2001). Environmental contextdependent memory: A review and meta-analysis.
Psychonomic bulletin & review, 8(2), 203-220.
Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A., & Bjork, R. A. (1978).
Environmental context and human memory. Memory &
Cognition, 6(4), 342-353.
Smith, S. M., Handy, J. D., Angello, G., & Manzano, I.
(2014). Effects of similarity on environmental context
cueing. Memory, 22(5), 493-508.
Stewart, N., & Chater, N. (2002). The effect of category
variability in perceptual categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28(5), 893.
Von Restorff, H. (1933). Über die wirkung von
bereichsbildungen im spurenfeld [Analysis of processes in
the memory trace: 1. On the effect of group formations on
the memory trace]. Psychologische Forschung, 18(1), 299342.
Wahlheim, C. N., Dunlosky, J., & Jacoby, L. L. (2011).
Spacing enhances the learning of natural concepts: An
investigation of mechanisms, metacognition, and aging.
Memory & Cognition, 39(5), 750-763.
Wahlheim, C. N., Finn, B., & Jacoby, L. L. (2012).
Metacognitive judgments of repetition and variability
effects in natural concept learning: evidence for variability
neglect. Memory & Cognition, 40(5), 703-716.

2332

