When High WMC Promotes Mental Set: A Model of the Water Jar Task
Erin E. Sovansky (esovan2@uic.edu)
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Psychology (MC 285)
1007 West Harrison Street
Chicago, Illinois, 60607-7137
Abstract

outperformed high WMC participants on match stick
arithmetic problems (Knoblich et al., 1999) and insight word
problems (Schooler, et al., 1993, Wieth & Burns, 2006).
Similarly, other studies have found that if WMC is reduced
through alcohol intoxication (Jarosz, Colflesh, & Wiley,
2012) or solving problems during one’s non-optimal time of
day (Wieth & Zacks, 2012), insight problem solving
improved while analytical problem solving suffered. This
outcome is counterintuitive and stands in need of explanation.
Why is lower capacity associated with greater probability of
reaching an insight solution?
One possible explanation is that WMC influences the types
of strategies used during problem solving. Those with high
WMC are better able to control attention, giving them an
increased ability to suppress distracting information and
process more information relevant to the task at hand (Engle,
2002; McCabe, Roediger, McDaniel, Balota, & Hambrick,
2010). Beilock and DeCaro (2007) suggested that individuals
with lower WMC may lack the attentional control required to
accurately use complex problem solving strategies and
instead use associatively based strategies, whereas
individuals with high WMC are able to use complex
strategies. However, “sometimes high WMC participants
may attempt to use complex strategies when simpler, more
elegant, or more direct approaches are available” (Wiley &
Jarosz, 2012, p. 210). Reliance on complex strategies are
often beneficial on analytical problems which require the
solver to hold multiple steps in working memory while
progressing toward the goal (Jarosz, 2015). However, insight
problems often trigger an inappropriate representation of the
problem (Ohlsson, 1992), and using a complex strategy based
on this representation will lead the solver toward impasse.
The solution to an insight problem typically requires that
complex yet familiar problem solving strategies are
abandoned in favor of searching for a novel solution
(Knoblich, Ohlsson, & Raney, 2001).

Differences in working memory capacity (WM C) relate to
performance on a variety of problem solving tasks. High WM C is
beneficial for solving analytical problems, but can hinder
performance on insight problems (DeCaro & Beilock, 2010). One
suggested reason for WM C-related differences in problem solving
performance is differences in strategy selection, in which high
WM C individuals tend toward complex algorithmic strategies
(Engle, 2002). High WM C might increase the likelihood of nonoptimal performance on Luchins’ (1942) water jar task because high
WM C solvers tend toward longer solutions, not noticing when
shorter solutions become available. We present empirical data
showing this effect, and a computational model that replicates the
findings by choosing among problem solving strategies with
different WM demands. The high WM C model used a memoryintensive strategy, which led to long solutions when shorter ones
were available. The low WM C model was unable to use that
strategy, and switched to shorter solutions.
Keywords: Working memory capacity; problem solving;
strategy selection; computational modeling

Background
Problem solving, like cognitive processes generally, is
bounded by resource limitations (Simon, 1972). In particular,
the capacity of working memory (WMC) has repeatedly been
found to be related to problem solving performance. In a
major review, Wiley and Jarosz (2012) concluded that, “In
analytical problem solving, the superior executive function
associated with WMC seem to generally support more
successful problem solving.” (p. 219).
However, as Wiley and Jarosz point out, this conclusion
may only hold for analytical problem solving. In this type of
process, problems are solved by extrapolating from prior
experience, and the problem solver makes steady, step by step
progress towards the goal.
In contrast, creative problem solving is characterized by
the need to override prior experience in order to identify
solutions that do not confirm to or follow from that
experience (Ohlsson, 1992, 2011). Evidence is accumulating
that in creative problem solving, the relationship between
WMC and performance works differently than the “more is
better” relation observed in analytical problem solving.
Several studies have documented a reversed relation, in
which problem solvers with lower working memory capacity
performing better on insight problems than solvers with
greater capacity. For example, DeCaro, Van Stockum, and
Wieth (2015) found that low WMC participants

The Present Study
The purpose of the present paper is to describe a
computational model of the classical findings on the water jar
task. The latter was introduced into problem solving research
by Luchins (1942). In this task, the solver is presented with a
set of three jars of specified values, and is instructed to use
only these jars to obtain a desired amount of water. The
original problem set included a single practice problem to
acquaint the solver with the task, followed by a set of ten

942

problems (see Table 1). The practice problem is solved by
filling jar A, then subtracting water with jar B three times (A
- 3B). Next, problems 1-5 can be solved by filling jar B, then
subtracting water with jar A once and jar C twice (B - A 2C). Problems 6-7 are solvable using the previous long
formula, but can also be solved using a shorter formula of
filling jar A and either adding or subtracting jar C (A +/- C).
Problem 8 can only be solved using the shorter formula, and
problems 9-10 can once again be solved with either the long
or short formula. The main finding of interest is that the
participants showed a strong tendency to use the long path on
the problems that could also be solved by the shorter and
more elegant, single-step path. However, after being given a
problem that could only be solved with the shorter solution,
they then applied that shorter solution to the two subsequent
problems that could be solved with either the short or the long
solution. The tendency to continue using the more
complicated, but previously successful solution was called
the Einstellung effect by Luchins (1942), and is now more
commonly referred to as mental set (Smith & Blankenship,
1991).
Because the later problems in the water jar task can be
solved using two different solutions, it is a particularly
interesting task for examining how strategy use varies with
WMC. Switching to the shorter solution is an insight-like
process because it requires the solver to change their
representation of the problem. In contrast, continuing to use
the longer solution suggests that the solver may be using
complex algorithmic strategies which tend to be better for
analytical problem solving. Based on previous problem
solving research, it would then be expected that low WMC
individuals may be more likely to switch to the shorter
solution than high WMC individuals, and high WMC
individuals are more likely to experience mental set.
Two recent studies using the water jar task have found this
effect (Beilock & DeCaro, 2007; Van Stockum & DeCaro ,
2015). Our model provides a possible explanation why less
working memory capacity might be associated with higher
probability of finding and using the short solution on water
jar problems.

experience, and successful problem solutions and task
performances are generated by extrapolating that prior
experience and applying it to a new problem or situation.
Such analytical problem solving necessarily involves
potentially complex interactions between working memory
and long-term memory, because the latter has to be engaged
in locating the relevant prior experience, retrieve it, and adapt
it to the task at hand.
However, insight problems are characterized by the need
to override prior experience and engage other processes than
memory retrieval in order to achieve a novel solution path.
The latter might include so-called weak methods, problem
solving strategies of high generality (Laird & Newell, 1983).
If the cognitive load required to access long-term memory is
greater than the cognitive load imposed by those alternative
processes, then working memory capacity might be one of the
factors that impacts the probability that a problem solver will
cease trying to use prior experience and instead engage
problem solving processes that are abstract and local and
hence might find a different solution than the one implied by
prior experience.
It is plausible that the participants store information about
the longer path in memory during the initial five problems,
and that they draw upon that information when solving each
successive problem. However, memory encoding is seldom
perfect and similar items, such as steps in the water jar
problem, are subject to interference. Applying what is
remembered from a previous problem might impose
significant cognitive load.
However, people also possess general or abstract problem
solving processes. A common type of strategy is to compare
the current state of the problem at hand with the desired or
designated goal state, and be guided by how or in what
respect they differ. Strategies of this sort are commonly
referred to as means-ends strategies (Newell & Simon, 1972).
The latter type of computation can be performed on
information that is visible to the participants (current water
levels in the jars and the desired goal state), and so do not
impose high cognitive load nor require operations on longterm memory. The participants might prefer to work a
problem by extrapolating prior experience, and only switch
to an abstract and local difference-reduction strategy when
prior experience imposes too high a cognitive load or turns
out to be unsuccessful.

Table 1: Classic water jar problem set (Luchins, 1942).
Problem
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Formula(s)
Practice
Long
Long
Long
Long
Long
Long, Short
Long, Short
Short
Long, Short
Long, Short

Jar A
29
21
14
18
9
20
23
15
28
18
14

Jar B
3
127
163
43
42
59
49
39
76
48
36

Jar C
0
3
25
10
6
4
3
3
3
4
8

Goal
20
100
99
5
21
31
20
18
25
22
6

A Computational Model
Our model assumes that people have multiple strategies for
solving water jar problems that vary with respect to the WMC
they require. WMC interacts with problem solving by
impacting strategy choice. The current version of the model
utilizes three different problem solving strategies . This was
not meant to be an exhaustive list of all possible strategies,
but to exemplify plausible strategies that a human solver
might use for the water jar task. One strategy was solving
from memory. In this strategy, if there are steps from a
previously successful solution path stored in memory, the
model can follow the path to check if that will solve the next

Problem solving typically relies on prior knowledge and

943

problem. This strategy could be considered a type of casebased reasoning (Riebeck & Schank, 1989).
A second strategy is a difference reduction strategy, which
is a simplified form of a means-ends analysis (Newell &
Simon, 1972).. This strategy finds a starting value by
evaluating which two operations will put the solver closest to
the goal value and will pick the first operation of the two. For
each subsequent step, the solver picks a value to add or
subtract from the current state that will bring the current state
closest to the goal value.
In order to prevent infinite loops of adding and subtracting
the same value, the model uses a form of the no-loop heuristic
(Atwood & Polson, 1976). If the solver is about to undo a
previous step by adding the same value that was subtracted in
the previous step or vice versa, it will instead randomly pick
a jar.
The third problem solving strategy is guided random
solving. For this strategy, at each step the solver determines
whether a value needs to be added or subtracted in order to
get closer to the goal, and then randomly selects a jar to
perform the operation.
One potential way in which the model can deviate fro m
human performance is that unless a limit is placed onto the
model, the difference reduction and random solving
strategies are both capable of performing an infinite number
of steps until a solution is reached, whereas a human solver
would only be capable of performing a limited number of
steps. In order to resolve this problem, the number of steps
that could be taken by either of these strategies was limited
to a maximu m of seven steps. A limit of seven steps was
chosen because people on average can hold about seven or
fewer items in memory depending on the type of informatio n
being stored (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; Cowan, 2010; Miller,
1956).
The model was implemented in python 3.4 and is
approximately 300 lines of code. Working memory was a
fixed size storage for which the capacity could be specified.
If a problem successfully solved a problem using any
strategy, the solution path was saved into the model’s long
term memory, which then was available to be used by the
memory strategy. For the memory strategy, the number of
steps that can be saved is limited by WMC. This means that
if the solution path was four steps long, but WMC only allows
memory for three steps, only the first three steps will be
saved. The steps were saved as a list of steps for which each
step had an operation (add or subtract), and the jar used to
perform the operation (A, B, or C), For example, the path for
the longer solution would appear in WM as: ((add, B), (sub,
A), (sub, C), (sub, C)). This solution path would remain in
WM until a problem is solved using a different solution, and
then the new solution would be saved into WM.
The model selects strategies in order from highest to lowest
WM demand. It will first attempt the solving from memory
strategy, followed by the difference reduction strategy,
followed by the guided random strategy. This order was
chosen because studies of WMC and strategy choice in
problem solving have found that those with higher WMC

tend to use more demanding strategies, sometimes instead of
using less demanding, but valid strategies. This suggests that
if a more demanding strategy can be used, it is more likely
that it will be used (Beilock & DeCaro, 2007; Wiley & Jarosz,
2012).
However, because human solvers do not always select
strategies in such a deterministic way, there is some noise in
the strategy selection so that ten percent of the time it will
skip the solve from memory strategy, and if it skips the first
strategy, in ten percent of those cases, it will also skip the
difference reduction strategy and go straight to the random
solving strategy. We have not yet found a way to ground this
parameter in the empirical data.

Empirical Study
Participants were 67 undergraduate students who were
enrolled in an introductory psychology course and received
credit for participation in this study.

Materials and Measures
Working Memory Capacity. WMC was measured using the
automated symmetry span task (aSymspan; Redick, et al.,
2012), and the automated running span task (aRunspan;
Broadway & Engle, 2010). The aSymspan is a computerbased complex span task in which a memory task and
processing task are interleaved.
In the aSymspan, participants judge whether an image is
symmetrical across a vertical axis followed, and are then
presented with a red square located in a 4x4 grid. After 2-5
trials, participants are then shown a grid and asked to click on
the locations of the red squares in the order they were
presented. Participants complete 12 sets of trial, 3 of each
length. A participant’s score is the number of red squares
correctly remembered, and can range from 0-42.
The aRunspan is a computer-based simple span task in there
is not a separate processing and memory component of the
task. Participants are told to remember the last specified
amount of letters in a string (3-7). Then participants are
shown a string of letters of unknown length one at a time.
Participants are then shown a screen with letters and are
asked to click on the specified letters in the order they
appeared. Score is the number of letters correctly
remembered, and can range from 0-75. The WMC measures
took approximately 5-10 minutes each to complete.
Problem Solving. Participants completed the water jar
problems shown in Table 1 in the order presented. Problems
were presented on paper with one problem per page.
Participants first received an instruction page which included
a completed example problem, and the practice problem
(problem 0). Once participants correctly solved the examp le
problem, they were given the rest of the task to complete.
This task took approximately 15-20 minutes to complete.

Modeling Results
In order to explore whether the model replicates WMCrelated differences in performance on the water jar task, the
model was run 20 times, 10 with high WMC and 10 with low

944

WMC. For high WMC, the model was capable of
remembering five steps, and for low WMC, the model was
capable of remembering three. The classic Luchins (1942)
problem set was used, and problems were performed in the
order listed in Table 1.
Overall, the high WMC version of the model had higher
accuracy in solving the water jar problems than the low
WMC solver. The proportion correct was .97 for high WMC
and .80 for low WMC. However, when broken down by
problem, it can be seen that the differences in accuracy are
driven by a few specific problems (see Table 2). More
specifically, the low WMC solver failed to solve problem 5
all ten times, problem 3 nine times, and problem 4 three
times. In contrast, the high WMC solver failed problem 5 in
two instances, but successfully solved problems 3 and 4 every
time. Errors occurred on these problems when the solver used
the difference reduction or random strategies.

Table 3. Proportion of strategy use as a function of WMC

High WMC
Model
Human
1.00
1.00
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.82
1.00
1.00
0.80
0.95
1.00
0.91
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.59
1.00
0.95
1.00
0.95
0.97
0.92

Proportion Long Formula Use

Low WMC
Model
Human
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
1.00
0.91
0.10
0.91
0.70
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.95
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.68
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.80
0.94

Low

High

Memory

0.00

0.50

Dif. Red.

0.79

0.47

Random

0.01

0.00

Fail

0.20

0.03

The main question is whether the model replicated the
finding that high WMC solvers are more likely than low
WMC solvers to use the long solution on problems 6-7 and
9-10. The model behaved in exactly this way (see Figure 1).
The low WMC solver always used the short solution formulas
instead of the long, whereas the high WMC solver used the
long solution formula just under half the time (see Figure 2).
When specifically examining problems 6-7, the high WMC
solver had an even higher tendency toward using the longer
solution, using it 90% of the time. On problems 9-10, because
problem 8 was solved using a short solution, the high WMC
solver overcame Einstellung and used the short solution.

Table 2. Proportion correct on each water jar problem as a
function of WMC.

Problem
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total

Strategy

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Model
Human

Low

High

WMC

Figure 1. Proportion of long formula use on problems 6-7 and
9-10 as a function of WMC.
Proportion Short Formula Use

Strategy use also varied by WMC (see Table 3 for a
summary). The low WMC solver was unable to successfully
use the solving from memory strategy, and instead used the
difference reduction strategy, and rarely the random strategy
to successfully solve the problems. The high WMC solver
successfully solved from memory on half of the problems,
and solved using the difference reduction strategy on just
under half of the problems. For the high WMC, when the
solver did not solve from memory, the majority of these
instances were problems in which the most recent
successfully solved problem had a different solution formula,
so there was not a relevant path stored in memory.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Model
Human

Low

High

WMC

Figure 2. Proportion of s hort formula use on problems 6-7
and 9-10 as a function of WMC.

945

Empirical Results

higher rate than low WMC human solvers. This may also be
because humans were using problem solving strategies not
included in the model. One possible future direction would
be to perform a think aloud study in order to learn what
strategies people are using to solve this problem. Any new
strategies that are learned could be incorporated into a future
iteration of this model.
Another limitation to this model is that it selects its
strategies in a pre-specified order: memory, difference
reduction, and then random search. The only variation is that
it sometimes skips an earlier strategy. People are not likely to
move down a list of strategies in a particular order, especially
if a strategy has not proven to be successful on previous
problems. Another future direction could be to have the
model randomly select a strategy based on the weighted
utility of the strategy. The utility could be updated on success
or failure of the strategy. If WMC determines which
strategies can be used, then it would be expected that high
and low WMC versions of the model would give higher
utility to different strategies, with high WMC giving higher
utility to more memory-intensive strategies.
Our results support the theory that strategy selection in
problem solving is influenced by WMC limits. High WMC
problem solvers are better able to make use of memory intensive strategies such as remembering entire solution
paths or algorithms. Low WMC problem solvers are less
likely to use these strategies because they may require storing
more information in working memory than the solver is able,
and have to rely on strategies with lower memory demand.
On the water jar task, the difference in s trategy use meant that
the high WMC solver had higher overall accuracy than the
low WMC solver, but it was also more likely to use a nonoptimal solution when a shorter possible solution was
introduced. The model explains the Einstellung effect as a
consequence of the interaction between the structure of the
task environment and the boundaries on human cognitive
capacity. When the task environment supports extrapolating
from prior experience and the extrapolation imposes low
cognitive load, people will tend to respond on the basis of
memory, with Einstellung, ruts, and mindlessness as
consequences. But when extrapolation is capacity demanding
and the environment allows a strategy that is based on
perceptually available information and hence imposes low
cognitive load, solutions that go beyond prior experience
become possible. Hence, the counterintuitive beneficial
effect of low WMC on insightful problem solving.

Participants’ WMC score was based on a factor score created
by calculating the shared variance between aSymspan score
and aRunspan score. In order to compare model data to
human data, participants were split into low, medium, and
high WMC groups. The low and high WMC groups were
used to compare to the model.
High and low WMC groups did not differ in overall
accuracy, t(42) = 0.84, p = .41 (Table 2.). Additionally, there
were no WMC differences in accuracy on any individual
problem. The low WMC human solvers had higher accuracy
than the low WMC model, and the high WMC human solvers
had slightly lower accuracy than the high WMC model
Although not significant, we found that the high WMC
group had a higher rate of using the long solution formula on
problems 6-7 and 9-10 compared to the low WMC group,
t(42) = -1.19, p = .24, and a lower rate of using the short
solution formula, t(42) = 1.52, p = .14. When analyzed as a
correlation across all participants, there is a negative
correlation between WMC and using the short solution
formula, r(65) = -.28, p = .02, and a marginal positive
correlation between WMC and using the long solution
formula r(65) = .22, p = .08. Compared to the model, both
low and high WMC human solvers showed a higher tendency
of using the long solution.

Discussion
This model demonstrated how WMC influences strategy use
on the water jar task and how strategy selection in turn affects
the likelihood of experiencing mental set. By placing WMC
limits on the memory strategy, the model was able to simulate
the finding that high WMC solvers are more likely to us e the
long solution. When WMC was high, like human solvers, the
model was more likely to continue using the long solution on
problems 6-7, even though the short solution was available.
The high WMC solver generally did not switch to the short
solution until it failed to solve problem 8 from memory and
used difference reduction to search for a new solution. When
WMC was low, the solver was not able to store the full four
step solution of the long formula, and was incapable of
solving from memory using the long formula. The low WMC
solver instead used the difference reduction and guided
random solving strategies.
Even though the model was able to simulate WMC
differences in formula use, compared to human performance,
the model under predicted the likelihood of continuing to use
the long solution once the short solution becomes available.
There are a couple possible explanations for this finding. One
possibility is that people resist changing strategies in a way
that this model does not account for. Another possibility is
that there are more strategies that could lead to using the long
solution. Other possible strategies could include the
undershoot or overshoot strategies used by Lovett on her
model of the building sticks task, which is an isomorph of the
water jar problem (Lovett, 1998; Lovett & Anderson, 1996).
One limitation of the model is that the low WMC solver
failed to solve certain problems (problems 3-5) at a much

References
Atwood, M. E., & Polson, P. G. (1976) A process model for
water jug problems. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 192-216.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory .
The Psychology of Learning and Motivation. New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Beilock, S. L., & DeCaro, M. S. (2007). From poor
performance to success under stress: Working memory,
strategy selection, and mathematical problem solving

946

under pressure. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 983-998.
Cowan, N. The magical mystery four: How is working
memory capacity limited, and why? Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 19, 51-57.
DeCaro, M. S., Van Stockum, C. A., & Wieth, M. B. (2015).
When working memory capacity hinders insight. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition.
Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive
attention. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11,
19–23.
Jarosz, A. F. (2015). The relationship between working
memory capacity and strategy use on tests of general fluid
intelligence (Doctoral Dissertation). Retrieved fro m
http://indigo.uic.edu/bitstream/handle/10027/19717/Jarosz
_Andrew.pdf?sequence=1
Jarosz, A. F., Colflesh, G. J. H., & Wiley, J. (2012).
Uncorking the muse: Alcohol intoxication facilitates
creative problem solving. Consciousness and Cognition,
21, 487–493.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D. (1999).
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight
problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1534–1555.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. E. (2001). An eye
movement study of insight problem solving. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 1000–1009.
Laird, J., & Newell, A. (1983). A universal weak method.
Computer
Science
Department,
Carnegie-Mello n
University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Lovett, M. C. (1998). Choice. In J. R. Anderson, & C. Lebiere
(Eds.). The atomic components of thought. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Lovett, M. C. & Anderson, J. R. (1996). History of success
and current context in problem solving: Combined
influences on operator selection. Cognitive Psychology,
31(2), 168-217.
Luchins, A. S. (1942). Mechanization in problem solving:
The effect of Einstellung. Psychological Monographs, 54,
1–95.
McCabe, D. P., Roediger, III, H. L., McDaniel, M. A.,
Balota, D. A., & Hambrick, D. Z. (2010). The relationship
between working memory capacity and executive
functioning: Evidence for a common executive attention
construct. Neuropsychology, 24, 222–243.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information processing explanations of
insight and related phenomenon. In M. Keane & K.
Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the psychology of thinking.
London, UK: Harvester-Wheatsheaf.
Ohlsson, S. (2011). Deep learning: How the mind overrides
experience. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Riesbeck, C., & Schank, R. (1989). Inside Case-Based
Reasoning.
Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993). Thoughts
beyond words: When language overshadows insight.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 166183.
Simon,
H.
A.
(1972).
Theories
of bounded
rationality. Decision and organization, 1, 161-176.
Smith, S. M., & Blankenship, S. E. (1991). Incubation and
the persistence of fixation in problem solving. The
American Journal of Psychology, 104, 61-87.
Van Stockum, C., & DeCaro, M. S. (2013). The path less
taken: When working memory capacity constrains insight.
In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Berlin, Germany: Cognitive
Science Society.
Van Stockum, C., & DeCaro, M. S. (2015). Differen t
working memory components predict flexibility versus
mental set. Poster presented at the 56th annual meeting of
the Psychonomic Society, Chicago, IL.
Wieth, M., & Burns, B. D. (2006). Incentives improve
performance on both incremental and insight problem
solving. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 59, 1378–1394.
Wieth, M. B., & Zacks, R. T. (2011). Time of day effects on
problem solving: When the non-optimal is optimal.
Thinking & Reasoning, 17, 387–401.
Wiley, J., & Jarosz, A. (2012). How working memory
capacity affects problem solving. Psychology of Learning
and Motivation, 56, 185–227.

947

