When to Block versus Interleave Practice?
Evidence Against Teaching Fraction Addition before Fraction Multiplication
Rony Patel (rbpatel@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Ran Liu (ranliu@andrew.cmu.edu)
Kenneth Koedinger (koedinger@cmu.edu)
Departments of Psychology and Human-Computer Interaction, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

denominators vs. multiplying the numerators and
denominators). Thus, this domain provides a fitting context
in which to explore theoretical conditions that can explain
and predict when interleaving will be better than blocking.
We present two experimental studies contrasting interleaved
versus blocked practice of these two topics within fraction
arithmetic.
We also illustrate how a cognitive task analysis of this
domain suggests a reasonable alternative to the typical and
recommended approach of teaching fraction addition before
fraction multiplication. The analysis not only suggests that
fraction multiplication is simpler than fraction addition, but
that it may be a prerequisite to the extent fraction
multiplication is used to implement the fraction conversion
steps required in the fraction addition procedure. The
second of the two studies explores this hypothesis.

In practice, mathematics education is blocked (i.e., teaching
one topic at a time; CCSS, 2010), but research generally
promotes interleaving (i.e., teaching multiple topics together;
Rohrer & Taylor, 2007). For example, fraction arithmetic is
blocked with students being taught fraction addition before
fraction multiplication. Since students often confuse fraction
operations to produce arithmetic errors, interleaved fraction
arithmetic instruction might be more productive than blocked
instruction to teach students to discriminate between the
operations. Additionally, a cognitive task analysis suggests
that fraction multiplication may be a prerequisite to fraction
addition and thus reversing the blocking order may enhance
learning. Two experiments with fraction addition and fraction
multiplication were run. Experiments 1 and 2 show that
interleaved instruction is generally better than the current
blocked instruction. Experiment 2 provides evidence that
blocking that reverses the standard order -- providing practice
on fraction multiplication before fraction addition -- produces
better learning.

Practitioners Block, Researchers Interleave

Keywords: blocking; interleaving; fractions

Introduction
A number of researchers recommend interleaving of
practice, whereby multiple topics are taught and practiced
together (Kornell & Bjork, 2008; Rohrer & Taylor, 2007).
Others have pointed to circumstances where blocking, in
which instruction/practice on each type of problem is
grouped together and is much more typical in school
instruction, is better for learning (Carvalho & Goldstone,
2014). The Knowledge, Learning, and Instruction
Framework (Koedinger, Corbett, & Perfetti, 2012) suggests,
more generally, that effectiveness of an instructional
recommendation depends on a fit with the specifics of the
nature of knowledge to be acquired and what learning
processes are needed to acquire such knowledge. For
example, when the target knowledge involves a need to
differentiate similar situations to respond appropriately,
interleaving can help the induction of appropriate cues (e.g.,
as might be represented in the if-parts of production rules)
for such differentiation. Fraction addition tasks (e.g., 1/3 +
1/2 = ?) and fraction multiplication tasks (e.g., 1/3 * 1/2 = ?)
are a good example in that the tasks look quite similar, only
differing the operator (+ vs. *), but the appropriate
responses are quite different (converting to common

In practice, mathematics is taught in a blocked fashion. The
Common Core State Standards (CCSS, 2010) have been
adopted by 42 of the 50 states, suggesting the CCSS are
representative of the standards for when mathematics topics
are generally taught in the United States. Based on these
recommendations, fractions should be taught across 3 years,
with different topics in different years. Note that these
standards do not force blocking or blocking in this order,
but the textbooks aligned with the Common Core follow the
blocked fraction addition to fraction multiplication
sequence. In contrast, research in interleaving and blocking
mathematics knowledge shows advantages of interleaving
over blocking (Rohrer & Taylor, 2007). Interleaving may
aid learning of strategy selection because it provides
negative feedback on over-generalized induction of when to
perform an operation that blocking does not (cf., Li, Cohen,
& Koedinger, 2012).

Sequencing Fraction Arithmetic Instruction
In 2008, the National Mathematics Advisory Panel
concluded, “The most important foundational skill not
presently developed, appears to be proficiency with
fractions” (p. 18). Fraction arithmetic errors are commonly
the product of incorrect strategy choices, not computational
errors or fact recall errors (Siegler & Pyke, 2013). A

2069

common incorrect strategy choice students make on fraction
addition problems is to independently add the numerators
and denominators of the addends, for example, getting 2/5,
when adding 1/2 and 1/3 (Ni & Zhou, 2005). To make this
issue more complicated, this independent whole number
strategy is the correct method for solving fraction
multiplication problems (e.g., 1/3 times 2/5 does equal
(1*2)/(3*5)). Learning fraction multiplication might
encourage students to make this error once again in fraction
addition problems even if they did learn the correct fraction
addition strategy. In addition, fraction addition knowledge
may also interfere with fraction multiplication knowledge
(Siegler et al., 2011). For example, students sometimes find
a common denominator before solving a fraction
multiplication problem and then only multiply the
numerators resulting in an incorrect answer (e.g., 1/2 * 1/3 =
3/6 * 2/6 = 6/6 = 1).
Given the potential sources of confusion and the presence
of interference errors, interleaving fraction arithmetic
operations might be beneficial relative to blocking
operations, especially for learning good strategy choices.
Blocking can have the benefit, however, of strengthening
prerequisite subskills before moving on to more complex
skills (VanLehn, 1987). Contrary to typical practice,
fraction multiplication may be a prerequisite to fraction
addition since a variant of fraction multiplication is needed
to get equivalent fractions in fraction addition problems
with different denominators Further, fraction multiplication
provides whole number multiplication practice that may
support finding common denominators in fraction addition.

Current Studies
Experiment 1 compares blocked fraction addition problems
before fraction multiplication problems to interleaving both
problem types to see if interleaving alleviates interference
errors between the two types of problems and if blocked
instruction causes them. Experiment 2 compares blocked
fraction addition to fraction multiplication, blocked fraction
multiplication to fraction addition, and interleaving both
problem types to see if progressive skill building (i.e.,
blocked fraction multiplication to fraction addition)
outperforms the other blocked condition and reduces the
interference amongst the fraction operations.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants. Participants were 70 sixth grade students in a
school in the Greater Pittsburgh Area. 35 students were
randomly assigned to each of the two conditions in the
study. These students had fraction instruction, but were far
from mastery.
Procedure and Design. All participants were run during
their regularly scheduled math class with the rest of their
classmates. The study took approximately 80 minutes (i.e.,

two classroom periods). Students worked independently on
a computer, using an online intelligent tutoring system. All
students had a pretest, midtest, and posttest with two
instruction periods between the assessment periods. The
inclusion of the midtest allowed us to track changes over
time.
Conditions. Blocked Condition (Fraction Addition before
Fraction Multiplication): Students see 24 fraction addition
problems with correctness feedback at every step in the first
instruction period followed by 24 fraction multiplication
problems with correctness feedback in the second
instruction period.
Interleaved Condition: Students are presented the same 24
fraction addition problems and 24 fraction multiplication
problems with correctness feedback from the blocked
condition in random order. This design was chosen as
opposed to perfectly interleaving to avoid students from
learning that they simply needed to use the alternating
strategies with every other problem. Twelve addition and 12
multiplication problems are randomly presented in each
instruction block.
Instruction. All students were presented with a tutor
interface for practicing fraction addition problems with
same denominators, fraction addition problems with
different denominators, and fraction multiplication problems
with different denominators (created with CTAT; Aleven,
McClarren,, Sewall, & Koedinger, 2006). For all three
problem types, students were provided a problem and
provided a space to input a numerator and denominator
answer. Students were also provided a checkbox they could
use to indicate whether the fractions in the problem need to
be converted before the problem could be solved (for
fraction addition problems with different denominators).
See Figure 1 below for example problems. If students were
incorrect completing any particular step, the system would
mark that step red. Students were required to input the
correct answer for any given step before moving on to the
next step. If he or she was stuck, the system provided up to
three hints per step. The first hint was always abstract (e.g.,
for fraction multiplication problems, multiply the
denominators to get the denominator answer). The second
hint provided the concrete instantiation (e.g., in this case,
that means multiplying 2 and 3). The final hint provided the
answer (e.g., please input 6 into highlighted cell). Once
students provided the correct answer, the step would turn
green to acknowledge a correct answer.
Assessment Tasks. Fraction Addition: Participants were
presented 4 fraction addition problems (2 same denominator
and 2 different denominators). Students were scored on
accuracy and incorrect strategy choice. Accuracy was based
on students having the correct magnitude (i.e., if the answer
was 1/2, all equivalent fractions, even if they are not
reduced, count as a valid answer). In this case, an incorrect
strategy choice reflects a strategy choice that would be

2070

successful for a fraction multiplication problem. This
includes the independent whole number strategy (adding the
numerators and denominators independently) or multiplying
either the two numerators or the two denominators while
adding the others.

Results
Blocked Addition-to-Multiplication VS. Interleaved. In a
regression, both pretest proportion correct and condition
(interleaved = 1) were used to predict posttest proportion
correct (R2 = 32.54%, F(2,67) = 16.16, p < .01). Pretest was
a significant predictor (i.e., students with higher scores
pretest scores did better on the posttest; B = 0.50 (0.10), t =
5.06, p < 0.01). Condition was a marginally significant
predictor (i.e., interleaved marginally outperformed
blocking at posttest; B = 0.08 (0.05), t = 1.80, p = 0.08). The
interleaved condition had a posttest accuracy of 79%
compared to the blocked addition-to-multiplication posttest
accuracy of 68%.

0.9

Add

0.85

Mult

0.8
Accuracy

0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4

Addition
Training
Pretest

Figure 1. Example instructional interfaces of (a) a fraction addition
problem with different denominators before converting, (b) a
fraction addition problem with different denominators after the
student requests to convert denominators, and (c) a fraction
multiplication problem. Students were prompted to solve the
following fraction arithmetic problem for every problem provided.

Fraction Multiplication: Participants were presented 4
fraction multiplication problems (2 same denominator and 2
different denominators). Students were scored on accuracy
and incorrect strategy choice. Accuracy was based on
students having the correct magnitude. In this case, an
incorrect strategy choice reflects a strategy choice that
would be successful for a fraction multiplication problem.
This includes finding a common denominator and only
multiplying the numerators (assuming a common
denominator was not present already), multiplying the
numerators (or denominators) and adding the denominators
(or numerators).
Fraction Division: Participants were presented 4 fraction
division problems (2 same denominator and 2 different
denominators) at posttest only. Students were scored on
accuracy.

Multiplication
Training

Midtest

Posttest

Figure 2. Students in the blocked addition-to-multiplication
condition in Experiment 1 performed better on fraction addition
after fraction addition training (between the pretest and the
midtest), while doing worse on fraction multiplication. After
fraction multiplication training (between midtest and posttest),
students performed better on fraction multiplication and worse on
fraction addition. Error bars reflect +/- 1 SE.

Transfer to Fraction Division. An independent t-test was
conducted to compare posttest division proportion correct
between conditions. The interleaved group significantly
outperformed the blocked addition-to-multiplication group
(70% vs. 57%; t = -2.27, df = 66, p = 0.03).
Evidence for Interference. Figure 2 shows how blocked
fraction addition practice (before the midtest) changes
performance on fraction addition and fraction multiplication
and how fraction multiplication practice (between mid and
posttest) produces further changes. Notice how there is
positive transfer within the two task types, but negative
transfer or interference between them. Paired t-tests
demonstrate that fraction addition practice between the
pretest and midtest produces improvement on fraction
addition (56% vs. 82%, t = -4.61, df = 37, p < 0.01), but

2071

decline on fraction multiplication (62% vs. 48%, t = 2.58, df
= 37, p = 0.01). Similarly, practice on fraction
multiplication between the midtest and the posttest produces
improvement on fraction multiplication (48% vs. 82%, t = 3.34, df = 34, p < 0.01), but decline on fraction addition
(82% vs. 70%, t = 2.63, df = 34, p = 0.01).

block at the point where students switch from adding samedenominator fractions (which do not require checking the
box to convert denominators) to adding differentdenominator fractions (which do require checking the box),
and again at the point where students switch to multiplying
fractions (which do not require checking the box).

Insights from Process Data. We analyzed the learning
process data to further investigate why the interleaved
practice may have yielded better learning. To do so, we fit a
logistic regression model predicting first-attempt correctness
on each step of each problem. The predictors included an
intercept parameter for each student, an intercept parameter
for each problem step (e.g., entering the correct numerator
on a multiplication problem) for each condition (blocked vs.
interleaved), and a slope parameter for each type of problem
step for each condition. Examining the beta estimates
revealed striking condition-driven differences in one
particular type of skill reflecting the very initial step in
which students must check a box to indicate whether to
convert the fractions. In particular, the slope estimates for
this skill were lower in the interleaved than in the blocked
condition, suggesting a slower progression in mastering this
skill during learning (Figure 3). Yet, the slower progression
on this skill resulted in better pre-post gains.

Discussion and Motivation for Experiment 2

Figure 3. Process data learning curves for the skill of
deciding whether to convert fractions. Severe interference
when switching problem types is apparent in the blocked
condition (black) but is more incremental in the interleaved
condition (grey).

We saw support for the hypothesis that interleaved fraction
addition and multiplication practice produces better learning
than does conventional blocked ordering, particularly on the
measure of transfer to fraction division. We found clear
evidence of interference that we have previously modeled as
over-generalized induction of the if-part of production rules
in blocked practice (Li et al., 2012). Interleaved practice
provides frequent negative feedback that can be used to
refine the if-part to prevent over-generalization errors.
In Experiment 2, we replicated the two conditions from
Experiment 1 and included fraction division at all
assessment points. Further, based on cognitive task analysis
supported by the tutor process data, we also added a third
condition that provides blocked instruction in a nonconventional ordering, going from fraction multiplication to
fraction addition. In the tutor process data, we observed
interference on specific steps within fraction arithmetic
procedures such as students incorrectly trying to apply the
independent whole number strategy to a fraction addition
problem (Liu, Patel, & Koedinger, 2016). These errors were
more likely if there had been practice on fraction
multiplication problems prior to the fraction addition
problem. We also observed student difficulties with finding
a common denominator, but also with converting to
equivalent fractions. Since this step involves fraction
multiplication, at least in principle, we wondered whether
there may be positive transfer from fraction multiplication
to fraction addition.

Experiment 2
Methods

We interpreted this as evidence of local trial-to-trial
interference between problem types, in the step where
students must decide the appropriate procedure to carry out
given the problem (i.e., they had to pay attention to the
operator to see if it was a ‘+’ or ‘x’). Despite evidence of
more local interference and slower progression in this
procedure selection step, students get much more explicit
practice handling the effects of such interference. We
hypothesize that this “procedure selection” practice
underlies the superior pre-post gains observed in the
interleaved condition.
Figure 3 also illustrates the striking interference that
occurs for this procedure selection skill when there are shifts
between problem types in the blocked addition-tomultiplication condition. This interference is apparent at the
sharp learning curve dips that occurs in the fraction addition

Participants were 118 sixth grade students in a school in the
Greater Pittsburgh Area. 59 students were in the interleaved
condition, while 59 students were in the blocked condition.
In the blocked condition, 29 students were given fraction
addition training before fraction multiplication training, and
the other 30 students were given fraction multiplication
training before fraction addition training.
The main difference from Experiment 1 is that this
experiment included an additional blocked condition,
moving from fraction multiplication to fraction addition. In
this condition, students saw 24 fraction multiplication
problems followed by 24 fraction addition problems with
correctness feedback on every step of all problems. This
experiment also employed a delayed posttest 3 days after the
study concluded, and included fraction division problems at

2072

all time points. All remaining methods were the same as in
Experiment 1.

multiplication condition by 9% (79% vs. 70%; B = 0.10
(0.03), t = 3.12, p < 0.01). Note: The interleaved condition
did not outperform the blocked multiplication-to-addition
condition (79% vs. 78%; B = 0.02 (0.03), t = 0.88, p = 0.38).
Blocked Multiplication-to-Addition Does Not Cause
Interference Errors. Four paired t-tests were conducted to
test changes in fraction multiplication and fraction addition
from pretest to midtest and midtest to posttest in the blocked
multiplication-to-addition condition (the blocked additionto-multiplication followed similar interference patterns as
experiment 1). Specifically, these t-tests were designed to
test if learning fraction multiplication causes worse
performance on fraction addition (and vice versa) due to
overgeneralization errors. After being taught fraction
multiplication between the pretest and midtest, students got
better at fraction multiplication (79% vs. 91%, t = -1.93, df
= 29, p = 0.06) and stayed the same at fraction addition
(55% vs. 58%, t = -0.43, df = 29, p = 0.66). After being
taught fraction addition between the midtest and the
posttest, students got better at fraction addition (58% vs.
78%, t = -3.33, df = 27, p < 0.01) and stayed the same at
fraction multiplication (91% vs. 90%, t = -0.07, df = 27, p =
0.95).
Blocked Addition-to-Multiplication Practice Interferes
with Fraction Division. The previous study showed an
advantage of interleaving to blocking in terms of fraction
division accuracy at posttest. This advantage appears to be
due to interference in the blocked addition-to-multiplication
condition. Changes in division accuracy were only observed
in the blocked addition-to-multiplication condition between
the pre- and mid-test (72% vs. 50%, t = 2.68, df = 26, p =
0.01). This decline in performance appears to result from
over-generalization of fraction addition procedures.

Results
Interleaved vs. both Blocked Conditions. A regression
was run with pretest proportion correct and condition (1 for
interleaved and 0 for both blocked conditions) predicting
proportion correct on the delayed posttest (R2 = 55.44%,
F(2,105) = 65.32, p < 0.01). Both pretest (B = 0.73 (0.06), t
= 11.40, p < 0.01) and condition (B = 0.06 (0.03), t = 2.28, p
= 0.02) were significant predictors. The interleaved
condition had a posttest accuracy of 79% compared to the
blocked posttest accuracy of 74%.

General Discussion
Figure 4. The three sequencing groups in Experiment 2
started with similar accuracies at pretest, but the interleaved
and blocked multiplication-to-addition conditions
outperformed the standard blocked addition-tomultiplication on both the posttest and delayed posttest.
Comparing Blocking Orders Individually. Separating the
blocked conditions by order type reveals a more interesting
story (see Figure 4). In a regression, pretest and condition as
a factor (all conditions were compared to the blocked
addition-to-multiplication condition) were used to predict
the delayed posttest (R2 = 57.13%, F(3,104) = 47.34, p <
0.01). Pretest was a significant predictor (B = 0.73 (0.06), t
= 11.59, p < 0.01). On average, the students in the blocked
multiplication-to-addition condition outperformed the
students in the blocked addition-to-multiplication condition
by 8% (78% vs. 70%; B = 0.07 (0.04), t = 3.57, p = 0.04).
On average, the students in the interleaved condition
outperformed the students in the blocked addition-to-

Perhaps the most interesting result suggests that the U.S.
curriculum teaches fraction addition and fraction
multiplication in the least effective way out of the three
alternatives we explored. Across both experiments, blocked
fraction addition-to-multiplication practice produced
significantly less learning than both interleaved practice and
blocked fraction multiplication-to-addition practice.
Consistent with theory (Li et al, 2012; Rohrer & Taylor,
2007), we observed evidence of interference between
practice trials of different kinds of fraction operations. That
interference was particularly pronounced for fraction
multiplication and division after an initial block of fraction
addition practice and for fraction addition after a second
block of fraction multiplication practice (see interference
sections under the results). The generally slower learning
rate in the interleaved condition in Experiment 1 is
consistent with interference from over-generalization during
interleaved practice, but the better posttest performance
suggests these over-generalizations were at least somewhat
remediated by error feedback during interleaved practice.
We did not find clear evidence of interference in the
blocked multiplication-to-addition condition. Perhaps the

2073

lower cognitive load of starting with a simpler task, namely
fraction multiplication, left students with capacity for more
deliberate and accurate reasoning about strategy selection.
Thus, they may have been better able to avoid overgeneralizing
the
fraction
multiplication
strategy
(independent whole number operations) to fraction addition.
Further, when moving to fraction addition, the prior fraction
multiplication practice may have aided performance of key
steps, particularly finding a common denominator (which
requires whole number multiplication) and converting the
numerators to maintain equivalent fractions (which arguably
requires faction multiplication, e.g., 1/2*2/2 = 2/4). With
better prior preparation, students may have had more
cognitive headroom to more deliberately avoid overgeneralizing similar to above, but in this case from fraction
addition to fraction multiplication or division. While this
argument is, in broad strokes, consistent with VanLehn
(1987), a precise application of the SimStudent model in Li
et al (2012) would still predict interference due overgeneralization. Thus, more work is warranted. A replication
of this reverse blocking effect is desirable.

Applications to Education
In the current U.S. standards, fraction arithmetic training
follows the same order as whole number arithmetic training
(addition, subtraction, multiplication, and finally, division).
While there may be some appeal to ordering the operations
the same way, our results imply that interleaving practice
among different operations yields superior learning
outcomes. Interleaved practice forces students to explicitly
practice recognizing when to carry out which procedure, an
aspect that is important for overcoming interference. An
alternative implication is that re-structuring blocked
instruction to progress from simpler subskills to more
complex skills (i.e., practicing fraction and whole number
multiplication before adding fractions with different
denominators), could be more optimal than what is currently
implemented in classrooms.

Generalizing to Other Domains
Our studies targeted the fraction arithmetic domain and past
experience and theory give us pause in suggesting crossdomain generalizations (Koedinger et al, 2012). We
specifically chose fraction addition and multiplication
because they present highly similar tasks features that
require different strategic responses. Other task type pairs
that have this characteristic are good candidates for applying
interleaving. For example, tasks types of finding the area
versus perimeter of figures are highly similar (with the
words “area” or “perimeter” sometimes being the only
difference) and thus interleaving practice of these task types
should be effective at reducing over-generalization errors
(i.e., computing the area on a perimeter problem). On the
other hand, we also found evidence consistent with some
forms of blocking being as effective as interleaving. The
benefits of blocking may be particularly enhanced when
subskills accumulate into more complex tasks. Thus, we

recommend careful cognitive task analysis to support the
decision of when to block or interleave.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Sharon Carver, Vincent Aleven, and Mimi
McLaughlin for their advice. Support came from grants
R305B090023 and R305B110003 from the Department of
Education’s Institute of Education Sciences.

References
Carvalho, P.F., & Goldstone, R.L. (2014). Putting category
learning in order: category structure and temporal
arrangement affect the benefit of interleaved over blocked
study. Memory & cognition, 42(3), 481-495.
Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2010). Common
Core State Standards for mathematics. Washington, D.C.:
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices
and the Council of Chief State School Officers. Retrieved
from http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CCSSI_Math
Standards.pdf
Li, N., Cohen, W., Koedinger, K.R. (2012). Problem order
implications for learning transfer. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems,
7315 (pp. 185-194). Berlin: Springer.
Liu, Patel, & Koedinger (2016). Modeling Common
Misconceptions in Learning Process Data. Submitted for
publication.
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.T. & Perfetti, C. (2012). The
knowledge-learning-instruction(KLI) framework: Toward
bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust
student learning. Cognitive Science, 36(5), 757-798.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories
is
spacing
the
“enemy
of
induction”? Psychological science, 19(6), 585-592.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel (NMAP). (2008).
Foundations for success: The final report of the National
Mathematics Advisory Panel. Washington, DC:
Department of Education.
Ni, Y., & Zhou, Y. D. (2005). Teaching and learning
fraction and rational numbers: The origins and
implications of whole number bias. Educational
Psychologist, 40(1), 27-52.
Rohrer, D., & Taylor, K. (2007). The shuffling of
mathematics problems improves learning. Instructional
Science, 35(6), 481-498.
Siegler, R. S., & Pyke, A. A. (2013). Developmental and
individual
differences
in
understanding
of
fractions. Developmental psychology, 49(10), 1994.
Siegler, R.S., Thompson, C.A., & Schneider, M. (2011). An
integrated theory of whole number and fractions
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 273–296.
VanLehn, K. (1987). Learning one subprocedure per
lesson. Artificial Intelligence, 31(1), 1-40.
Aleven, V., McLaren, B. M., Sewall, J., & Koedinger, K. R.
(2006, June). The cognitive tutor authoring tools (CTAT):
preliminary evaluation of efficiency gains. In Intelligent
Tutoring Systems (pp. 61-70). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

2074

