Who should I tell?
Young children correct and maintain others’ beliefs about the self
Mika Asaba (masaba@stanford.edu)

Hyowon Gweon (hyo@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract
We care tremendously about what other people think of us.
Motivated by two lines of prior work – children’s inferential
and communicative capacities and strategic reputation management – we examine how children infer what others think
of them given others’ observations of their performance, and
how they influence these beliefs through disclosing their performance. In Experiment 1, 3-5 year-olds played a luck-based
game; one confederates watched the child win and another
confederate watched the child lose. We asked the child to disclose an additional, unobserved win to one of the two confederates. We find that younger children overwhelmingly choose
the person who previously saw them win. However, as age
increased, children were more likely to choose to disclose to
someone who previously saw them lose. In Experiment 2,
adults played a similar third person version and selectively
chose the person who saw the main character previously lose.
Keywords: Theory of Mind; social cognition; cognitive development; communication; reputation management

Introduction
We are deeply curious about the minds of other people. From
merely observing others’ behaviors to probing them with direct questions, we frequently engage in learning about others’
beliefs, and even attempt to change these beliefs by communicating with others. Among many kinds of unobservable contents of other people’s minds, there is one suite of beliefs that
we care extraordinarily about: others’ beliefs about us.
Decades of research on Theory of Mind (ToM) – our capacity to understand and reason about others’ unobservable
mental state – has revealed much about both its early emergence (Baillargeon, Scott, & He, 2010) and its developmental
trajectory (Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). A host of prior
work has examined various domains in which ToM plays
a central role in our everyday social interactions, such as
helping others (Buttelmann, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2009),
morally evaluating others (Cushman, Sheketoff, Wharton, &
Carey, 2013), and teaching and communicating with others
(Gweon, Pelton, Konopka, & Schulz, 2014; Strauss & Ziv,
2012). In this study, we highlight a yet another important role
of ToM in our social lives: it allows us to reason about others’
beliefs and evaluations of us, and help us change or maintain
these beliefs by informing others about ourselves.
Imagine the following scenario: your friend Tom observes
you win many amazing tennis matches, but later your friend
Sam watches you lose several games in a row. Based on what
they have seen, you might reasonably infer that your friends
would hold different beliefs about your skill level; Tom would
think of you as a competent tennis player, while Sam might
think quite the opposite. Based on these inferences, you may
even attempt to correct Sam’s belief (e.g., by telling him that
you recently won many matches) while maintaining Tom’s

belief (e.g., by omitting your losses). We propose that these
seemingly simple intuitions emerge from a sophisticated ability to: (1) infer what others believe about us given some evidence about the self, (2) understand that such beliefs can be
revised and updated given new information, and (3) decide
how to selectively communicate information about the self to
cultivate or maintain others’ positive beliefs about us.
Previous developmental work has provided evidence for
young children’s competence in each of these components
outside of the domain of beliefs about the self. First, children draw inferences about others’ beliefs, epistemic states,
and even moral dispositions based on their experiences and
behaviors (Hamlin, 2013; Koenig & Harris, 2007). Second,
children understand that others’ beliefs can change with additional data (Song, Onishi, Baillargeon, & Fisher, 2008), and
that these revisions are sensitive to the amount and strength
of evidence (Schulz, 2012; Gweon, Shafto, & Schulz, 2014).
Third, preschool-aged children also understand that they can
actively cause such revisions to others’ beliefs by selecting
and communicating information for others (Ding, Wellman,
Wang, Fu, & Lee, 2015; Gweon, Chu, & Schulz, 2014;
Gweon, Shafto, & Schulz, 2014; Rhodes, Bonawitz, Shafto,
Chen, & Caglar, 2015). For instance, children differentially
select evidence to show others, depending on whether the
goal is to teach or deceive (Rhodes et al., 2015) and the
learner’s prior beliefs (Gweon, Shafto, & Schulz, 2014).
However, in most of these studies, the contents of others’
beliefs involve states of the external world with a ground truth
(e.g., locations or names of objects, causal mechanisms). For
instance, in the Sally-Anne task or other variations of falsebelief tasks (Wimmer & Perner, 1983; Gopnik & Astington,
1988), children are questioned about the contents of others’
beliefs that are either accurate or inaccurate with respect to
the current states of the world. However, in people’s beliefs
about the self (or people’s beliefs about people more generally), there is not always a clear ground truth; these beliefs are
formed via various sources of information that reflect a person’s unobservable, internal qualities (e.g., competence, niceness, knowledgeability, etc.). Therefore, the accuracy of such
beliefs can only be assessed with respect to the representativeness of such observations. Therefore, it remains an open
question whether children’s competence in reasoning about
others’ factual beliefs about the world also naturally extend
to reasoning about others’ beliefs about the self.
In reasoning about others’ beliefs about us, we not only
care about the accuracy of others’ beliefes but also about the
desirability of the beliefs; that is, we care tremendously about
whether others think we are competent, nice, and knowl-

1529

edgeable, independent of its ground truth. Indeed, prior research on children’s impression management suggests that
even young children are motivated to create a positive reputation with others (Shaw, Li, & Olson, 2013; Lee, 2013),
using appropriate communicative (e.g., lying) and behavioral
(e.g., sharing, helping) means to do so. For instance, even
3-year-old children lie about peeking into a box when an experimenter told them not to do so (Chandler, Fritz, & Hala,
1989; Polak & Harris, 1999). Five-year-olds help more and
cheat less in the presence of others (Engelmann, Herrmann, &
Tomasello, 2012; Leimgruber, Shaw, Santos, & Olson, 2012),
and even when they have been told that other children think
they are good (Fu, Heyman, Qian, Guo, & Lee, 2015). By
the end of the preschool years, children show both a motivation for others to think well of them as well as a sensitivity to
particular kinds of information that might lead others to form
positive impressions of them in prosocial or moral contexts.
While these studies have demonstrated children’s desire to
maintain a positive reputation with others, most of these studies looked at children’s behaviors with others with whom they
had no prior experience; that is, previous work has mainly
shown children’s attempts to create a good “first impression”.
However, many of our daily interactions involve people we
have already interacted with before, and thus have already
formed some beliefs or impressions of us. If we want these
individuals to hold positive beliefs about ourselves, we must
employ our Theory of Mind to manage these beliefs: we need
to infer what others believe about us, and when such beliefs
are discrepant from what we want others to believe, we must
provide additional information to change these beliefs.
As adults, we intuitively understand that one can be selective about to whom we tell different pieces of information.
Importantly, such selective and targeted communication of
information is driven by our desire for others to know only
certain (and often desirable) aspects of ourselves. We also
recognize that the same piece of information (e.g., winning
a game) can differentially impact what others think of us. In
the tennis example, disclosing to Sam (who thinks you are
not very skilled) that you won a game might greatly improve
his beliefs about your skills, whereas telling Tom (who thinks
you are good) might simply reaffirm what he thinks of you.
In our study, we asked whether young children prefer to
provide new positive information about themselves to someone who has previously seen them succeed over someone who
has seen them fail. In Experiment 1, we examine children’s
choices about whom to disclose information about their performance in a simple, luck-based game. In Experiment 2, we
asked how adults perform in similar third-person tasks.

Experiment 1: 3-5 year-olds
In Experiment 1, children played four trials of a simple luckbased game. They lost the game once in front of one confederate and won once in front of another, and then were asked
to disclose another final win to either one of the confederates. We targeted 3-5 year-olds, given prior work showing

that children in this age range are strongly motivated to have
others think positively of them (Shaw et al., 2013), while also
showing remarkable developmental changes in their ability to
reason about and track others’ beliefs (Wellman et al., 2001).
In light of this work, we can consider a few possible patterns of data. First, children might be strongly biased to disclose an additional win to someone who previously saw them
win (and thus holds a positive belief about them). Second,
children might prefer to disclose to someone who has seen
them lose (and holds a negative belief about them), recognizing that they can correct such negative beliefs. Finally,
we might see a developmental change in children’s choices;
younger children might have a preference for someone who
already holds a positive belief about them, whereas older children might understand the value of disclosing a win to someone who holds a less positive belief about their performance.

Methods
Subjects Seventy-three
preschool-aged
children
(MAge (SD): 4.56(.71), range: 3.23 - 5.98) were recruited
from an on-campus preschool. An additional eleven children
were tested and dropped from analysis due to failure to
complete the study (N = 7) or experimenter error (N = 4).
Materials Children played a simple game with the experimenter using laminated cards (2”x 3”). The winning cards
were red on the front with a large yellow star in the middle,
while the losing cards were blue on the front with no star; all
cards were yellow on the back. Two headshot photos (3”x 5”)
of each confederate wearing neutral colored clothing. Stickers were used as rewards. See Figure 1B for stimuli.
Procedure Participants were tested in a quiet room inside
of the preschool. First, the experimenter introduced the game
to the participant: in each trial, the experimenter would lay
out several cards face down on the table, and the child could
choose one of the cards to flip over. Then, the experimenter
showed the two types of possible cards: a red card with a star
on it meant that the child won (i.e., win a sticker) ; a blue card
with no star meant the child lost (i.e., receive nothing). The
experimenter asked the child what happens if each type of
card was picked; all children were able to correctly report the
outcome of each card. The experimenter showed the child the
two pictures of the confederates, provided their names (e.g.,
Anne and Sally), and said, “Sometimes, my friends will come
in and watch the game. Does that sound okay?” All children
agreed for the confederates to come in during the game.
Children played four trials of the game; the cards were
stacked such that the experimenter could control the outcome
for each trial. If the child chose a winning card, the experimenter said, “Oh wow, you got a star! That means you get
a sticker!” If the child chose a losing card, the experimenter
said, “Oh no, that means you do not get anything.” The child
always won on the first trial. Before each of the second and
third trials, the experimenter told the child, “Okay, I think
my friend Anne (Sally) wants to watch now!” And then she

1530

(A)

(B)

(C)
Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

Confederate

Child

100%

Win Observer

*

Loss Observer

*

80%

Outcome
Win

Win

Fail

Win

60%
40%

Adult

Confederate

X

X
Sally

Anne

20%
0%

young

old

Figure 1: Experiment 1 game setup (A), design and order of trials (B), and results (C), *p < .05.
looked at the door (behind the child) and and said, “Hey Anne
(Sally), is that you?” Anne (Sally) then entered the room,
smiled politely, and sat in a chair between the child and experimenter (see Figure 1 for schematics of the room setup).
The confederate maintained a neutral to mildly positive facial
expression, made no comments while the game was playing,
and did not respond to the outcome of the game. The child
won in front of one confederate and lost in front of another
(order and confederate counterbalanced). After the outcome
was revealed, the confederate left the room.
On the final, fourth trial, no confederate was present and
the child always won. Then, the experimenter brought out
the pictures of the confederates and told the child that now he
or she can tell Anne or Sally about the final win. The child
indicated his or her response by saying a name or pointing to
one of the photos; if the child did not respond or said both,
the experimenter asked the child to only choose one confederate. The experimenter called the chosen confederate into
the room. After the child told the confederate what happened,
the confederate left the room and the child then received three
stickers for the three winning trials.

Results and Discussion
Three- to five-year-olds were asked to disclose the final win
to either someone who previously saw them win (“Win” observer) or someone who previously saw them lose (“Loss”
observer). Our main interest was which confederate children
chose, and whether children’s choices change with age. We
found no effects of gender, the order of the win and lose in
the second and third trials, or the identity of the confederates.
Collapsing across all participants, we found that 31 of 73
participants (42.5%) chose to disclose the final win to the
“Loss” observer (p = .242). Next, we used the median age
(4.64) to split participants into a younger (N = 36; MAge (SD):
3.96(.43)) and older group (N = 37; MAge (SD): 5.14(.33)). We
found that only a small proportion of the younger group, 11
of 36 (30.5%) chose to disclose the final win the “Loss” observer (p = .029, by binomial test). However, the older group
showed a different pattern; although the number of children
who chose the “Loss” observer was not significantly above
chance (p = .743, by binomial test), they were significantly
more likely to disclose to the “Loss” observer compared to

the children in the younger group (20 of 37 or 54.1%, younger
vs. older: p = .059, by fisher’s exact test). Indeed, in a logistic regression model (1 = Chose “Loss”, 0 = Chose “Win”),
Age was a significant predictor in children’s choice of confederates (β = .828, p = .025), with older children were more
likely to disclose to the “Loss” observer.
In sum, we found that although younger preschool-aged
children preferred to disclose the final win to the “Win” observer, children gradually become more likely to disclose to
the “Loss” observer. Interestingly, the “Win” observer already had a positive belief about the child, and thus disclosure of an additional win would do little to change her beliefs. While older children were significantly more likely to
disclose to the “Loss” observer, the proportion of children
who did so was only slightly above chance. Moreover, this
result shows young children’s striking ability to distinguish
between the two observers after only single trials.
Given the results from the logistic regression, one question
to further explore is when we might preferentially select the
“Loss” observer over the “Win” observer. In the next study,
we asked whether even adults would choose the “Loss” observer. It is also interesting to consider how the nature of
the game (e.g., luck-based vs. skill-based games) might differentially affect motivation to correct others’ beliefs. Here,
children played a simple, luck-based game but if the game’s
outcome was determined by effort or skill, there might be a
greater concern for reputation and thus a stronger tendency to
maintain or change others’ beliefs in the desired direction. In
Experiment 2, we first investigate adults’ choices in an online
third-person version of the task (2A), and directly compare
participant’s responses in a game of chance and a game that
involves more skill (2B).

Experiment 2A: Adults (Luck-Based)
In Experiment 2A, we first asked about adults’ preferences
to correct others’ negative impressions. In order to make the
scenario plausible for an online study, we asked people to
predict another agent’s choice to disclose, rather than their
own choices. Adults observed an agent (Bill) succeed or lose
in a card game task as two confederates observed the agent at
different times. We asked the participants to choose who Bill
should tell about his final successful performance: the friend

1531

who watched him win, or the friend who watched him lose.

Methods
Subjects Adults (N=100) were recruited from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk (AMT), MAge (SD): 34.2(8.9), range: 22 60. Fifteen additional participants were tested but excluded
from analysis due to failing a planned attention-check question (see Procedure).
Materials Participants observed several cartoon pictures in
the online game. The game consisted of a vertical board with
five cards on it (see Figure 2); the dealer is depicted in green.
A card with a star on it meant that Bill won; a card with an
X on it meant that Bill lost. Only the characters backs were
shown during the observation pictures.

Procedure
Participants first learned how the game worked and what each
card meant; only those who correctly reported that the winning card has a star were included in analyses. We ran two
versions of the study in which we varied the amount of evidence. In one version (N=50), Bill won once by himself,
then won once in front of one friend (“Win” observer) and
lost once in front of the other (“Loss” observer). Each win
or loss trial was represented in its own image on a page. For
the fourth and last trial, Bill won once all by himself. Then,
participants were asked who Bill will tell about his final win:
the friend who previously saw Bill win once or the friend who
previously saw Bill lose once. Participants were asked to explain their choice afterwards.
In another version (N=50), Bill won or lost three trials in a
row in front of each confederate, and participants were asked
to choose to whom Bill should disclose his final three wins.
For both versions, we counterbalanced the order of the observed outcomes (W L vs. L W; W W W L L L vs. L L L
W W W) as well as which of the two friends observed during
these trials.

Results and Discussion
We found no effect of the order of the observed outcomes (W
first vs. L first), the order of the friend (Anne or Sally), or the
number of trials (1 or 3 trials). Thus the data were collapsed
for further analysis. Participants were asked to choose which
one of the two friends Bill should tell about his final win:
the friend who previously saw him win lose before versus
the friend who previously saw him lose before. 61% (61 of
100) of participants chose the person who previously saw Bill
lose (binomial test, p = .03). Thus adults were sensitive to
the kind of outcome each friend observed, and predicted Bill
to selectively disclose to the friend who previously saw him
lose.

Experiment 2B: Adults (Skill-Based)
In Experiment 2B, we asked how manipulating the nature of
the game (luck-based vs. skill-based) might affect adults’ reasoning about selective disclosure. When the game involves

skill rather than luck and is thus more informative about the
player’s underlying competence, more participants might predict that the agent would communicate his positive performance to someone who holds a negative belief about his competence than someone who holds a positive belief.

Methods
Subjects Participants (N=200) were recruited from AMT,
MAge (SD): 39.1(10.1), range: 24 - 59. Twelve participants
were excluded from analysis due to failing the two planned
attention-check questions (see Procedure).
Materials As in Experiment 2A, participants observed a
cartoon scenario where Bill played a game as one of his
friends (Anne or Sally) was present. The game featured a
dart board divided into 6 alternating blue and red slices.

Procedure
The structure of the task was nearly identical to Experiment
2A, and the only difference was that Bill played darts, rather
than a card game. This allowed us to easily manipulate the
nature of the game (luck-based vs skill-based) using nearly
identical stimuli. Participants were randomly assigned to the
Skill and Random conditions (N = 100 in each condition).
In the Random condition, Bill simply pressed a button to activate a dart-throwing machine that would place the dart at
a random location on the board. In the Skill condition, Bill
aimed at the board to throw the dart, but no information was
provided about his competence. In all conditions, participants
were told that Bill would “win” if the dart landed on one of
the blue slices on the board, and “Loss” if it landed on red.
As in Experiment 2A, we ran two versions of this task. In
one version, one of Bill’s friends observed him win once and
the other friend watched him lose once. Then, Bill won once
in the last weekend when no one was watching. We asked
participants who Bill will tell, the friend who observed him
win before or the friend who observed him lose before. In
another version, Bill won or lost three times (instead of once)
in front of each confederate and would disclose three wins to
one of them. We counterbalanced the order of the outcomes
and which of the two friends observed during these trials.

Results and Discussion
There was no effect of the order of the observed outcomes (W
vs. L), the order of the friend (Anne or Sally), or the number
of observation trials (one or three); thus the data were collapsed for further analysis. As in previous experiments, participants were asked to which friend Bill should tell about his
win.In the Random condition, 68% (68 of 100) of participants
chose the person who previously saw Bill lose (binomial test,
p < 0.001), replicating the results from Experiment 2A. In
the Skill condition, 71% (71 of 100) of participants chose this
person (p < 0.001, by binom. test). Contrary to our prediction, there was no difference between the two conditions.

1532

(A)

(B)

(C)
Fail Observer

% Choices

100%

Win Observer

*

***

***

2A: Random

2B: Random

2B: Skill

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

Figure 2: Experiment 2A “win” trial (A), Exp. 2B “loss” trial (B), and Exp. 2A and 2B results (C), ***p <0.001, *p <0.05.

General Discussion
In this study, we explored how people communicate information about the self to others. More specifically, we asked
whether children as well as adults would choose to disclose
positive information about the self (e.g., winning a game) to
someone who previously observed a negative outcome or to
someone who observed a positive outcome about the self. If
people understand that: (1) others’ prior observations of the
self can result in positive or negative beliefs about one’s competence, and (2) one can revise such beliefs by communicating information about the self, they would be sensitive to others’ prior observations and preferentially choose to communicate to the person who observed a negative outcome.
In Experiment 1, we tested our prediction with children between ages 3 - 5. We found that while younger children preferred to disclose their positive performance to someone who
has previously seen them win rather than lose, older children
were more likely to choose the person who has previously
seen them lose. While older children’s choice was not significantly above chance, children’s age predicted their choice.
These results suggest that even though young children might
be biased to prefer someone who already holds a positive belief about them, children gradually understand the benefit of
correcting others’ negative beliefs. Under this interpretation,
the chance-level choice in older children might suggest that
they were torn between their preference for one observer (i.e.,
“Win”) and their desire to communicate their winning outcome to the other observer (i.e., “Loss” observer).
One alternative explanation is that young children’s preference for someone who holds a positive belief about them
gradually disappears; in this case, older children’s choice
might reflect a genuine absence of preference between the
two observers. However, intuitively even adults prefer people
who hold positive impressions of them, and it is unlikely that
such preference is absent in the older half of the children in
our study. Future studies are needed to provide stronger support for the idea that our results reflects children’s developing
understanding that others’ beliefs about the self can be revised and maintained via selective disclosure of information.
In Experiment 2, we tested adults’ intuitions in analogous

tasks and further explored the role of luck vs. skill in these
inferences. Adults showed a systematic preference for the
person who observed a negative outcome of the game, suggesting that they understand that one can change others’ negative beliefs about the self by communicating positive information about the self. While we failed to find a difference
between the luck-based and skill-based games, it is possible
that the positive glow from a lucky win was just as powerful as a skill-based outcome for adults, or that the skill-based
game also increased the desire to maintain people’s positive
beliefs about an underlying competence. We also did not find
a difference in selectivity for the “Lose” observer when we
varied the amount of evidence (one vs. three instances), but
this may have also been due to an increase in desire to affiliate
with the person who previously viewed multiple wins.
Future studies will further explore how the nature of these
games and amount of observed evidence might differentially
affect others’ impressions of oneself. For instance, in the
face of someone who holds a less positive belief about the
child, we could ask whether the child would like to disclose
a luck-based positive outcome or a skill-based positive outcome. Further, we could compare how children differentially
disclose information to others who have weak positive (e.g.,
viewed one win) or strong positive (e.g., viewed multiple
wins) evidence of the child’s performance.
Previous work in children’s understanding of disclosure
have utilized relatively complicated vignettes and asked children to either endorse or reject others’ disclosure about another agent to a third party agent (Shaw & Olson, 2015) or
predict whether or not others will disclose information about
themselves (e.g., Hicks, Liu, & Heyman, 2015). Our novel
and simple paradigm provides a rich and naturalistic environment from which we can better understand how children infer
others’ beliefs of them based on what others have observed,
and how they communicate information about themselves to
change or maintain these beliefs.
Last, we hope that this work will inspire future research
integrating work in social cognitive development and impression management behaviors. While reputation management
behaviors have largely concerned valence-based impressions

1533

(e.g., “good” or “bad”), there are many other kinds of beliefs
that others can have about us. For instance, even our preferences or a set of beliefs can provide rich information about
who we are, and selectively communicating these to others
can be an effective way to manage the representations of ourselves that others hold.
Inferring others’ beliefs about the self and knowing how
to change and maintain them might be particularly important
for young children who are just beginning to develop a coherent self-representation and forming initial relationships with
others. This capacity to reason about others’ beliefs of us is
deeply important for navigating our daily communicative interactions, building meaningful, lasting bonds with others.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sumudu Rathnayake, Sara Altman, Chelsey Pan,
and Amy Qian for help as confederates. We also thank Bing
Nursery School and the children and families who participated. This work was supported by a Varieties of Understanding grant from the John Templeton Foundation to HG.

References
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief
understanding in infants. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
14(3), 110–118.
Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).
Eighteen-month-old infants show false belief understanding in an active helping paradigm. Cognition, 112(2), 337–
342.
Chandler, M., Fritz, A. S., & Hala, S. (1989). Small-scale
deceit: deception as a marker of two-, three-, and four-yearolds’ early theories of mind. Child development, 60(6),
1263–1277.
Cushman, F., Sheketoff, R., Wharton, S., & Carey, S. (2013).
The development of intent-based moral judgment. Cognition, 127(1), 6 - 21.
Ding, X. P., Wellman, H. M., Wang, Y., Fu, G., & Lee, K.
(2015). Theory-of-Mind Training Causes Honest Young
Children to Lie. Psychological Science, 26(11), 1812–
1821.
Engelmann, J. M., Herrmann, E., & Tomasello, M. (2012).
Five-year olds, but not chimpanzees, attempt to manage
their reputations. PloS One, 7(10).
Fu, G., Heyman, G. D., Qian, M., Guo, T., & Lee, K. (2015).
Young children with a positive reputation to maintain are
less likely to cheat. Developmental Science, 19(2), 275283.
Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988). Children’s understanding of representational change and its relation to
the understanding of false belief and the appearance-reality
distinction. Child Development, 59(1), 26–37.
Gweon, H., Chu, V., & Schulz, L. E. (2014). To give a fish or
to teach how to fish? Children weigh costs and benefits in
considering what information to transmit. Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 559–564.

Gweon, H., Pelton, H., Konopka, J. a., & Schulz, L. E.
(2014). Sins of omission: Children selectively explore
when teachers are under-informative. Cognition, 132(3),
335–341.
Gweon, H., Shafto, P., & Schulz, L. E. (2014). Children
consider prior knowledge and the cost of information both
in learning from and teaching others. Proceedings of the
36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
565–570.
Hamlin, J. K. (2013). Moral judgment and action in preverbal
infants and toddlers: Evidence for an innate moral core.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22(3), 186193.
Hicks, C. M., Liu, D., & Heyman, G. D. (2015). Young children’s beliefs about self-disclosure of performance failure
and success. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
33(1), 123–135.
Koenig, M. A., & Harris, P. L. (2007, 10). The basis of epistemic trust: Reliable testimony or reliable sources? Episteme, 4, 264–284.
Lee, K. (2013). Little liars: Development of verbal deception in children. Child Development Perspectives, 7(2), 91–
96.
Leimgruber, K. L., Shaw, A., Santos, L. R., & Olson, K. R.
(2012). Young Children Are More Generous when Others
Are Aware of Their Actions. PLoS ONE, 7(10).
Polak, A., & Harris, P. (1999). Deception by young children following noncompliance. Developmental Psychology, 35(2), 561–568.
Rhodes, M., Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Chen, A., & Caglar, L.
(2015). Controlling the message: Preschoolers’ use of evidence to teach and deceive others. Frontiers in Psychology,
6.
Schulz, L. (2012). The origins of inquiry: inductive inference
and exploration in early childhood. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 16(7), 382-389.
Shaw, A., Li, V., & Olson, K. (2013). Reputation is everything. Navigating the social world.
Shaw, A., & Olson, K. (2015). Whose idea is it anyway?
The importance of reputation in acknowledgement. Developmental Science, 18(3), 502-509.
Song, H.-J., Onishi, K., Baillargeon, R., & Fisher, C. (2008).
Can an agent’s false belief be corrected by an appropriate
communication? Psychological reasoning in 18-month-old
infants. Cognition, 109(3), 295?315.
Strauss, S., & Ziv, M. (2012). Teaching is a natural cognitive
ability for humans. Mind, Brain, and Education, 6(4), 186–
196.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: the truth about
false belief. Child development, 72(3), 655–684.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs in
young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition,
13(1), 103 - 128.

1534

