Why Sense-Making through Magnitude May Be Harder
for Fractions than for Whole Numbers
Eliane Stampfer Wiese (eliane.wiese@berkeley.edu)
Graduate School of Education, 4407 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Rony Patel (rbpatel@andrew.cmu.edu)
Kenneth R. Koedinger (krk@cs.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 342c Baker Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
What is the role of fraction magnitude knowledge in learning
fraction addition? An experiment with 71 6th and 7th grade
students compared fraction addition instruction and practice
with a magnitude representation to a tightly controlled nonmagnitude condition. In the magnitude condition, students
with better fraction magnitude estimation skills benefitted
more from the conceptual instruction and this relationship
was moderated by students’ knowledge of how magnitude
relates to fraction addition and equivalence. However,
students with better fraction magnitude estimation skills
benefitted less from the practice problems with magnitude. In
the non-magnitude condition, fraction magnitude estimation
was not predictive of learning. This study indicates that
students with magnitude knowledge can leverage it to learn
fraction addition concepts from magnitude representations,
but, for those students, magnitude representations may be a
distraction from practicing the procedure.
Keywords: fraction addition; number line estimation;
multiple representations

Fractions are Important but Difficult to Learn
Proficiency with fractions is a pivotal skill for students:
fraction knowledge in fifth grade predicts math achievement
in tenth grade even after statistically controlling for
socioeconomic status, general IQ, and whole number
arithmetic knowledge (Siegler et al., 2012). Yet, fractions
are a difficult topic for students (Siegler et al., 2010) and
teachers (Lee, Brown, & Orrill, 2011; Siegler et al., 2010).
One obstacle to students’ conceptual understanding is
difficulty estimating a fraction’s magnitude (Behr,
Wachsmuth, & Post, 1985). In addition to improving
conceptual understanding, fraction magnitude estimation,
specifically accuracy on number line estimation, is
correlated with accuracy on fraction arithmetic tasks
(Siegler, Thompson, & Schneider, 2011).
One potential reason for this correlation is that students
who have stronger fraction number line estimation
knowledge can avoid incorrect strategies that result in
magnitude incongruent answers. Adding 1/2 and 1/3, for
example, must result in an answer greater than 1/2 and 1/3.
Students who understand that the magnitude of the sum
needs to be greater than the magnitude of both positive
addends might reject an incorrect strategy that leads to a

magnitude incongruent answer. A common incorrect
strategy, adding the numerators and denominators, would
lead to a sum of 2/5. Since the magnitude of the incorrect
sum (2/5) is smaller than that of one of the addends (1/2) the
strategy must be incorrect.
Fifth grade students don’t always understand that adding
positive fractions results in a sum with a magnitude that is
larger than each individual addend (Wiese & Koedinger
2014) while sixth grade students almost always understand
this concept (Siegler & Lortee-Forgues, 2015). If the
correlation between accuracy of fraction number line
estimation and accuracy on fraction arithmetic is at least
partially driven by the reduction of magnitude incongruent
procedural strategies, the correlation between accuracy of
fraction number line estimation and accuracy on fraction
arithmetic should be greater for those students who know
how addition or subtraction affect magnitude versus those
students who do not. That is, students cannot logically use
their magnitude knowledge to reject magnitude incongruent
answers if they do not know the sum is greater than the
addends for positive fractions. Therefore, the understanding
of how the magnitude of the addends is related to the sum
should moderate the relationship between fraction
magnitude knowledge and fraction addition knowledge.
Students also need equivalence magnitude knowledge in
addition to fraction magnitude knowledge to help select
amongst fraction arithmetic strategies. A student cannot use
fraction magnitude knowledge to select amongst fraction
addition strategies if she or he does not know that equivalent
fractions have the same magnitude. For example, when
adding 1/2 and 1/4, students need to find a common
denominator (e.g., 2/4 plus 1/4). If students do not know
that 1/2 and 2/4 are the same magnitude, it makes it difficult
to compare the final sum (3/4) to the original addends. This
means equivalence magnitude knowledge should moderate
the relationship between fraction magnitude knowledge and
fraction addition knowledge. The present study tests the two
moderators of the relationship between fraction magnitude
knowledge and fraction addition knowledge.

Prior Work: Brief Number Line Interventions
Existing literature supports the positive relationship between
magnitude knowledge of whole numbers and whole number

1229

arithmetic knowledge (Siegler & Mu, 2008), and the
positive, causal influence of whole number magnitude
knowledge on whole number arithmetic knowledge with a
brief intervention (Booth & Siegler, 2008). Since
magnitude-based interventions have been shown to improve
students’ proficiency whole number arithmetic, they may
improve students’ proficiency with fraction arithmetic also.

demonstrate superior learning gains than a procedure-only
control?’ Magnitude approaches would suggest yes, as
considering magnitude should help students reject incorrect
answers, while cognitive load theory would suggest no, as
the magnitude representations require processing that is
extraneous to learning the procedure.

Magnitude Representations May Not Be Sufficient
for Fraction Addition Skills

78 6th and 7th graders from two middle schools participated
in the study. The analyses include only the 71 students who
completed all portions of the study. Within-class random
assignment yielded 38 in the procedure-and-magnitude
intervention and 33 students in the procedure-only control.
Three assessments were given: before the instruction
(pretest), after the instruction (midtest) and after the practice
problems (posttest). Three assessment forms were created
and students were randomly assigned to one of the six
counter-balanced orders. The overall reliabilities
(Chronbach’s Alpha) for the test forms were .77 or greater.
Fraction Number Line Estimation items presented a target
fraction to the left of a number line, which was labeled with
a ‘0’ on the left endpoint and a ‘1’ on the right endpoint.
Participants saw 10 of these problems, only at pretest.
Students saw four Fraction Addition problems. Two had
same denominators while two had unlike denominators. For
the addition items, the reliabilities (Chronbach’s Alpha) for
the three test forms ranged from .72 to .75. The remaining
items (described below) assessed how students connected
magnitude knowledge to a fraction addition context.
For magnitude knowledge to be beneficial for fraction
addition, students will likely need to understand how
magnitude relates to addition. Direction of Effects items
asked if the addition of two positive fractions is greater than
one of those fractions alone (e.g., 1/2 + 1/3 > 1/3, with
answer options True, False, and Can’t tell from the
information given). Addend-Sum items asked if the sum
was greater than each of the addends (e.g., showing students
1/2 + 1/3 = 5/6 with a note that the addition is correct, then
asking if 5/6 > 1/2 and if 5/6 > 1/3, with the answer options
True, False, and Can’t tell from the information given).
For linear depictions of magnitude to be beneficial,
students will likely need to be able to interpret them
correctly, including recognizing that equivalent fractions
have the same magnitudes. Fraction Equivalence items
presented a number line with a fraction plotted on it.
Students were provided with an equivalent fraction (and the
statement that the two fractions were equivalent) and asked
to plot the equivalent fraction on the same number line.
They were then asked if the plotted fraction belonged to the
left, right, or in the same spot as the presented fraction with
a fill-in-the-blank multiple-choice question. For example,
2/8 belongs ____ 1/4, with the options “to the left of,” “in
the exact same spot as,” and “to the right of.”

Participants and Assessment Materials

On the other hand, although magnitude training is a
promising approach, it may not be sufficient for improving
students’ arithmetic skills or for their rejection of strategies
that ignore magnitude. In one study, 5th grade students were
asked to judge if fraction addition equations were correct or
not. Half of the equations were correct, and half used the
add-both-numerators-and-denominators strategy to yield a
sum that was smaller than one of the addends. Even when
shown the fraction symbols in the equation and their
corresponding magnitudes, students performed around
chance (Stampfer & Koedinger, 2013). This result indicates
that magnitude was not sufficient for the students to
determine the correctness of an addition equation. To reject
a strategy that ignores magnitude, students must realize not
only that fractions have magnitudes, but also that fractions
follow the same rules of addition as whole numbers,
namely, that adding two positive fractions yields a sum
larger than each addend. A follow-up study confirmed that
those 5th grade students had difficulty applying that addendsum relationship to fractions (Wiese & Koedinger, 2014).
Finally, though choosing an incorrect addition procedure
reveals gaps in conceptual knowledge, it also reveals gaps in
procedural knowledge. Students may make procedural
errors on fraction addition items even though they have high
levels of conceptual knowledge. Indeed, Byrnes & Wasik
(1991) found, in a an experiment with middle-schoolers,
that reinforcing fraction magnitude concepts and explaining
the addition procedure did not improve performance above
simply executing the procedure. However, Byrnes and
Wasik used discrete rectangles instead of a continuous
number line. Since there are theoretical reasons a number
line specifically might be more conducive to thinking about
magnitude (e.g., Siegler et al., 2011) and discrete rectangles
might elicit counting behavior as opposed to thinking about
magnitude holistically, the present study uses a continuous
representation of magnitude.

Study: Fraction Addition Instruction With and
Without a Representation of Magnitude
The present study will compare two forms of instruction,
one with a magnitude representation and one without. We
hypothesize that knowledge and application of the addendsum relationship (that two positive addends yield a sum
larger than each) moderate the relationship between
magnitude estimation of fractions and fraction addition
skills. Additionally, we propose conflicting hypotheses for
the question ‘Does a procedure-and-magnitude intervention

Instructional Materials
Students were given initial instruction and then practice
problems. First, all students saw an example whole number

1230

addition equation, and an explanation that adding whole
numbers yields the total of their sizes. A similar example of
a fraction addition equation followed, showing that the
independent whole number strategy yields an incorrect sum.
Accompanying text explained that the correct sum for
fraction addition would be the same magnitude as the
combined magnitudes of the addends. The instruction
included brief multiple-choice and free-response questions
to check that students had read the text. This instruction was
intended to shake students’ confidence in the incorrect
whole number strategy, and did not demonstrate the full
fraction addition procedure. Students in the procedure-andmagnitude intervention saw depictions of the magnitudes of
the addends and sums in the example equations. This
depiction was intended to reinforce that a correct sum would
equal the combined magnitudes of the addends, while an
incorrect sum would not. These depictions were linear
magnitude representations, but were not presented on a
number line. The procedure-only control did not include
depictions of magnitude (see Figure 1). After completing
that initial instruction, students did the mid-test.
After the mid-test, students did scaffolded practice
problems with correctness feedback for each step,
alternating with non-scaffolded problems (Figure 2), which
were similar to the fraction addition assessment items. After
entering an answer for the non-scaffolded problems,
students were given correctness feedback. If the answer was
wrong, students were shown a worked example of that
problem and were asked to fix their answer. The worked
examples in the procedure-and-magnitude intervention
included a linear magnitude depiction of the two original
addends, the student’s incorrect answer, and the correct
answer. Students in the procedure-only control did the same
tasks, but without the depictions of magnitude.

Method
All study activities took place during normal class time.
Students were given 2 minutes for the number-line
estimation questions, 5 for the pre-test and post-test, and 25
minutes for the instruction, mid-test, and practice problems,
which students did at their own pace. All activities used an
online math tutoring system. While the instruction between
the pre-test and mid-test was brief, it targeted only one
concept: that a correct addition strategy will yield a sum that
is equal in magnitude to the two addends together. After the
mid-test, students practiced fraction addition with
scaffolding, interleaved with worked examples. This study
was timed for a standard 40-minute class period. Though
students would likely have improved more over a longer
study duration, previous work has demonstrated learning
with brief interventions that include magnitude (Lomas,
Ching, Stampfer, Sandoval, & Koedinger, 2011; Opfer &
Thompson, 2008; Siegler & Ramani, 2009).

Results
For the fraction addition items, students rated their answers
with a confidence score from 1 to 5. The answer score

Figure 1: Matched instruction with magnitude (top)
and without it (bottom), question four of six. Both
formats try to convey that a sum cannot be smaller
than the combined magnitudes of its addends.
(correct or incorrect) was combined with the self-reported
accuracy to yield a scale from 1 to 10 (from highest
confidence in an incorrect answer to highest confidence in a
correct answer). This measure is referred to below as
‘accuracy’ (Note: Similar patterns of results were obtained
using accuracy without confidence). Students’ responses
spanned the entire scale. Table 2 shows means and standard
deviations for fraction addition accuracy, and mean scores
for direction of effects problems, addend sum problems, and
the multiple-choice portion of the fraction equivalence
problems. For the latter three items, since there was only
one question per student per type of problem, the
distributions are binomial and can be expressed in a single
parameter.
One striking finding from this study was students’
difficulty in progressing through the initial instruction
(between the pre-test and mid-test), which was intended to
be straightforward. This initial instruction presented six
problems, starting with whole number addition and moving
to fraction addition, all focused on the idea that the sum of
two numbers is the total of their magnitude. In particular,
the error rate for question four (Figure 1) reveals gaps in
students’ reasoning around fraction addition. In the
procedure-only control, the majority of students (85%)
answered at least one question incorrectly, even though the

1231

Table 2: Assessment Scores
Fraction Addition Accuracy Means (and Std. Deviations)
Condition
Pretest
Midtest
Posttest
Procedure-only
5.22 (2.81) 5.45 (2.84) 6.48 (2.30)
Procedure & Magnitude 5.14 (2.58) 5.26 (2.61) 6.35 (2.64)
Direction of Effects Mean Scores
Condition
Pretest
Midtest
Posttest
Procedure-only
45%
61%
55%
Procedure & Magnitude
42%
38%
42%
Addend-Sum Mean Scores
Condition
Pretest
Midtest
Posttest
Procedure-only
56%
58%
56%
Procedure & Magnitude
55%
54%
57%
Equivalence Mean Scores
Condition
Pretest Midtest Posttest
Procedure-only
21%
21%
13%
Procedure & Magnitude
29%
30%
27%
first question explicitly states that the proposed sum is less
than combined sizes of the two addends, and the second
question explicitly states that the proposed sum is less than
the size of one of the addends alone. While the matched
questions were easier in the procedure-and-magnitude
intervention (which showed the magnitude of each fraction
graphically), students were still far from ceiling (34% had at
least one incorrect response). One hypothesis for why
students benefit from magnitude knowledge is that it helps
them reject magnitude-incongruent answers. That
hypothesis suggests that knowledge of magnitude helps
students arrive at the correct evaluation of whether or not a
sum is incongruent. However, this information was
explicitly provided in the procedure-only control, and
students’ error rates show that version of the question was
harder. These results suggest that it is the underlying
addition principles that are hard for students to make sense
of in a fraction addition context. The hypothesis that
magnitude knowledge helps students by making it easier for
them to apply principles of addition presupposes that
students understand the principles of addition in the first
place. Rather, these results suggest the reverse: depictions of
magnitude may help students make sense of abstract
principles of addition.

Analyses
Across both conditions, a pairwise t-test revealed no
difference between pretest fraction addition scores and midtest fraction addition scores (t = -0.46, df = 68, p = 0.65). In
a linear regression, pretest addition scores and condition
were predictive of mid-test scores (F(2,66) = 23.29, R2 =
41.37%, p < 0.01). While pretest fraction addition accuracy
was predictive of mid-test fraction addition accuracy (B =
0.65, t = 6.814, p < 0.01), condition was not predictive (B =
-0.20, t = -0.39, p = 0.70).
Within each condition, paired t-tests with pretest fraction
addition accuracy and mid-test fraction addition accuracy

Figure 2: A non-scaffolded problem (top) and
scaffolded problem (bottom). Non-scaffolded
items initially show only the addition problem. If
the student answers incorrectly, the worked
example is revealed. Scaffolded items unfold step
by step, and are the same in both conditions.
reveal no significant improvement (magnitude: t = -0.07, df
= 36, p = 0.94; control: t = -0.75, df = 31, p = 0.46). Within
each condition, linear regressions predicted mid-test fraction
addition accuracy with pretest fraction addition accuracy
and Percent Average Error (PAE) for fraction number line
estimation (magnitude: F(2,34) = 12.63, R2 = 42.62%, p <
0.01; control: F(2,29) = 27.68, R2 = 65.62%, p < 0.01). In
the procedure-and-magnitude invervention, both pretest
fraction addition accuracy (B = 0.29, t = 2.01, p = 0.05) and
PAE for fraction number line estimation (B = -11.01, t = 3.47, p < 0.01) were significant predictors of mid-test
fraction addition accuracy. Note that a negative predictor for
PAE means low error (i.e., high accuracy) in number line
estimation is associated with higher scores on the fraction

1232

addition accuracy scale at mid-test. Since there was no
learning in fraction addition from pre-test to mid-test and
PAE was a significant predictor, it seems that students got
better at fraction addition if they had strong magnitude
knowledge, but got worse if they had weak magnitude
knowledge. For the procedure-only control, pretest fraction
addition accuracy was a significant predictor of mid-test
fraction addition accuracy (B = 0.81, t = 7.33, p < 0.01), but
PAE was not (B = -1.04, t = -0.45, p = 0.66). The two
groups seem to have learned in different ways: students’
number line magnitude knowledge influenced their learning
for the procedure-and-magnitude intervention, but not for
the procedure-only control.
Three separate regressions on the procedure-andmagnitude intervention tested moderators of fraction
magnitude knowledge and fraction addition learning from
pre-test to mid-test: scores on direction of effects,
equivalence, and addend-sum items. Separate regressions
were run since the moderators were correlated, violating the
independent and identical distribution assumption (i.i.d.) of
regression.
Moderators: PAE and Direction of Effects This
regression included pretest fraction addition accuracy, PAE
fraction number line estimation, pretest direction of effects
accuracy, and the interaction between PAE and pretest
direction of effects accuracy (F(4,32) = 9.414, R2 = 54.06%,
p < 0.01). In this model, pretest fraction addition accuracy is
not predictive of mid-test fraction addition accuracy (B =
0.19, t = 1.40, p = 0.17), but PAE (B = -8.82, t = -2.83, p <
0.01), pretest direction of effects score (B = 1.43, t = 2.070,
p = 0.05), and the interaction of the two (B = -0.60, t = 1.66, p = 0.10) are predictive. Thus, for fraction addition
accuracy, students with low magnitude error and high
direction of effect accuracy benefited the most from the
procedure-and-magnitude intervention.
Moderators: PAE and Equivalence Knowledge The
second regression uses pretest fraction addition accuracy,
PAE fraction number line estimation, pretest equivalence
knowledge, and the interaction between PAE and pretest
equivalence knowledge to predict mid-test fraction addition
accuracy (F(4,32) = 8.996, R2 = 52.93%, p < 0.01). Pretest
fraction addition accuracy (B = 0.12, t = 0.84, p = 0.41) and
pretest equivalence knowledge (B = -1.17, t = -0.91, p =
0.37) were not predictive of mid-test fraction addition
accuracy, but PAE (B = -14.81, t = -3.51, p < 0 .01) and the
interaction between PAE and pretest equivalence knowledge
(B = -1.48, t = -2.32, p = 0.03) are predictive of mid-test
fraction addition accuracy. Thus, for fraction addition
accuracy, students with low magnitude error and high
equivalence accuracy benefited most from the intervention.
Moderators: PAE and Addend-Sum The final regression
included pretest fraction addition accuracy, PAE fraction
number line estimation, addend sum knowledge questions,
and the interaction between PAE and addend sum
knowledge to predict mid-test fraction addition accuracy

(F(4,31) = 6.097, R2 = 44.03%, p < 0.01. Pretest fraction
addition accuracy (B = 0.30, t = -3.10, p = 0.06) and PAE
(B = -10.49, t = -3.104, p < 0.01) were both predictive of
mid-test fraction addition accuracy, but addend sum
knowledge (B = 0.00, t = 0.00, p > 0.99) and the interaction
between PAE and addend sum knowledge (B = -0.36, t = 0.97, p = 0.34) were not predictive of mid-test fraction
addition accuracy.
Midtest to Posttest Learning Across both conditions, a
pairwise t-test revealed improvement in fraction addition
scores from mid-test to post-test (t = -3.81, df = 66, p <
0.01; means were 5.35 at mid-test vs 6.41 at post-test). In a
linear regression, mid-test addition scores and condition
were predictive of post-test scores (F(2,64) = 26.38, R2 =
45.19%, p < 0.01). While mid-test fraction addition
accuracy was predictive of post-test fraction addition
accuracy (B = 0.62, t = 7.258, p < 0.01), condition was not
predictive (B = -0.11, t = -0.24, p = 0.81).
Midtest to Posttest Learning and PAE For both
conditions individually, paired t-tests on mid-test and posttest fraction addition accuracy show learning (magnitude: t
= -2.92, df = 34, p < 0.01; control: t = -2.48, df = 31, p =
0.02). In a linear regression with the procedure-andmagnitude invervention only, post-test fraction addition
accuracy was predicted using mid-test fraction addition
accuracy and PAE for fraction number line estimation
(F(2,32) = 24.05, R2 = 60.05%, p < 0.01). Both mid-test
fraction addition accuracy (B = 0.92, t = 6.54, p < 0.01) and
PAE (B = 6.37, t = 2.01, p < 0.01) were significant
predictors of post-test fraction addition accuracy. Note that a
positive predictor for PAE here means low error (or high
accuracy) in number line estimation is associated with lower
scores on the post-test fraction addition accuracy measure.
When running the same regression with the procedure-only
control (F(2,29) = 8.49, R2 = 36.92%, p < 0.01), mid-test
fraction addition accuracy was a significant predictor posttest fraction addition accuracy (B = 0.48, t = 3.95, p < 0.01),
but PAE was not (B = -1.56, t = -0.62, p = 0.54). Note: We
tested the same moderators we used from pretest to mid-test,
but none were significant.

Discussion
What is the role of fraction magnitude knowledge in
learning fraction arithmetic? Within the procedure-andmagnitude intervention, when students were learning how
magnitude knowledge can be used to justify correct and
incorrect answers (between pretest and mid-test), students
with greater initial magnitude knowledge benefited more
than students with lower initial magnitude knowledge.
However, when solving the problems and studying the
worked examples (between mid-test and post-test), students
with greater initial magnitude knowledge benefitted less
than their counterparts. Perhaps the magnitude knowledge
that was initially helpful for learning the general concept of
fraction addition became a distractor to learning the

1233

procedural steps. Perhaps the combination of learning the
right steps to solving a fraction addition problem and seeing
how the magnitudes of their answers compared to the
magnitude of the actual answer exceeded the desirable
difficulty. Trying to learn both pieces of information at once
(each of which can be considered complex) may have
caused excessive cognitive load and hurt their performance.
Those with stronger magnitude knowledge might have been
more distracted by the magnitude stimuli if they were
attending to it more, while those with weaker magnitude
knowledge might have attended to the magnitude stimuli
less, resulting in more focus in the steps, and thus, better
performance.
Also of note is the lack of differences between the groups
in terms of overall learning. While the mechanisms by
which the students learned might have been different, both
groups overall did not improve from pretest to midtest and
learned equally from midtest to posttest. This indicates the
benefits of learning by doing: overall, each condition only
demonstrated learning from the activities that gave students
practice solving the targeted problems. The results from this
experiment do not provide evidence supporting the
hypothesis that the inclusion of magnitude in a brief fraction
addition instruction benefits students’ learning. However,
the role of magnitude knowledge in the procedure-andmagnitude interention does provide evidence for the
theoretical role of magnitude in fraction addition learning:
explicit representations of fraction magnitude can help
students learn fraction concepts but may detract from
learning the procedures.
Finally, the initial instruction (between pre-test and midtest) posed surprising challenges for the students. Students
demonstrated difficulty in making logical inferences
involving fraction addition. For example, 85% of students in
the procedure-only control thought that an answer that was
less than the total size 1/2 and 1/3 could be the correct
answer to 1/2 + 1/3. While the correct inference was easier
to make in the procedure-and-magnitude intervention, where
the magnitudes of the addends and proposed sum were
provided, 34% of students in that condition still made
errors. Results from students’ interactions with the initial
instruction indicate that students did not have a solid,
context-general foundation with the principles of addition.
It is important to consider how this type of instruction
might generalize to other fraction arithmetic operations.
While there is evidence for the mechanistic use of
magnitude knowledge, in this study there was little practical
benefit of the procedure-and-magnitude intervention
compared to the control for learning the fraction addition
procedure.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by Carnegie Mellon
University’s Program in Interdisciplinary Education
Research (PIER) funded by Grant R305B090023 from the
U.S. Department of Education, and by the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through

Grant R305C100024 to WestEd. The opinions expressed are
those of the authors and do not represent views of the
Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

References
Behr, M. J., Wachsmuth, I., & Post. (1985). Construct a
Sum: A Measure of Childrens Understanding of Fraction
Size. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
16(2), 120–131.
Booth, J. L., & Siegler, R. S. (2008). Numerical Magnitude
Representations Influence Arithmetic Learning. Child
Development, 79(4), 1016–1031.
Byrnes, J. P., & Wasik, B. A. (1991). Role of Conceptual
Knowledge in Mathematical Procedural Learning.
Developmental Psychology, 27(5), 777–786.
Lee, S. J., Brown, R. E., & Orrill, C. H. (2011).
Mathematics Teachers’ Reasoning About Fractions and
Decimals Using Drawn Representations. Mathematical
Thinking and Learning, 13(3), 198–220.
Opfer, J. E., & Thompson, C. a. (2008). The trouble with
transfer: insights from microgenetic changes in the
representation
of
numerical
magnitude.
Child
Development, 79(3), 788–804.
Siegler, R., Carpenter, T., Fennell, F., Geary, D., Lewis, J.,
Okamoto, Y., … Wray, J. (2010). Developing Effective
Fractions Instruction for Kindergarten through 8th
Grade. IES Practice Guide. NCEE 2010-4039. What
Works Clearinghouse. Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/
ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED512043
Siegler, R. S., Duncan, G. J., Davis-Kean, P. E., Duckworth,
K., Claessens, A., Engel, M., … Chen, M. (2012). Early
predictors of high school mathematics achievement.
Psychological Science, 23(7), 691–7.
Siegler, R. S., & Mu, Y. (2008). Chinese children excel on
novel mathematics problems even before elementary
school. Psychological Science : A Journal of the
American Psychological Society / APS, 19(8), 759–63.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2009). Playing Linear
Number Board Games – But Not Circular Ones –
Improves
Low-Income
Preschoolers’
Numerical
Understanding. Journal of Educational Psychology,
101(3), 545–560.
Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. a, & Schneider, M. (2011). An
integrated theory of whole number and fractions
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62(4), 273–96.
Stampfer, E., & Koedinger, K. R. (2013). When seeing isn’t
believing: Influences of prior conceptions and
misconceptions. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I.
Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1384–
1389). Berlin, Germany: Cognitive Science Society.
Wiese, E. S., & Koedinger, K. R. (2014). Investigating
scaffolds for sense making in fraction addition and
comparison. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B.
Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1515–
1520). Quebec City, Canada: Cognitive Science Society.

1234

