Working Memory Affects Attention to Loss Value and Loss Frequency in DecisionMaking under Uncertainty

Bo Pang (pangbo@tamu.edu), Kaileigh A. Byrne (kbyrne21@tamu.edu), Darrell A. Worthy (worthyda@tamu.edu)
Department of Psychology, TAMU 4235, College Station, TX 77843 USA
Abstract

Decision-making under uncertainty is pervasive. This work
sought to understand the role of working memory (WM) in loss
sensitivity by utilizing two widely used tasks, the Iowa
Gambling Task (IGT) and the Soochow Gambling Task (SGT),
and manipulating WM with a dual-task paradigm. We
hypothesized that WM load would reduce attention to both loss
value and frequency in the decision-making tasks. To better
delineate the psychological processes underpinning choice
behavior, we developed an Expectancy-FrequencyPerseveration (EFP) model which parsimoniously captures
three critical factors driving choices: expected value,
frequency of gains and losses, and perseveration. Behavioral
and computational modeling results indicate that WM load
compromised performance in the IGT due to reduced attention
to loss value but enhanced performance in the SGT because of
diminished attention to loss frequency. Our findings suggest
that WM heightens attention to losses, but that greater attention
is given to loss frequency than loss value.
Keywords: decision-making under uncertainty, working
memory, loss, frequency, Iowa Gambling Task

Introduction

Many decisions in everyday life involve some degree of
uncertainty, either small decisions, such as whether to pick a
new restaurant for dinner or eat at one you frequently visit, or
major ones, such as whether to invest in a risky hedge fund
for a foreign oil company or invest in safer alternatives such
as bonds. The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT; Bechara, Damasio,
Damasio, & Anderson, 1994) and the Soochow Gambling
Task (SGT; Chiu et al., 2008) mimic real-life decisionmaking situations involving uncertainty. In the present work
we utilize these two tasks to examine how working memory
load affects sensitivity to losses versus gains, a critical factor
in many decision-making situations.
The IGT is widely used to examine choice behavior in
various clinical populations (e.g., brain damage, substance
abuse), developmental samples, and in healthy adults
(Buelow & Suhr, 2009). The IGT manipulates the uncertainty
of premises and outcomes, as well as gains and losses
provided by each deck. In this task, players choose between
four decks of cards, which yield both gains and losses.
Unbeknownst to players, Decks A and B are disadvantageous
because they have a negative net expected value, while Decks
C and D are advantageous because they have a positive net
expected value. The task is initially challenging because the
disadvantageous decks consistently yield larger gains (100
versus 50 points), yet they also give larger losses.
Although it is assumed that players make choices by
comparing expected values for options in the IGT, some
authors present critiques that gain-loss frequency plays an
important role in choice behavior in the IGT (Chiu et al.,

2008; Steingroever, Wetzels, & Horstmann, 2013). In the
IGT, Decks A and C give frequent losses (on 50% of trials),
while Decks B and D give less frequent losses (on 10% of
trials). A tendency to avoid decks with frequent losses will
not have an effect on the net amount of points gained since
the high-frequency loss decks are split across the
advantageous and disadvantageous decks. The SGT was
recently developed to further distinguish the influence of
expected value and gain-loss frequency (Chiu et al., 2008). In
this task the two advantageous decks (C and D) also give the
most frequent losses – on 80% of trials compared to only 20%
of trials for the disadvantageous decks (A and B). Thus, a
tendency to avoid decks that give frequent losses will lead to
poor performance, but a tendency to focus on the net expected
value will lead to good performance. Comparing
performance in both tasks allows for better inference about
the mechanisms that contribute to decision-making
performance. Attention to the net expected values provided
by each deck should lead to good performance in both tasks,
while attention to the frequency of losses should have little
effect on performance in the IGT, but a negative effect on
performance in the SGT.
Working memory (WM), a central component of cognitive
executive function, is crucial to a variety of higher-order
cognitive tasks. It might contribute to the decision-making
processes in the IGT and the SGT. Recently, a number of
studies have examined the role of WM on choice behavior in
the IGT or its variants, but the findings have been somewhat
mixed (e.g., Hinson, Jameson, & Whitney, 2002; Turnbull,
Evans, Bunce, Carzolio, & O’Connor, 2005). Thus, the first
goal of the current research was to examine whether
completing the IGT requires WM by utilizing the original
IGT and a dual-task paradigm. We also evaluated the
contribution of WM on choice behavior in the SGT, which is
the first attempt to do so. As such, results from these two
tasks would provide convergent evidence for the role of WM
in decision-making.
Perhaps of greater importance, we sought to pinpoint the
specific mechanisms through which choice behavior in the
IGT and SGT are reliant on WM. Sensitivity to potential
losses is crucial to make reasonable choices in the IGT and
other decision scenarios. With impaired attention to losses,
decision makers might base their choices mainly on the gains
that they expect to receive. In the context of the IGT, such a
strategy leads to preference for the disadvantageous decks
because these options consistently yield larger gains than the
advantageous decks (e.g., Cella, Dymond, Cooper, &
Turnbull, 2012). WM might be important to maintain
attention to losses, especially in such a complicated task. For
example, in a study demonstrating that WM load interferes

2357

with performance in a three-deck variant of the IGT (Hinson
et al., 2002), participants under low WM load produced
different anticipatory emotional reactions to different decks
as the task progressed. These prospective emotional reactions
are theorized as somatic markers and assumed to facilitate
decision-making under uncertainty (Bechara & Damasio,
2005; Damasio, 1994). Participants under high WM load,
however, did not exhibit distinguishable emotional reactions,
which might be due to inadequate sensitivity to losses when
WM resources were taxed by a WM-demanding concurrent
task. We speculated that intact WM resources may enable
decision makers to adequately attend to gains and losses and
maintain them across trials, making it possible that
participants represent appropriate expected values for each
option. However, insufficient WM resources may impair
players’ attention to losses and bias them towards gains,
causing inaccurate expected values and poor performance in
both tasks.
Besides expected value, attention to the frequency of losses
versus gains might also be an important component of
decision-making that is mediated by WM. Tracking the
frequency and choosing the option with infrequent losses and
frequent gains is a heuristic-based strategy, which appears
simple but might be WM-sensitive. Indeed, previous studies
have shown that participants with intact WM resources prefer
heuristic-based strategies, such as win-stay, lose-shift, by
remembering the outcomes from past trials more than
participants under WM load (Worthy, Otto, & Maddox,
2012). In contrast, Worthy et al. (2012) found that
participants under WM load preferred a strategy that
implicitly track expected values of options. One possibility is
that the frequency of losses is more salient than the net value
of each option. WM load may attenuate participants’ ability
to attend to both the value and the frequency of losses, but
because the frequency of losses is more salient than the value
of losses, participants with intact WM resources will attend
more to the frequency of losses than to the value of losses.
This would lead to a pattern of behavior where participants
performing the task under no-load conditions would perform
better than participants under WM-load on the IGT due to
superior attention to the loss value of each deck, but worse on
the SGT due to enhanced attention to the frequency of losses.

Computational Modeling

In addition to our behavioral approach of utilizing tasks
where attention to loss frequency differentially affects
performance, we also utilize computational modeling to
isolate and identify these specific psychological mechanisms
underpinning choice behavior. A range of computational
models have been applied to IGT and SGT data. Prospect
valence learning (PVL) models, including PVL-Delta and
PVL-Decay, and value-plus-perseveration (VPP) models
have been most popular in recent work (Ahn et al., 2008;
Worthy, Pang, & Byrne, 2013). As with most reinforcement
learning (RL) models (Sutton & Barto, 1998), the basic
assumptions behind the PVL models are that outcomes of
past decisions are integrated to determine expected values for

each option and that decision makers tend to choose options
with larger expected value (Ahn et al., 2008). The VPP model
further accounts for both the tendency to choose the option
with the highest expected value and to perseverate or stay
with the same option that was selected on the past trial
(Worthy et al., 2013). However, as discussed above, attention
to gain-loss frequency is another central source of choice
behavior, which may also be affected by WM load. As such,
in this work, we developed a new model which accounts for
attention to expected value, to the frequency of gains versus
losses, and perseveration, which we believe are three critical
mechanisms in gambling tasks. We call this the ExpectancyFrequency-Perseveration (EFP) model.
The PVL models and the VPP model have been extensively
discussed in many recent articles (e.g., Ahn et al., 2008;
Worthy et al., 2013). Readers are referred to these articles for
the models’ details. In what follows, we first introduce the
EFP model and evaluate it against other models by applying
all the models to a large data set of IGT data. We then use the
EFP model to simulate choice behavior in the IGT and SGT.
This model explicitly accounts for the attention people give
to the frequency of net gains versus losses so that we could
make predictions as to how attention to gain-loss frequency
would affect decision-making performance in the tasks.

EFP Model In contrast to the PVL models with a single
expected value term and the VPP model with expected value
and perseveration terms, the EFP model includes three terms
to account for three critical components of choice behavior:
expected value, gain-loss frequency, and perseveration.
Increasing the number of terms may ostensibly improve the
fit of the model or lead to overfitting simply because the
model has too many parameters. Considering this, we sought
to design a model to capture these three important
psychological components while keeping it as parsimonious
as possible.
This model first assumes that after making a choice and
( ) and
receiving feedback (
( )), the utility
( ) for the choice made on trial t is given by:
( )=
( )− ∙|
( )|
(1)
Here represents a loss aversion parameter (0 ≤ ≤ 5) that
governs the sensitivity of losses compared to gains. A value
of
greater than 1 indicates that an individual is more
sensitive to losses than gains, and a value less than 1 indicates
greater sensitivity to gains than to losses. Note that the EFP
model assumes that the subjective utility is linearly
proportional to the actual payoff amount, in contrast to the
PVL models that use a nonlinear function (see Ahn et al.,
2008). One major reason for the nonlinear function is to
implicitly account for the gain-loss frequency. The EFP
model, however, explicitly captures the gain-loss frequency
(see below) and thus a shape parameter is not necessary.
Additionally, using a linear function improves the parsimony.
The EFP model then assumes that the utility ( ) is used
to update expectancies ( ) for the chosen option, i, on trial
t. It utilizes the Delta rule (Sutton & Barto, 1998) which

2358

assumes that expectancies are recency-weighted averages of
the rewards received for each option:
( ) = ( − 1) + ∙ [ ( ) − ( − 1)] (2)
Here represents the recency parameter (0 ≤ ≤ 1) that
describes the weight given to recent outcomes in updating
expectancies. As approaches 1, greater weight is given to
the most recent outcomes in updating expectancies,
indicating more active updating of expectancies.
The perseveration term in the VPP model was designed to
model the tendency to perseverate following gains and to
switch following losses. Thus, it also implicitly captures the
frequency of gains and losses. In the EFP model we
decompose the tendency to select the option with infrequent
losses and frequent gains and the tendency to perseverate.
The frequency term for chosen option i, on trial t, differed
based on whether the net outcome, x(t), was positive or
negative:
( )
( ) = (( )∙)∙ (( ))
(3)
( )
The frequency value increases by 1 following a net gain or
decreases by 1 following a net loss. Instead of using a
separate parameter to capture the weight to previous
information as in the VPP model, the EFP model utilizes 1 −
. Here has the same meaning as in Equation 2, accounting
for weight given to recent information. Thus, utilizing the
same recency parameter for both the value updating function
and the gain-loss frequency function increases the parsimony
of the EFP model.
The perseveration term for chosen option i, on trial t, is
determined by:
( ) =
(4)
The tendency to perseverate or switch is denoted by which
varies between -100 and 100. This perseveration term simply
gives a bonus or a reduction to the value of the option that
was selected on the last trial, and thus indicates a general
tendency to stay or switch to a different option on each trial.
The overall value of each option was determined by taking
a weighted average of the expected value and the frequency
plus the perseveration strength of each j option:
( ) = ∙ ( ) + (1 − ) ∙ ( ) + ( ) (5)
where (0 ≤
≤ 1) quantifies the weight given to the
expected value for each option versus the weight given to the
frequency of losses versus gains provided by each option.
Finally, these overall values ( ) were entered into a
Softmax rule function to determine the probability of
selecting each option, j, on each trial, t:
( ) =

( )∙

∑

( )]

[ ( )∙

( )]

(6)

( )=3 − 1
(7)
Here c (0 ≤ c ≤ 5) represents the response consistency or
exploitation parameter. Lower values indicate more random
responding over the course of the task.
Model Evaluation We then compared the fit of the EFP,
VPP, PVL-Delta, and PVL-Decay models by employing a
large IGT dataset (N=504) of healthy participants. We fit
each participant’s data by maximizing the log-likelihood for

each model’s prediction on each trial. We used Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC; Schwarz, 1978) to assess the
relative fit of the model. BIC penalizes models with more free
parameters. For each model, i, BICi is deﬁned as:
BIC = −2logL + V log( )
where Li is the maximum likelihood for model i, Vi is the
number of free parameters, and n is the number of trials.
Smaller BIC values indicate a better fit to the data. The EFP
model exhibited the smallest median BIC value (see Table 1),
indicating that it provides a better fit to the data than other
models. Also, note that the VPP model fits were close to those
of the EFP model, followed by the PVL-Decay model. The
PVL-Delta model had a poorer fit compared to these models.
Table 1: Median BIC values for each model
Model EFP
VPP
PVL-Delta PVL-Decay
242.58

242.85

256.76

246.05

Simulations and Predictions To predict the effects of WM
load on participants’ performance, the proportion of trials
when the good decks are selected minus the proportion of
trials that the bad decks are selected, we next utilized the EFP
model, to simulate choice behavior in the IGT and SGT.
Specifically, we focused on how WM load would affect
performance by biasing attention to either the value or
frequency of losses versus gains. We conducted 2,000
simulations for the EFP model for each of the two tasks by
systematically varying either the loss aversion parameter or
the weight parameter for value versus gain-loss frequency,
while fixing other parameters at reasonable values. In the loss
aversion simulations, the loss aversion parameter varied from
0 to 5 in increments of .5, other parameters used were .5 for
recency, 1 for exploitation, .5 for weight (indicating equal
attention to the expected value and gain-loss frequency), and
0 for perseveration. Figure 1 (left panel) displays the results
for the loss aversion parameter. As attention to losses
increased, performance improved. This relationship held for
both the IGT and SGT, although the slope for the SGT was
slightly steeper. In the weight parameter simulation, the
weight parameter varied from 0 to 1 with an increment of .1,
other parameters were .5 for recency, 1 for exploitation, 1 for
loss aversion (indicating equal weighting of the value of gains
and losses), and 0 for perseveration. Figure 1 (right panel)
depicts the simulation results. Clearly, increased weight to
expected value enhanced performance in the SGT. A similar
tendency was present for the IGT but was considerably
weaker. It appears that weight to expected value versus gainloss frequency does not strongly impact performance in the
IGT. This notion is consistent with the payoff structure of the
IGT. Both advantageous and disadvantageous IGT decks
include one option with high-frequency losses and another
option with low-frequency losses. As such, reliance on the
frequency of gains versus losses does not have a strong
impact on performance in the IGT.
As discussed earlier, we predict that WM load would
compromise attention to losses, or reduce the loss aversion
parameter value in the EFP model, and drive participants

2359

away from the frequency heuristic, or increase the weight
parameter value in the EFP model. According to the
simulations, in the IGT decreased loss aversion is associated
with poorer performance, while greater weight to expected
value does not strongly impact performance. Thus, we
predicted that WM load would impair performance in the
IGT. In the SGT, reduced loss aversion is also associated
poorer performance, but increased weight to expected value
versus gain-loss frequency leads to better performance. As
such, WM load should either improve or compromise
performance in the SGT, depending on whether participants
performing the task without WM load attend more to the
value or to the frequency of losses.

Figure 1. Performance in the IGT and SGT from the EFP
model’s simulations with varying loss aversion parameter
(left panel) and weight parameter (right panel) values.

Experiment In this work, we aimed to examine whether WM
contributes to decision-making under uncertainty by utilizing
the IGT (Experiment 1A) and SGT (Experiment 1B), and to
investigate what specific decision-making mechanisms WM
load affects. To manipulate WM, we used a numerical Stroop
task which has been used in previous experiments (e.g.,
Worthy, Otto, & Maddox, 2012). Specifically, in the single
task (ST) condition participants only performed the decisionmaking task, the IGT (Experiment 1A) or the SGT
(Experiment 1B), while in the dual task (DT) condition
participants concurrently performed the decision-making
task and the numerical Stroop task. Two potential
mechanisms were tested that might drive the effects of WM
load on the decision performance: attention to losses and
gain-loss frequency. We combined behavioral analysis and
computational modeling to evaluate these possible
mechanisms. The computational models described above
were fit to the data, and best-fitting parameter estimates,
indicative of specific psychological components involved in
decision-making processes, from the best-fitting model were
compared between the ST and DT conditions. This procedure
enabled us to infer the mechanisms whereby WM load
affected decision-making behavior.

Method

Experiments 1A 1B

Participants 169 participants (101 females) recruited from
an introductory psychology course at Texas A&M University
participated in the experiment for course credit. Participants

were randomly assigned to either the ST or DT condition in
Experiments 1A and 1B.

Materials and Procedures Participants performed the
experiment on PCs using Psychtoolbox for Matlab (version
2.5). In Experiment 1A, participants in the ST condition
performed the computerized IGT (Bechara et al., 1997). On
each of 100 trials four decks of cards appeared on the screen
and participants were prompted to select one deck. Upon each
selection the computer screen displayed the gain and loss, if
applicable, and net value beneath the card decks. The task
was self-paced, and participants were unaware of how many
card draws they would receive. The schedule of gains and
losses was identical to those used in the original IGT
(Bechara et al., 1994).
In the DT conditions, in addition to the IGT participants
performed a numerical Stroop task concurrently. The
memory task required participants to remember which of two
numbers was physically larger and which was larger in
numerical value while performing the IGT. At the beginning
of each trial, two numbers for the concurrent memory task
were presented on each side of the screen, one number on
each side, for 300 ms. Participants were then allowed to make
a selection from among four decks of cards, followed by
feedback as mentioned above. A new screen then appeared
that queried participants with either VALUE or SIZE, and they
selected either Left or Right to indicate which side had the
number largest in either numerical value or physical size.
Upon making a selection, they were told whether they were
correct or not, and then the next trial began. Participants were
told that they should focus on achieving good performance
on the numerical Stroop task and “use what you have left
over” for the decision-making task. To allow them to become
familiar with the procedure, participants were given 10
practice trials. The practice trials were the same as the formal
ones except that each selection on the IGT resulted in zero
points regardless of which deck they selected.
The materials and procedures in Experiment 1B were
identical to those in Experiment 1A except that participants
performed the SGT (see Chiu et al., 2008) instead of the IGT.

Results and Discussion

Experiment 1A We examined performance by 20-trial
blocks in the IGT (see the right panel of Figure 2). A mixed
ANOVA with WM load (ST versus DT) as a betweensubjects factor and Block (five 20-trial blocks) as a withinsubject factor revealed a significant main effect of WM load,
F(1, 84) = 12.35, p = .001, η = .13, but not of block, F < 1.
Moreover, there was a significant interaction, F(4, 336) =
6.74, p < .001, η = .07. To examine this interaction, we
looked at the simple effect of block within each WM load
condition using trend analysis. For ST participants,
performance improved linearly as the task progressed, F(1,
42) = 12.27, p = .001, η = .23. In contrast, participants in the
DT condition showed a linear downwards trend in
performance across blocks, F(1, 42) = 5.25, p = .03, η = .11.
That is, participants learned to perform better over time,

2360

whereas WM load impaired normal progress and led to worse
performance across blocks.

Experiment 1B The same ANOVA for SGT performance
revealed a significant main effect of WM load, F(1, 81) =
6.50, p = .01, η = .07, and for block, F(4, 324) = 14.76, p =
.00, η = .15. The WM load X Block interaction was also
significant, F(4, 324) = 2.95, p = .02, η = .04. To examine
this interaction, we looked at the simple effect of WM load
within each block using t-tests. As can be seen in Figure 2
(right panel), although participants in both the ST and DT
conditions appeared to learn to perform better across the task,
DT participants performed better compared to ST
participants in the first three blocks (ps < .01), but ST
participants reached a similar performance level as DT
participants in the last two blocks (ps > .72). This result
suggests that WM load affected decision-making early in the
SGT such that WM load improved performance.

Figure 2. The performance in the IGT (right panel) and in the
SGT (left panel) by 20-trial block for each WM condition (ST
versus DT).

Computational Modeling

Table 2: Median BIC values for each model as a function of
the task and WM condition
Model
IGT
SGT
EFP
257.96
261.71
VPP
262.68
258.76
ST
Delta
277.96
264.07
Decay
271.16
252.85
EFP
273.90
269.86
VPP
286.20
277.73
DT
Delta
284.18
274.67
Decay
285.47
275.60

larger median BIC value than the PVL-Decay model.
Considering the model fitting results here and those from the
aforementioned large IGT dataset, it seems clear that the EFP,
PVL-Decay, and VPP models provide a better fit than the
PVL-Delta model.

Modeling Results

We next compared the parameter estimates of the EFP model
between the ST and DT conditions for each task to examine
the effects of WM load on specific psychological processes
related to decision-making. Table 3 lists the average best
fitting parameter values of the EFP model for each task under
each WM condition. Nonparametric Mann-Whitney U tests
were used because the best-fitting model parameters were not
normally distributed. In the IGT, ST participants’ data were
best fit by higher loss aversion parameter values than DT
participants’ data, U = 569, p = .002. This suggests that ST
participants were more attentive to losses than DT
participants, thus providing direct evidence to support the
impaired loss sensitivity hypothesis. Furthermore,
participants under WM load showed marginally significantly
higher weight to RL expected value, U = 708, p = .057,
providing some evidence to support our prediction that WM
load would cause less reliance on a frequency-based strategy.
In the SGT, ST participants exhibited lower values for the
weight parameter than did DT participants, U = 645, p = .04.
This suggests that participants with compromised cognitive
resources were less likely to utilize the frequency heuristic in
the SGT, which is consistent our predictions the IGT results.
Although we observed a trend that ST participants showed a
higher loss aversion parameter estimates than did DT
participants, this difference did not reach significance, U =
697, p = .13. Moreover, data from ST participants were best
fit by higher recency parameter values than data from DT
participants, U = 643, p < .05. This results suggests that ST
participants were more attentive to recent outcomes, which
might allow participants with intact WM resources to more
actively update expectancies compared to participants under
WM load.
Table 3: Average parameter estimates as a function of the
task and WM condition
Parameters
IGT
SGT
ST
DT
ST
DT
0.40
0.32
0.40
0.19
(0.39)
(0.39)
(0.39)
(0.27)
2.11
0.61
1.56
0.97
(2.28)
(1.43)
(1.96)
(1.69)
−0.41
−10.77
20.74
−0.96
(28.56)
(26.92)
(37.56)
(25.69)
0.26
0.37
0.31
0.42
(0.39)
(0.43)
(0.41)
(0.46)
0.70
0.57
0.47
0.53
c
(0.96)
(0.94)
(0.48)
(0.71)
Standard deviations are listed in parentheses.

Model Selection

Four models, the EFP model, the two PVL models, and the
VPP model, were evaluated with the method as above.
Median BIC values are listed in Table 2. In the both WM
conditions for the IGT and the WM load condition for the
SGT, the EFP model had the smallest median BIC values,
suggesting that this model fit the data best in these conditions.
In the ST condition for the SGT, the EFP model exhibited

2361

General Discussion

Our results provide clear evidence that WM contributes to
choice behavior in decision-making under uncertainty.
Results from Experiment 1A indicated that intact WM is
necessary to do well on the IGT. These results were at odds
with Turnbull et al. (2005), possibly because random number
generation and articulatory suppression tasks used in
Turnbull et al. did not tax enough WM resources to interfere
with decision making processes, and/or their experiment
lacked statistical power due to relatively small sample sizes
(n = 25 for each group). On the other hand, our findings
confirm implications from previous behavioral studies using
variants of the IGT (instead of the original IGT; Hinson et al.,
2002) and from brain lesion studies with DLPFC damage
patients (Fellows & Farah, 2005). As such, this work
contributes to the IGT literature by lending direct support to
the idea that choice behavior in the IGT is dependent on WM.
Moreover, results from Experiment 1B showed that WM load
influenced performance in the SGT. This is the first work
demonstrating that WM contributes to choice behavior in this
frequently used decision-making task. Therefore, this work
provides convergent evidence to support the notion that WM
plays a role in decision-making under uncertainty.
Further, our results provide considerable insight into the
mechanisms through which WM contributes to decisionmaking under uncertainty. First, we found that participants
with compromised WM resources performed worse in the
IGT and had data better fit by smaller loss aversion parameter
values, suggesting that WM enables decision-makers to
adequately attend to losses in decision-making under
uncertainty. In contrast, we found that participants with
impaired WM resources performed better overall in the SGT
and exhibited greater weight to expected value versus
gain/loss frequency, indicating that another role of WM in
decision-making under uncertainty is to attend to the
frequency of gains versus losses, rather than just the net
expected value of each alternative. Much evidence suggests
that a prediction error, the difference between the outcome
received and the expected value for a given option, is tracked
by the ventral striatum, a subcortical region implicated in
implicit, procedural learning (e.g., Hare, O’Doherty,
Camerer, Schultz, & Rangel, 2008). In many RL models,
including models used in this article, these prediction errors
are used to update the expected value for the option that was
chosen on each trial. Given the ability of subcortical regions
to track expected value, people may be able to implicitly learn
which option provides the largest expected value across the
task. However, with intact WM resources decision makers
prefer heuristics such as the frequency heuristic which can be
efficient in many situations, but counterproductive in
situations like the SGT where gain-loss frequency is directly
opposed with expected value.
Collectively, this work demonstrates that WM strongly
contributes to choices involving uncertainty. Intact WM
resources mainly enable decision makers to maintain
adequate attention to loss value and loss frequency, with loss
frequency receiving greater attention than loss value.

References

Ahn, W.-Y., Busemeyer, J. R., Wagenmakers, E.-J., & Stout,
J. C. (2008). Comparison of decision learning models using
the generalization criterion method. Cognitive Science, 32,
1376–1402.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S.
W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50, 7–15.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, a R.
(1997). Deciding advantageously before knowing the
advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293–1295.
Buelow, M. T., & Suhr, J. A. (2009). Construct validity of the
Iowa Gambling Task. Neuropsychology Review, 19, 102–
114.
Cella, M., Dymond, S., Cooper, A., & Turnbull, H. (2012).
Cognitive decision modelling of emotion-based learning
impairment in schizophrenia: The role of awareness.
Psychiatry Research, 196, 15–19.
Chiu, Y.-C., Lin, C.-H., Huang, J.-T., Lin, S., Lee, P.-L., &
Hsieh, J.-C. (2008). Immediate gain is long-term loss: Are
there foresighted decision makers in the Iowa Gambling
Task? Behavioral and Brain Functions, 4, 13.
Fellows, L., & Farah, M. (2005). Different underlying
impairments in decision-making following ventromedial
and dorsolateral frontal lobe damage in humans. Cerebral
Cortex, 15, 58–63.
Hare, T. A., O’Doherty, J., Camerer, C. F., Schultz, W., &
Rangel, A. (2008). Dissociating the role of the orbitofrontal
cortex and the striatum in the computation of goal values
and prediction errors. The Journal of Neuroscience, 28,
5623–5630.
Hinson, M., Jameson, T., & Whitney, P. (2002). Somatic
markers, working memory, and decision making.
Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 2, 341–
353.
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model.
The Annals of Statistics, 6, 461–464.
Steingroever, H., Wetzels, R., & Horstmann, A. (2013).
Performance of Healthy Participants on the Iowa Gambling
Task. Psychological Assessment, 25, 180–193.
Sutton, A. G., & Barto, R. S. (1998). Reinforcement
Learning: An Introduction. Cambridge: MIT press.
Turnbull, H., Evans, Y., Bunce, A., Carzolio, B., &
O’connor, J. (2005). Emotion-based learning and central
executive resources: an investigation of intuition and the
Iowa Gambling Task. Brain and Cognition, 57, 244–247.
Worthy, D. A., Otto, A. R., & Maddox, W. T. (2012).
Working-memory load and temporal myopia in dynamic
decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38(6), 1640–1658.
Worthy, D. A., Pang, B., & Byrne, K. (2013). Decomposing
the roles of perseveration and expected value
representation in models of the Iowa gambling task.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1–9.

2362

