UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
6.5-Months-Olds' Perception of Goal-Directed, Animated Motion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9cd840xs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Cownie, Jane
Schlottmann, Anne
Ray, Elizabeth D

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

6.5-Months-Olds’ Perception of Goal-Directed, Animated Motion
Anne Schlottmann (a.schlottmann@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK

Elizabeth D. Ray (e.ray@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK

Jane Cownie (j.cownie@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK

Traditionally, infants’ grasp of agents and their actions
was studied in the context of how they act and interact
socially, with their understanding seen as derived from such
experiences (e.g., Tomasello, 1999). Young infants’ social
interactions do not show many signs of understanding that
others have goals and intentions until the end of the first
year when triadic interactions become much more
widespread (e.g., Carpenter et al., 1998). Even then,
however, the interaction data are not clear on whether
infants react to others’ goals and intentions or merely to
their overt actions (Moore & Corkum, 1994). On the other
hand, infants could have much earlier understanding, with
limited action/interaction skills preventing them from
expressing it. Recently, therefore, researchers have begun to
study infants as observers of, rather than participants in,
goal-directed action and interaction, to unconfound ability
to engage with the social world from understanding of it.
A number of such studies suggest quite sophisticated
social/psychological understanding by the end of the first
year. Gergely and colleagues (Gergely, Nadasdy, Csibra &
Biro, 1995; Csibra, Gergely, Biro, Koos & Brockbank,
1998) showed that 9- but not 6-months-olds recognize goaldirected actions even when animated shapes rather than
humans are involved. Infants were habituated to a circle that
jumped over an obstacle to reach another circle. Upon
removal of the obstacle infants dishabituated more when the
circle took the familiar, but now unnecessary, curved path
to the target than when it used a novel, but direct straight
path. This suggests that infants saw the movement as goaldirected and evaluated whether it was efficient in this
environment.
Kuhlmeier, Wynn and Bloom (2003) showed that 12- but
not 5-months-olds can even extrapolate from goal-directed
action in one physical context to another context with a
different goal. They habituated infants to an animation in
which a ball climbed up a hill, either helped or hindered by
another shape that pushed it up or down. Upon test, infants
preferred to look at the ball sidling up to the stationary
helper than the hinderer, even without the hill present By
the end of the first year infants thus seem capable of quite
elaborate reasoning about goal-directed actions.

Abstract
This study investigates how infants recognize agents and their
goal-directed actions. Infants habituated to a hand reaching
for a toy react more when the hand reaches for a new toy at
the old location than for the old toy at a new location
(Woodward, 1998). By 5 or 6 months, infants understand this
action as goal-directed, but the data leave open whether their
goal attribution is specific to human reaching, or signals a
more general grasp of goal-directed action. To test this, we
implemented a minimal, animated version of the paradigm.
Infants were habituated to a square moving towards one of
two circles. When the circles’ locations were switched,
infants reacted more to movement towards a new goal than a
new location – but only if the square moved in a non-rigid,
rhythmic motion (Michotte, 1963), not if it moved rigidly.
Adults described the non-rigid motion as more animate and
more goal-directed. The infant data suggest that they already
interpret these 2-dimensional events in a similar manner.
Overall, goal attribution extends to simple schematic
motions, but not all self-motions. These results contribute to
growing knowledge about the origins of social cognition.
Keywords: Cognitive development; human experimentation.

Introduction
Much recent work has focused on the perceptual basis and
developmental origins of our understanding of the
social/psychological world. Two central questions here are
how we identify social/psychological agents, typically
animates, and how we make sense of these agents’ actions.
The actions of inert objects are organized by physical law,
but animates’ actions are often goal-directed: We tend to
treat two actions as similar if they have the same goal, even
if they are not close in terms of their physical parameters.
To investigate how agents and their actions are perceived
it is particularly useful to study infants, because they lack
much experience of the social world and its conventions.
Adults’ understanding of goal-directedness owes a lot to
familiarity with particular actions, typical reasons for
engaging in them, and their goals. Infants’ abilities,
however, are likely to reflect, in part at least, perceptual
cues and possibly innate structural reasoning principles.
738

providing infants with mechanisms for learning about
unfamiliar agents and actions. This view makes it easy to
understand that infants (and older observers) readily
attribute goals and other aspects of social agency to nonhuman objects and shapes. On the other hand, infants may
learn from experience with the goal-directed actions of
actual social agents (e.g., Meltzoff, 1995; Tomasello, 1999).
The latter is more in line with traditional views, and with
Woodward’s (1998) findings that younger infants attribute
goals to familiar actions and human agents only. To resolve
this issue, more evidence is needed on the scope of goalbased reasoning when it first appears in infants.
Accordingly, we considered 6-months-olds’ sensitivity to
goal-directed action in Woodward’s task when all
references to reaching and humans are eliminated. At the
simplest level, in this paradigm one object moves on a
straight line towards another. This is the habituation
stimulus in our study, which involved 2-dimensional shapes
rather than hands and toys (Figure 1). If infants still react
more to a new goal than a new location with such schematic
motions, it suggests that even very young infants have some
general ability to interpret action in terms of its goals.

Evidence from half-year-old infants pertains to simpler
forms of goal-directed action. In Woodward’s (1998, 1999)
now classic paradigm infants are habituated to a hand
reaching for one of two toys. When the location of the toys
is eventually switched, infants as young as 5 to 6 months
dishabituate more if the hand reaches for a new toy at the
old location than for the old toy at the new location, i.e.,
they treat an action physically identical to the habituation
event, but different in its goal as more novel than an action
that is physically less similar, but has the same goal. Infants
do not react in this way if a mechanical claw rather than
hand reaches for the objects or if the back of the hand just
touches the objects. Thus, these very young infants may see
reaching as goal-directed, but their understanding could be
limited to familiar, human action, for which they may even
have dedicated neural mechanisms (Gallese, 1996).
Other work (Schlottmann & Surian, 1999; Schlottmann,
Surian & Ray, under review; Schlottmann, Ray & Surian,
2002) found that 6-months-olds react more to the reversal
of a reaction event -- in which a square appears to run away
from another square chasing it -- than they react to reversal
of the same motions separated by a brief pause. The
reaction event appears as goal-directed action and reaction
to adults and young children, but the delayed motions
appear unrelated. (Kanizsa & Vicario, 1968; Schlottmann,
Allen, Linderoth & Hesketh, 2002). Accordingly, reversal
alters spatio-temporal structure in both events, but affects
the causal agents only in the reaction. Increased attention to
a reversed reaction thus suggests that infants are sensitive to
its causal structure. We do not know definitely whether 6months-olds, like older observers, also see the event as
goal-directed because they could initially have a more
general, unspecific notion of causality (‘A does something
to B’) that does not clearly distinguish social from physical
causality, but 12-months-olds see somewhat more complex
action-and-reactions as goal-directed (Csibra, Biro, Koos &
Gergely, 2003).
The apparent discrepancy between the ages at which
infants succeed in these studies thus can be resolved in two
ways: First, computational complexity could account for
why only older infants reason about rational goal
completion (Gergely et al., 1995, Csibra et al., 1998, 2003)
or the implications of one action for the next (Kuhlmeier et
al., 2003). In line with this, Kamewari, Kato, Kanda,
Ishiguro & Hiraki (2005) showed that 6 months-olds
attributed goals in the Gergely et al. (1995) paradigm when
more agency cues were provided -- a human or robot
performed the motions and the 3-dimensional display may
also have helped. Alternatively, as outlined above, the data
with younger infants have interpretations that do not imply
a general understanding of goals.
The interpretations of these studies also differ in their
implications for the origins of infants’ ability to reason
about goals. On the one hand, structural reasoning
principles and perceptual agency cues may be available to
infants independent of experience with actual social agents
in the real world (e.g., Csibra et al, 1998; Premack, 1990),

Habituation

New Location Test

New Goal Test

Figure 1: Schematic of the motions shown during a
habituation, new location and new goal test trial.
Woodward’s paradigm also provides a unique
opportunity to study how infants identify the agents that can
engage in goal-directed action. Many have argued that
agents are perceptually distinguished from inert physical
objects in that only agents can self-initiate motion and react
at a distance (Leslie, 1994; Mandler, 1992; Premack, 1990).
Of course, there are many other cues to agency, e.g.,
morphological cues, such as having a face and body
orientation (Johnson, 2000) or the bio-mechanical manner
of animate motion (Bertenthal, 1993). While infants are
sensitive to these cues, evidence that they use them to
identify agents is scarce. For instance, several of the studies
previously described involved self-initiated motion, but
when tested this turned out not to be crucial for the
interpretation (Csibra et al., 1998; Schlottmann et al., under
review). However, these studies involved complex motion
configurations that might be sufficient in themselves for
goal attribution. This would make the paradigms insensitive
to the role of other agency cues. The simple event used
here, in contrast, may provide a better test case because
further agency cues may be necessary before a straight-line
motion appears goal-directed.
In the present study, the motion of the red shape is always
self-initiated. Apart from this, the event provides no cues to
739

towards the purple circle, left motion towards the blue
circle, right motion towards purple, and right motion
towards blue. Two additional stimuli showed only the initial
position of the shapes, with purple either on the left or right.
These stationary stimuli, lasting up to 1500 frames, were
used to familiarize infants with the switch in circle location.

its interpretation other than that is repeated and selective,
i.e., during habituation the shape always moves towards one
and not the other target. In a second condition, however, we
provided additional information: In particular, the shape did
not move rigidly towards the goal, but turned to face in the
direction of motion, then moved in a non-rigid, rhythmic
manner that appears animate to adults (see Figure 2;
Michotte, 1963, Schlottmann & Ray, 2004) and young
children (Schlottmann et al., 2002). The present study thus
begins to investigate how much information about agency
infants need to attribute a goal. Is self-initiated motion
sufficient or do infants need additional cues, for instance,
that the agent moves in an animate fashion?

Design and Procedure
Infants were habituated to either rigid or non-rigid motion,
with the initial direction of motion and location of the
circles approximately counterbalanced within groups. They
were then shown the switched circle display and finally
tested on 3 pairs of test trials, with the order of test trials
counterbalanced. The overall design was a 2 (new goal or
new location test) x 2 (rigid or non-rigid motion) x 2
(habituation motion to left or right) x 2 (habituation motion
towards blue or purple circle) x 2 (new location test first or
new goal test first) 5-factor mixed model factorial design,
with type of test trial as the within-subjects factor.
Infants sat in a semi-dark room, on their caretaker's lap
about 90 cm away from a LaCie monitor (21 inches
diagonally view). Other equipment was hidden. Caretakers
had no knowledge of purpose/design of the study and were
told not to interfere with the infant. A camera above the
monitor was centered on the infant's face; the experimenter
observed the infant on video. A Macintosh G5 was used to
control the display and record looking times.
Trials began with sounds and a flashing screen to attract
attention to it. When the baby looked, the experimenter hit a
key to start the movie and record onset of a look. When the
baby looked away, the experimenter hit another key. If the
baby looked away prior to the square reaching its target the
trial was abandoned, otherwise it ended if the baby looked
away for 2 s consecutively, or after 10 complete cycles.
Habituation continued until mean looking time on 3
consecutive trials fell below half of the mean on the first 3
trials; the minimum number of trials was 6, the maximum
12. Another observer without knowledge of purpose/design
of the study checked videos for a random third of the
babies. The correlation of looking times measured on- and
offline was r = .94, so reliability was high.
Adults were tested in groups, on one trial with non-rigid
and one with rigid motion, presented in counterbalanced
order (adults only saw left motion towards purple, repeated
15 times each). For each stimulus, observers briefly
described in writing “what the red is doing”. Then they saw
the switched objects display and predicted whether on the
next trial red would move to the left or right; they were also
asked to justify answers. All answers were coded for
mention of animate agents, and for descriptions of clearly
intentional or unintentional movement; disagreements
between the two coders were resolved by discussion.

Figure 2: Schematic caterpillar motion

Method
Infants were habituated to rigid or non-rigid motion towards
one of two circles, then circle location was switched, and
infants were tested on both new location/old goal and old
location/new goal motion. We also elicited verbal
descriptions of both rigid and non-rigid motion from adults.

Subjects
The final infant sample consisted of 24 girls and 25 boys,
ranging from 185 days to 215 days with a mean age of 200
days. Thirty-two further infants did not habituate, and 20
were excluded for non-compliance. The adult sample
consisted of 40 females and 6 males, mostly undergraduate
students in their early twenties.

Materials
Each event involved two colorful circles (100 pixels
diameter) at the bottom left and right of the screen with a
red square (70 x 70 pixels) centered at the top (Figure 1).
After 30 stationary frames, it moved diagonally towards one
circle, stopping after 72 frames with 13 pixels overlap
between shapes and remaining in this position for 88
frames. The square moved either rigidly, without change in
orientation, at a rate of about 6 pixels/frame. Or it turned
over 6 frames to face the circle, then moved non-rigidly:
The square first expanded over 10 frames at about 13.4
pixels/frame with the rear edge stationary, then it contracted
over 10 frames with the front edge stationary until the
original shape was recovered. It repeated these steps twice
more, then returned to horizontal orientation.
The events were generated in MacromediaDirector. One
190 frame cycle took about 5.6 seconds, repeated for up to
10 times, with a 750 ms interval during which the screen
turned grey. Each event existed in 4 versions: Left motion

Results
Habituation
Looking times during habituation (Figure 2) decreased from
38.4 s on the first trial to 7.7 s on the last habituation trial
for infants habituated to rigid motion (N = 22), and from
740

39.4 to 9.1 s for those habituated to non-rigid motion (N =
27). The only significant effect in the 5-factor ANOVA on
looking times during the first 3 and last 3 habituation trials
was a significant decrease across trials, F(2.734, 90.229
[Greenhouse Geisser]) = 53.419, MSE = 252.078 p < .001.
The groups did not differ in the number of habituation
trials, 6.7 for rigid and 6.9 for non-rigid motion. However,
the 4-way interaction was significant, F(1,33) = 6.276, MSE
= 1.149, p = .017, with 3 contributing 2-way interactions.
This was due to one of the 16 counterbalancing groups in
which the number of habituation trials was 9, when it lay
between 6 and 7 for the other 15 groups.
Looking times when the circles were initially switched,
16.9 in the rigid motion group and 12.5 s in the non-rigid
groups, also did not differ significantly. There was a 3-way
interaction: Infants that would see new location test trials
first looked longest, 27.51 s, at the switched objects, but
only if habituated to rigid motion towards a blue circle,
while those habituated to non-rigid motion towards blue
looked shortest, 8.85 s. In the other 6 counterbalancing
groups infants looked at the switched objects for between
11 and 17 s. With these minor exceptions, however, the
groups appeared largely equivalent during habituation.

therefore suggest that 6-months-olds reacted to an
unexpected change in goal, but only when the shape moved
in a non-rigid, apparently animate manner.

Figure 4: Mean looking times in seconds (and standard
errors), summed over 3 new location and 3 new goal test
trials.
In addition, the overall 5-factor ANOVA found a 4-way
interaction between Type of Motion and the 3
counterbalancing factors, F(1,33) = 6.228, MSE = 2502.49,
p = .018. The Type of Motion x Direction of Habituation
Motion interaction, F(1,33) = 5.696, MSE = 2398.61, p =
.02, and both main effects were significant as well, F(1,33)
= 7.458, MSE = 2996.67, p = .01, and F(1,33) = 11.285,
MSE = 4534.48, p = .002. Across both types of test trial,
infants looked particularly long if habituated to non-rigid
motion to the left. The 4-way interaction reflects that within
this group, infants habituated to movement towards the blue
circle looked longer when new goal preceded new location
trials, but infants habituated to movement towards purple
looked longer if new location trials came first.
Importantly, none of these effects interacted with the
Trials factor. No qualification is therefore required of our
main finding that infants treated the motion as goal-directed
only if the agent appeared to move in a non-rigid, animate
fashion. In fact, infants looked longer at new goal trials in 7
of 8 counterbalancing groups involving non-rigid, animate
motion, but only in 2 of 8 groups involving rigid motion.

Figure 3: Mean looking times in seconds (and standard
errors) for the first and last 3 habituation trials and for the
stationary display of the switched shapes.

Test Trials

Adult Descriptions

Looking times on the test trials are in Figure 4. Infants in
the rigid motion group looked about equally long on both
types of test trial, 32.77 and 30.57 s. Infants in the non-rigid
motion group, however, looked longer when the shape
moved towards the new goal, 45.67 s, than when it moved
towards the old goal at a new location, 39.03 s. This pattern
of looking led to a Trial x Type of Motion interaction,
F(1,33) = 4.651, MSE = 551.94, p = .038, confirmed nonparametrically, Mann-Whitney U = 172, p = .012.
Follow-up tests found that infants in the non-rigid group
looked longer at new goal trials, F(1, 19) = 4.496, MSE =
153.715, p = .047, but infants in the rigid group did not
differ significantly, F < 1. The same pattern appeared nonparametrically, with z (Wilcoxon) = -2.354, p = .019 for
non-rigid motion and z < 1 for rigid motion. The data

The non-rigid stimulus elicited more animate descriptions
(e.g., “crawled like a worm”, 48%) than the rigid stimulus
(9%), p < .001 (sign test). It also elicited more intentional
(e.g.,“uses effort to move to the bottom left”, 30%) and less
unintentional (0%) descriptions than the rigid stimulus
(19% intentional, 13% unintentional; e.g., “the red box
floats down), p = .039. Thus, adult intuition about the
meaning of the events is consistent with infant looking
patterns. That the effects remain weak in spontaneous
verbal report was to be expected (Schlottmann et al, 2005).
Adults expressed no clear expectations of what should
happen when the circles were switched. Only 46%
predicted that the non-rigid shape should continue to move
towards the same goal; 41% did so for the rigid shape.
741

These predictions did not differ from each other or chance.
In contrast to infants, adults may consider not only goals for
which they have perceptual evidence, but they may go
beyond to consider possible goal changes – or, in this case,
how the display was programmed. Justifications for the
predictions also did not differ between conditions; they
often simply restated that red would continue to move
towards the same side/circle.
Nevertheless, of those predicting movement towards the
old goal, 43% mentioned the shape’s or programmer’s goal,
when only 8% did so if they had predicted motion in the
same direction. A further 17% of these said that red’s
motion was independent of the circles and/or that red
couldn’t detect the location switch; no-one predicting
motion towards the old goal argued in this way. This
difference in how predictions were justified was significant,
Mann-Whitney U = 183 for non-rigid, 129 for rigid motion,
both p < .01. Thus statements reflect that same-objectmotion is likely to be intentional, while same-directionmotion is not.
All in all, therefore, adults’ verbalizations indicate both
that non-rigid motion appears more animate and goal
directed to them, and understanding that continued
movement towards an object that changes location is likely
to be motivated by an unchanging goal. Such interpretations
agree with the findings from infants.

might react to the motion’s rhythm or its non-rigidity alone,
or like older observers, they might see only particular nonrigid and rhythmic patterns as animate (Schlottmann & Ray,
2004). Work is currently underway to investigate this.
In contrast to animate motion, merely self-initiated motion
did not trigger goal-based reasoning. This finding agrees
with Shimizu and Johnson (2004), who used the Woodward
paradigm to show that 12 months-olds saw the self-initiated
motion of a 3-dimensional featureless oval object as goaldirected, but only after they had seen it turn to the
experimenter, who conversed with it, and it responded by
beeping. So the object interacted contingently at a distance
with the experimenter and the experimenter endorsed its
status by interacting with it. Without this, infants did not see
the object as goal-directed, even if it beeped and moved
itself in the same manner. Shimizu and Johnson’s results fit
with ours, but the study left open whether infants attribute
goals to non-humans from early on or whether they learn
this gradually by the end of the first year. It also left open
whether the operative cues were perceptual in nature or
depended on observation of the object in social interaction.
That self-initiated motion may play a smaller role in agent
identification than initially proposed (e.g., Leslie, 1994;
Mandler, 1992; Premack, 1990) also appeared in Csibra et
al. (1998) and Schlottmann et al. (2005), reviewed earlier.
Both studies found that self-initiated motion was neither
sufficient for 9-months-olds’ goal attribution in their control
events, nor was it necessary in their experimental events.
Finally, in Kamewari et al.’s (2005) study, 6-months-olds
looked longer at a familiar curved motion, made irrational
by removal of a previous obstacle, than an unfamiliar, but
more rational straight motion if performed by a human or
robot, but not by a block. In this case, self-initiated motion,
even with additional evidence that the action was rational,
was insufficient to trigger goal-based reasoning.
The only exception to this pattern is work by Luo and
Baillargeon (2005). They found that 5-months-olds
attributed a goal to a self-moving 3-dimensional block in
the Woodward paradigm after seeing it repeatedly move
back and forth across the stage. Infants did not attribute a
goal to such a block, if familiarization trials (in a fixed trial
rather than infant-led procedure) involved only one target,
so that the block’s movement towards it did not imply a
preference of this target over the other. Thus observation of
selective behavior also seems crucial for infant goalattribution. Nor did infants attribute a goal if the block had a
handle extending past the stage, so that it was not clear
whether the block moved itself or not. This factor may have
prevented infants from attributing a goal to the mechanical
claw in Woodward’s (1998) own studies.
Luo & Baillargeon’s (2005) results may differ from all the
other studies reviewed earlier because information about
self-motion was far more salient in their study. In particular,
in initial trials without targets the block moved back and
forth across the screen on average more than 12 times, with
second-long pauses between the motion phases. In the other
studies, in contrast, the object simply moved itself towards
the target without prior history of self-motion. Such simple
self-initiated motion without further amplification does not
appear sufficient for goal attribution. It remains to be seen

Discussion
In this study, 6-month old infants appeared to attribute a
goal to the motion of a square shape when it moved in a
non-rigid, rhythmic manner, but not if it moved rigidly.
These results suggest that infants of this age seem to have
a notion of goal-directed action that extends beyond simple
familiar actions: They can apply this notion even to the
movements of unfamiliar 2-dimensional shapes. Infants’
grasp of goal directed reaching (Woodward, 1998, 1999)
thus does not seem initially restricted to particular familiar
actions of clearly human agents.
Nevertheless, infants do not see all repeated self-initiated
motion towards one of two targets as goal directed: Here,
infants did so only if the shape moved itself in a non-rigid,
rhythmic manner seen as animate by older observers. Our
data suggest that 6-months-olds may already see this motion
in a similar way.
Previous work by Bertenthal (1993) showed even 3months-olds are sensitive to bio-mechanical motion patterns
in point-light displays and that infants distinguish them
from jumbled displays with identical local motion. Such
sensitivity alone does not, however, imply that infants use
bio-mechanical motion as a cue to agency or animacy. In
the present study, in contrast, the evidence is stronger,
because a schematic form of bio-mechanical motion helped
trigger early goal-based reasoning. This link suggests that
infants take this style of motion as a cue to agency/animacy.
We do not know yet, of course, whether animate motion is
sufficient to trigger reasoning about goals in this context.
Our stimulus involved further cues, in particular, the object
self-started its motion and oriented itself towards the target
before moving towards it. We also do not know yet which
aspect of the present motion pattern was effective. Infants
742

what the effective component of Luo and Baillargeon’s
(2005) stimulus is: How extensive a history of self-motion
is needed, whether this would or would not need to involve
changes in direction or merely stop-go motion, or whether
what matters is that infants attend to self-initiated motion
over a sufficiently long period of time without distraction
by the potential goal and motion towards it.
Be this as it may, the most important new finding in the
present study was that even without a history of selfmotion, and even in computer-animated, 2-dimensional
events, 6-months-olds attributed a goal to a rectangular
shape, as long as it moved itself in a non-rigid, rhythmic
manner that older observers see as animate. Infants did not
attribute a goal to the object moving itself in the rigid
manner of an inert object. By 6 months, infants may thus
perceive this non-rigid style of motion as a cue to
agency/animacy.
Previous work on how infants might identify agents was
hampered by lack of tasks that could show more than
sensitivity to various cues. This problem can be overcome
by testing their role in the Woodward (1998, 1999)
paradigm: If a hypothesized agency cue can successfully
trigger goal-attribution, this demonstrates its link to an early
system for social/psychological reasoning. The present
results agree with other recent data in their support of the
view that infants have early access to domain-specific,
abstract reasoning systems. Clearly a variety of perceptual
cues or cue combinations, usually correlated with, but not
necessarily tied to humans can trigger psychological/social
reasoning. Future research is needed to measure cue
strength and delineate effective cue combinations not just
by example, but in principle.

Gergely, G. Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G. & Bíró, S. (1995).
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age.
Cognition, 56, 165-193.
Johnson, S.C. (2000). The recognition of mentalistic agents
in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(1), 22-28.
Kamewari, K., Kato, M., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H. & Hiraki,
K. (2005). Six-and-a-half-month-old children positively
attribute goals to human action and humanoid-robot
motion. Cognitive Development, 20, 303-320.
Kuhlmeyer, V. Wynn, K. & Bloom, P. (2003). Attribution
of dispositional states by 12-month-olds. Psychological
Science, 14(5), 402-408.
Leslie, A. M. (1994). ToMM, TOBY, and Agency: Core
architecture and domain specificity. In L. A. Hirschfeld &
S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain
specificity in cognition and culture (pp. 119-148).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Luo, Y. & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Can a self-propelled box
have a goal? Psychological reasoning in 5-months-olds.
Psychological Science, 16(8), 601-608.
Mandler, J. M. (1992). How to build a baby II: Conceptual
Primitives. Psychological Review, 99, 587-604.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of
others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 31(5), 838-850.
Michotte, A. E. (1963). The perception of causality. (Tr. by
T.R. Miles & E. Miles.) London: Methuen.
Moore, C. & Corkum, V. (1994). Social understanding at
the end of the first year of life. Developmental Review,
14, 349-372.
Premack, D. (1990). The infant's theory of self-propelled
objects. Cognition, 36, 1-16.
Schlottmann, A., Allen, D., & Linderoth, C. & Hesketh, S.
(2002). Children’s intuitions of perceptual causality.
Child Development, 73(6), 1656-1677.
Schlottmann, A. & Ray, E. Perceptual animacy in schematic
motion events. Perception ECVP 2004 Supplement, 308.
Schlottmann, A., Ray, E., Demetriou, N. & Mitchell, A.
(2005). Perceived social and physical causality in
animated motions: Spontaneous reports and ratings.
Under review.
Schlottmann, A., Ray, E. & Surian, L. (2002). 6-monthsolds’ perception of causation-at-a-distance. International
Conference on Infant Studies. Toronto, Canada.
Schlottmann, A. & Surian, L. (1999). Do 9-month-olds
perceive causation-at-a-distance? Perception, 28, 11051113.
Schlottmann, A., Surian, L. & Ray, E. (2005). Eight- and
10-months-old infants’ perceive action and reaction.
Under review.
Shimizu, Y.A. & Johnson, S.C. (2004). Infants’ attribution
of a goal to a morphologically unfamiliar agent.
Developmental Science, 7(4), 425-430.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Woodward, A.L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal
object of an actor’s reach. Cognition, 69, 1-34.
Woodward, A.L. (1999). Infants’ ability to distinguish
between purposeful and non-purposeful behaviors. Infant
Behavior & Development, 22(2), 145-160.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ESRC grant 230198. We thank
Jessie Ricketts, Laura Pope and Henrik Westin for their
help with testing and coding of the data.

References
Bertenthal, B. I. (1993). Infants' perception of
biomechanical motions: Intrinsic image and knowledge based constraints. In C. E. Granrud (Ed.), Visual
perception and cognition in infancy (pp. 175-214).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Carpenter, M, Nagell, K & Tomasello, M (1998). Social
cognition, joint attention and communicative competence
from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 63(4).
Csibra, G., Gergely, G., Biro, S., Koos, O., Brockbank, M.
(1999). Goal attribution without agency cues: The
perception of "pure reason" in infancy. Cognition, 72,
237-267
Csibra, G., Biro, S., Koos, O. & Gergely, G. (2003). Oneyear-olds use teleological representations of actions
productively. Cognitive Science, 27, 111-133.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).
Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain, 119,
593-609.

743

