UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cross-Cultural Study on Conditional Reasoning and Hindsight Bias

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1h8737zx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Adachi, Kuniko
Kawasaki, Yayoi
Manktelow, Ken I.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cross-Cultural Study on Conditional Reasoning and Hindsight Bias
Hiroshi Yama (yama@mail.kobe-c.ac.jp)
School of Human Sciences, Kobe College, 4-1 Okadayama
Nishinomiya, 662-8505 Japan

Ken I. Manktelow (K.I.Manktelow@wlv.ac.uk)
School of Applied Sciences, University of Wolverhampton, Wulfruna Street,
Wolverhampton, WV1 1SB, UK

Hugo Mercier (hmercier@isc.cnrs.fr)
Institut Jean Nicod, 1bis, Avenue Lowendal
Paris, 75007 France

Jean-Baptiste Van der Henst (vanderhenst@isc.cnrs.fr)
Institut des Sciences Cognitives, 67, boulevard Pinel
Bron, 69675 France

Yayoi Kawasaki (yayoi@iris.dti.ne.jp)
School of Human Sciences, Kobe College, 4-1 Okadayama
Nishinomiya, 662-8505 Japan

Kuniko Adachi (k-adachi@osa.att.ne.jp)
School of Human Sciences, Kobe College, 4-1 Okadayama
Nishinomiya, 662-8505 Japan

Abstract
The purpose of this study is to see whether hindsight bias is
stronger among Japanese people than among French people
using conditional reasoning and probability judgment task. We
describe the relation between analytic thought (Westerners) and
holistic thought (Easterners) in terms of SuperP. SuperP is a
superordinate principle that describes a set of events possibly
related to the p in an ‘if p then q’ conditional. The participants
were asked to judge the probability of the two events of a given
indicative conditional. The cultural differences on hindsight
bias were not very strongly observed, but we inferred that
information about the actual outcome might activate the
SuperP. This phenomenon could be universal across cultures.

Introduction
Summing up previous cross-cultural studies on cognition,
Nisbett (2003; Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayay, 2001)
argued that Westerners are more likely to engage in analytic
thought, whereas Easterners are more likely to engage in
holistic thought. According to his definition, analytic
cognition involves detachment of the object from its context,
a tendency to focus on attributes of the object to assign it to a
category, and a preference for using rules about the categories
to explain and predict the object’s behavior. On the other
hand, holistic cognition has an orientation to the context or
the field as a whole, attention to relationships between a focal
object and the field, and a preference for explaining and
predicting events on the basis of such relationships.

Nisbett et al. (2001) explained these cultural differences
using the distinction of individualist (Westerners) and
collectivist (Easterners) cultures. According to Triandis
(1995), individualism is defined as a social pattern that
consists of loosely linked individuals who (i) view themselves
as independent of collectives (family, co-workers, tribe,
nation), (ii) are primarily motivated by their own preferences,
needs, rights, and the contracts they have established with
others, (iii) give priority to their personal goals over the goals
of others, and (iv) emphasize rational analyses of the
advantages and disadvantages of associating with others.
Collectivism is defined as a social pattern that consists of
closely linked individuals who (i) see themselves as parts of
one or more collectives, (ii) are primarily motivated by the
norms and duties imposed by those collectives, (iii) are
willing to give priority to the goals of these collectives over
their own personal goals, and (iv) emphasize their
connectedness to members of these collectives. In the culture
of collectivism, rule-based thinking is not adaptive, because it
may break the in-group harmony that is an important goal of
people in collectivist culture. Instead, dialectic thinking is
preferred and holistic thought is appropriate to use the
cognitive tool of dialectic.
Although many social psychologists (Nisbett et al., 2001)
have demonstrated cultural differences in cognition using
experimental tasks from cognitive psychology, we sometimes
find discrepancies in the use of terminology between social
psychologists and cognitive psychologists. For example, the

2399

distinction between holistic and analytic thought is one of the
important distinctions that dual process theories (which
propose that human thinking has two sub processes) have
emphasized (Evans & Over, 1996; Stanovich, 2004).
Therefore, the first motivation of this study is to describe the
cultural differences in thought using the terms and tasks of
cognitive psychologists.
Choi and Nibett (2000) asked their participants to imagine
a situation in which they expect plausible consequences.
When Korean participants knew an unexpected consequence,
they showed greater hindsight bias and thus were less
surprised at the unexpected consequences than Americans.
They inferred that these tendencies among the Koreans were
due to the fact that they have more complex models for
events than Americans, and thus they regarded these
tendencies as a result of holistic thought vs. analytic thought.
However, they did not made further discussion on what
complex models are. We try to replicate these results using
conditional reasoning tasks often used in the study of
reasoning mechanisms.
Conditionals are grouped into two kinds of categories:
indicative and deontic (Manktelow & Over, 1991).
Conditionals of an indicative form codify common sense,
scientific knowledge, or arbitrary rules, whereas those of a
deontic form express laws, social agreement, moral rules, and
so on. The goal of the former is to describe the world,
whereas that of the latter is to show people how to act in the
world. When an indicative conditional is stated, people often
suppose causal relationship between the premise p and its
consequence q. In this study we asked participants to do a
conditional causal reasoning task.
Byrne (1989) reported that Modus Ponens (if p then q, and
p, therefore q) is often suppressed by additional information
in natural reasoning. For example, people usually conclude
that John eats a fish for dinner when they are given “if John
goes fishing then he eats a fish for dinner, and he goes for
fishing”. However, they are unlikely to do so when the
statement “John is poor at fishing” is added. This can be
related to the holistic way of thinking, because participants
considered the situational information in choosing whether to
infer the conclusion or not. On the other hand, in the case of
the conditional “if X studies hard, X will do well in the next
test”, people are more likely to conclude “X will do well in
the next test” when they are given added information that X
had seen a copy of the question before the exam even if the
antecedent is not satisfied. Manktelow and Fairley (2000)
proposed that people suppose a superordinate principle that is
related to the stated-p in the conditional. They called this
SuperP. In the case of the conditional above, the SuperP is
supposed to be anything that makes X do well in the next test.
They demonstrated that people were more likely to infer the
consequent when SuperP was satisfied both in causal and
deontic reasoning.
We argue that the “complex models” (Choi & Nisbett,
2000) contain causality when they are used for expectation.
Regarding causality, Cummins (1995; Cummins, Lubart,
Alksnis, & Rist, 1991) argued that causal reasoning is

sensitive to two factors: alternative causes (AC) and disabling
conditions (DC). An AC is a cause that is not the one cited in
the causal rule but is capable of evoking the effect cited in the
rule. A DC is an event that could prevent an effect from
occurring in the presence of a cause. The condition that John
is poor at fishing is a typical example of DC. Using the term
of SuperP, an alternative cause is a factor that satisfies
SuperP, whereas a disabling condition is a factor that prevents
SuperP from being satisfied even though stated-p has been
satisfied. Thus SuperP is not only an enlarged set of stated-p,
but it eliminates sets that do not cause the effect.
We infer that SuperP is one of the kinds of holistic
thought, because having SuperP means considering
situational factors beyond rule-based reasoning. Hence it is a
surprise from the view of Nisbett that the theory of SuperP is
constructed based on the data of Western participants
(Manktelow & Fairley, 2000). Considering the previous
results on cross-cultural studies, we predict that Easterners
show this tendency more.
We interpret the results of Choi and Nisbett (2000) as that
Korean people, belonging to an Eastern culture, are supposed
to think holistically and thus to have more complex model to
construct their subjective SuperP than Americans who,
supposedly, think analytically.
On the other hand, as Manktelow and Fairley (2000) have
noted, SuperP is, if it is codified, a superordinate principle.
Therefore, it is plausible that this principle could be used for
analytic thought, if it becomes explicit in some ways. We
expect this inference leads a resolution for one of the
problems on the usage of terminology. Although holistic
thought is supposed to be implicit according to the dual
process theorists, Nisbett says little on this distinction. We
infer that SuperP supposition is holistic if it is done implicitly,
whereas that it can be used analytically if it is explicit because
SuperP expresses a category that can be used for conditional
reasoning.
Therefore, we are going to examine if Easterners
construct larger SuperPs than Westerners, and if Easterners
construct these SuperPs more easily or more automatically
than Westerners. In the probability judgment of consequent
task, we present an indicative conditional with its antecedent
satisfied, and ask the participants to estimate the probability
of the consequent. Half of the participants receive information
on the outcome such that the consequent did not occur before
the probability judgment (outcome condition), whereas the
other half do not (control condition). Next, they are informed
that the consequent did not actually occur, and they are asked
to point out possible DCs. In this procedure of producing
DCs, we assume that the SuperP becomes explicit in
participants’ mind. Finally, they are asked to judge the
probability that the consequent occurred returning to the time
when they were not yet informed of the outcome. In the
probability judgment of antecedent task, we present in
indicative conditional with satisfied consequent, and
participants are asked to judge the probability of the
antecedent. The rest of the procedure is the same as that of the
probability judgment of consequent task. As far as we know,

2400

this is a new paradigm created by the mixture of conditional
reasoning, probability judgment, creation of possible ACs or
DCS, and outcome information (hindsight bias). In short, we
assume that the outcome information activates SuperP
implicitly whereas the creation of ACs or DCs makes SuperP
explicit.
Based on the distinction between analytic and holistic
thought (Nisbett et al., 2001), we predict the following
regarding our experimental manipulation. We picked up
French participants as a sample of Westerners and Japanese
as a sample of Easterners.
1) Japanese participants will judge both the probabilities of
consequent (the probability judgment of consequent task) and
of antecedent (the probability judgment of consequent task)
lower in the outcome condition than French participants
because the hindsight bias is stronger for Japanese people
than for French people. In other words, Japanese participants
activate SuperP more easily to figure out what the outcome is
than French participants.
2) Japanese participants will point out more factors than
French participants, because they have more complex theories
based on holistic thought. In other words, Japanese people
have larger SuperP than French people.
3) We predict that the SuperP of Japanese people becomes
available when the outcome is given, whereas the SuperP of
French becomes available when they are asked to point out
possible factors. Therefore, the effect of generating factors is
reduced in the outcome condition only in Japanese
participants. On the other hand, because the effect of outcome
is less among French participants, the effect of generating
factors are shown both in the control condition and in the
outcome condition.

populations, participants were nationals having Japanese or
French as mother tongue.

Materials
Based on the mean generation counts of possible DCs and
ACs (Cummins, 1995), we chose two kinds of conditionals
(slightly revised so that natural scenarios were created). We
created Scenario A with conditional “if a student studies hard,
then (s)he will pass the exam”(Mean AC=3.9; Mean DC=4.4)
and Scenario B with conditional “if fertilizer is put on the
plants, then they will grow quickly”(Mean AC=4.2; Mean
DC=3.4). The scenarios are shown in Appendix.

Procedure

Method

Materials were printed on booklets. Each participant was
given a booklet containing either Scenario A or B, either the
probability judgment of antecedent task or the probability
judgment of consequent task, and either in the control
condition or in the outcome condition. In the antecedent task,
each participant was given an indicative conditional with the
information that the consequent occurred, and was asked to
estimate the probability that the antecedent was satisfied. Half
of the participants received information on the outcome that
the antecedent had not been satisfied before the probability
judgment (the outcome condition), whereas the other half did
not (the control condition). The participants in the outcome
condition were asked to judge the probability supposing that
they did not know the outcome. In the next page, they were
informed that the antecedent was not actually satisfied, and
they were asked to point out possible ACs in four minutes. In
the final page, they were asked to estimate the probability that
the antecedent had been satisfied thinking back to the time
when they were not yet informed of the outcome. In the
probability judgment of consequent task, each participant was
given an indicative conditional with satisfied antecedent, and
was asked to estimate the probability that the consequent
would occur. Half of the participants received information on
the outcome that the consequent did not occur before the
probability judgment (the outcome condition), whereas the
other half did not (the control condition). In the next page,
they were informed that the consequent did not actually
occur, and they were asked to point out possible DCs in four
minutes. In the final page, they were asked to judge the
probability of the consequent thinking back to the time when
they were not yet informed of the outcome. The experiment
was run in regular classes in French and Japanese
universities.

Design
The design was 2 (nationality: Japanese, French) by 2
(outcome: control, outcome) by 2 (trial: prior, final) in each
task. The “nationality” and “outcome” were between-subject
factors.

Participants
Eighty-seven French university students at the University
of Lyon 2 who majored in psychology and 98 Japanese
university students at Kobe College, Ritsumeikan University,
and Osaka International University who majored in
psychology, sociology, or environmental sciences
participated in this experiment. About 70 percents of the
participants were female in both countries. In the probability
judgment of antecedent task, 23 French students and 26
Japanese students participated in the control condition, and 19
French students and 26 Japanese students participated in the
outcome condition. In the probability judgment of consequent
task, 21 French students and 25 Japanese students participated
in the control condition, and 24 French and 22 Japanese
students participated in the outcome condition. In both

Results

2401

The mean estimated probabilities of antecedent (the
probability judgment of antecedent task) and of consequent
(the probability judgment of consequent task), the mean
numbers of DCs or ACs (factors) in each condition of
Japanese and French students are shown in Table 1.

not significant (F(1,89)=1.109, ns). The interaction of
nationality and outcome was not significant (F(1,89)=.463,
ns).
The main effect of nationality was significant in the
probability judgment of antecedent task (F(1, 89)=11.457,
p<.01). The main effect of outcome was not significant
(F(1,89)=.740, ns). The interaction of nationality and
outcome was not significant (F(1,89)=.049< ns).

Table 1: Initial and final mean estimated probabilities, the
number of possible factors, and the number of participants
whose data were analyzed for each condition.
Antecedent Control
Initial
Final
Factors
N
French
61.5
49.8
5.48
23
Japanese
62.5
51.7
3.81
26
Outcome
Initial
Final
Factors
N
French
66.1
56.8
5.63
19
Japanese
72.8
71.4
4.52
25
Consequent Control
Initial
Final
Factors
N
French
64.8
53.5
5.52
21
Japanese
72.2
64.4
4.52
25
Outcome
Initial
Final
Factors
N
French
70.4
64.6
5.48
23
Japanese
74.8
74.2
4.29
24

Discussion

An ANOVA was conducted following the design of 2
(nationality) by 2 (outcome) by 2 (trial) on the probability
judgment of antecedent task data. The main effect of
nationality was not significant (F(1, 89)=2.148, ns). The main
effect of outcome was significant (F(1, 89)=6.317, p<.05).
Very surprisingly, the estimated probabilities were higher in
the outcome condition than in the control condition. The main
effect of trial was significant (F(1, 89)=17.500, p<.01). The
estimated probabilities got lower in the final estimation. The
one-way interaction of trial and nationality was not significant
(F(1, 89)=1.230, ns). The interaction of trial and outcome was
not significant (F(1,89)=2.259, ns). The interaction of
nationality and outcome was not significant (F(1,89)=1.235,
ns). Although the decrease of estimated probability was less
in the Japanese outcome condition than in the other three
conditions, the two-way interaction was not significant (F(1,
89)=.747, ns).
The same analysis was run on the probability judgment of
consequent data. The main effect of nationality was
significant (F(1, 89)=4.332, p<.05). The estimated probability
was higher among the Japanese than among the French
participants. The main effect of outcome was not significant
(F(1, 89)=3.514, ns). The main effect of trial was significant
(F(1, 89)=7.873, p<.01). The one-way interaction of trial and
nationality was not significant (F(1, 89)=.904, ns). The
interaction of trial and outcome was not significant
(F(1,89)=1.893, ns). The interaction of nationality and
outcome was not significant (F(1,89)=.077, ns). Again, the
two-way interaction was not significant (F(1, 89)=.042, ns).
The mean numbers of possible factors pointed by
participants are shown in Table 1. Opposite to our prediction,
the French participants tended to give more factors than the
Japanese participants. An ANOVA was conducted following
the design of 2 (nationality) by 2 (outcome) on the number of
possible factors in each task. The main effect of nationality
was significant in the probability judgment of antecedent task
(F(1, 89)=11.457, p<.01). The main effect of outcome was

Generally speaking, the results were ambiguous regarding
our predictions. The biggest surprise was that the estimated
probabilities were higher in the outcome condition than in the
control condition. This did not match our first prediction.
Further, we had a rough prediction that the probabilities given
by Japanese participants could be lower than those given by
French participants, because Japanese are believed to
consider situational factors easily against the conditional
rules, and because French are thought to prefer to take rulebased reasoning. However, in the probability judgment of
consequent, the probabilities judged by French were lower.
These results require us to reexamine what does the
preference for rule-based reasoning among Westerners
means.
We do not believe that this was by chance, because this
effect was observed both in France and Japan, and in both
tasks. One possible explanation is to suppose that our
participants took precautions against the information on
outcome, and overcompensated. The greatest experimental
differences between the studies of Choi and Nisbett (2000)
and ours are the scenarios used in the experiment and
nationalities. Choi and Nisbett (2000) provided a story on a
seminary student who was very likely to help others with a
no-help outcome, whereas we provided a plausible
conditional with an outcome against the conditional. A
possible reason for the differences of results is that we
provided our participants a situation where they are enhanced
to do logical reasoning, whereas Choi and Nisbett provided a
more natural setting. Thus, although our participants received
outcome information, they made an effort to neglect this in
order to do logical reasoning. As a consequent of this, they
overcompensated.
The second difference was nationality. The participants of
Choi and Nisbett (2000) were American and Korean. It is
possible that such hindsight bias is stronger among Korean
than among Japanese. We need to pursue further research on
this topic.
The data did not match our second prediction. Although,
the differences were not so important, French pointed out
more DCs and ACs than Japanese did. Even if Japanese are
believed to consider situational factors more than French
from the assumption of holistic thought, in the situation
where participants are asked to point out factors, we infer
either that the cultural difference is less than it is thought to
be, or that French could point out more factors than Japanese.
Again, we have not yet find reasons for these results. We

2402

infer that the possible DCs or ACs in the image of people are
affected by many factors. For example, domain specific
knowledge may be needed to infer the causality in the plantfertilizer case. It is plausible that French participants had
more knowledge on these. We conclude that this dependent
variable may not be appropriate to asses the analytic-holistic
thinking style.
The effects of generating DCs or ACs were strong, as
shown by the main effect of trial. This shows that, when
being asked to generating possible DCs or ACs, people in
both countries take these factors into consideration to make
probabilistic judgment. Further, according to the descriptive
statistics of data, the effect of pointing out DCs or ACs on the
final probability judgment was reduced when the outcome is
informed in the initial judgment in Japanese participants. This
effect disappeared in the probability judgment of antecedent
task as shown in Table 1. Except for the fact the probability in
the outcome condition was higher, the result on this
disappearance was consistent with the third prediction. We
infer that DCs or ACs were available for Japanese, hence the
generation has less effect in Japanese people than in French
people. However, because two-way interaction was not
significant, we do not accept the conclusion above.
Generally, we conclude that even if these cultural
differences exist, it may not be so strong. One possible reason
for the absence of the expected cultural differences is the use
of indicative conditionals. According to Nisbett (Nisbett et al.,
2001; Peng & Nisbett, 1999), rule-based reasoning supported
by analytic thought is not adaptive in collectivist culture
because it may break in-group harmony. Rather, people in
collectivist culture should go “middle way”, and dialectic or
holistic thinking is needed to do this. However, this might be
only the case with deontic reasoning concerning how people
act. Because indicative reasoning concerns just the
description of the world, it does not refer to how people act in
the real world. Therefore, indicative reasoning itself does not
concern human adaptation in a culture. We expect that we
find stronger cultural differences when we use deontic
reasoning.
The present research is the first step to use this paradigm
in order to describe cultural differences between French and
Japanese. At this point, it provides us more with problems to
be solved than with results describing cultural differences.

Acknowledgments
We thank Junichi Taniguchi and Masasi Hattori for their
arrangement of running parts of this experiment. This
research has been supported by a CHORUS grant from the
French Ministry of Research and the Japanese Society for the
Promotion of Science, and by a grant-in-aid from the
Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science (No.
16530483).

References
Byrne, R. M. J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences with
conditionals. Cognition, 31, 61-83.

Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naïve theories and causal deduction.
Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Cummins, D. D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991).
Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory & Cognition,
19, 274-282.
Choi, I. and Nisbett, R. E. (2000). Cultural psychology of
surprise: Holistic theories and recognition of contradiction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 890-905.
Evans, J. St. B. T, & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Manktelow, K. I. and Fairley, N. (2000). Superordinate
principles in reasoning with causal and deontic
conditionals. Thinking and Reasoning, 6, 1-25.
Manktelow, K. I. and Over, D. E. (1991). Social roles and
utilities in reasoning with deontic conditionals. Cognition,
39, 85-105.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How Asians
and Westerners think differently…and why. New York: The
Free Press.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and system of thought: Holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108, pp 291-310.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and
reasoning about contradiction. American Psychologist, 54,
741-754.
Stanovich, K. E. (2004). The robot’s rebellion: finding
meaning in the age of Darwin. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individual and collectivism. Boulder,
CO: Westview Press.

Appendix
Scenario A
Please imagine that students are going to take an exam at a
university. The lecturer said, “if a student studies hard, then
(s)he will pass the exam.” Mary is a student at the university.
She studied hard. But it turned out that Mary did not pass the
exam later. Now if you had been asked the following question
before you knew that Mary did not pass the exam, what might
have been your answer?
What is the probability that Mary will pass the exam in
this situation?
Scenario B
Please imagine that you are interested in gardening. People
say, “if fertilizer is put on the plants, then they will grow
quickly.” John likes growing plants. Fertilizer was put on the
plants. But it turned out that the plants did not grow quickly.
Now if you had been asked the following question before you
knew that the plants did not grow quickly, what might have
been your answer?
What is the probability that the plants will grow quickly in
this situation?
Note. These are the scenarios used in the outcome condition.
The underlined sentences are deleted in the control condition.

2403

