UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A "Triangle Model" of Chinese Reading

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6zv05439

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Li, Ping
McCandliss, Bruce D.
Shu, Hua
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A “Triangle Model” of Chinese Reading
Jianfeng Yang (goldswordy@gmail.com)
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning,
Beijing Normal University, China

Jason D Zevin (jdz2001@med.cornell.edu)
Sackler Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, USA

Hua Shu (shuh@bnu.edu.cn)
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning,
Beijing Normal University, China

Bruce D. McCandliss (bdm2001@med.cornell.edu)
Sackler Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, USA

Ping Li (pli@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond, USA
Abstract

Our approach is informed by the "triangle" model of
reading, developed by Seidenberg & McClelland (1989; see
also Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996;
Harm & Seidenberg, 1999; Harm & Seidenberg, 2004). This
series of models treats reading as a constraint satisfaction
problem, and provides the basis for a consideration of how
insights from models developed to explain reading in English
can be brought to bear on a very different reading system –
Chinese. Both English and Chinese writing systems contain
multiple probabilistic cues to pronunciation that contribute to
the learning of spelling-to-sound mappings. Whereas in
English, these constraints are relatively few, and highly
consistent – so that they are often roughly characterized as
mappings from individual letters to individual speech sounds
– in Chinese, mappings from spelling to sound tend to be less
consistent, and depend on a much larger number of
orthographic constituents called "phonetic radicals", part of a
character that makes a basic morpheme in this language. In
Simulation 1, we examine the effects of regularity,
consistency, and frequency in a version of the triangle model
adapted to Chinese characters.

In this paper we present two connectionist models of reading,
using a parallel distributed processing framework that has been
applied to English, to examine the extent to which such models
can also account for developmental performance in Chinese.
Simulation 1 was trained to map from orthography to
phonology for a large corpus of stimuli, and simulates the
frequency, regularity, consistency effects and interactions
among them. Simulation 2 was trained to map among spelling,
meaning, and sound for a smaller set of items, and captures
basic effects of orthographic transparency and family size.
Although the computational models used here are very similar
to the English models, a very different developmental pattern
emerged, such that mappings from orthography to semantics
were learned more rapidly than mappings from orthography to
phonology. The results show how qualitative differences in the
development of reading skill across writing systems can arise
from the functioning of the same general learning mechanisms.

Introduction
Over the past three decades, computational models have
become increasingly sophisticated in accounting for a broad
range of phenomena and specifying the hypothetical
mechanisms underlying skilled reading and its acquisition.
However, because the vast majority of this work has been
done in English, questions remain about the generality of
these models. For example, the DRC model of reading
English contains specific assumptions (e.g., about how
conflicting rules at different grapheme sizes are handled)
that are unlikely to generalize to transparent languages
(Coltheart, Rastle, Perry, Langdon, & Ziegler, 2001).
Furthermore, it is not clear how the architecture of that
model would handle a language in which there are no
regularities that can readily be identified as "rules," such as
Chinese. On the other hand, at least one computational
model of Chinese reading acquisition involves a set of
highly language-specific processes for identifying specific
constituents of characters (Xing, Shu, & Li, 2002, 2004).

An additional factor that distinguishes Chinese from
English (and most other writing systems) is that Chinese
characters typically contain a "semantic radical" that
provides some probabilistic information that aids in the
translation from orthography to semantics. In alphabetic
languages such as English, monosyllables rarely contain
sub-lexical information about meaning. An exception to this
is inflected forms, e.g., "walk," "walks," and "walked," which
are semantically related in predictable ways. Interestingly,
the triangle model picks up on these regularities in English
(Harm & Seidenberg, 2004), because the associative learning
mechanism used in the triangle model is highly sensitive to
similarity. Thus, in a language like Chinese, wherein many
characters contain probabilistic cues to meaning, we would

912

which are transparent, but it can also appear in phonograms
that are not ( , law, , negotiate), which are opaque. This
is a unique feature of the Chinese writing system – it
encodes probabilistic information about semantics at the
sub-lexical level. In Simulation 2, we will consider how this
property of the writing system influences both skilled
reading and the acquisition of reading ability.
For more detailed introductions to characters, reading, and
reading acquisition in Chinese, consult Honorof and Feldman
(2006), Perfetti and Liu (2006), Shu and Wu (2006), and
other chapters in Li, Tan, Bates, and Tzeng (2006).

expect effects analogous to consistency effects in mapping
from spelling-to-sound to arise in spelling-to-meaning
mappings.
Furthermore, because these models are inherently
developmental, they provide an opportunity to examine the
influence of the statistical regularities in the writing system
on learning to read. A number of studies have shown that
spelling-to-meaning consistency (or “transparency”) plays a
role in children's reading from very early on in Chinese
(McBride-Chang, Shu, Zhou, Wat, & Wagner, 2003; Shu &
Anderson, 1997), and that a factor called "morphological
awareness" – essentially the ability to generalize based on
sub-lexical semantics – is a strong predictor of learning to
read (McBride-Chang et al., 2005; Shu & Anderson, 1997;
Shu, Anderson, & Zhang, 1995). In Simulation 2, we explore
these phenomena in a model that includes mappings among
orthography, phonology, and semantics.

Simulation 1: Mapping from Orthography
to Phonology
Architecture
The architecture of the reading model is similar to a
specific model previously implemented in English to account
for mappings between orthography and phonology model
(Harm & Seidenberg, 1999). The input layer consists of 270
orthographic units, fully connected to an intermediate level
of 200 hidden units, which in turn were fully connected to
output representation, which was composed of 92
phonological units and 50 cleanup units to create a
phonological attractor network. The phonological layer was
also fully connected to itself.

A Brief Primer on Chinese Reading
In modern Chinese, nearly 90% of characters are
“phonograms,” which consist of two components (radicals).
The semantic radical provides information about the meaning
of the character, and a phonetic radical indicates the
character's pronunciation. These radicals often also appear by
themselves as “simple words” (i.e., mono-morphemic
words). For example, the word (“ ”huang1) also appears in
a “family” of words (“ , , , ”). When a phonogram’s
pronunciation matches its phonetic radical, it is called
“regular.” Families in which all the phonograms match in
pronunciation are called “consistent.”
For most families, however, the pronunciation of at least
some of the family members differs from the pronunciation
of the phonetic, such as “ /tai/,
/dai/, /yi/,
/tai/,
/chi/”. All phonograms in such a family are called
“inconsistent,” and those particular phonograms that do not
match the phonetic are called “irregular.”
Research on Chinese has revealed both regularity and
consistency effects that interact with frequency. Seidenberg
(1985) found that phonograms whose pronunciations
differed from the pronunciation of their phonetic radical were
named more slowly and less accurately than “regular”
characters. Consistency effects have also been observed in
single character naming, such that items from inconsistent
families are named more slowly than consistent characters
(Fang, Horng, & Tzeng, 1986). A number of studies have
now compared three types of stimuli: regular-consistent
(R-C), regular-inconsistent (R-I) and irregular-inconsistent
(I-I), (Hue, 1992; Peng & Yang, 1997; Peng, Yang, & Chen,
1994). These studies found both a consistency effect, and a
regularity effect, such that I-I items were read more slowly
than either R-C or R-I items – a finding which may provide a
challenge to a constraint-based model.
Semantic radicals also appear in “families” that vary both
in the number of items in which they occur (“family size”)
and in the consistency with which they map on to a
particular meaning (“transparency”). For example, the
radical for water ( ) appears in many phonograms that are
related to water ( , lake, , river, , thirsty, , swim),

Figure 1: Architecture of Model 1
The orthographic representation is based on a linguistic
description of Chinese orthography including radicals,
number of strokes and radical position (for details see Xing et
al., 2004). The phonological representation includes five
slots: one onset slot, three rime slots, and a fifth slot for tone.
The rime was divided into a “medial,” usually consisting of a
glide or approximant, a “nucleus,” which is always a vowel,
and a “coda” which can either be a nasal (/n/ or /N/) or the
second vowel of a diphthong. This slot system captures
similarities such as the fact that /tSwaN3/ (“ ”) and /ba1/
(“ ”) share a nuclear vowel, despite having very different
syllable structures. Each phoneme was represented using a
vector of 22 real-valued units, each of which corresponds to a
phonetic feature. Including 4 units for tone, there are in total
92 units for each Chinese syllable representation.

913

Training

90
80

A set of 4468 items from the Modern Chinese Frequency
Dictionary (1986) was used to train the model (one
character was eliminated because there is no orthographic
representation for characters with more than 7 radicals).
Frequency counts from the corpus were transformed into a
probability of presentation by a square root compression
(Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996).
Following Harm & Seidenberg (1999), we first pretrained
the phonological attractor model, and then trained the full
reading model on the mapping from orthography to
phonology. The continuous recurrent back-propagation
algorithm (Pearlmutter, 1995) was used, with online
learning. A learning rate of 0.005 and momentum of 0.9 were
used. On each trial, a character was selected and the
orthographic units were clamped with the pattern
corresponding to the spelling of the word for 12 time ticks.
Error computed at the phonological layer was computed from
5-12 time ticks and back propagated to update the connection
weights. The model was trained for 3 million trials.

Hi gh Fr eq. R- C
Hi gh Fr eq. R- I

70

Hi gh Fr eq. I - I

SSE

60

Low Fr eq. R- C
Low Fr eq. R- I

50

Low Fr eq. I - I

40
30
20
10
0
500K

1M

1. 5M

2M

2. 5M

3M

I t er at i on

Figure 2: Pattern of SSE over 3 million training trials
(Simulation 1)
Analysis of the model at the end of training reveals an
interaction between frequency and type typical of the human
data (Figure 3, top). High frequency items have a lower SSE
than low frequency items, F (1,114) =35.65, p<0.001. There
is also a significant effect of the interaction between
frequency and type, F (2,114) =3.93, p=0.022. Whereas
there was no effect of type for high frequency items, F (2,
115) <1, low-frequency items demonstrated significant type
effects, F (2,115) =6.74, p=0.002. R-C items had a lower
SSE than R-I items, and R-I items were in turn read more
easily than I-I items.

Testing
120 phonograms were used to test the model’s
performance. Three types of phonograms were selected:
Regular Consistent (R-C), Regular Inconsistent (R-I) and
Irregular Inconsistent (I-I) items. For each type, we selected
20 high frequency (565 per million) and 20 low frequency
(10 per million) items. The number of strokes and radicals
was matched across conditions. Naming accuracy and sum
squared error were computed to test the model’s
performance. The model’s output was determined by a
winner-take-all mechanism based on the Euclidean distance
between the model’s output and all possible phonemes in the
coding scheme. The sum squared error (SSE) was computed
from the model’s output at the last time tick by taking the
square of the difference between the model’s phonological
output for each unit and the target output.

8. 00

SSE

6. 00

I-I
R- I
R- C

4. 00

2. 00

0. 00
Hi gh

Low

Fr equency
750

Results
700

After 3 millions trials of training, the model can name
86.92% items in the training set accurately. Most of error
items (86.3%) are very low frequency characters (no more
than 10 per million) and for those items, adults typically
have difficulty naming. Out of 120 testing items, 118
(98.33%) items were correctly named. Two low frequency
irregular-inconsistent items were named incorrectly. In
training, high frequency items were learned most rapidly, and
show no effect of regularity or consistency. Among
low-frequency items, R-C items were learned faster than R-I
items, which were in turn learned faster than I-I items (Figure
2).

I-I
R- I
R- C

RT( ms)

650

600

550

500
Hi gh

Fr equency

Low

Figure 3: Effects of frequency and type: Simulation 1(top)
and adult experiment (down)

Adult Experiment: Naming Latencies
We tested 24 graduate students from Beijing Normal
University in a naming task with the same 120 items, using
the DMDX software. In each trial, a fixation cross “+” was
presented for 300ms, followed by a 300ms blank and then a
Chinese character for 400ms presented in black on white

914

background. An Inter-trail Intervals of 2000ms separated
each trial. The results are consistent with previous studies of
the impact of type (R-C, R-I, I-I) on naming, and with the
predictions of the model, as shown in Figure 3(lower panel).
A main effect of frequency was observed, F (1, 19) =43.84,
p<0.001), as well as an interaction between frequency and
type, F (1, 19) =12.24, p<0.01.

took the hierarchical feature trees from HowNet (Dong,
2000; Liu & Li, 2002), a Chinese project similar to WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998; Miller, 1990) and “flattened” them into
vectors (following Harm & Seidenberg, 2004). Both the
semantic and phonological layers were pretrained (both with
100K trials) to simulate early experience, first separately,
and then in 400K trails of “speaking” (mapping semantics to
phonology) and 400K trails of “hearing” (mapping
phonology to semantics) tasks before being trained on the
main task of reading aloud. When the reading model was
trained, the weights in pretrained task were frozen. Items
were presented to the network according to the same online
learning scheme as before with the same frequency
distributions. Error signals were provided for both the
phonological and semantic representations of each item on
each trial.

Discussion
Two critical results emerged from the orthography to
phonology model. First, we demonstrate that a model with
essentially the same architecture and learning rules used to
study reading in English can in fact learn to map from
spelling to sound for over 4000 Chinese characters. Previous
models (Chen & Peng, 1994; Perfetti, Liu, & Tan, 2005;
Perfetti & Liu, 2006; Xing, Shu, & Li, 2004) of Chinese
reading have used much smaller training corpora, and did not
address consistency effects (Chen & Peng, 1994; Hsiao &
Shillcock, 2004, 2005). Our model successfully simulates a
central result in the study of Chinese character reading: the
interaction of regularity and consistency with frequency.
Critically, this was done using items that produce the same
pattern of effects in human subjects.

Testing

100
Semant i c

60

Phonol ogi c al

40

150K

120K

90K

0

60K

20
30K

Simulation 2: Triangle reading model

80

0K

Per cent Cor r ect

Although the model does not encode any rules, nor indeed
does it treat phonetic radicals as at all “special,” it does
produce regularity and consistency effects, demonstrating
that these effects do not depend on literal representations of
rules. Finally, the developmental trajectory of the effects of
regularity and consistency are correctly simulated. In both
humans and the model, both regularity and consistency
effects are observed throughout development (Yang & Peng,
1997).

After 150K trials, testing was carried out as for Simulation
1, with the addition that the “output” of the model was read
from both phonology and semantics. From 103 items, we
selected 50 items (25 transparent and 25 opaque items) to
test the semantic transparency effect. We also selected 46
items (23 from large families and 23 from small families) to
test the family size effect. Semantic transparency was
defined according to the Elementary School Textbooks
Corpus (Hua Shu, Chen, Anderson, Wu, & Xuan, 2003).

I t er at i on

A major feature of the Chinese orthography is that single
characters encode probabilistic cues to meaning. In
Simulation 2, we add a semantic network to the model and
examine the development of mappings among spelling,
meaning, and sound.

Architecture
We scaled down the architecture of Simulation 1 (because
of the smaller training set, see “Training”), and added a
semantic attractor layer, which had full feed-forward
connections from orthography (mediated by 100 hidden
units), bidirectional connections with phonology (mediated
by 100 hidden units) and a cleanup layer of 50 units.
Semantic layer consists of 246 units.

Figure 4: Learning in Simulation 2(top) and in the Harm &
Seidenberg (2004) model (bottom).

Results
Figure 4 shows the model’s accuracy over time for
mapping of orthography onto the semantic and phonological
layers. Of particular interest is the comparison of the Chinese
model (Figure 4, top) to the English model (Figure 4,
bottom): whereas English monosyllables contain very little
sub-lexical semantic information, Chinese characters contain
probabilistic cues to meaning. As a result, spelling to
meaning is learned more rapidly than spelling to sound.

Training
The model was trained on 103 phonograms, selected from 6
semantic radical families (3 large and 3 small families),
including both transparent and opaque phonograms. The
same orthographic and phonological representations were
used as in Simulation 1. For semantic representations, we

915

based on a large corpus, in which effects of frequency,
regularity, consistency and their interactions were modeled.
Simulation 2 was trained to map spelling, meaning, and
sound for a smaller set of items, in which effects of
orthographic transparency and family size were modeled.
The model can explain a number of interesting empirical
phenomena in the acquisition and skilled use of reading
ability in Chinese. Furthermore, the same basic
computational principles can explain effects in both the
mapping from spelling to sound and the mapping from
spelling to meaning. These results suggest that the
differential development of reading skills across languages
may be driven by the statistical regularities particular to each
writing system. They demonstrate how qualitative
differences in the development of reading skills can arise
from the functioning of the same general learning
mechanisms.

1000
Tr anspar ency
Opaque

SSE

100

150k

120k

90k

60k

30k

1

0k

10

I t er at i on
1000
Lar ge
Smal l

SSE

100

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Haiyan Zhou for help with
data collection, and Mike Harm for technical assistance, the
Mikenet software and interesting discussions. This research
was supported by Natural Science Foundation (China) grants
30070259 and 30470574 (HS), NSF REC 0337765 (BDM),
NIH F32 DC006352 (JDZ), and NSF BCS 0131829 (PL).

150k

120k

90k

60k

30k

1

0k

10

I t er at i on

Figure 5: Semantic transparency and Family size effect

References

Furthermore, as shown in Figure 5, the speed of learning –
and efficiency of skilled processing – for this mapping is
influenced by both transparency and family size. Items with
highly consistent mappings between spelling and meaning
are learned more rapidly than items with inconsistent
mappings, and items within larger “families” are learned
more rapidly than those that share structure with few other
items in the training set.

Chen, Y., & Peng, D. (1994). A connectionist model of
recognition and naming of Chinese characters. In J.-T.
H. H-W. Chang, C-W Hue, & O. Tzeng (Ed.), Advances
in the study of Chinese language processing (Vol. 1, pp.
211-240). Taipei: National Taiwan University Press.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegler,
J. (2001). DRC : A Dual Route Cascaded Model of
Visual Word Recognition and Reading Aloud.
Psychological Review, 108(1), 204-256.
Dong Zhendong(2000), instroduction to HowNet, from
website http://www.keenage.com/.
Fang, S. P., Horng, R. Y., & Tzeng, O. J. L. (1986).
Consistency effects in the Chinese character and
pseudo-character naming tasks. In H. S. R. Kao & R.
Hoosain (Eds.), Linguistics, psychology, and the
Chinese language (pp. 11-21). Center of Asian Studies:
University of Hong Kong.
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: An electronic lexical
database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Phonology,
Reading Acquisition, and Dyslexia: Insights From
Connectionist Models. Psychological Review, 106(3),
491-528.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Computing the
Meanings of Words in Reading: Cooperative Division
of Labor Between Visual and Phonological Processes.
Psychological Review, 111(3), 662-720.
Honorof, D.N, & Feldman, L. (2006). The Chinese

Discussion
Our preliminary results from this model concern the
development of mapping from spelling to sound and spelling
to meaning over time. Whereas in English, the development
of spelling to sound occurs earlier and more rapidly than the
development of spelling to meaning, in Chinese, this pattern
is reversed, as mappings from spelling to meaning are
learned more readily than spelling-to-sound mappings. This
cross-linguistic difference, we hypothesize, is due to the
language-specific properties of the English versus Chinese
orthography-to-meaning relationships: whereas the Chinese
orthography contains sub-lexical units that prompt lexical
meaning, the English orthography contains no such
information.

General Discussion
In this study we present a large-scale connectionist model
of Chinese reading based on the triangle model that has been
successfully applied to account for English reading.
Simulation 1 was trained to map orthography to phonology
916

Perfetti, C. A., Liu, Y., & Tan, L. H. (2005). The Lexical
Constituency Model: Some Implications of Research
on Chinese for General Theories of Reading.
Psychological Review, 112(1), 43-59.
Perfetti, C.A., & Liu, Y. (2006). Reading Chinese characters:
Orthography, phonology, meaning and the lexical
constituency model. In P. Li, E. Bates, L. H. Tan & O. J.
L. Tzeng (Eds.), Handbook of East Asian
Psycholinguistics (Vol. 1: Chinese). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Pess.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., &
Patterson, K. (1996). Understanding Normal and
Impaired Word Reading: Computational Principles in
Quasi-Regular Domains. Psychological Review, 103(1),
56-115.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A
Distributed, Developmental Model of Word
Recognition and Naming. Psychological Review, 96(4),
523-568.
Shu, H., & Anderson, R. C. (1997). The role of radical
awareness in learning characters of Chinese children.
Reading Research Quaterly, 32(1), 78-89.
Shu, H., Anderson, R. C., & Zhang, H. C. (1995). Incidental
Learning of Word Meanings while Reading: a
Chinese and American Cross-cultural Study. Reading
Research Quaterly, 30(1), 76-95.
Shu, H., Chen, X., Anderson, R. C., Wu, N., & Xuan, Y.
(2003). Properties of School Chinese: Implications for
Learning to Read. Child Development, 74(1), 27-47.
Shu,
H.,
&
Wu,
N.
(2006).
Growth
of
orthography-phonology knowledge in the Chinese
writing system. In P. Li, E. Bates, L. H. Tan & O. J. L.
Tzeng
(Eds.),
Handbook
of
East
Asian
Psycholinguistics (Vol. 1: Chinese). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Pess.
Xing, H., Shu, H., & Li, P. (2002). A self-organizing
connectionist model of character acquisition in Chinese.
In W.D. Gray & C.D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 950-955). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Xing, H., Shu, H., & Li, P. (2004). The Acquisition of
Chinese
Characters:
Corpus
Analyses
and
Connectionist Simulations. Journal of Cognitive
Science, 5(1), 1-49.
Yang, H., & Peng, D. (1997). The learning and naming of
Chinese characters of elementary school children. In H.
C. Chen (Ed.), Cognitive Processing of Chinese and
Related Asian Languages (pp. 323-346): The Chinese
University of Hong Kong Press.

character in psycholinguistic research: Form, structure,
and the reader. In P. Li, E. Bates, L. H. Tan & O. J. L.
Tzeng
(Eds.),
Handbook
of
East
Asian
Psycholinguistics (Vol. 1: Chinese). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Pess.
Hsiao, J. H.-W., & Shillcock, R. (2004). Connectionist
modelling of Chinese character pronunciation based on
foveal splitting. Proceedings of the Twenty Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 601-606.
Hsiao, J. H.-W., & Shillcock, R. (2005). Differences of split
and non-split architectures emerged from modelling
Chinese character pronunciation. Proceedings of the
Twenty seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 989-994.
Hue, C. (1992). Recognition Processes in Character Naming.
In Chen Husanchih & T. O. J.L. (Eds.), Language
Processing in Chinese (pp. 93-107). North-Holland.
Li, P. (2006). Modeling language acquisition and
representation: Connectionist networks. In P. Li, E.
Bates, L. H. Tan & O. J. L. Tzeng (Eds.), Handbook of
East Asian Psycholinguistics (Vol. 1: Chinese).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Pess.
Liu, Q., & Li, S. (2002). Word similarity computing based on
How-net. Computational Linguistics and Chinese
Language Processing, 7, 59-76.
McBride-Chang, C., Cho, J.-R., Liu, H., Wagner, R. K., Shu,
H., Zhou, A., et al. (2005). Changing models across
cultures: Associations of phonological awareness and
morphological structure awareness with vocabulary and
word recognition in second graders from Beijing, Hong
Kong, Korea, and the United States. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 92(2), 140-160.
McBride-Chang, C., Shu, H., Zhou, A., Wat, C. P., &
Wagner, R. K. (2003). Morphological Awareness
Uniquely Predicts Young Children's Chinese Character
Recognition. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(4),
743-751.
Miller, G. (1990). WordNet: An on-line lexical
database.International Journal of Lexicography, 3,
235-312.
Modern Chinese frequency Dictionary (1986). Beijing,
China: Beijing Language Institute Press.
Pearlmutter, B. A. (1995). Gradient calculations for dynamic
recurrent neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks, 6, 1212–1228.
Peng, D., & Yang, H. (1997). The phonological processing of
Chinese phonograms. Asia and Pacific Journal of
Speech, Language and Hearing, 2, 177-195.
Peng, D., Yang, H., & Chen, Y. (1994). Consistency and
phonetic-independcency effects in naming tasks of
Chinese phonograms. In Q. Jing, H. Zhang & D. Peng
(Eds.), Information processing of the Chinese language
(pp. 26-41). Beijing: Beijing Normal University Press.

917

