UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
ACE: A Model of the Cognitive Strategies of a Contemporary Artist

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/81m9871t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Gosselin, Frederic
Leclerc, Jude

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

ACE: A Model of the Cognitive Strategies of a Contemporary Artist
Jude Leclerc (jude.leclerc@umontreal.ca)
Frédéric Gosselin (frederic.gosselin@umontreal.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Montreal
C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montreal, QC, H3C 3J7, Canada
Weisberg, 1993), little has been done to study artistic
creativity from this perspective. In fact, most of the
computational models of creativity, in recent years, have
been of the creativity involved in the process of scientific
discovery (e.g., Kulkarni & Simon, 1988; Langley, Simon,
Bradshaw, & Zytkow, 1987; Schunn & Anderson, 1998).
In recent years, research on creativity has also converged
on ideas and models similar to those found in situated and
distributed approaches to cognition (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi’s
systems model of creativity, 1999). This is why our project
is conducted within the artistic creativity as situated
problem solving framework (Leclerc & Gosselin, 2004). We
are considering the problem-solving processes involved in
artistic creativity to be situated, thus reflecting, and
responding to, the environmental, social, cultural and
economic conditions (Nersessian, 2004; see also Clancey,
1997; Hutchins, 1995; Norman, 1993; Thagard, 1999). The
most significant element concerning the situated aspect of
the project is its use of field methods and corresponding
emphasis on ecological validity.

Abstract
Building on the analysis of Leclerc and Gosselin (2004), we
present a partial but nonetheless substantial computer-based
model of some of the processes involved in a contemporary
visual artist’s practice. This model is based on fieldwork data
and its purpose is the modeling of the tasks, goals, and
operations involved in a real-world artistic practice. The
project is being conducted within the artistic creativity as
situated problem solving framework; we thus view creativity
both as a problem-solving process and a situated process.
Keywords: creativity; problem solving; situated cognition;
computer model; field study; visual arts.

Introduction
This project consists of a field study of the real-life practice
of a well-known Canadian visual artist, Isabelle Hayeur.
The project was conducted over a three-year period and is
ongoing at the moment of writing. The goal of the project is
to uncover and describe the problems facing a contemporary
artist in the context of a real-life practice and to describe
sets of processes or strategies applied by the artist to face
these problems or tasks related to her artistic practice. See
Leclerc and Gosselin (2004) for a first qualitative analysis
of this data – an analysis based on human problem solving
theory (Klahr & Simon, 1999; Newell & Simon, 1972). This
project has been conducted in two phases. In the first phase
of the project, over a twelve-month period, from May 2003
to April 2004, we conducted a field study of this artist’s
practice; in the second – ongoing – phase, started in May
2004, we have been modeling the gathered data. Our project
is thus a field study – an ethnographic type of study – that
has the uncommon goal of building a computer-based model
of real-life artistic problem-solving processes1.
Recently, Klahr and Simon (1999) have suggested that by
using the concepts and vocabulary of human problemsolving theory (Newell & Simon, 1972) "we may be able …
to converge toward a common account of discovery in many
areas of human endeavor", including the arts (p. 524). Much
work has already been done to understand processes of
scientific discovery with this approach (e.g., Klahr, 2000;
Kulkarni & Simon, 1988). But, with few exceptions (e.g.,

Methodology
Isabelle Hayeur: Contemporary Visual Artist
Isabelle Hayeur2 (IH) is a successful professional Canadian
visual artist3. She works mainly with digital photography
and video; her work has been shown in solo and group
exhibitions nationally and internationally. A great part of
her work involves producing large-scale photomontages;
these often show idyllic-looking landscapes… idyllic, but
not quite; her images often evoke a feeling of strangeness in
the viewer. She also works with video, Net art and does in
situ – site-specific – projects.

Data Collection and Analysis

1

A detailed account of data collection and qualitative
analysis is provided in Leclerc and Gosselin (2004). Briefly
stated, multiple data types, from multiple sources, have been
collected, on-site, to allow the modeling of a distributed set
of cognitive activities (Clancey, 2001). These included:
interviews, photographs of work space and tools, recording
of activity at the computer, and extensive field notes. All
data was digitally recorded and archived (except for the

The study might be said to be interested in problem finding as
well as in problem solving. Problems faced by artists in real-life
practice are not ‘presented problems’ (compared to those given to
subjects in the context of laboratory experiments, for example);
those problems are rather discovered or taken on by the artist in the
course of the artistic practice. Problem finding – as well as
problem solving – has been found to be an important part of artistic
creativity (e.g., Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi, 1976).

2

1669

Her work, artist’s statement and resume can be found on her Web
site: isabelle-hayeur.com
3
IH is considered a professional artist according to Quebec’s law
on the Professional status of artists in the visual arts, arts and
crafts and literature, and their contracts with promoters (R.S.Q.,
S-32.01).

field notes); total data volume amounts to about 30
gigabytes. The ACE model, presented in this paper, is based
mainly on the interview data and field notes.
Interview Data and Analysis Eight semi-structured
interviews were conducted over a six-month period, from
May to October 2003, at the artist’s studio (Leclerc &
Gosselin, 2003). The interview technique was inspired by
traditional protocol analysis methodology (Ericsson &
Simon, 1993) and aimed at eliciting descriptive information
about the subject’s artistic activities. Interviews were 30 to
60 minutes long; these were digitally recorded and
transcribed verbatim. They were then organized, stored, and
analyzed using the Atlas.ti computer package. The analysis
consisted of coding the interviews in terms of the problem
spaces, goals, operators (i.e., using the concepts of human
problem-solving theory, Newell & Simon, 1972) and, from
the coded interviews, extracting a set of 70 rules pertaining
to the diverse problem spaces – problems, tasks, and so on –
involved in this artist’s work and practice.
Four additional two-hour interviews were conducted with
the artist, over a two-month period, from October to
December 2004, in order to complete the model. In this
second round of interviews, we considered the artist to be a
domain expert (an expert of her own practice; e.g., McGraw
& Harbison-Briggs, 1989; Meyer & Booker, 1991). These
additional expert interviews allowed us to: (1) fill gaps in
the model, (2) and do a first validation of the model.

Search Spaces in IH’s Creative Processes
Human problem-solving theory models usually distinguish
sets of problem spaces, or search spaces, in which a problem
solver operates in order to resolve a particular problem or
accomplish a task (for example, the two-space model of
scientific discovery, first proposed by Klahr & Dunbar,
1988; this model presents scientific discovery as a process
involving dual search in an Hypothesis space and an
Experiment space). We previously came to the conclusion
that IH’s artistic processes were operating in two main
problem spaces, an Artistic practice space (A) and a Career
space (C), and a third, secondary one, the Economic space
(E) (Leclerc & Gosselin, 2004). Our model’s name, ACE,
comes from the letters standing for these three search
spaces. How IH resolves the problems of being an artist, of
producing art works and of attaining a certain level of
professional success all happens in these, A, C, E spaces.
The combined size of these search spaces is vast (compared,
for example, to the cognitive space involved in a typical
cognitive psychology experiment). Thus, such a model
cannot be fine-grained; what matters most to us is the
ecological validity of the model and its ability to give us a
bird’s eye view of the problem-solving processes involved
in a real-life artistic practice.

(Jackson, 1999); these systems have been adopted early on
by cognitive scientists to model language, memory, and
problem solving (e.g., Anderson, 1976; Chomsky, 1957;
Newell & Simon, 1965). These have also served more
recently to model scientific discovery processes (e.g.,
Kulkarni & Simon, 1988; Schunn & Anderson, 1998).
According to Anderson and Lebiere (1998), “[production
systems] are the only modeling formalism capable of
spanning a broad range of tasks, dealing with complex
cognition, in complete detail, and with a high degree of
accuracy” (p. 3).
The production system outlined in this article was
implemented using Jess4 (version 6.1p6), a general-purpose
rule engine, a Java-implemented version of CLIPS, itself a
descendant of the OPS family of production rule languages
and related languages; OPS5 was the language most often
used to model cognitive processes by the first generation of
cognitive scientists (Herbert Simon, Allen Newell, and
others). The Jess language, like its ancestors, has a syntax
very close to LISP, a language traditionally used in AI and
in many models of human cognition.
We chose to model IH’s artistic processes in terms of four
main entity types or variables: (1) agents, (2) goals, (3)
knowledge, and (4) environment. Goals and knowledge are
typical categories involved in knowledge-based, or
production, systems (see Jackson, 1999). Even though our
main focus is on one individual, we want to allow for the
explicit modeling of ‘outside’ processes, i.e. other agents
and their respective environments; this relates to the
situated, or distributed, part of our approach. Each rule in
the model, therefore, involves either agents – the main one
being IH, goals and knowledge of these agents, or various
states of the environment. The ACE model is a forwardchaining production system5; the current version consists of
a set of 70 rules.

Results
ACE: A Sample Run
To illustrate the model's behavior, we have chosen initial
conditions – a state of the world, so to speak – typical of
those encountered during our time working with the artist.
Some of these initial conditions are stable variables in the
subject, conditions observed to be present for the entire
duration of the research project. Part of the initial conditions
also consist of variables that may change from one
simulation run to the other. These represent changing
conditions in IH’s own state, the state of her goals and
knowledge, and in the state of her environment (these may
also include the changing state of other agents). Among the
twenty initial conditions for this run, every stable condition,
and some of the most significant changing conditions, are
shown in Table 1.

Production Systems as Cognitive Models of Artistic
Creativity

4

Jess (trial version or licensing for either academic or commercial
use) is available online from Sandia National Laboratories at:
http://herzberg.ca.sandia.gov/jess/
5
The model, and related information, are available at:
mapageweb.umontreal.ca/gosselif/ACE.html

The model presented here was implemented as a production
system. Production systems have their origin in Emil Post’s
(1943) study of the properties of systems based on rules

1670

Shown in Figure 1 is a list of the main rules fired in the
course of the simulation, starting from the initial conditions
(see Table 1). Displayed here are ‘threads’ of activity
simulating interweaved threads of activity in IH’s life and
art-related activities. Each thread begins with a top-level
goal; in this run, there are four top-level goals: (1)
disseminating the artistic work, (2) doing the artist work
seriously, (3) being an artist one's entire life, (4) paying for
one's artistic production.
One thread in Figure 1, for example, begins with the rule
“DOING-THE-ARTIST-WORK-SERIOUSLY---doing-myartistic-work-full-time” (see Figure 2); this rule states that if
IH wants to do the artist’s work seriously, she must do this
work full-time, and not come out or stop doing her artistic
work. In order to achieve its goal, this rule calls on the next
rule in the thread, “DOING-MY-ARTISTIC-WORK-FULLTIME---having-time-for-my-artistic-work”. The same goes
on for every rule that follows in the thread; each one is
activated in turn, until the initial goal is reached. As we can
see, each thread constitutes an operator – a set of rules –
working to achieve particular goals.

Table 1: Initial conditions of the simulation run
________________________________________________
All stable conditions
(agent (name IH) (status artist))
(goal (agent IH) (task being-an-artist-doing-that-my-entire-life))
(goal (agent IH) (task art-must-remain-a-calling-remain-research))
(goal (agent IH) (task taking-my-work-as-an-artist-seriously))
(goal (agent IH) (task living-conditions--food-and-house))
(goal (agent IH) (task having-success-as-an-artist))

________________________________________________
Some changing conditions
(agent (name IH) (variable artistic-production-unpaid))
(agent (name IH) (variable photographic-production))
(agent (name IH) (variable very-active-professional-life))
(goal (agent Isabelle) (task sending-projects-to-arts-centers))
(knowledge (agent IH) (variable what-I-have-to-do-to-be-anartist))
(environment (agent Isabelle) (variable high-cost-of-printing-largescale-photographs))
________________________________________________

The above facts state, in first-order predicate logic, that
IH’s status is that of an artist, that her goal is to be an artist
her entire life, that for her art must remain a calling, that her
artistic production is initially unpaid for, that she has a
photographic production, has a very active professional life,
and so on. For the computer simulation, these facts are put
in working memory at the start of the simulation, may
change during the simulation, and they serve to activate the
production rules that constitute the model of IH’s artistic
process; in turn, these rules may change the content of
working memory – the facts – as the simulation unfolds.

Figure 2: An operator’s description.
“Doing the artist work seriously”
Threads like this one, and those displayed in Figure 1,
give us an understanding of some of the most important
goals, strategies and activities occupying the artist, given the
initial conditions set for this run of the model. We see how
each thread involves the application of a certain set of rules
– or, operators – to reach these high-level goals.

Analysis of the ACE Model

Figure 1: A sample run of the ACE model. Letters in square
brackets (e.g., [AC] ), following the name of a rule, indicate
in which of the three search spaces (A, C, E) the rule
operates.

Simulation runs of the ACE model, as shown in Figures 1
and 2, provide us with a first means of identifying the
problem-solving processes involved in IH’s art-related
activities. But, further analyses are needed to understand
exactly (1) what problems are solved by the artist in the
context of her practice, and (2) by what sets of strategies.
Because of the difficulty that comes with attempting to

1671

analyze the complex behavior that results from the
interaction of 70 rules, with the naked eye, we turned to
cluster analysis for a deeper understanding.
Cluster analysis is an exploratory analysis technique, or
set of techniques, designed to solve classification problems;
essentially, it allows the discovery and grouping of related
objects. In order to understand the structure behind the ACE
model’s – and the artist’s – behavior, we conducted two
types of hierarchical cluster analyses (HCAs): (1) one on
rules fired during a simulation run, and (2) one on sets of
rules fired during multiple runs of the ACE model. The
HCAs and other statistical analyses reported here were
performed with the Statistics Toolbox for MATLAB version
6.5.

Operators from IH’s Artistic Practice This first HCA
serves to analyze the rule structure of the ACE model, and
thus reveals the goal and operator structure used by IH in
the course of her practice. The resulting dendrogram (see
Figure 3), allows us to see which rules of practice work
together, form clusters, and thus act as operators working to
achieve specific, artistic, goals. It also allows us to see clear
relationships between subsets of rules.
Following this cluster analysis of ACE, we can outline the
following operators IH uses to solve ‘problems’ – or, reach
goals – in the three search spaces of her artistic practice:
•

Cluster Analysis of IH’s Rules of Practice
We performed a first HCA on rules fired during a
simulation run of ACE; initial conditions were kept identical
to those used previously (see Table 1; these initial
conditions are a set of conditions typical of IH usual artistic
life and practice). Euclidean distance (ED) was calculated to
measure distances between rules fired. Rules fired closer in
time, during the simulation, were considered closer in terms
of ED. Unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean
(UPGMA) clustering was performed.6 As a result, a
dendrogram (i.e., hierarchical binary cluster tree) was
produced, visually representing the clusters of rules found
(see Figure 3). To evaluate goodness of fit of the UPGMA
dendrogram and original distance matrix, a cophenetic
correlation coefficient was calculated (r = 0.82; a value of
0.8, or above, indicates a low-level of distortion, and is
considered good [Romesburg, 1984; see also Everitt,
Landau, & Leese, 2001] ). Thus, the dendrogram in Figure 3
can be considered an adequate representation of the
relationships among rules of the ACE model.

•

•

Artistic space:
o [SPC] Sending art projects to art centers, galleries.
o [WAP] Working on art projects; making time for
working on projects.
o [DAS] Doing my work as an artist seriously.
o [WFT] Working full-time as an artist (i.e., artistic
work and career-related activities).
o [TFC] Making time for art practice and career.
Economic space:
o [FAP] Financing one’s artistic production.
o [PPI] Producing, printing, photographic images.
o [CJD] Choosing ‘bread-and-butter’ jobs related to
one’s artistic domain.
o [LWL] Living with less; ‘bread-and-butter’ jobs
must not replace time for artistic work.
o [RPG] Being represented by a private gallery;
selling one’s work.
Career space:
o [SOL] Simplifying one’s life (i.e., living with less,
less time working at ‘bread-and-butter’ jobs).
o [ARJ] Avoiding a return to the job market.
o [PRA] Promotion-related activities (i.e., making
oneself and one’s work known).
o [BAL] Being an artist my entire life; doing what I
know I have to do to be an artist.
o [TCC] Taking care of career side (of artist’s life).

The dendrogram – set of strategies used – may recombine
according to the (1) external conditions (i.e., environmental
variables) and to the (2) state variables (i.e., IH’s goals and
other variables). For example, if we change the initial state
to include these facts: (1) represented by a private gallery,
(2) private gallery is an excellent one, and (3) production
medium is low-cost, then, a major branch of the dendrogram
disappears, the E branch, simply because the operators
needed to achieve E goals are no longer needed.

Cluster Analysis of Randomly Generated Sets of
Rules of Artistic Practice
Figure 3: Operators of the A-C-E search spaces

We performed a second HCA on the sets of rules fired
during 30 simulation runs of the ACE model7; each run was
the result of a randomly generated set of six, present or
absent, ‘stable’ initial conditions (see first section of Table

6

Using other distance measures and clustering algorithms we
obtained very similar results; it appears that the analyses reported
here are robust.
1672

7

After the first 10 simulation runs, the analysis was already
converging on the set of clusters represented in Figure 4.

1, “Stable conditions”). ED was calculated to measure
distances between these sets of rules (i.e., for each of the 30
runs, a vector was recorded, representing the entire set of
rules of the model, and whether each rule had fired or not
during this run). Similar runs – vectors of rules fired – were
at a closer distance, and thus represented similar general
artistic strategies, or attitudes. UPGMA clustering was
performed. As a result, a dendrogram was produced (see
Figure 4). To evaluate goodness of fit of the UPGMA
dendrogram and original distance matrix, a cophenetic
correlation coefficient was calculated (r = 0.94). Thus, the
dendrogram in Figure 4 is an adequate representation of the
relationships among sets of active rules generated by
random runs of the ACE model.
Classes of Cognitive Strategies of Artistic Practice This
second HCA allows us to better comprehend IH’s general
artistic strategy by examining its boundaries8. The resulting
dendrogram allows us to observe what would happen to the
ACE model’s behavior if we modified its initial conditions.
And, afterward, comparing the clusters of strategies, thus
generated, with IH’s usual strategy will give us further
insight into what makes her own strategy successful.

ask: What are the other possible strategies? What are their
relationships to C6?
Looking at Figure 4, we notice two main strategy clusters.
The first one includes C1, C2, C3, C4; the second one, C5,
C6, C7, C8 (and, thus, includes IH’s strategy). C1, C2, C3,
C4 are the furthest from C6, compared to C5, C7, C8. Why?
C1 and C2 have in common the first and fourth initial
‘stable’ conditions (from Table 1, the absence of: (agent
(name X) (status artist)); and, the presence of: (goal (agent
X) (task taking-my-work-as-an-artist-seriously))). Both
assert that their simulated – ACE – agent does not have the
status of artist. Thus, they do not have to pay for their own
production, be productive, and so on, as IH must. The case
is the same for strategies C3 and C4. We might say that
these four strategy types represent strategies that might be
used by ‘aspiring artists’; these strategies use some of the
operators of IH’s own strategy, but are also lacking many
(i.e., those related to financing one’s own production).
What about strategies closer to IH’s strategy? Unlike C1C2-C3-C4, both C5-C6 and C7-C8 have in common the
asserted fact of having the status of artist (i.e., from Table 1:
(agent (name X) (status artist))). In the simulation, the runs
that later formed clusters C5-C6-C7-C8 (i.e., runs 2, 3, 7, 8,
11, 16, 18, 21, 25, 26) activated many of the E operators
(e.g., FAP, PPI), but the runs forming C1-C2-C3-C4 never
did. Thus, strategies closer to IH’s manage to efficiently
achieve E goals – economic ones.
The closest strategies are those composed of the runs
clustered under C5 (i.e., runs 2, 16, 21, 25). These runs, in
addition to simulating agents having the status of artist,
assert that these have as a goal taking their artistic work
seriously (from Table 1: (goal (agent X) (task taking-mywork-as-an-artist-seriously))). What happens if you combine
this artistic status with serious work? In runs 2, 16, 21, and
25, many operators are active in E; and, as a consequence of
doing the work as an artist seriously, there is more activity
in both the A and C spaces (e.g., the DAS, ARJ, PRA
operators; these ensure that the agent does not stop working
on his or her art, works at it full-time). These strategies,
very close to IH's own, emphasize highly committed work,
both on the artistic front and the career front.
This second HCA mainly emphasizes the importance and
role of both IH’s status as a professional artist and of her
high-level goal of doing her work as an artist seriously – and
of what these initial conditions entail in IH’s general artistic
strategy. To these all-important conditions, IH’s strategy
also adds very significant high-level goals (see sections
“ACE: A Sample Run” and “Cluster Analysis of IH’s Rules
of Practice”): wanting to be an artist her entire life, learning
and doing what she needs to in order to do that, wanting art
to remain a calling, maintaining basic living conditions, and
attaining success as an artist. These high-level goals – and
related operators – distinguish her strategy from other
variations seen here.

Figure 4: Sets of possible strategies for an arts practice
The clustering of the 30 generated sets of active rules,
starting from 30 randomly generated sets of initial ‘stable’
conditions, is shown in Figure 4. Of these 30 randomly
generated sets of ‘stable’ conditions, one took the form of
the binary array [1 1 1 1 1 1], meaning that every initial
stable condition was set to ON; this set is identical to IH’s
stable conditions (Table 1). Thus, it represent IH’s own
artistic strategy (i.e., use of operators, given the initial
conditions of the simulation); in Figure 4, this artistic
strategy is represented by cluster 6 (i.e., C6). In fact, this
strategy is the set of rules we have seen in the previous
simulation run of ACE (Figures 1, 2, 3). Now, knowing that
IH’s general artistic strategy is represented by C6, we might

Conclusions
Previous analyses (Leclerc & Gosselin, 2004) had suggested
three main search spaces, three problem-solving spaces,
were involved in the artistic practice of professional artist
Isabelle Hayeur. Now, a computer model, simulations and

8

This HCA may also serve as a Gedanken, or thought experiment,
suggesting possible general classes of artistic strategies; these
different strategies – sets of operators and artistic goals – would
then suggest different types of artistic strategies.
1673

cluster analyses of the model's behavior further suggest the
role played by these search spaces in this artist's real-life
artistic practice. Further work will need to be done, both
with other artists and other research methods, in order to
validate this three-space model of artistic creation. If
validated, this model could prove useful for the study of
artistic creation and practice-related processes in a similar
way as Klahr and Dunbar's (1988) dual-space model is for
the study of discovery processes in science.
We are currently planning on extending the model to
include the “image-generation space”, the problem-solving
space involved in the image-production activity of the artist
(part of A, but at a finer resolution than the rules presented
here). Further work will also involve expanding and
validating the model; this will include testing the predictions
of the model as these relate to the artist's behavior.

Acknowledgments
We thank Isabelle Hayeur for her generous participation in
this research project and for graciously giving her consent to
the disclosure of confidential information. This research was
supported by a Bourse d’Excellence de l’Université de
Montréal, a scholarship from the Sun Life Corporation, and
a SSHRC grant awarded to Jude Leclerc, and by a NSERC
(249974) and a NATEQ (03NC082052) grant awarded to
Frédéric Gosselin.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1976). Language, memory, and thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (Eds.) (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague :
Mouton.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Clancey, W. J. (2001). Field science ethnography: Methods
for systematic observation on an expedition. Field
Methods, 13, 223-243.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Implications of a systems
perspective for the study of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg
(Ed.), Handbook of creativity (pp. 313-335). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Everitt, B. S., Landau, S., & Leese, M. (2001). Cluster
analysis. (4th ed.). London: Arnold.
Getzels, J. W., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1976). The creative
vision. New York: Wiley.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Jackson, P. (1999). Introduction to expert systems (3rd ed.).
Harlow, England: Addison-Wesley.

Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and
development of discovery processes. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search in
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-55.
Klahr, D., & Simon, H. A. (1999). Studies of scientific
discovery: Complementary approaches and convergent
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 524-543.
Kulkarni, D., & Simon, H. A. (1988). The processes of
scientific discovery: The strategy of experimentation.
Cognitive Science, 12, 139-175.
Langley, P., Simon, H. A., Bradshaw, G. L., & Zytkow, J.
M. (1987). Scientific discovery: Computational
explorations of the creative processes. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Leclerc, J., & Gosselin, F. (2003). [Interviews with Isabelle
Hayeur]. Unpublished raw data.
Leclerc, J., & Gosselin, F. (2004). Processes of artistic
creativity: The case of Isabelle Hayeur. In K. Forbus, D.
Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the TwentySixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 801-806). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
McGraw, K. L., & Harbison-Briggs, K. L. (1989).
Knowledge acquisition: Principles and guidelines.
Englewoods Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Meyer, M., & Booker, J. (1991). Eliciting and analyzing
expert judgment: A practical guide. London: Academic
Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (2004). Interpreting scientific and
engineering practices: Integrating the cognitive, social,
and cultural dimensions. In M. Gorman, R. Tweney, D.
Gooding, & A. Kincannon (Eds.), New directions in
scientific and technical thinking (pp. 17-56). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1965). Limitations of the
current stock of ideas for problem solving. In A. Kent &
O. Taulbee (Eds.), Conference on electronic information
handling (pp. 195-208). Washington, DC: Spartan Books.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewoods Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Norman, D. A. (Ed.) (1993). Special issue on situated action
[Special issue]. Cognitive Science, 17(1).
Post, E. L. (1943). Formal reductions of the general
combinatorial decision problem. American Journal of
Mathematics, 65, 197-215.
Romesburg, H. C. (1984). Cluster analysis for researchers.
London: Lifetime Learning.
Schunn, C. D., & Anderson, J. R. (1998). Scientific
discovery. In J. R. Anderson & C. Lebiere (Eds.), The
atomic components of thought (pp. 385-427). Mahwah,
NJ : Erlbaum.
Thagard, P. (1999). How scientists explain disease.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Weisberg, R. W. (1993). Creativity: Beyond the myth of
genius. New York: Freeman.

1674

