UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Amnesia, Memory, and the Implicit/Explicit Learning Distinction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2zb5m1wb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Ritchie, J. Brendan

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Amnesia, Memory, and the Implicit/Explicit Learning Distinction
J. Brendan Ritchie (SENECA.Y@Gmail.Com)
Department of Philosophy, 453 University College
Winnipeg, MB, R3T 2M8 Canada

David Shanks and colleagues (Shanks & St. John 1994;
Kinder & Shanks 2001, 2003).
In the remains of this paper I take up the arguments and
results of Shanks and Mark St. John (1994), as well as
Shanks’ work with Annette Kinder (2001, 2003). I will argue
such research fails to show the irrelevance of results from
studies of amnesiacs.
While not the only researchers to be critical of multi-model
theories of learning and memory (e.g. see Roediger 1990) the
work of Shanks and others is especially relevant. This is
because in the case of Kinder & Shanks they focus solely on
amnesia and implicit learning, rather than implicit forms of
learning and memory, and, in the case of Shanks & St. John
are widely cited, so it is important to see where their
arguments fail.

Abstract
Whether or not a disassociation between implicit and explicit
learning can be proven experimentally has been widely
contested. In this paper I am concerned with the arguments
that David Shanks and colleagues have made for why results
from work on amnesia are: (a) not relevant to the debate
(Shanks & St. John, 1994), and (b) can be simulated by
connectionist models that do not involve distinct learning
systems (Kinder & Shanks, 2001, 2003): making amnesia
irrelevant. None of the arguments that Shanks and colleagues
make succeed at proving either (a) or (b).
Keywords: amnesia; implicit learning; explicit learning
episodic memory; disassociation; connectionism; hippocampus.

Background
Since Reber (1967) first used the term ‘implicit learning’
there has been much debate as to whether or not a distinction
can be shown between implicit and explicit forms of learning:
this being especially true of the last 15 or so years (Shanks
2005: 204).
Naturally, various methods have been used to try and prove
the case, both for and against, the implicit/explicit learning
distinction. Especially common, for example, are the
Artificial Grammar Learning (AGL) experiments first
conducted by Reber (1967). Reber had subjects study
seemingly nonsense letter strings, such as VXVS, and then
told them that the strings were constructed using a set of rules.
The subjects were then informed that in the next stage of the
experiment they would have to try and determine which
strings were grammatical, and which were not. Subjects
displayed an above chance ability for identifying grammatical
letter strings, but could not report what the grammatical rules
were. Thus, it was concluded, the rules had been learned
implicitly.
Such work, however, is far from conclusive. For instance,
Perruchet & Pacteau (1990) found that subjects are successful
at determining which strings are grammatical if they only
study letter pairs, such as VX, and not full letter strings. If
this is right, then it is mistaken to expect subjects to report
rules, since knowledge of pairs is enough for determining
which strings are grammatical. The hypothesis being that
learning letter pairs caused the desired results, which subjects
can report familiarity with, rather than implicitly learned
rules.
Despite such difficulties many researchers (e.g. Knowlton,
Ramus & Squire, 1992) think that methods like AGL
experiments can overcome such difficulties by using
amnesiacs in the place of normal subjects. In light of this,
whether studies of amnesiacs provide any novel defense of the
implicit/explicit learning distinction has been questioned.
Especially prominent in this regard has been the work of

2026

The Irrelevance of Amnesia
This section is split into two parts: part one responds to the
target article of Shanks & St. John (1994) who argue that
evidence from work on amnesia is undermined by the fact
that some amnesiacs suffer from only partial deficits to
explicit learning. Part two objects to the arguments made in
response to commentary on Shanks & St. John (1994).

Implicit Learning and Implicit Retrieval
According to Shanks & St. John implicit learning occurs if
there is (i) learning that is not accompanied with awareness of
the information being learned, and (ii) a separate system from
the one that operates during more common forms of learning
(1994: 368). In contrast, implicit retrieval is retrieval where
the information from a past experience is recalled and
influences current processing without conscious recall of the
prior experience (Shanks & St. John, 1994: 372).1 Shanks &
St. John hold that, while a case of implicit learning entails the
occurrence of implicit retrieval, it is not the case that implicit
retrieval entails implicit learning.
As an example, suppose a subject emits a galvanic skin
response (GSR) in response to a conditioning stimulus (CS):
a tone; the CS previously being paired with an unconditioned
stimulus (US): a shock. When the subject emits the GSR, one
of three things might have occurred:
1. The subject is able to explicitly recall the study episode:
the subject can verbally report or somehow show evidence of
recalling the study episode. Perhaps the subject remembers
where the shock was administered, or from where the tone
was being emitted. This would fail to be a case of implicit
retrieval, since the subject can consciously recall the study
episode.
1

This definition follows that of Schacter (1987).

2. The subject cannot consciously recall the study episode,
but shows evidence of semantic memory of the learning
episode: the subject might know that the tone precedes a
shock, but not where the information was learned. According
to Shanks & St. John, this would count as a case of implicit
retrieval, but not as a case of implicit learning.
3. The subject cannot recall the study episode, nor can the
subject show evidence of semantic memory. In contrast to
the last scenario, the subject would not know that the tone
precedes a shock. This would count as a case of both implicit
retrieval and learning.
As stated, (2) and (3) are cases of implicit retrieval, but
only the latter is a case of implicit learning (Shanks & St.
John, 1994: 372). If it were the case that amnesiacs provide
evidence for implicit learning, then amnesiac subjects would
exhibit behaviour characteristic of (3), and according to
Shanks & St. John they fail to do so. This is because on the
one hand an amnesic patient will respond normally to a CS,
but fail to recall the study episode. But, on the other hand,
the amnesiac subject “may well have been” able to verbally
report that the US is followed by the CS (Shanks & St. John,
1994: 394). The ability of amnesiacs to show evidence of
semantic knowledge in a GSR test means they do not display
behaviour found in (3). Following the episodic/semantic
distinction of Tulving (1983), Shanks & St. John suggest that
while many studies (e.g. Weiskrantz & Warrington, 1979)
show a failure of episodic memory, there is evidence of
conscious rule learning in amnesiacs (e.g. Wood, Ebert &
Kinsbourne, 1982), which is comparable to showing less than
a total failure of semantic memory. Since episodic and
semantic memory are thought to be forms of explicit
memory, the fact that amnesiacs only show a failure of one
kind of explicit memory does not suggest a disassociation
between the analogous distinction between explicit and
implicit learning.
I will assume that there is good reason to think that some
amnesiac subjects seem to suffer from a failure of episodic
memory, but not of semantic memory. Vargha-Khadem,
Gadian, Watkins, Connelly, Van Paesschen & Mishkin
(1997) discuss three cases of anterograde2 amnesia where the
subjects were able to acquire factual information, in spite of
their severe anterograde amnesia. In all three cases, the
damage was entirely restricted to the hippocampus. There
was no damage to the surrounding cortical areas (the limbic
cortex or the medial temporal lobe). In all the cases the
damage occurred very early in life and the subjects attended
school where performance was relatively good. They could
not remember anything of their daily experiences, but, as
evident from the fact they did reasonably at school, they were
able to gain a vast amount of abstract knowledge. This study
by Vargha-Khadem et al. suggests that damage to the
hippocampus only affects episodic memory, but leaves
semantic memory unscathed.3

So far I have cited one case that gives support to Shanks &
St. John’s assertion that amnesiacs suffer from a failure of
episodic, but not semantic, memory. But the case described
above is not exhaustive of the variations that can be found
between patients who suffer from amnesia. There is good
reason to think that a disassociation exists between episodic
and semantic memory, so it is no surprise that some subjects
can be impaired in their ability to gain episodic knowledge,
but not semantic knowledge. To show that amnesiacs do not
meet (3) it would have to be the case that amnesiacs, in the
majority of cases, only have impairment to episodic memory.
As the following study shows, this is hardly the case.
In support of Vargha-Khadem et al.’s study, Verfaellie,
Koseff & Alexander (2000) studied two amnesiacs that had
contrasting deficits. Patient SS suffered from bilateral
damage to the medial temporal lobe. This included damage
to the anterior hippocampus, amygdala, entorhinal and
perirhinal cortices leading to the septal regions and insular
cortex (Verfaellie, Koseff & Alexander, 2000: 486). SS, who
before suffering the damage to his medial temporal lobe was
of above average intelligence, showed poor performance in
the experiments, which tested for evidence of acquiring new
knowledge. In contrast to SS, patient PS suffered only from a
reduction in volume to the hippocampus, and performed far
better than SS on tests for the acquisition of new knowledge.
Both SS and PS exhibited severe failure of episodic memory.
By way of illustration, here are some of the results of
Verfaellie, Koseff & Alexander. The first set of tasks tested
to see whether or not SS and PS could remember words that
had been introduced into use during different periods of time
after the onset of amnesia. The recall task required the
subjects to provide definitions for the words, while the
recognition task had them select definitions from a list of
plausible candidates. For the recall task SS’s average score
was 16. 3% compared to a mean score of 83.5% (SD=15.9)
for controls. On the recall task PS did not fair much better
than SS, with an average score of 23.9% while the mean for
controls was 70.3% (SD=18.1). On the recognition task,
again, SS did poorly with an average score of 30.4% (14/46,
with chance cut-off at 17/46). However, on the recognition
test PS faired much better with a score of 68.8% (22/32, with
chance cut-off at 13/32), but was still impaired relative to the
90.8% (SD=4.2) of controls.
In an experiment that tested for knowledge of faces of
people who had become famous after the onset of amnesia PS
again faired better than SS. On the fame judgment task SS
performed just at the chance cut-off 61.7% (37/60) compared
to a score of 82% (SD=6.4) for controls. On the face
identification task SS scored 10.2% to the 61.7% (SD=12.5)
of controls. PS scored above chance on the fame judgment
task with an average of 75% (27/36, with chance cut-off
24/36) compared to the 87.2% (SD=8) of controls. Like SS,

2

For the whole of this paper I am only discussing subjects with
anterograde amnesia.
3
Tulving & Markowitsch (1998) discuss the implications of
Vargha-Khadem et al.’s study. But see Zola, Squire, Teng,
Stenfanacci, Buffalo & Clark (2000) who suggest that the presence
of semantic memory, in the absence of episodic memory, might be

the result of some sort of compensation, not seen in adults who
suffer damage to the hippocampus later in life. Though in another
study by Baddeley, Vargha-Khadem & Mishkin (2001) that
involved one of the three subjects, results were consistent with
those of Vargha-Khadem et al. (1997).
2027

PS did poorly on the face identification task: 15.3%
compared to controls: 68.1 (SD=12.2).4
This summary of the work of Verfaellie, Koseff &
Alexander shows that amnesiac subjects can vary in how their
memory is affected by brain damage (the variation seeming to
depend on whether it is the hippocampus or surrounding
cortical areas that have been damaged). Obviously, it is not
paradigmatic of subjects that they suffer from a failure of
episodic, but not semantic, memory. This can be seen by the
fact that SS was impaired regardless of whether the task
required recognition or recall, which is in contrast to PS for
whom only recall was impaired.
Indeed, amnesiac subjects who suffer from deficits to both
episodic and semantic memory have been studied for quite
some time. In a study of subject HM Gabrieli, Cohen, &
Corkin (1988) found that he showed no knowledge of words
that had been introduced since the onset of his amnesia. HM
suffers from severe damage to the hippocampus and
surrounding cortical areas: making his case of amnesia
similar to that of SS.
Thus, even if one is unconvinced by the results of
Verfaellie, Koseff & Alexander one can easily point to other
results to make the same point I am making here: namely, it
seems that amnesic subjects can experience a deficit in both
episodic and semantic memory. Most likely this is from
damage to the hippocampus and other cortical areas. Thus, in
SS we have a case of an individual who fits the criteria for
scenario (3): someone who would fail to recall a study
episode, and fail to exhibit evidence of semantic knowledge
of that episode. Therefore, Shanks & St. John have not yet
proven that amnesiacs fail to exhibit implicit learning.

classification task. Presumably, a subject will be motivated
to use all consciously available information on the
recognition task. Therefore, the information relevant to the
implicit task must not have been learned explicitly. This
would qualify as a case of implicit retrieval, and it is
reasonable to assume it was unconscious at the time it was
learned.
2. An amnesic subject performs above chance on the
recognition task, and performs above chance on the implicit
classification task. Here it is not a given that the subjects had
access to certain information on the implicit test, which they
did not have access to on the explicit test. This is because
recognition and classification tasks are measured in different
ways. The controls presumably have access to more
information than the amnesiacs on recognition task, but the
two groups perform equally well on the classification task
because this extra information does not affect implicit
retrieval. So the above-chance performance on the implicit
test is due to information that is only available unconsciously,
which the amnesiac subjects have full access to.
According to Shanks & St. John, it is the second of the
above arguments that is relevant to implicit learning
experiments. If it is the case that amnesiacs are impaired on
the implicit test as well relative to controls, then the argument
does not succeed. This is because it opens the possibility that
the superior performance of controls on the implicit test is
due to the extra explicit knowledge the controls have access
to. As Shanks & St. John go on to argue, in most cases,
implicit knowledge is either certainly impaired, or it is
unclear whether or not it is impaired (1994: 436).
It is certainly to be expected that both PS and SS would be
impaired on tests of implicit learning. And I would agree that
one would be hard pressed to find a study where subjects
performed at the same level as controls. However, there are
two responses that can be made to Shanks & St. John. First,
it is far too stringent to expect subjects to perform at the same
level as controls on an implicit test, which Shanks & St. John
expect (1994: 436). In fact, even if a clear dissociation of
implicit and explicit learning was shown to exist, one should
expect some impairment to the learning system that was not
directly damaged. This is because any two systems that
would operate as closely as two learning systems would
inevitably be affected to some degree if one of the systems
were severely damaged.
Consider olfaction and gestation. As a child, you might
remember that if you held your nose when forced to eat
something you disliked (I hated spinach) it wouldn’t taste as
bad. Let us assume that when I was a child I could hold my
nose very tightly, causing almost complete obstruction of
olfaction. I would still taste the spinach pretty well, but it
wouldn’t taste nearly as bad as it would if I had not held my
nose. Plugging my nose is analogous to the sort of implicit
and explicit tests that Shanks & St. John are criticizing: one
system is severely impaired causing a lesser impairment to
another system. Yet it does not seem warranted to conclude
that olfaction and gestation can be explained by the same
system, even though they are closely related. Likewise, it
seems unwarranted to conclude that because amnesiacs are
impaired on implicit tests, implicit and explicit learning can
be explained by one system.

Partial vs. Complete Disassociation
In response to commentary that evidence from work on
amnesia is pertinent to the debate over the implicit/explicit
learning distinction Shanks & St. John give a different
argument against the relevance of amnesia. Several studies
have found that amnesiacs are impaired on tests of explicit,
but not implicit, knowledge. Given the discussion above, this
much should be clear. Had SS been given Milner’s (1965)
mirror drawing task chances are SS would have performed
equally well as HM who was able to become quite skilled at
the task in spite of the fact that he could not remember any of
the instances he had practiced it. Presumably SS would have
performed about the same. Knowlton, Ramus & Squire
(1992) tested amnesic subjects in AGL experiments, like
those of Reber (1967). Subjects performed almost as well as
control subjects on classification tasks. On a recognition task
the amnesic subjects performed much worse than the control
subjects. Although many think such results provide evidence
of implicit learning, the reasoning for why is not often
explicitly given (Shanks & St. John, 1994: 436). Shanks &
St. John suggest that depending on the results of the
recognition tests the reasoning could be of two forms:
1. An amnesiac subject performs at chance on the
recognition task, but performs above chance on the implicit
4

See Verfaellie, Koseff & Alexander (2000: 488-491) for
methods, results, and discussion.
2028

amnesiacs perform as well as controls on classification tasks.
Thus, such studies support evidence from other research that
posit distinct learning systems. Kinder & Shanks (2001)
present a Simple Recurrent Network (SRN) model that
achieves the same test results as those achieved by amnesiacs
in AGL experiments.
In their model, Kinder & Shanks assumed that recognition
and classification are functionally the same: that one system
is responsible for both recognition and classification (2001:
649).
Following this assumption, Kinder & Shanks
manipulated the model by changing the learning rate to
account for the general differences in memory ability
between amnesiacs and controls. Learning rate affects the
whole of a SRN: if I set the learning rate at x, then the
learning rate of each individual node in the network is x.
Thus, one parameter is manipulated and changes the system
at a global scale. Kinder & Shanks conclude that a single
learning system can account for the evidence found from
research on amnesia. Since their SRN model performed in
the same way as amnesiacs do on AGL experiments, and the
SRN model involves one learning system, there is no reason
to posit distinct learning systems.
Kinder & Shanks (2003) again did a similar study, which
sought to mimic the evidence found for a disassociation
between recognition and priming suggested by research on
amnesiacs. Kinder & Shanks followed the experiments of
Keane, Gabrieli, Mapstone, Johnson & Corkin (1995), which
found amnesiacs to be impaired on recognition task, but not
on priming tasks. Again, Kinder & Shanks assumed that
amnesia is characterized by a general learning impairment
and manipulated the learning rate in their model in both tasks
(2003: 738-739). Again, Kinder & Shanks found that their
results matched those of the study they targeted.
Given such findings, Kinder & Shanks held that their
studies undermine the support that research on amnesia has
given the implicit/explicit learning distinction. Most have
thought that given the poor performance of amnesiacs on
recognition tasks, compared to their performance on
classification and priming tasks, studies on amnesiacs provide
support for the distinction. But, since SRN models can
produce the same results as amnesic and control subjects
learning can be adequately explained using a single learning
system.

Second, following some commentators (Nagata 1994; Reber
& Winter 1994), we can respond to Shanks & St. John in the

following way: if a greater amount of explicit knowledge is
available to controls compared to amnesiacs, and the same
amount of implicit knowledge is available to both controls
and amnesiacs, then a disassociation has been shown. The
reasoning is that if both kinds of tests were of the same
learning system, then we would expect amnesiacs to score
lower on implicit tests than they actually do. The large
discrepancy on the explicit test cannot be reconciled with the
small discrepancy on the implicit test if we try to explain the
results using a single system.
Shanks & St. John’s response is that the scores from
explicit tests are not comparable to scores on implicit tests
(1994: n.1).5 Just because percentages are used to represent
scores on both tests, it does not follow that we can compare
these percentages across tests. I think that this response
misses the point.
As an example, let us again use Milner’s mirror-drawing
test. Suppose that I was brought in as a control whose results
would be compared to those of HM. In this case, let the
explicit test just be a series of questions that are meant to test
episodic memory and semantic memory for the learning
phase: I score a 90% on this test. Suppose that the implicit
test is just to see if I retain my ability to do the mirrordrawing task: I am given a grade of A. On the recall test HM
does dismally, with a score of 52%. On the implicit test HM
receives a grade of B+, which is comparable to my A.
Shanks & St. John charge that it would be wrong to compare
HM’s score of 52% to his grade of B+, and I agree. For one
thing, the level of chance is no doubt different, not to mention
other possible differences. But this is not what the
commentators suggest: rather, we compare HM’s score of
52% to my 90%, and we compare HM’s B+ to my A.
In fact, the grading on the implicit test could be done using
any form of measurement for differentiating between
performances: it is unimportant. What is important is the
difference that is found on a single test between subjects and
controls. In the mock experiment HM does far worse than I
on the explicit test, however, HM performs almost as well as
I do on the implicit test. If we compare HM’s results to mine,
then his explicit knowledge is far more impaired than his
implicit knowledge. This is all that is needed for a
disassociation between explicit and implicit learning systems
to be shown to exist.

What SRN Models Do Not Prove About Learning
Nothing about Kinder & Shanks’ models allow them to infer
that they have undermined the support that research on
amnesia gives the explicit/implicit learning distinction. We
can assume it is true that their models’ results match those of
Knowlton, Ramus & Squire and others, but this is only half
the battle. Connectionist models can achieve any pattern of
results, if the model is large enough, or parameters are
manipulated in the right way. But there are two conditions
that a connectionist model must meet if we want to conclude
that the model accurately mimics some collection of results,
let alone can be said to be the sort of system found in
humans:

Connectionist Models of Amnesia
More recently, Kinder & Shanks (2001, 2003) have argued
that, since they can create connectionist models that mimic
results from work on amnesia, a single system can explain the
apparent disassociation between explicit and implicit
learning. In part one of this section I summarize their work,
which I follow with my response in part two.

Recognition, Classification, and Priming
Several studies (Knowlton, Ramus & Squire, 1992; Knowlton
& Squire, 1994, 1996) have found that in AGL experiments
5

This is note one in the authors’ response to commentary.
2029

1992: 173).6 In fact, since the results of Knowlton, Ramus &
Squire were obtained using amnesiacs that suffered from
lesions to different brain areas, the results would only be
accurately mimicked if the manipulations Kinder & Shanks
made on their models were changed to account for lesion
groupings. One has to do more than manipulate a single
parameter to accurately simulate their results.
Keane et al. (1995) studied two subjects, LH and HM. LH
suffered from bilateral occipital lobe lesions, while HM
suffers from bilateral medial temporal lobe lesions (to the
hippocampus and surrounding regions). As is usual, HM was
not impaired in visual priming tasks, but LH was impaired on
the visual priming tasks.7 Obviously the subjects studied by
Keane et al. did not suffer from global deficits in learning in
the brain, since lesions caused their deficits.
Given the discussion above, I see no prevailing reason why
research on amnesia cannot be used as evidence of a
disassociation between explicit and implicit learning systems.

1. The model’s performance is identical to the
performance of the subjects it is designed to mimic in its
performance.
2. The model achieves the same results as the subjects it
is designed to mimic by being manipulated in a manner
analogous to that which caused the subjects’
performance.
The SRN models of Kinder & Shanks seem to meet the first
condition, or we can assume that they do, since it is the
second condition that their studies fail to meet. What we are
interested in is whether or not a disassociation can be found
between implicit and explicit forms of learning. Thus, if we
are to investigate certain deficits that are found in some
individuals, then we are interested in the deficits themselves
and in what appears to have caused those deficits. In the
studies mentioned earlier, depending on whether damage is to
the hippocampus or surrounding cortical regions, one seems
to find different deficits.
If I want to explain a deficit that is caused by lesions it is no
help to make a model that achieves the same deficit if the
model is manipulated at a global scale. To explain a
cognitive deficit with a connectionist model it is not enough
to just have it mimic the performance of subjects with the
deficit: you also have to mimic the cause of the deficit.
It is widely known that amnesia usually involves some sort
of lesion, and not global neural change in some area of the
medial temporal lobe. One could make a SRN model that
mimics the performance of SS and PS, but if the model relies
on manipulating the learning rate, then it has failed to explain
the deficits of SS and PS. Kinder & Shanks (2001) briefly
address the idea that a more “straightforward” way of trying
to induce amnesia in the model would be to directly lesion it
(2001: 663). Kinder & Shanks claim that, by removing part
of the hidden layer and copy units of their model, they
produced results that were similar those found with amnesiac
subjects, but Kinder & Shanks do not report these results.
However, even assuming that such lesions did cause the
SRN model to perform exactly like an amnesiac subject
Kinder & Shanks still would not have shown that their single
system model explained the deficits of amnesiacs. It is not
enough to lesion the model, since the lesions should be
similar to those found in amnesiacs. It is of course too much
to expect Kinder & Shanks’ models to be organized like the
hippocampus and surrounding regions. But in order for
Kinder & Shanks to draw their strong conclusion, it would
have to be the case that they manipulated their models in a
way that was at least similar to the sorts of lesions found in
the amnesiacs whom Knowlton, Ramus & Squire and others
studied.
In the studies that Kinder & Shanks targeted amnesiac
subjects did not suffer from global damage to learning
centers. Knowlton, Ramus & Squire (1992) tested 13
amnesiac subjects: 6 of the subjects suffered from
diencephalic amnesia (from Korsakoff’s syndrome, thalamic
infarction, or penetrating brain injury), and the other 7 from
confirmed (or expected) damage to the hippocampus. In all
cases, lesion to the diencephalons or hippocampus was
responsible for the amnesia (Knowlton, Ramus & Squire,

Acknowledgments
Thank you to Jason Leboe, Tim Schroeder, and three
anonymous referees for helpful discussion of and/or
comments on earlier drafts of this paper.

References
Baddeley, A., Vargha-Khadem F., & Mishkin, M. (2001).
Preserved recognition in a case of developmental amnesia:
Implications for the acquisition of semantic memory?
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 357-369.
Gabrieli, J., Cohen, N., & Corkin, S. (1988). The impaired
learning of semantic knowledge following bilateral medial
temporal-lobe resection. Brain and Cognition, 7, 157-177.
Keane, M., Gabrieli, J., Mapstone, H., Johnson, K., & Corkin
S. (1995). Double dissociation of memory capacities after
bilateral occipital lobe or medial temporal lobe lesions.
Brain, 118, 1129-1148.
Kinder, A., & Shanks, D. (2001). Amnesia and the
declarative/nondeclarative distinction: a recurrent network
model of classification, recognition, and repetition priming.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 648-669.
Kinder, A., & Shanks, D. (2003). Neurophysiological
dissociations between priming and recognition: s singlesystem connectionist account. Psychological Review, 110,
728-744.
Knowlton, B., Ramus, S., & Squire, L. (1992). Intact artificial
grammar learning in amnesia: Evidence for parallel
learning of item-specific and general information.
Psychological Science, 3, 172-179.
Knowlton, B., & Squire, L. (1994). The information acquired
during artificial grammar learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 79-91.
Knowlton, B., & Squire, L. (1996). Artificial grammar
learning depends on implicit acquisition of both abstract
6

Knowlton and Squire (1994, 1996) studied the same subjects as
Knowlton et al.
7
LH suffers from Alzheimer’s, but unlike most subjects with this
condition, he has a deficit in visual priming and not in conceptual
priming. See Keane et al. (1995).
2030

Shanks, D., & St. Johns, M. (1994). Characteristics of
dissociable human learning systems. Behavior and Brain
Sciences, 17, 367-440.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York:
Oxford.
Tulving, E. & Markowitsch, H. (1998). Episodic and
declarative memory: Role of the hippocampus.
Hippocampus, 8, 198-204.
Vargha-Khadem, F., Gadian, D., Watkins, K., Connelly, A.,
Van Paesschen, W., & Mishkin, M. (1997). Differential
effects of early hippocampal pathology on episodic and
semantic memory. Science, 277, 376-380.
Verfaellie, M., Koseff, P., & Alexander, M. (2000).
Acquisition of novel semantic information in amnesia:
effects of lesion location. Neuropsychologia, 38, 484-492.
Weiskrantz, L., & Warrington, E. (1979) Conditioning in
amnesiac patients. Neuropsychologia, 17, 187-194.
Wood, F., Ebert, V., & Kinsbourne, M. (1982). The episodicsemantic distinction in memory and amnesia: Clinical and
experimental observations. In L. Cermak (Ed), Human
memory and amnesia. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Zola, S., Squire, L., Teng, E., Stenfanacci, L., Buffalo, E., &
Clark, R. (2000). Impaired recognition memory in monkeys
after damage limited to the hippocampal region. Journal of
Neuroscience, 20, 451-463.

and
exemplar-specific
information.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 169-181.
Milner, B. (1965). Memory disturbance after bilateral
hippocampal lesions. In P. Milner & S. Glickman (Eds.),
Cognitive Processes and the Brain. Princeton: Van
Nostrand.
Nagata, H. (1994). Faulty rational for the two factors that
disassociate learning systems. Behavior and Brain
Sciences, 17, 412.
Perruchet, P., & Pacteau, C. (1990) Synthetic grammar
learning: implicit rule abstraction or explicit fragmentary
knowledge? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
119, 264-275.
Reber, A. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammar.
Journal of Learning and Verbal Behavior, 5, 855-863.
Reber, A., & Winter, B. (1994). What manner of mind is this?
Behavior and Brain Sciences, 17, 418.
Roediger, H. (1990) Implicit memory: retention without
remembering. American Psychologist, 42, 1043-1056.
Schacter, D. (1987). Implicit memory: history and current
status. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13, 501-518.
Shanks, D. (2005). Implicit Learning. In K. Lamberts & R.
Goldstone (Eds.), Handbook of cognition. London: Sage.

2031

