UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Analysis of the CARIN Model of Conceptual Combination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tz8n0v1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Cater, Arthur W.S.
Costello, Fintan
Devereux, Barry
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Analysis of the CARIN Model of Conceptual Combination
Barry Devereux (Barry.Devereux@ucd.ie)1
Phil Maguire (Phil.Maguire@ucd.ie)
Fintan Costello (Fintan.Costello@ucd.ie)
Arthur Cater (Arthur.Cater@ucd.ie)
School of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland

Abstract
The CARIN model of conceptual combination (Gagné
& Shoben, 1997) assumes that people interpret nounnoun compounds by selecting a relation to link the
two constituent nouns from a fixed list of possible
relations.
The model uses statistical information
about the frequency with which the modifiers of
compounds have been associated with different possible
thematic relations in past experience. The CARIN
model describes how relation selection could involve
competition between relations; Gagné and Shoben have
shown that response strengths computed by the model
correlate with people’s reaction times when judging the
sensibility of compounds. We present data in support
of the CARIN model’s assumption that people store
statistical information about relation frequency: an
analysis of representative compounds selected from a
corpus produced frequencies that agreed with those
derived by Gagné and Shoben. We also present an
analysis of the equation proposed in the CARIN model,
showing that it does not provide for competition among
relations in the manner asserted by the theory. We
propose a simple alternative mechanism for relation
selection in compounds whereby response times for
a given compound are proportional to the number
of frequent relations that must be considered before
reaching the correct relation.

Keywords: Conceptual combination; noun-noun compounds; CARIN; mathematical modelling.

Introduction
For speakers of English and many other languages, nounnoun compounds such as volcano science or gas crisis
are a productive and efficient strategy for referring to
novel concepts and ideas. In English, compounds consist of a modifier noun followed by a head noun: the head
noun typically denotes the main category and the modifier indicates a contrast or specialization of this category
(e.g. a kitchen chair is a type of chair typically found in
kitchens). Both lexicalized and spontaneous compounds
are ubiquitous phenomena in everyday language, providing a concise way to reference concepts. Such concision
can be exploited when the addresser is confident that the
addressee can interpret the phrase in its reduced state
using their knowledge of the situation. This interpretation process can be dependent on an accompanying
context or alternatively the meaning of the constituent
nouns alone may be sufficient for comprehension.
1
The first two listed authors should equally be regarded
as first author

There has been much interest in this phenomenon
within cognitive psychology due to the fact that the
study of concept combination presents a well-defined domain which retains the potential to reveal much about
conceptual representation and language comprehension
in general. Consequently, many different models of concept combination have been proposed (e.g. Costello &
Keane, 2000; Wisniewski, 1997). Most of these models have tended to converge on the view that during the
interpretation process, the basic head noun category is
somehow refined or modified by the modifier concept.
One theory which has adopted a different view is the
Competition Among Relations In Nominals (CARIN)
model (Gagné & Shoben, 1997). According to the
CARIN model, the interpretation of a compound occurs
when a person identifies a relation that exists between
the modifier and the head noun. The number of potential relation types (called thematic relations) is restricted
to a set of about 16, including basic relation types such
as located and for. According to the theory, the accessibility of thematic relations determines the ease with
which the compound can be understood. Accessibility
of thematic relations was estimated by determining the
frequencies with which different thematic relations cooccurred with different modifiers and heads in a large
corpus of compounds. This allowed them to identify
which thematic relations were most common for the different modifiers and heads. For example, the modifier
mountain was found to combine with the location relation far more than with any other relation type (in
compounds such as mountain cloud, mountain stream,
and mountain goat). After analyzing response times
for a sample of compounds incorporated into a sensibility judgment task, it was found that the distribution
of thematic relation preferences of the modifier noun influenced response time but that this was not the case for
the head noun. In other words, Gagné and Shoben’s findings suggest that the fact that mountain was frequently
associated with the location relation appears to influence
response times for compounds involving mountain as a
modifier, whereas the fact that magazine was frequently
associated with the about relation does not appear to
have any effect for compounds involving magazine as a
head. At first blush, this modifier primacy effect seems
surprising given that previous theories have emphasized
the importance of both constituents, and have usually
viewed conceptual combination as a modification of the
head noun concept.
However, one problem with this evidence is that it is

1222

based on relation frequencies which are not derived from
a representative sample of compounds. The CARIN theory offers no reasons why one would expect frequencies
derived in the manner of Gagné and Shoben’s study to
approximate true statistical frequencies. Storms and
Wisniewski (in press) have pointed out that the compounds on which Gagné and Shoben based their frequencies are not compounds which would be expected to
occur naturally (e.g. flu candy, rain lake, headache season). Storms and Wisniewski attempted to rectify this
by using compounds generated by experimental participants. However, participants tend to generate mostly
obvious compounds (with more common relations) than
less obvious ones (with rarer relations), meaning that
these too do not reflect a naturally occurring sample
of compounds. To our knowledge, no study so far has
collected representative frequency data from a sample
of compounds occurring in everyday language. In this
article we address this oversight by means of a corpus
study and evaluate the implications of our findings for
the CARIN theory.

Estimating Relation Frequency
In Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) original study relation
frequency data were gathered as follows. First, 91 heads
and 91 modifiers taken from Levi (1978) were paired in
every possible combination, producing 8,281 compounds,
of which 3,239 were judged to be sensible. These were
classified into the 16 relation categories used with the
CARIN model. The frequency with which a relation
was associated with a given noun was determined by
calculating the percentage of sensible compounds having
that noun and relation. For example, for the head noun
cloud, the located relation had a frequency of 13%: 13%
of the sensible compounds with the head noun cloud used
the located relation.
However, it is doubtful whether such a sample is representative enough to accurately reflect the relation type
distribution of a given noun. It would seem intuitive
that different modifiers often combine with quite different heads (and vice versa). (For example, the head noun
debate may occur with modifiers which are a type of social concept (e.g. war, government, or globalization) far
more often than heads in general do. Such nuances are
not taken into account in Gagné and Shoben’s pairing
methodology. Furthermore, such arbitrary pairings are
likely to include a large proportion of unfamiliar compounds.
Unfortunately, no study investigating CARIN thus far
has examined the true incidence of combinational variance in everyday life. We therefore derived a fully representative, corpus-based set of relation frequencies with
which to test the robustness of the CARIN theory. We
believed that deriving more accurate frequencies would
allow us to assess the accuracy of previous methods in
estimating the actual frequencies of relations.

Corpus Study
In order to carry out this analysis we needed to consult
a large corpus that was representative of naturally oc-

1223

curring language and which could be expected to yield
a sufficient number of compounds for given heads and
modifiers. We used the British National Corpus (BNC)
World Edition, a tagged corpus containing over 100 million words. Noun-noun sequences were identified using
GSearch (Corley et al., 2001), a chart parser that detects
syntactic patterns in a tagged corpus via a user-specified
context-free grammar and a syntactic query.

Method
In our study, we aimed to generate new frequency data
for a subset of the 91 heads and 91 modifiers that Gagné
and Shoben used in their corpus study, namely the 19
heads and 19 modifiers that are used in Gagné and
Shoben’s (1997) Experiment 1. To this end, we extracted
from the BNC a random sample of 100 modifier-noun
phrases for each of the 19 modifiers and each of the 19
heads. In selecting a sample of 100 valid compounds for
each noun, we were forced to resolve the issue of noun
ambiguity. For example, terms such as plant and album
are ambiguous and were found to combine in different
senses (e.g. nuclear plant vs. flower plant, photo album
vs. rock album). However, as the materials in Gagné
and Shoben’s experiments suggest that noun ambiguity
was ignored when materials were being created for their
experiments, we also ignored this issue. To resolve potential ambiguities in compound meaning we presented
each compound within its BNC sentential context. A
random sample of 100 valid compounds was extracted
from each sample for the purpose of deriving relation
type frequencies and in the seven cases where there were
less than 100 valid compounds, all were used. In total,
1,832 modifier and 1,669 head compounds were used to
derive the frequencies which compares favorably with the
1,037 modifier and 878 head compounds used by Gagné
and Shoben for the same materials.
The first two authors classified each of these 3,501
compounds into the most appropriate thematic relation
categories. We did not find the task of classifying the
compounds into relation categories to be straightforward, however. We found that it was rarely the case
that there was a single clearly appropriate thematic relation for a given compound. For example, it is difficult
to judge whether family activities is best classified as
belonging to the has relation (i.e. “family has activities”), the located relation (i.e. “activities in a family”), or indeed the for (“activities for families”), causes
(“families cause activities”), or by (“activities by families”) relations. This suggests a significant difficulty
with the thematic relation approach; thematic relations
are too vague and ill-defined to serve as adequate representations of the specific relationships that are instantiated during conceptual combination. However, since
our rating task required us to follow Gagné and Shoben’s
methodology of classifying compounds into one and only
one thematic relation category, this necessitated selecting a single relation in a way that was often quite uncertain. We computed inter-rater reliability using a sample of 10 combinations for each of the 38 nouns. Given
that multiple relations were often equally appropriate,

the level of agreement was reasonably high at 68%, with
Cohen’s (1960) κ = 0.65 (p < .001).
Having classified each compound into one thematic relation category, we derived relation frequencies by counting the percentage of cases falling into each category (the
same manner in which relation frequencies were derived
in Gagné & Shoben, 1997). These were then compared
to the frequencies derived in Gagné and Shoben’s study.

Results
We compared the frequencies for the 19 heads and 19
modifiers derived from the BNC sample with the frequencies obtained for those items in Gagné and Shoben’s
dataset. In comparing these frequencies with Gagné and
Shoben’s frequencies we did not include all 16 relation
categories for every noun. This would have produced an
artificially high correlation as many thematic relations
will always receive frequencies of 0% given that some
thematic relations are simply invalid for some heads
and modifiers (for example, the statistic that mountain
as a modifier does not combine using the during relation is uninformative). On average, the nouns occurred
with compounds for only a handful of the thematic relations and so the most informative method of comparison
would involve using only non-zero values. As a result
frequencies of 0% in both our and Gagné and Shoben’s
corpus study were discarded. Given that frequencies
tended not to be normally distributed we always used
Spearman’s ρ.
In spite of the restrictions on the statistics described
above, there was a significant degree of agreement between the frequency scores derived by Gagné and Shoben
and those derived in our study (for the heads, ρ = 0.337,
p < 0.01, N = 166; for the modifiers ρ = 0.392, p < 0.01,
N = 188). These results suggest a close relationship between the relational distribution in Gagné and Shoben’s
original dataset and in the BNC sample, and demonstrate that relation frequencies derived using Gagné and
Shoben’s arbitrary modifier and head pairing methodology are a good approximation to the relation frequencies
that exist in natural language.
While the agreement between relation frequencies in
our BNC corpus and in the Gagné and Shoben dataset
was high, there were some interesting cases where the
two datasets deviated significantly. These are worth examining in detail. One reason for deviations in frequency
was due to the fact that some relation frequencies were
more domain specific than others. Thus, for example,
the fact that plastic has an affinity for the made of relation could be picked up using the arbitrary pairing
methodology since many different things can be made of
plastic. However, the modifier which deviated greatest
was servant, which we found occurred with the is relation 76% of the time (typically in compounds such as
servant boy and servant girl ), compared with only 5% for
Gagné and Shoben’s corpus (where typical compounds
would be servant book and servant scandal ). The reason for this discrepancy is that the use of this thematic
relation for servant is quite domain specific. Gagné and
Shoben’s approach to estimating frequency fails to take

account of this; the modifier servant is combined with
exactly the same set of heads that the modifier plastic is,
failing to account for usage patterns of real compounds.
The limitations of arbitrary pairings were also revealed
in the opposite sense in that universal acceptors (i.e.,
heads that can combine sensibly with modifiers of any
type) like book were forcibly paired using the universal
slot more often that was representative. Although the
X in the compound X book can be filled by nearly any
subject matter, in reality terms like accounts book and
address book are more common than indicated by Gagné
and Shoben’s frequencies.

Analysis of the CARIN Strength
Equation
In the previous section we provided evidence supporting the relation frequency distributions used in Gagné
and Shoben’s studies of conceptual combination. In this
section we turn to the equations that they put forward
to represent the Competition Among Relations In Nominals (CARIN) model of compounding. The degree of
competition among relations in the CARIN equation is
a function of the frequency of those relations for the modifier of the compound being interpreted. We intend to
show here that this equation does not actually provide
for competition among relations.
The CARIN model proposes two factors influencing
the ease of interpretation, and hence reaction time, for a
given compound. First, ‘interpretations are easier if the
required relation is of high strength [high frequency]’.
Second, the availability of other high-strength [relations]
should slow the interpretation of conceptual combinations’ (both quotes from Gagné & Shoben 1997, pp 81).
In other words, given that the correct relation for some
compound has a frequency f , if there is some other incorrect relation with a frequency close to f , then reaction time for the compound should be slow (because
of competition between the two similarly frequent relations). However, if there is no other relation with a
frequency close to f , then the reaction time for the compound should be faster (because the correct relation can
be selected without competition).
As an explanatory step in presenting the CARIN
model, Gagné and Shoben (1997) first present the following version of their strength equation:
strength =

Pselected
Pselected + P1 + P2 + P3

(1)

1224

where Pselected is the frequency, or proportion of times,
that the selected (i.e. most appropriate) relation is used
with compounds that have the same modifier, and P1 ,
P2 , P3 are the corresponding proportions for the three
highest-frequency alternative relations for that modifier.
Qualitatively, this equation predicts that the ease or
rapidity for interpreting a compound c with a relation
r is an increasing function of the frequency with which
compounds which have the same modifier as c are interpreted with relation r, and a decreasing function of the
corresponding frequencies for the three most common

alternative relations for those compounds. For Experiment 1 from Gagné and Shoben (1997), the correlation
between the strength ratios derived from this equation
and the response time data is -0.35 for the 57 items.
Though only used as an explanatory step in presenting the CARIN model, we were interested in whether
this equation actually reflects competition in relation selection. Is the response strength for the correct relation
affected if there is another relation with frequency close
to that of the selected relation? In fact, no. Whether
one of these alternative relations has a frequency close
to that of the selected relation or not does not have any
influence on the equation’s output. For example, suppose the proportional frequency of the selected relation
is 0.50. If one of the alternative relations also has a
frequency of 0.50 and the other two have frequencies of
0.0 this equation will give a strength response of (0.50
/ (0.50 + 0.50 + 0.0 + 0.0)) = 0.5. However, if the
three most frequent relations have frequencies of 0.17,
0.17 and 0.16 (which together sum to 0.50), this equation will also give a strength response of (0.50 / (0.50 +
0.17 + 0.17 + 0.16)) = 0.5. According to the equation,
these two situations are indistinguishable. However, the
first case clearly should involve competition between two
relations both with a frequency of 0.50 while the second
case does not involve competition (the correct relation
having a frequency 0.50 and the next most frequent relation having a frequency of only 0.17).
If this equation does not involve competition, how does
it give a significant correlation with the response times
obtained in Gagné & Shoben’s experiment? If we consider a generalized form of this equation, we can see what
is actually happening:
Pselected
(2)
Pselected + P1 + P2 + ... + PN
where N is the total number of thematic relations being used. In this equation, the numerator is simply the
frequency for the correct relation for the compound in
question, and the denominator is the sum of frequencies
for all relations (not just the three most frequent alternatives). Since, the sum of all frequencies totals 1, this
equation simply reduces to the frequency of the correct
relation: in this equation, response strength is simply
equal to Pselected . The reason Equation 1 gives a significant correlation with response time is not because it involves competition among relations, but simply because
it reduces to the frequency of the selected relation. An
analysis of the data confirmed this relationship, giving
a correlation between Pselected and response strength as
computed in Equation 1 of r > 0.99.
In the second, more important, version of the CARIN
model presented in Gagné and Shoben (1997), each of
the variables are transformed using the negative exponential function and a free parameter α:
strength =

strength =

e−αPselected

e−αPselected
+ e−αP1 + e−αP2 + e−αP3

(3)

Qualitatively, this version of the model predicts that the
difficulty or length of time (not ease and rapidity) of in-

terpreting a compound c with relation r is an increasing
function of the frequency with which compounds which
have the same modifier as c are interpreted with relation
r, and a decreasing function of the corresponding frequencies for the three most common alternative relations
for those compounds. The correlation of this negativeexponential-term version of the CARIN model and the
response time data is 0.45, using a value of 36 for the
parameter α to optimally fit the data.
Though both of these versions of the CARIN model
take the same general form, they differ in how they model
response time: the linear-term version of the model measures the ease or rapidity of interpreting a compound (as
indicated by the fact that that model gives a negative
correlation with RT), whilst the exponential-term version measures the difficulty or slowness of interpreting a
compound (as indicated by the fact that that model gives
a positive correlation with RT). To further investigate
how the two models differed, we calculated correlations
between the variables and the strength values that they
contributed to. For the linear-term model, we examined the correlation between the strength values for the
57 items in Experiment 1 and the untransformed variables (which are the terms used in that model). This
revealed the variable with the strongest linear relationship to strength to be Pselected , the second strongest
to be P1 , the third strongest to be P2 , and the fourth
strongest to be P3 (r = 0.99, r = −0.71, r = −0.66,
and r = −0.57 respectively). This is sensible: the selected relation and its closest competitor should have
the greatest influence on the model’s predictions. For
the exponential-term model, the corresponding correlations are between the strength values and the exponentially transformed variables (which are the terms in
that model). The pattern of correlations was very different for this model: the strongest linear relationship
with strength values was again found to be for the selected relation (r = 0.59); however, P3 was found to
be the second strongest (r = −0.41), with P2 the third
strongest (r = −0.36) and finally P1 the fourth strongest
r = −0.18. The order of importance of the frequencies
for the alternative relations was P 1, then P 2, then P 3
for the linear-term model but was P 3, then P 2, then P 1
for the exponential term model.
Why is the third most frequently selected relation
having such a disproportionate influence on strength
as calculated using the exponential-term version of the
CARIN strength equation? It seems contrary to our intuitions about competition among relations. The effect
is observed because of the use of the negative exponential in this version of the model. For example, the term
e−36∗P evaluates to less than 0.04 for all values of P between about 0.09 and 1.00 and evaluates to between 1
and 0.04 for the small range of values from 0.00 to 0.09.
Since P1 is typically a relatively large number (its average value in the data is 0.31) the corresponding exponential term tends to have no influence on the denominator
of the strength equation (i.e. it is effectively zero). P3
is typically a relatively small number (its average value
in the data is 0.08) and therefore the corresponding ex-

1225

ponential term tends to range over a much wider range
of values and is much more likely to be a non-negligible
term in the denominator.
In fact, the CARIN model of Equation 3 can be approximated by the formula e−αPselected /e−αPlowest indicating that usually only the lowest frequency occurring
in the denominator (i.e. Plowest ) is influential (for the
Experiment 1 data, the correlation between this formula and the formula of Equation 3 is significant, with
r = 0.97). In other words, the output of the CARIN
model can be approximated using only two relation frequencies, namely Pselected and Plowest . Since no other
frequencies tend to influence the output of the formula,
it clearly cannot support competition among relations.
In Gagné and Shoben (1997), the CARIN model is
presented as being an application of Luce’s (1959) choice
function. Luce’s choice function formulates the probability of selecting a particular item from a pool of alternatives (in the context of the CARIN model, the particular
item is the selected relation, and the pool of alternatives
is all the thematic relations in the CARIN model’s taxonomy). However, a problem with how Luce’s choice
function is applied in the CARIN model is how the exponential decay function is used to transform the frequency variables. Gagné and Shoben report that they
are following previous applications of Luce’s choice rule
(e.g. Sadler & Shoben, 1993) when they utilize the exponential decay function; however, there are important
differences between how the exponential decay function
is used in the CARIN model and how it is used in these
previous applications. In Sadler and Shoben (1993), for
example, the probability that an item i is selected from
a pool of n alternatives in an analogical reasoning task
is given by
p(i) =

e−αdi
n
X
e−αdj

(4)

j=1

where di is the distance between item i and some ideal
solution to the analogy problem. The probability that
item i is selected is therefore a decreasing function of distance: the probability that i is selected decreases as the
distance between i and the ideal solution point increases.
In this and other models, the negative exponential transformation of the distance measure is used because distance transformed in this way is taken to be a measure
of psychological similarity (following Shepard, 1958). In
terms of this similarity measure, Luce’s choice function
asserts that the probability that item i is selected is an
increasing function of similarity.
In the CARIN model the relation frequencies correspond to the notion of similarity, not distance: if the
frequency of the selected relation is high, then the probability that that relation should be selected should also
be high. If the CARIN model is to be specified as an
application of Luce’s choice rule, therefore, the correct
formulation of it is the linear-term version that we have
presented above, as the probability that a given relation
is selected is an increasing function of the untransformed

frequency measure for that relation. The exponentialterm version of the model cannot be considered a correct
application of Luce’s choice rule.
Leaving this issue aside, does the exponential-term
model implement a competition amongst relations approach to conceptual combination? As done above for
the linear-term version of the model, we investigate this
issue by examining whether the response strength for
the correct relation is affected if there is another relation
with frequency close to that of the selected relation. We
found again that the model failed to pass this test. For
example, with α = 36 as in Gagné and Shoben (1997),
suppose that Pselected = 0.2. If P1 = 0.2 also and P2
and P3 = 0.05, then the calculated strength response is
0.0008/(0.0008 + 0.0008 + 0.1653 + 0.1653) = 0.00225.
However, if the three most frequent relations have frequencies of 0.7, 0.05 and 0.05 the strength response
is 0.0008/(0.0008 + 1.14 × 10−11 + 0.1653 + 0.1653) =
0.00225. According to the equation, these two situations are indistinguishable to 5 decimal places. However,
competition amongst relations predicts the first scenario
should be faster that second, as in the first scenario the
selected relation only has to compete with relations of
the same or less frequency, whereas in the second scenario it is competing with a relation over three times
more frequent than it. Again, the problem is with the
negative exponential function: as discussed above, the
term e−36∗P is negligible unless P has a very small value.
Another way to assess the competition proposal is by
looking directly at the experimental data. To do this
we selected, out of the set of compounds used in Gagné
& Shoben’s Experiment 1, the set of compounds where
the correct relation was also the most frequent relation
for the modifier of that compound. We divided this set
of compounds into two groups: the ‘close’ group (compounds for which there was another competing relation
with a proportional frequency within 0.10 of Pselected ),
and the ‘distant’ group (those for which there was no
other competing relation with a proportional frequency
within 0.60 of Pselected ). We selected the criteria values
of 0.10 and 0.60 so that there would be an equal number of compounds in both the close and distant groups.
The competition among relations approach would predict that, on average, people would have faster reaction
times for the distant group (in which there is no other
relation competing with the correct relation for the compound), but slower reaction times for the close group
(in which there is another relation close in frequency to
the correct relation, and competing with that relation).
However, analysis showed that the average reaction time
for the close group was 1030ms (SD = 94ms) while the
average reaction time for the distant group was 1073ms
(SD = 75ms): people reacted, on average, faster to compounds in which there was another relation close in frequency to the correct relation, and slower to compounds
in which there was no such such competing relation. This
is opposite to the pattern that would be expected by the
competition model. Of course, this a post-hoc selection
of data from the experimental results, using a relatively
small set of data points, and for which there was no sig-

1226

nificant difference between the two groups (t = 0.32 in
an unpaired t-test). It does, however, along with our
other findings, suggest an absence of explicit evidence
for the CARIN model’s competition proposal.
In light of these issues, how does the exponential-term
model give a significant correlation of 0.45 with response
times obtained in Gagné & Shoben’s experiment? An
analysis of the data shows that the strength score captures information about the number of relations greater
than Pselected ; this suggests that what this equation is
actually modeling is the rank of Pselected (the correlation
between the rank of the selected relation and response
strength computed by Equation 3 is 0.93). Gagné &
Shoben found that the rank of the correct relation was
significantly correlated with response time (r = 0.45, the
same correlation as seen for the exponential equation).
It seems that the reason the exponential equation gives a
significant correlation with response time is not because
it involves competition among relations, but simply because it reduces to the rank of the correct relation.

Discussion
In this paper we have presented both good and bad news
for the CARIN model of conceptual combination. Our
good news is that the relation frequencies used in the
model are confirmed by the close match between a selected subset of those frequencies and a set of relation
frequencies derived from a more realistic and more general source: the BNC corpus. This is encouraging for the
thematic relations approach because it suggests that relation frequency is a fairly constant property of the words
used in compound phrases, with similar relation frequencies being returned for the constituent words of compounds when they are sampled from a randomly selected
dataset (as Gagné & Shoben did in their study) and
when they are sampled from a large and representative
corpus of written text (as was the case for our study).
We have also, however, presented bad news for this approach, in showing that the equations used in the competition among relations in nominals (CARIN) model
do not actually describe competition, and so the correlations between reaction times and response strengths
computed by these equations cannot be taken as support
for the CARIN model of conceptual combination.
In the face of this problem for the CARIN model, we
propose an alternative model for reaction times in nounnoun compounds: one based simply on the rank of the
correct relation for a compound, in order of modifier frequency. One advantage of this modifier rank measure is
that it correlates significantly with reaction times in the
experiments, as Gagné and Shoben report. A second
advantage is that it has a suggestive relationship with
ideas of memory access and recall. For example, it could
be that when people encounter a compound they query
their long-term memory for examples of relations occurring in previously-seen compounds with the same modifier. As each example of a possible relation is returned,
its suitability for the compound in question is assessed,
and the relation is either accepted or rejected. Given
the associative nature of memory, relations are likely to

be returned in rank order according to their association
with the modifier. Thus the response time for a given
compound would be proportional to number of relations
that need to be considered and rejected before an acceptable relation is found; in other words, proportional
to the rank of the correct relation for that compound.
This proposal is purely speculative, based solely on
the observed relationship between relation rank and response time in Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) data. There
are many other ways in which the observed influence of
relation rank on reaction time could be explained and
modelled: an important area for future work is to investigate and distinguish between these possible accounts.
We think that our results here provide a solid grounding for that work, and may lead to future understanding
of the fascinating processes by which people understand
nominal compounds.

Acknowledgements
We sincerely thank Christina Gagné for making available
the data from Gagné and Shoben (1997), Experiment
1. This research was funded in part by a grant from
the Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and
Technology to the first author.

References
Cohen J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
20, 37-46.
Corley, S., Corley, M., Keller, F., Crocker, M. W. &
Trewin, S. (2001). Finding syntactic structure in unparsed corpora: The Gsearch corpus query system.
Computers and the Humanities, 35, 81-94.
Costello, F. J., & Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient creativity: Constraint guided conceptual combination. Cognitive Science, 24(2).
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Levi, J. (1978). The Syntax and Semantics of Complex
Nominals. New York: Academic Press.
Luce, R. D. (1959). Individual Choice Behavior. Wiley,
New York.
Sadler, D. D., & Shoben, E. J. (1993). Context effects on
semantic domains as seen in analogy solution. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 19, 128-147.
Shepard, R.N. (1958). Stimulus and response generalization: Tests of a model relating generalization to
distance in psychological space Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 509-523.
Storms, G. & Wisniewski, E. J. (in press) Does the order
of head noun and modifier explain response times in
conceptual combination? Memory and Cognition.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1997). When concepts combine. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(2), 167-183.

1227

