UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Empirical Investigation into Spatial Reference Frame Taxonomy using Dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/96r8s236

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Branigan, Holly P.
Watson, Matthew E.
Pickering, Martin J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Empirical Investigation into Spatial Reference Frame Taxonomy using Dialogue
Matthew E. Watson (s0129081@sms.ed.ac.uk)

Martin J. Pickering (martin.pickering@ed.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh,
7 George Square, Edinburgh EH9 7HZ

Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh,
7 George Square, Edinburgh EH9 7HZ

Holly P. Branigan (holly.branigan@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh,
7 George Square, Edinburgh EH9 7HZ
plane above a house causes the scale parameter to be set
larger than a clock above a bookcase).

Abstract
Reference frames are abstract representations that enable
people to describe the location of objects using projective
descriptions such as, above, below, left, and right. There have
typically been three broad classes of reference frames
identified in the literature: Those that are based upon the
environment, those based upon an object and those that are
egocentric. However, the exact details of reference frame
classification have been disputed. In this paper we present two
experiments that used a confederate priming paradigm that set
out to distinguish between the Traditional taxonomy and
Levinson’s taxonomy of reference frames. The results provide
evidence supporting the Traditional taxonomy of reference
frames. We suggest possibilities for further investigations of
reference frame alignment.

Introduction
When a speaker describes the location of an object using a
projective spatial term (one that describes the location of an
object in a region of space projected from a second object
e.g. above, below, left and right), it requires the imposition
of a reference frame on the scene. The reference frame is an
abstract representation that parses space around a reference
object (the object the figure object is related to) into regions,
so that the location of a figure object (the located object) can
be determined in relation to the reference object.
According to Logan and Sadler (1996), a reference
frame is a three-dimensional, axial co-ordinate system that
defines origin, orientation, direction and scale parameters.
The settings of each of these parameters determine the
appropriate description of the location of the figure object.
For example, in Figure 1 the ball can be described as in
front of the car, because it is located in the region projected
from the car’s headlights, which determine the car’s front.
In this case, the orientation and direction parameters are set
according to the intrinsic sides of the reference object: the
car. The orientation is set so that the horizontal, front-back
axis is the car’s major axis of elongation. The setting of the
direction parameter then determines which ends of this axis
correspond to the front and back. The origin of the reference
frame is situated upon the reference object. The scale
parameter is not explicitly given in the spatial description.
However, there is evidence that suggests the scale parameter
is set even when not explicitly stated (Carlson & van
Deman, 2003), in which case it may be set according to the
relative sizes of the figure and the reference object (e.g. a

Figure 1: The ball can be described as in front of the car
or to the left of the car
The ball in Figure 1 may, however, also may be described as
to the left of the car. This description is as felicitous as the
description the ball is in front of the car; however, the
parameters of the reference frame have different settings. In
this case, the orientation and the direction parameters are set
according to the reader’s own directional axes. The
horizontal front-back axis is set according to the front and
back of the reader. The second horizontal axis (the left-right
axis) is then set as orthogonal to the front-back axis. The
direction parameter of the left-right axis is then set
according to the anchoring system provided by the frontback axis. The origin of the reference frame could be
situated upon either the reader or the reference object; it is
not clear which of these is the case as both settings would be
consistent with the description. The scale parameter is not
explicitly given in the description, but may be set using
other processes (Carlson & van Deman, 2003).
The different settings of the parameters of a reference
frame yield different descriptions of a scene from a speaker,
and different interpretations of a locative description from
an addressee. The different settings of the parameters also
lead to the reference frames being described as different
types. For example, the first description given is an objectcentered reference frame, whereas the second description
given is a person-centered reference frame. But there has

2353

been little agreement in the literature as to how reference
frames should be categorized. Many psycholinguistic
studies have divided reference frames into absolute,
intrinsic and deictic (e.g. Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin,
1993, Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976); we shall describe this
as the Traditional taxonomy. Levinson (1996, 2003),
however, used a different system of classification that
divides reference frames into absolute, intrinsic and
relative.
According to the Traditional taxonomy, the defining
characteristic of reference frames is the object that sets the
orientation and direction parameters. If these parameters are
set by the reference object, it is an intrinsic reference frame.
If the parameters are set by either the speaker or the
addressee, it is a deictic reference frame. The deictic
reference frame is often thought of as an egocentric
reference frame, whereas the intrinsic reference frame is an
object-centric reference frame. For example, take three
different descriptions of the scene shown in Figure 1: the
ball is in front of the car, the ball is to the left of the car and
the car is in front of me (if the reader assumes the position
of the person in the scene). According to the Traditional
taxonomy, the first of these descriptions uses an intrinsic
reference frame because the orientation and direction
parameter are determined by the car. The second two
descriptions use a deictic reference frame because the
orientation and direction parameters are set egocentrically.
According to Levinson’s taxonomy (1996, 2003), the
defining characteristic of a reference frame is the argument
structure of the description. If the description is a two-place,
binary description, with a figure object and a reference
object as the arguments, then it is an intrinsic reference
frame. If the description is a three-place, ternary
description, with a figure object, reference object and a
viewpoint as the arguments, then it is a relative reference
frame. A spatial relationship using a relative reference frame
is accurate relative to a viewpoint on the scene.
If we consider the three descriptions of Figure 1, given
above, using Levinson’s taxonomy then the reference frame
that each of the descriptions uses is different to the
Traditional taxonomy. The description the ball is in front of
the car uses an intrinsic reference frame because it is a
binary function, with the figure object (the ball) as one
argument, and the reference object (the car) as the second
argument. The description the ball is to the left of the car
uses a relative reference frame because it is a ternary
function, with the figure object, reference object and the
viewpoint of the reader as the three arguments. The
description of the scene is only valid if the viewpoint
remains constant. The description the car is in front of me
uses an intrinsic reference frame because it is a binary
function with the figure object (the car) and the reference
object (the ego) as the two arguments. Note that despite this
description being egocentric it still uses an intrinsic
reference frame: Levinson’s taxonomy affords no special
status to an egocentric reference frame.

The grouping of reference frames differs according to
the two taxonomies. The Traditional taxonomy groups
together the descriptions the ball is to the left of the car and
the car is in front of me as using the same reference frame: a
deictic one. Levinson, however, argued that the descriptions
the ball is in front of the car and the car is in front of me use
the same reference frame: an intrinsic one. Despite these
differences there has been little empirical evidence to
distinguish between the two reference frame taxonomies.
In this paper, we present two experiments that used a
confederate priming paradigm to investigate which
taxonomy correctly categorizes reference frames.

Experiment 1
One of the differences between the two taxonomies is their
categorization of sentences of the form the ball is in front of
me; the Traditional taxonomy argues it is a deictic reference
frame, whereas Levinson’s taxonomy argues it is an
intrinsic reference frame. These positions can be empirically
distinguished using a confederate priming paradigm, in
which a confederate who purported to be a naive participant
and who followed a script, and a genuine naïve participant,
took it in turns to describe pictures. Watson, Pickering, and
Branigan (2004) found that naïve participants tended to use
the same reference frame to describe a picture as the
confederate had used to describe a previous picture. In the
experiments reported below, a confederate described the
location of a figure object using a scripted description of the
form the X is in front of us (we refer to this as an egoreferent description) and the naïve participant chose which
of two pictures matched the description. The participant
then described the location of a figure object to the
confederate, in the belief that she would have to also match
a picture to this description. Following Watson et al. (2004),
participants should tend to use the same reference frame for
their descriptions as they had just heard from the
confederate. The Traditional taxonomy and Levinson's
taxonomy make different predictions about which reference
frames count as 'the same', and hence which reference frame
participants should use. Specifically, if the Traditional
taxonomy is the correct way to categorize reference frames,
then following hearing an ego-referent description,
participants should be significantly more likely to use a
relative/deictic reference frame of the form the X is to the
left of the Y than an intrinsic reference frame of the form the
X is in front of the Y. However, if Levinson’s taxonomy is
correct, then following hearing the X is in front of us
participants would be more likely to use an intrinsic
reference frame of the form the X is in front of the Y than a
relative/deictic reference frame of the form the X is to the
left of the Y.

Method

2354

Participants: 16 native English-speaking students at the
University of Edinburgh were paid to participate in the
experiment. The confederate was a female postgraduate at
the University of Edinburgh.

Materials: The experiment was run using two E-prime
computer programs. One computer program presented
locative sentences upon a computer screen and was used by
the confederate. A second program was created for the
participant which presented pictures for the match phase and
the describe phase of each trial.
Each of the scenes used in the experiment involved a
picture of two people (participants were told that they
represented the participant and the confederate), one object
that had intrinsic sides and was viewed from the side,
termed a tri-axial object (e.g. a car), and one object that had
no horizontal intrinsic axes, termed a bi-axial object (e.g. a
tree) (Carlson-Radvansky & Jiang, 1998).
All the match and target scenes contained the two
people at the centre and bottom of the screen, one tri-axial
object and one biaxial object. The tri-axial and bi-axial
objects were selected from three ‘land’ bi-axial items (mast,
tree, and skyscraper) and three ‘land’ tri-axial objects (car,
catapult, and train) or three ‘sea’ bi-axial objects (buoy,
lighthouse and island) and three ‘sea’ tri-axial objects (ship,
windsurfer, and hovercraft). The sea and land items were
never paired together in a picture. One of the bi-axial or triaxial objects was presented in the centre of the screen and
one to the left or the right of the central object. All of the
match and target scenes in the experiment therefore
appeared in an arrangement as in Figure 2.

Figure 2: The arrangement of objects in Experiment 1.
Design: There was one within-participants and within-items
factor of Prime reference frame (ego-referent, intrinsic, and
relative/deictic). The ego-referent description of Figure 2
would be the catapult is in front of us. The intrinsic
description of Figure 2 would be the tree is in front of the
catapult. The relative/deictic description of Figure 2 would
be the tree is to the left of the catapult. Each object used in
the experiment appeared as the figure object an equal
number of times and as the reference object an equal
number of times. There were 108 trials each consisting of a
prime sentence, where the confederate read a sentence
which described the location of one of the objects on one of
the scenes on the match scene, a match phase, where the
participant saw two scenes on their screen and had to decide

which matched the confederate’s description, and finally a
target phase, where the participant was told, via a word on
the screen, to describe the location of one of the objects on
the target scene.
Fifty-four of the trials were experimental trials, 18 in
each of the three conditions. The match scenes were created
by having one scene matching the confederate’s description
exactly and a second scene with the same objects, but in a
different spatial arrangement. These scenes were positioned
so that one was on the left of the screen and one on the
right; the position of the matching scene was counterbalanced.
The target scenes were created from the same pool of
objects as the objects used in the match scenes. Again the 18
target scenes in each condition were formed from
combinations of the tri-axial and bi-axial objects. The target
scene always contained different objects (except for the two
people who were present on all scenes) from the match
scenes, with the stipulation that the objects were of the same
type as in the match scene (e.g. if the match scene used the
sea objects then so did the target scene). On experimental
target scenes the tri-axial object was always in the centre of
the screen and the bi-axial object was to the left or right. For
the experimental trials, the participant always had to
describe the location of the bi-axial object. The spatial
relationship between the tri-axial and bi-axial objects was
always different on the target scene from the match scene.
The remaining 54 trials were filler trials. 18 of the filler
trials had a relative reference frame prime sentence, 18 had
an intrinsic reference frame prime sentence, and 18 had the
ego-referent prime sentence. On the filler trials the figure
object on the target scene, which the participant had to
describe the location of, was always the tri-axial object. This
meant that on the filler trials there was no possibility of
using the intrinsic reference frame because bi-axial objects
have no horizontal intrinsic axes.
Procedure: The confederate and naïve participant were
introduced as if they were both naïve participants and seated
at computers on two desks side by side; a divider prevented
them from seeing each others’ screens. The participant and
the confederate were told that they would be taking it in
turns to describe the location of objects to each other and
then decide which of two scenes on their screen matched
their partner’s description. They were also told that all the
pictures contained two people at the bottom of the screen
which represented them both, and that they should treat
themselves as part of the scene. They were also told that all
the pictures would contain two other objects, one in the
centre of the screen and one that would be one side or the
other of the central object. Participants were told not to use
the screen to describe the location of the objects; such as the
mast is to the left of the screen.
The participants then pressed the space bar to begin the
practice session. The practice session lasted six trials, one
for each of the three experimental conditions, and three

2355

fillers. Instructions on the screen signalled the end of the
practice session and the start of the experiment.
Each trial proceeded as follows: After participants
pressed the space bar to begin, they were presented with the
match scenes. The confederate then followed her script to
describe the location of an object that was present on the
participant’s match scenes. The participant then decided
which match scene matched the confederate’s description,
pressing the Z key if they thought it was the left hand scene
and the M key if they thought it was the right hand scene. A
fixation cross then appeared for 1000ms, before being
replaced by a word. This word stayed on the screen for
1500ms and named the object which was to be the figure
object on the target scene. When the word disappeared it
was replaced by the target scene. Participants then had to
describe the location of the named object. After describing
the location of the figure object on the target scene
participants pressed the space bar and the target scene was
replaced with a fixation cross. The fixation cross remained
for 500ms, before being replaced with the next match scene.
The confederate pressed the space bar after hearing the
participant’s description; this caused the next prime
sentence to appear on her screen. This was the procedure for
all practice, experimental and filler trials.

reference frame utterance. Finally, there was no significant
difference in the RI between the relative/deictic prime
condition and the ego-referent prime condition (t1(15) =
0.13; p > .05, t2(17) = 0.16; p > .05) Participants were just
as likely to use a relative reference frame after an egoreferent reference frame utterance, as after a relative
reference frame utterance.
Condition
Mean Reference frame
index
Mean percentage
Intrinsic responses
Mean percentage
Relative responses

Intrinsic

Ego-referent

0.23

0.34

0.24

20.5%

31.6%

23.3%

69.1%

61.8%

72.2%

Table 1: The mean reference frame index for each of the
conditions in Experiment 1.

Discussion
The results show that participants were more likely to use an
intrinsic reference frame after hearing the confederate use
an intrinsic reference frame, than after hearing the
confederate use an alternative reference frame. This is in
line with other research showing that interlocutors align
reference frames (Watson et al, 2004) and reflects a general
tendency for interlocutors to align representations that
underlie language production and comprehension (Pickering
& Garrod, 2004). More importantly, they show that
participants were more likely to use a relative/deictic
reference frame after hearing an ego-referent description
than an intrinsic reference frame. Assuming that this
tendency reflects reference-frame alignment, it constitutes
evidence that supports the Traditional taxonomy of
reference frames and is inconsistent with Levinson’s
taxonomy.

Results
We analyzed participants’ first responses (i.e. if participants
used one reference frame, but then switched to an
alternative reference frame the response was classified
according to their first response). Responses were coded as
using either an intrinsic or relative/deictic reference frame
or other response (3.5% of responses) if the response did
not use a reference frame (e.g. the train is travelling
towards the skyscraper). Analysis was performed only on
the relative/deictic and the intrinsic responses. This was
done by dividing the percentage of intrinsic responses by the
percentage of relative/deictic responses plus the number of
intrinsic responses to give a reference frame index score
(RI). Table 1 shows the mean RI for each of the three
conditions. The RI was analysed using two withinparticipants one-way ANOVAS, one for participants (F1)
and one for items (F2), with the factor Prime Reference
Frame (relative/deictic, intrinsic and ego-referent). There
was a significant main effect of Prime Reference Frame (F1
(2,30) = 3.46; p < .05; F2 (2,34) = 11.47; p < .01). Planned
comparisons showed that there was a significant difference
between the intrinsic prime condition and the
relative/deictic prime condition (t1(15) = 2.54; p < .05,
t2(17) = 3.76; p < .01). Participants were more likely to use
an intrinsic reference frame after hearing an intrinsic
reference frame utterance, than after a relative/deictic
reference frame utterance. There was also a significant
difference in the RI between the intrinsic prime condition
and the ego-referent prime condition (t1(15) = 2.15; p < .05,
t2(17) = 3.8; p < .01). Participants were more likely to use
an intrinsic reference frame after hearing an intrinsic
reference frame utterance, than after an ego-referent

Relative
/deictic

Experiment 2
The evidence from Experiment 1 supports the Traditional
taxonomy; however, there is a possible alternative
explanation. In Experiment 1, in the intrinsic and the
relative/deictic prime reference-frame conditions the
reference object was in the same position on the target scene
as on the match scene. However, in the ego-referent
condition the reference object was in a different position on
the match scene to the target scene. This is because the two
people were the reference object for the prime and were
always at the bottom of the screen, whereas the reference
object on the target was the tri-axial object, positioned in the
centre of the screen.
Previous research has shown that the more factors the
prime and target have in common, the more interlocutors
align (e.g. Branigan et al, 2000; Cleland & Pickering, 2003).
Hence, participants might not have used an intrinsic
reference frame, in the ego-referent condition, because of

2356

the reduced common factors between match scene and
target scene. They may instead have used a relative/deictic
reference frame because this is preferred to the intrinsic
reference frame.
Experiment 2 therefore tested whether or not a different
position of the reference object on the match scene and
target scene affects levels of alignment. This experiment
added a fourth condition (intrinsic-different) where the
confederate used an intrinsic reference frame, but the
reference object was placed in the position in which two
people appeared in the other conditions. If interlocutors
align reference frames independently of position then
participants should be more likely to use a reference frame
when they had just heard the confederate use that reference
frame compared to an alternative reference frame,
regardless of whether the reference object was in the same
position or a different position on the match scene and target
scene

four times and seen in the target scenes four times. As there
were 10 objects this made a total of 40 trials (10 per
condition) in the experiment. All of the trials were
experimental; there were no fillers.

Method
Participants: 18 native English-speaking students of the
University of Edinburgh who had not participated in
Experiment 1 were paid to participate. The confederate was
a male postgraduate at the University of Edinburgh.
Materials and Design: In this experiment each match and
target scene contained three objects: a football, two people
side-by-side viewed from overhead, and one of 10 tri-axial
objects also viewed from overhead. The perspective was
switched to overhead because of the difficulty in finding
tri-axial objects that, when positioned at the bottom of the
screen, appeared to be looking into it in an analogous
fashion to the people in Experiment 1 (see Figure 2). There
was one within-participants and within-items factor of
Prime Reference frame, with four levels (relative/deictic,
intrinsic, intrinsic-different, ego-referent). The first three
conditions were analogous to those in Experiment 1, except
from an overhead perspective. The intrinsic-different
condition had the reference object, on the match scene,
positioned at the centre and bottom of the screen, as shown
in Figure 3. The confederate then described this as the ball
in front of the tank. In this condition, the confederate used
an intrinsic reference frame; however the reference object
was in a different position on the target scene to the match
scene (the reference object was always in the centre of the
screen for the target scenes).
The target scenes always contained two people at the
bottom of the screen (centrally placed), one of the objects in
the centre of the screen and a ball to the left or right of this
object (analogous to the layout in Figure 2).
The reference object used in the match scene was always
different to the reference object used in the target scene. In
each list all reference objects appeared once per condition in
the match scene, and once per condition in the target scene.
This meant that each object was seen in the match scenes

Figure 3: Stimulus from the intrinsic-different condition in
Experiment 2.
Procedure: The procedure was the same as for Experiment
1.

Results
The responses were coded and converted to a reference
frame index score as in Experiment 1. Table 2 shows the
mean RI and the mean percentage intrinsic and
relative/deictic scores for each of the four conditions. The
mean RI scores were analysed using two one-way, withinparticipants (F1), and within-items (F2) ANOVAs, with
Prime Reference frame (intrinsic, relative/deictic, intrinsicdifferent and ego-referent) as the factor and levels. There
was a significant main effect of Prime Reference Frame by
both participants and items (F1(3,51) = 5.4; p < .01,
F2(3,27) = 3.1; p < .05). Planned comparisons showed that
there was a significant difference between the
relative/deictic and intrinsic Prime Reference Frame
conditions, both by participants and items (t1(17) = 4.4; p <
.01, t2(9) = 2.6; p < .05). Participants used an intrinsic
reference frame more after hearing an intrinsic reference
frame (0.77 RI) than after a relative/deictic reference frame
(0.6 RI). There was also a significant difference between the
intrinsic and the intrinsic-different Prime Reference Frame
conditions both by participants and items (t1(17) = 2.28; p <
.05, t2(9) = 2.53; p < .05). Participants used an intrinsic
reference frame more often after hearing an intrinsic
reference frame when the reference object position was held
constant from the match scene to the target scene (0.77 RI)
than when the reference object position changed from match
scene to target scene (0.68 RI).

2357

Condition
Mean Reference frame
Index
Mean percentage
Intrinsic responses
Mean percentage
Relative responses

Relative/deictic

Intrinsic

Intrinsic-different

Ego-referent

0.60

0.77

0.68

0.68

50.6

62.8%

57.8%

55%

33.9

18.9%

27.8%

26.1%

Table 2: The mean reference frame index scores, percentage intrinsic and deictic responses for each of the four conditions in
Experiment 2.
There was no significant difference between the
relative/deictic and ego-referent Prime Reference Frame
conditions (t1(17) = 1.47; p > .05, t2(9) = 0.92; p > .05).
Participants used an intrinsic reference frame just as often
after hearing the confederate use a relative/deictic reference
frame as after hearing the confederate use an ego-referent
reference frame.

that it is these aspects of a reference frame on which
interlocutors align in dialogue, and that these parameters
may be the most salient features of a reference frame. Such
a conclusion must be tentative because many other factors
relevant to spatial language may have had an influence (e.g.
features of the reference object, syntactic structure of the
descriptions). Such factors and their influence on alignment
in spatial language in dialogue are issues for future research.

General Discussion

References

The two experiments presented here set out to test whether
reference frames should be categorized according to the
Traditional taxonomy or Levinson’s taxonomy. The results
of Experiment 1 supported the Traditional taxonomy:
Participants were more likely to use a relative/deictic
reference frame after hearing the confederate use an egoreferent reference frame. We interpret this finding as
showing that the two different utterances are implicitly
treated as uses of the same reference frame.
Experiment 2, however, raises some questions about this
interpretation. In this experiment the three conditions that
were replicated from Experiment 1 showed a similar pattern
of reference frame usage. However, when the confederate
used an intrinsic reference frame and the reference object
was in a different position on the match scene and the target
scene, the participant was less likely to use an intrinsic
reference frame than when the reference object’s position
was held constant. Despite this, participants were still more
likely to use an intrinsic reference frame following an
intrinsic prime than following a relative/deictic prime. This
suggests that the reference object’s position on the match
and target scenes did affect the likelihood of alignment, but
that this is not the reason for the patterns of reference frame
use after the confederate used an ego-referent reference
frame. Overall there were more intrinsic responses in
Experiment 2 than Experiment 1. This is probably due to the
greater difficulty of using a relative/deictic reference frame
from the unusual, overhead viewpoint. Nevertheless the
pattern of alignment across the two experiments is similar.
We therefore tentatively conclude that the results presented
here support the Traditional taxonomy of reference frames.
Hence it is the object setting the orientation and direction
parameters of the reference frame that is important for
classification of reference frames. Our results show, further,
2358

Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B13B25.
Carlson, L. A., & van Deman, S. R. (2004). The space in
spatial language. Journal of Memory and Language,
51,418-436.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Irwin, D. E. (1993). Frames of
reference in vision and language: Where is above?
Cognition, 46, 223-244.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Jiang, Y. (1998). Inhibition
accompanies reference frame selection. Psychological
Science, 9, 386-391.
Cleland, A. A., & Pickering, M. J. (2003). The use of lexical
and syntactic information in language production:
Evidence from the priming of noun-phrase structure.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 214-230.
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Frames of reference and
Molyneux’s questions: Cross linguistic evidence. In
P.Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and space, (pp. 109-169).Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and cognition:
Explorations in cognitive diversity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Towards a
mechanistic theory of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27, 169-226.
Watson, M. E., Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (2004).
Alignment of reference frames in dialogue. Proceedings of
the 26th Cognitive Science Meeting: Chicago, 2004.

