UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analysing Group Creativity: A Distributed Cognitive Study of Joint Music Composition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wr4k4dc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bryan-Kinns, Nick
Nabavian, Shahin

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analysing Group Creativity: A Distributed Cognitive Study of Joint Music Composition
Shahin Nabavian (shahin@dcs.qmul.ac.uk)
Nick Bryan-Kinns (nickbk@dcs.qmul.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science: Queen Mary University of London
London E1 4NS, UK
Abstract

improvisational music and theatre as it “exaggerated the key
characteristics of all group creativity: process,
unpredictability, intersubjectivity, complex communication
and emergence”. The principle idea of improvisation is that
the process is the product. Sawyer's theory of analysing
improvisation is based on semiotic mediation, which relates
to linguistic ideas of deictics and indexical entailments. This
theory helps illustrate how a person makes some
presumption about a future action and is therefore a suitable
way of understanding the improvisational process, be it in
conversation or music. However, there are numerous
collaborative situations such as Joint Music Composition
(JMC), in Western contemporary music, where synchronous
interaction such as improvisation plays a major part, yet it is
not the product. Indeed the product in JMC, where 2 or
more musicians collaborate to compose, is a song
(composition) that retains a structure once it is deemed
complete. JMC is product creativity that develops over time
and in a group context. At this stage, our research is not
focussed on understanding how individuals come to make
predictions on future actions. We are interested in the role
of information processing and how it impacts the creative
process.

We investigated the processes involved in an instance of
group creativity by conducting a pilot study that looked
closely at a group of expert musicians creating musical
compositions over a period of time. We used Distributed
Cognition principles to investigate how information
propagates and transforms and how it impacts the
compositional process. We identified three key processes
(attainment, experimentation and structuring) that help the
group achieve a successful operation in creating compositions
together over a period of time.
This approach has implications for how we investigate
group creativity in general. By focussing on the propagation
and transformation of information, we can gain a more
systematic understanding of how groups come to create
products together. Analysis from this pilot study demonstrates
that an individual’s creative musical idea possibly bears less
influence on group creativity than the group’s ability to
transform that idea in a desirable manner. Therefore,
information processing within Joint Music Composition has a
major impact in how groups create compositions. This view
sheds light on how we view the notion of group creativity. It
can inform how we design tools to support it and how we
design experiment to investigate it.
Keywords: Group Creativity; Distributed Cognition; Music
Composition

Distributed Cognition
The principles of Distributed Cognition (DC) have been
around for over a decade and have primarily been utilised in
workplace settings (Nardi, 1996; Hutchins, 1995a, 1995b;
Heath and Luff 1997). More recently DC has been
employed in new directions. For example, Kirsh's (2004)
design principles for a visual e-learning environment are
based on the notion that metacognition can sometimes be
associated with external processes; hence metacognitive
decisions are sometimes distributed between the internal and
external and can be affected by a visual tool. We illustrate
the process of JMC using Marr’s (1982) computation,
algorithmic and implementation levels of description in
similar manner to how Hutchins (1995a) and Flor and
Maglio (1997) utilised it. Our findings are based on a pilot
study that was conducted with a group of expert musicians
who were given the task of writing songs over a period of
three weeks. At the computational level we describe the
constraints that need to be satisfied to achieve a successful
operation in JMC. At the algorithmic level we specify three
levels that help encode the propagation and transformation
of information for key processes within the system. At the
implementation level we shall illustrate details of how the
representations are actually realised in the system.

Introduction
Many researchers have discuss the contested nature of what
constitutes creativity and how it can be viewed in different
domains (Boden 1992, 1994; Csikszentmihalyi, 1996;
Sternberg, 1999; Schneiderman, 2000; Sawyer, 2003;
Paulus and Nijsatd, 2003). However, what is yet to
materialise is a practical application of theories that can be
used to investigate the phenomenon of individual or group
creativity.

Group Creativity Research
The term group creativity can be attributed to a number of
diverse situations in which a group of people communicate
and/or work together. Our research defines group creativity
as situations that are not scripted beforehand and therefore
have an improvisational element where members of the
group collaborate together to shape the emerging flow of
interaction (Sawyer, 2003) and where the creation of a
product requires a distribution of cognitive and physical
labour.
Studying musical groups provides an opportunity
to investigate group creativity. Sawyer studied
1856
1856

We conclude the paper by discussing the implications of our
approach and findings for research into JMC and group
creativity.

Computation of JMC
Our research is based on studies of Western contemporary
music groups (i.e., Rock, Pop, Folk etc.) and therefore our
definition of JMC is based on work situations governing
these genres of music.
When writing songs, a group often starts with
fragments of musical ideas that are manifested through the
instruments individual members play, along with verbal,
written and gestural communication. Over time, through
various forms of interaction between group members and
artefacts in their environment, a composition emerges. The
primary task of the group is to create and co-ordinate what
each musician plays and when. JMC is a classic DC work
situation where the cognitive and physical labour of the task
is distributed (Hutchins, 1995a) but with the added
dimension of time. By this we mean compositions can take
several work sessions, at different points in time (i.e.,
several days or weeks), before being completed.
JMC is an informal work setting in the sense that
there are no manuals written on how to conduct work. We
would classify JMC as an “ill structured” system where the
role of the participants, the processes and artefacts are
unspecified or under defined (Perry, 1999). However, there
are some structures that help musicians co-ordinate action in
JMC. Each musician plays a musical instrument and each
instrument has a function within a song. Musical and
behavioural conventions, relating to genres of various
Western contemporary music, can also help musicians coordinate actions and possibly expectations. In addition,
musicians commonly use a variety of techniques in
overcoming the cognitive burden associated with
performing songs (Flor and Maglio, 1997). Therefore,
though we state that JMC is ill-structured, it is clear that
some structures exist.

Musical Conventions
In most situations, the musical role of each musician is
greatly influenced by conventions associated to the genre of
music within which the group is composing. In simple
terms, musical choice can be constrained to certain actions
depending on the genre. For example, within standard Jazz
the set of chords/musical notes and the structure that
underlie the composition, is known as the form. Awareness
of the form and knowledge of the conventions of a genre,
such as standard Jazz, often dictates the choices made by
musicians in selecting notes and scales they play over the
form.

Form
The concept of the form is important to understand as we
believe it plays a major role in how a group develop a
composition. In JMC, the form is often developed within a

group context especially as it may not be fully created in the
beginning. This means that the group have to extend the
form and agree whether the new form is acceptable to the
group. In most cases of JMC, the initial musical idea that is
proposed for composition can be thought of as musical
information for certain parts of the form and possibly for
certain members of the group. To complete a composition,
all members should play sequences that adhere to a common
structure and that are linked in some way (i.e., key, scales,
harmonies, rhythms etc.). At the computational level, the
most basic constraint that needs to be satisfied for a
successful operation in JMC is the emergence of a
composition that redeems a form after a period of
development. In Western contemporary music such as pop
or rock, other compositional features (for example, melodies
and solos that are played over the form) are often expected
to be redeemed for future performances. We use the terms
redeem or retain to mean the process by which individuals
within the system store and reproduce existing musical
sequences. This process involves both internal and external
representations, which are often interlinked. For example, a
guitarist can remember the notation of a composition by
recording the labels of chords and notes in their own
memory (internal representation) and/or recording a
representation externally, for example creating written notes
and audio recordings. A guitarist can also use their guitar a
as memory aid by recalling the finger positions that they use
when playing the composition.
It is important to note that though musical
conventions play a major role in the decision making
process of the individual, a song can still be written without
the individuals sharing knowledge of the same conventions.
Therefore, by our definition, the constraints for a successful
operation in JMC to be satisfied are not always down to
conventions. JMC constraints are satisfied if the group
manage to create a form that they can reproduce and that
they themselves recognise as a composition.
In order to investigate group creativity, we needed
to create a description of the algorithmic and
implementation levels in JMC. In particular we were
interested in how information propagates and transforms
and how this related to the compositional process.

Pilot Study
A pilot study was conducted from 1st - 22nd November 2004,
at Queen Mary University of London (QMUL), which
entailed an analysis of a group engaged in JMC.

Aim
Since this study was the first of its kind, our aim was to
identify observable information that appeared relevant to the
work of the group; what representations were used and why;
what was the affect of physical environment; what was the
role of the artefacts in the process; what was the affect of
time in the process of work?

1857
1861

Observation Set Up
The Group The group consisted of musicians who had not
worked together before. They were all expert musicians in
the sense that they could play their instruments proficiently;
two were classically trained, one had some form of formal
training and the fourth had been involved in writing music
in Western contemporary music bands for over 10 years.
The group consisted of two males and two females all in the
20-30 age range. Three members were research students in
different departments at QMUL, and the one was an artist
and animator.
One of the participants was the researcher of the
pilot study. The main reason for being directly involved was
to follow outside interaction between group members as it
may impact the compositional process. Another reason for
this participation was for the researcher to have some form
of understanding of the process from within the system. The
other members were aware of the dual role of the
researcher. Based on the observations that we have made of
other musical groups in their work environment, we believe
that this participation did not appear to impact the process
being analysed (i.e., we did not identify any side effects).
The participants were named 'H' (violinist), 'C'
(guitarist), 'S' (bassist) and 'A' (keyboardist).
Task The musicians were asked to write at least one song
over the course of three weekly sessions. They were told
that these sessions would be filmed. No description was
given of what constitutes a song. They were asked to be
prepared to write a song with people whom they would meet
in the session. They were invited to bring compositional
ideas if they wished to do so. Apart from the researcher, the
participants were paid £5 per session.
Physical Setting The sessions took place in a section of the
Electronic Engineering (EE) Lab in the Engineering
building at QMUL. We positioned the chairs for people to
have access to the equipment that they were to use. 'A' was
positioned behind the keyboards; 'C' next to the guitar amp;
'S' next 'C' and within distance of the bass amp; 'H' was
positioned in a way that was in the line of vision to all
members and at least one of the two cameras recording the
pilot study. In essence we attempted to recreate as natural a
rehearsal setting as possible with the assumption that visual
and aural channels were important to the process of work.
Data Capture The study consisted of filming 1.5 hours of
the musicians working together in the EE lab. Each session
lasted between 1.5 and 2 hours. Copies of the written notes
that musicians created were collected after the final session.
E-mail exchanges that the researcher had access to, were
also treated as data

Method of Analysis
To start with we had to define what constituted information
in this environment. We classified information in terms of
what we observed as possible inputs and outputs to and

from a musician. Primarily, we focussed on verbal
communication, some gestural communication (gaze,
nodding, smiling etc.), sounds produced by musical
instruments and written notes created by the musicians
during the process of work.
We then proceeded to investigate where
information comes from, how it propagates and how is it
transformed. We then correlated this with key events in
order to map the relationships between interactions and
consequences for the compositional process. Examples of
key events are: instances where musical ideas were
proposed to the group; the beginning of a session when the
group had to recommence working on compositions from a
previous session; times when perceptions of representation
relating to the composition (i.e., labels for musical structures
and musical parts) appeared to be different for members of
the group especially when divergence in perception caused a
breakdown in communication or music playing.
We transcribed the communications to highlight
areas of misunderstanding or areas where we wanted to
demonstrate a certain process of work. We analysed the
information created within the written notes and tracked the
timings of when the written notes were created and when
they were referenced.

Summary of Findings
For the purposes of this paper we will describe three
algorithmic levels of description that we feel reflect the key
group processes within JMC. It must be stated that these are
high-level descriptions and constitute some but not all
algorithmic levels of description available in JMC; this is
beyond the scope of this paper. Primarily, we use these
levels to classify individual actions within a specific context
of group work to illustrate the fundamental processes that
help the group to achieve a successful operation in JMC.
Key Algorithmic Levels in JMC
(Attainment) This is characterised by gathering information
of core musical units of principle idea, through various
mediums. Members interact with each other and the
artefacts to determine whether the states of representation
have propagated appropriately.
(Experimentation) Typically at this level, the core musical
units have propagated to musicians and they then contribute
their own knowledge to the attained information in order to
extend the form. The information can transform into playing
an instrument or it may prompt a verbal contribution. This is
primarily the stage during which the group experiments and
verifies what they want to retain.
(Structuring) At this level, a structure is created based on
the retained ideas, as a way to co-ordinate cues for musical
changes. Individuals can employ different algorithms in
structuring musical information but would need to achieve
the same output in order to perform in unison.

1858
1861

It is our theory that a group cannot develop a composition
from a stage where the form is incomplete (i.e., musical
information is not fully available or created for the form for
all members in the group) without employing these
algorithms. The composition cannot develop if the states of
representation relating to the core musical units that
constitutes the form (i.e., notes, the structure, the tempo, the
rhythm etc.) does not propagate across the members of the
group. Attainment refers to the process by which members
obtain core musical units relating to the form. The form is
rarely formulated from the outset. Some information may
exist for certain members but in the end all members would
have to conduct work on the basis of the core musical units.
At the same time to create a composition, the form needs to
be extended. This is the experimentation process. Once it is
extended, the group need a system of co-ordination to
reproduce what they have extended. We refer to this process
as structuring. Of course, there are other fundamental
processes such as verification and retention. We shall touch
on these in the course of the paper.
It would be beyond the scope of this paper to create
details beyond general descriptions of the three levels.
However, we shall attempt to illustrate how the
implementational level relates to the algorithmic levels in
relation to compositional process by using some excerpts
from the pilot study.
Excerpt 1
0:43:02
A:<plays keyboards> “E flat?” (Looks to 'C')
0:43:09
C:”So that erm B flat major over a B flat chord I
am sure there is better name for it”
H:“it's diminished”
C:“yeah half diminished or something?”
A:<plays keyboard> “isn’t it just major 7ths?”
C:“yeah erm” (looks at his guitar carefully as he
plays notes)
0:43:43
C:“eh it has a ahh what it is it’s a” <plays the
same chord twice> “it’s kind of ambiguous
because it doesn’t have a 3rd in it does it?”
A:(puts her hands on the keyboard) “oh does it
not?” <plays keyboard> (not quite in unison with
C)
0:44:02
C:“its got a oh its got a 9 in it”.

This excerpt is typical of attainment level interaction when
musicians aligned their understandings of what each other
played. The excerpt demonstrates several important
representational and interactional features of all three
algorithmic levels: 1) musical and verbal modes of
communication were the most prevalent and it created a
fluid form of expression where verbal communication was
intertwined with musical sounds, 2) the majority of
representation used in the interaction was transient in nature,
3) musicians perceived the same musical information
slightly differently, 4) musicians used their instruments to
map internal and external representations, 5) the fluid nature
of the work situation played an integral part in the cognitive
processes of the musicians (i.e., instant feedback and access
to other sources of information influenced how they

worked), 6) the open channel of communication invited
people outside of direct interaction to participate, in this
example H became involved.
In the pilot study, individuals transformed
propagated information into some form of action, like
playing their own instruments. At certain points, the group
jammed (performed the composition in its present state).
The performance can be seen as an attempt by the group to
co-ordinate the individuals’ transformation of propagated
information, as manifested by the instruments they play.
This type of activity helps the group to verify whether the
states of representation relating to the compositional
information have propagated appropriately.
Excerpt 2
‘S’ plays a set of notes; ‘C’ replicates it on his guitar. Once one
set is replicated, ‘S’ plays the next set of notes. After replicating
(or attempting to replicate) what ‘S’ plays, ‘C’ compiles a set of
chords. ‘C’ asks ‘S’ “so the chords you are outlining is” <plays a
chord> “that” <plays a chord>.

Once the information propagated and the group achieved a
common ground of understanding (Clarke and Brennan,
1991), they extended the form together. Often the group
verified what each member added to the composition. This
meant that members of the group assessed whether musical
sequences met the criteria of what they were attempting to
compose. Notice that in certain genres, like standard Jazz,
verification could be based solely on objective external
verifiers such as musical conventions. Therefore,
conventions can be used to create a criteria for verification.
The pilot study group appeared to set their own boundaries
for verification, which is something that we have seen in
previous observations of JMC (Nabavian, 2002). The
verification may have been influenced by conventions each
musician had knowledge of, however verbal judgement was
rarely based on external verifiers (i.e., conventions of what
scales should be played); subjective verification played a
bigger role. Subjective verification can be seen as musicians
basing judgement on what they feel sounds good rather than
whether the sequence belonged to a certain convention.
Excerpts 1 and 2 show that the attainment of the
core musical units rely heavily on the interaction between
the musicians and between the musicians and the musical
instruments. We therefore believe the transformation of
compositional information, in context of the work in JMC,
is a group process. In particular, the feedback between
musicians plays a major role in defining whether there is a
common ground of understanding between the group. This
can exist through out the three algorithmic levels set out
because of two main reasons: 1) the responsibility or
decision-making process is often at system level and it
requires constant feedback from members to determine
whether propagation of information and the transformation
appears agreeable and 2) the representations used within the
group do not always yield the desired transformation.
We state that the decision making process is often
at system level as musicians can influence what each other

1859
1861

plays. Even though the information propagates and
transforms in a manner deemed suitable by the individual, it
does not mean that it is deemed suitable by others. For
example, 'H' asks 'A' to make her notes “sparser than
that...because otherwise I can’t put anything on top”. 'C'
asks 'A' to play her notes higher up the keyboard “because
there isn't much happening at the top”. 'C' asks 'S' to change
his bass line to play more in the same rhythm as his guitar
part. This is more the type of processes that we associate
with the experimentation levels of description.
There is sufficient evidence in the pilot study and
previous studies (Nabavian, 2002) to suggest that the
representations used within the JMC do not always yield the
desired transformation.
Excerpt 3
21:18
S:“So the 1st verse sounded alright we could do it
8-2-4-2”
C <looks at S and nods>
21:19
H:“8”
S:“2-4-2”
21:30
H:“you are talking in terms of bars?”
A to S: “what do you mean?”
21:31
S to H: “bars”
A:“Oh because you are doing it longer anyway”
21:34
S: “So one repetition – I call that a bar”
21:37
A:“because the 2nd time <plays something>
<laughs>
21:42
H:“that's the chorus”
21:46
H:“The chorus is”
21:48
S:“The 2nd part” <plays notes>
H:“Twice as long”
S: “The chorus”
A:“Twice as long”
21:54
C <leans over to look at A's notes>
21:58
A:“because the first one” <plays notes> “and the
chorus goes” <plays notes>
S <plays with 'A'>
22:08
S:“yeah I see what you mean”

In theory structures are created in order to retain coordination of the playing of existing composition. They can
serve as a basis to co-ordinate cues for the changes of
musical parts during the performance of composition.
Structures also help musicians to breakdown the task of
recalling what they have to retain. Flor and Maglio (1997)
refer to this type of activity as ‘chunking’. Essentially,
structures segment the serial composition into sections with
labels where each musician plays a certain part for an
agreed length. An example of a Western contemporary pop
song structure can contain the following labelled sections:
Introduction, Verse, Chorus, Bridge, Middle 8. When
musicians reach the end of the length of the section, they
change to the next segment without actually needing to
know what someone else is playing; they just need the cue
to change. Musicians can utilise a number of methods to
track changes when performing to a structure. For example,
if a musician loses count of the number of bars that s/he has
played, s/he can look for gestural cues (like nods from other
musicians) or musical events within the composition (like a
particular sequence in the song) in order to establish when
to change. In this way, they co-ordinate the playing of
retained ideas over a period of time without attempting to
remember everything that occurs in the system.

Discussion

This excerpt illustrate how representations can be perceived
differently even after multiple sessions of work with the
same composition. In this instance, the system that
musicians employed in counting cycles of music appeared
to be different. They managed to conduct work because the
output was the same (i.e., they all managed to change at the
right places). S and C appear content with using the term bar
number to signify a certain number of patterns to be played.
The representation “8-2-4-2” signified a structure for them.
'A' did not appear to use this method. In fact, there are other
places where she plays her sequence in the wrong places.
The concept of what constituted a bar was not something
that 'H' and 'A' shared with 'S' immediately. This excerpt
was taken from the final session of the pilot study. The
group had performed the composition with various
structures without realising their notions of the structure of
the form may be different. If musicians can perform whilst
having different states of representation when expressing
the structures, why do they create them?

We have illustrated that a musical group can create
compositions without sharing knowledge of the same
musical conventions. We have illustrated that, at the
implementational level, there can be more than one type of
representation utilised in achieving the same output (for
example, cues to change by counting bar number or looking
for particular musical sequences or events). We have also
shown that, in JMC, members of the group rely on constant
feedback from the system to overcome any differences in
interpretation that might be caused by using different
representations in the process work.
In terms of the development of the composition,
the group needed a common understanding of the
fundamental underlying information that constitutes the
composition (i.e., the form). There are occasions (i.e.,
excerpt 1), when the group literally spell out each musical
note and there are periods when they do not discuss or query
what each person plays. Therefore, we state that the states of
representation of certain musical units (for example,
information about the form) must remain the same through
out the system for the composition to develop. We have also
illustrated that much of the transformation, in relation to
what is produced and retained for the composition, is
dependant on the group verification.
We have specified three algorithmic levels of
description (attainment, experimentation and structuring)
that help the group in satisfying the constraints of JMC at
the computational level (i.e., creating a composition that
redeems a form after a period of development). In other
words, without attaining information about the form,

1860
1861

extending the form and structuring what has been created in
order to reproduce it, the constraints for a successful
operation in JMC would not be satisfied.
Structuring the analysis of natural observations of
JMC in this way allows us to assess the impacts of the
propagation and transformation of information at various
points during the development of the composition. This is
important because it illustrates how information processing
within JMC impacts group creativity. Information may
propagate in a number of ways and create a number of
transformations. Each of these transformations will play a
role in the group’s ability to achieve a desired outcome for
the composition. In simple terms, group creativity is
influenced by how the states of representation of musical
ideas (as manifested by the musical information such verbal
labels of musical notes, hand movements on instruments,
written musical notation etc.) propagate and transform
within the group. This means that the individual’s creative
musical idea possibly bears less influence on group
creativity than the group’s ability to transform the
information contained in that idea in a desirable manner
(i.e., achieving a transformation that is deemed suitable in
the context of composition). Therefore, it is not just the
individual’s idea but what the group makes of the idea that
impacts group creativity.
We are currently investigating whether we can help
musicians enhance the group's ability to transform
information in a more uniform manner by creating
constraints for the propagation of the states of representation
relating to the three algorithmic levels that we have
identified. We would like to test the possibilities of
attempting to superimpose a structure, through a computermediated tool, that would constrain the possibility of
interpretation of representations during the process of work.
Musical scores can be thought of as system that imposes
certain constraints. However, formal scores do not appear to
be used in JMC, as seen in the pilot study. There are
numerous reasons for the absence of scores in JMC: 1)
musicians all need the knowledge in creating and reading
scores, 2) it is a time consuming task, 3) composition is
dynamic, changes can be frequent and therefore to make
written notes of everything will disrupt flow of work and 4)
scores do not always help to produce the exact
transformations (in terms of how musical notes are
phrased). Computer mediated tools may be one way that
enable groups to create representations that help attainment,
retention and structuring of musical ideas in a group context
fluidly. We seek to investigate the features that are required
to help maintain the states of representation and examine
whether they help achieve a transformation of information
better than or compliment current representations.

Acknowledgements
This research is funded by the Engineering and Physical
Sciences
Council
(EPSRC).
Grant
reference:
GR/P00130/01.

References
Boden, M. A. (1992) The Creative Mind. London: Abacus.
Boden, M. A. (1994). Dimensions of Creativity. London:
MIT Press.
Clark, H.H. and Brennan, S.E. (1991). Grounding in
Communication. pp.127-149 In Resnick, L.B., Levine, J
and Behrend, S.D. (eds.) Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition. Washington DC.: American Psychological
Association.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the
Psychology of Discovery and Invention, HarperCollins
Flor, N. V. and Maglio, P. P. (1997) Emergent Global
Cueing of Local Activity: Covering in Music, CSLC
Proceedings, 45-52.
Heath, C. and Luff, P. (1997) Reconfiguring Media Space:
Supporting Collaborative Work. in Finn, K.E., Sellen,
A.J. and Wilbur, S., (eds.)
Video-Mediated
Communication. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Mahwah, New Jersey. pp.323-347.
Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition In the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b). How A Cockpit Remembers Its
Speed, Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Kirsh, D. (2004). Metacognition, Distributed Cognition and
Visual Design. In Gardinfas, P. and Johansson, P. (eds.)
Cognition, Education and Communication Technology,
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into
the Human Representation and Processing of Visual
Information . San Francisco, CA: Freeman
Nabavian, S., (2002) The Emergence of composition from
improvisation, AMSc. Thesis, Dept. of Computer
Science, QMUL.
Nattiez, J. J. (1990). Music and Discourse: Toward a
semilogy of music (Carolyb Abbate, Trans.). Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Nardi, B. A. (1996). ‘Studying Context: A Comparison of
Activity Theory, Situated Action Models and Distributed
Cognition.’ In Nardi, B. (ed.) Context and Consciousness:
Activity Theory and Human-Computer Interaction. MIT
Press.
Paulus, P. B., and Nijstad, B. A. (2003). Group Creativity,
NewYork: Oxford University Press
Perry, M., (1999). The application of individually and
socially distributed cognition in workplace studies: two
peas in a pod?, European Conference in Cognitive
Sciences, Siena, Italy – p. 87-92.
Ruwet, N. (1972). Linguistics and musicology.
International Social Science Journal, 19, 79-87.
Schneiderman, B. (2000). Creating Creativity: User
Interfaces for Supporting Innovation, ACM Transactions
on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 7, No. 1.
Sawyer, K. R. (2003). Group Creativity: Music, Theater,
Collaboration. New Jersey: LEA.
Sternberg. R. J. (1999). Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge
University Press.

1861
1861

