UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are There Cross-Cultural Differences in Reasoning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1tr5n9sr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Johnson-Laird, P.N.
Lee, N.Y. Louise

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are There Cross-Cultural Differences in Reasoning?
N. Y. Louis Lee (ngarlee@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

P. N. Johnson-Laird (phil@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
Chinese society, for instance, was agrarian and communal,
and prized cooperation and social harmony. As a result, East
Asians – Chinese, Koreans, and Japanese, who are the heirs
of this tradition – are likely to attend to the entire visual field
in perception, to attribute causes to the environment, and to
reason on the basis of experience and in a dialectical way that
tolerates contradictions. In contrast, ancient Greek society
was organized in city-states, and prized individual agency,
criticism, and logic. As a result, Westerners – who are the
heirs of this tradition – are likely to attend to entities in a
scene rather than to its background, to attribute causes to
individual agents, and to reason in an analytical and logical
way. Nisbett and his colleagues have reported a set of
experiments supporting this account.
Our concern is with reasoning and with the two main
studies describing differences in reasoning between East
Asians and Westerners. In one study, Norenzayan et al.
(2002) reported that Koreans were more influenced by their
beliefs when they reasoned than were Westerners. The
Koreans were more likely to accept a conclusion consistent
with their beliefs, and to reject a conclusion inconsistent with
their beliefs, regardless of whether the conclusion was
deductively valid. Unsworth & Medin (2005), however,
reanalyzed these data, and failed to detect any reliable
difference between the two cultures. In the other study, Peng
and Nisbett (1999) presented Chinese and American
participants with vignettes depicting social conflicts. The
participants then had to write down their thoughts about the
conflicts. The investigators found that the Chinese
participants made dialectical evaluations of the conflicts more
often than the American participants did.
In short, experimental results suggest that cross-cultural
differences in reasoning exist, but a key issue is whether these
differences reflect entrenched cognitive processes or merely
typical strategies. Entrenched cognitive processes should be
difficult, if not impossible, for individuals to modify.
Strategies, which are assembled from sequences of these
processes, should be quite easy to modify (see van der Henst,
Yang, & Johnson-Laird, 2002). Individuals might have a
characteristic bias favoring one sort of strategy, but they
might develop other strategies in appropriate circumstances.
Investigators themselves sometimes claim that no difference
exists in processes: “people in all cultures are likely to
possess both [holistic and analytical] reasoning systems”
(Norenzayan et al., 2002, p.654). But, they also sometimes
claim that the differences are in more entrenched cognitive
processes: “… if it was the social circumstances that

Abstract
Psychologists have suggested that people from different
cultures use different cognitive processes when they reason.
Nisbett (2003), for example, proposes that East Asians tend to
think holistically, dialectically, and on the basis of their
experience, whereas Westerners tend to think analytically,
logically, and abstractly. It follows that East Asians should
tolerate contradictions to a greater degree than Westerners. We
report an experiment in which East Asians were no more likely
than Westerners to succumb to illusions of logical consistency,
and an experiment in which they were no more likely than
Westerners to reason solely from their experience.

Introduction
Culture is a plausible source of differences in the process of
reasoning. Two separate strands of evidence appear to
corroborate its effects. One strand shows that peoples from
subcultures with no writing or schooling are reluctant to make
inferences about hypothetical individuals (Luria, 1976). For
instance, Cole and his colleagues gave a non-literate Kpelle
rice farmer in Liberia this problem:
All Kpelle men are rice farmers.
Mr. Smith is not a rice farmer.
Is he a Kpelle man?
Westerners are likely to respond: no. But the farmer replied:
“If I know him in person, I can answer that question, but
since I do not know him in person, I cannot answer that
question”. This answer is typical of those individuals in
cultures that have no writing (Cole, Gay, Glick, & Sharp,
1971). They tend to make inferences based on knowledge and
experience rather than on logical acumen (Scribner, 1977).
Preschool children and unschooled adults in Recife, Brazil,
have the same bias. Yet, as Dias, Roazzi, and Harris (2005)
have shown, when an inference is couched in the context of a
distant planet, where no one could have any relevant
knowledge, the bias disappears and non-literate participants
reason in a competent way about contents outside their
experience. The effect of schooling and of learning to read
therefore seems to make people more amenable to reason
hypothetically rather than to yield a new process of reasoning.
The second strand of evidence is due to Nisbett and his
colleagues. They have proposed that socio-historical
traditions lead to differences in cognition (see, e.g., Nisbett,
2003; Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001; Norenzayan,
Smith, Kim, & Nisbett, 2002; Peng & Nisbett, 1999). Ancient
459

inconsistent. Experiment 2 investigated whether East Asians
were more likely than Westerners to reason on the basis of
their experience.

produced the cognitive differences between ancient Chinese
and Greeks, then we might expect to find cognitive
differences between modern East Asians and Westerners that
map onto the differences between the ancient Chinese and
Greeks” (Nisbett, 2003, p.77).
In our view, given the similarities in human genetic makeup and the universal nature of language (see, e.g., Chomsky,
1995; Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002), the basic processes
of reasoning are likely to be universal. Nisbett (2003, e.g., p.
8) appears to take for granted that reasoning depends on
formal rules of inference. But, in common with other
researchers (e.g., Cosmides, 1989; Oaksford & Chater, 2001),
we are skeptical about this idea and suppose instead that
reasoning depends on envisaging what is possible given the
premises. According to this theory, human reasoners
construct mental models of the possibilities compatible with
the premises (see, e.g., Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002).
Mental models are constrained by the principle of truth: they
represent only what is possible, and represent a clause in the
premises of an inference, whether it is affirmative or negative
only if it holds in a possibility (Johnson-Laird & Savary,
1999). For example, an inclusive disjunction of the form: A
or B, or both, has three mental models, which each represent
a separate possibility:

Experiment 1
If East Asians are tolerant of contradictions, then they should
be poorer at detecting them. This experiment accordingly
compared East Asians and Westerners in a task in which they
had to judge whether or not sets of assertions were consistent.
According to the model theory, individuals carry out this task
by searching for a single mental model of a possibility in which
all the assertions are true. If they find such a model, they judge
that the assertions are consistent; otherwise, they judge that
they are inconsistent (Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto, &
Legrenzi, 2000). Consider the following problem (adopted
from Legrenzi, Girotto, & Johnson-Laird, 2003, Experiment 3):
Only one of the following assertions is true:
The man is very patriotic or, the man is hot-blooded, or
both.
The man is hot-blooded, and the man joins the army.
The following assertion is definitely true:

A
A

The man is hot-blooded, and this man joins the army.

B
B

Write a description of the man. ______________________

Individuals tend to interpret the absence of B from the first
model as the negation of B. In contrast to mental models, fully
explicit models represent the clauses in the premises whether
they are true or false in all the possibilities:
A
¬A
A

The mental models of the initial disjunction of the two
assertions represent four different possibilities:
very patriotic

¬B
B
B

very patriotic

hot-blooded
hot-blooded
hot-blooded

joins army

The last of these models, which represents that the man is
hot-blooded and joins the army, corresponds to the
conjunction that is definitely true, and so individuals should
judge that the assertions are consistent and formulate the
following description of the man based on this model:

Reasoning is not a fixed deterministic process, and so
individuals can develop different strategies when they reason
about a series of problems (van der Henst et al., 2002).
Knowledge can also modulate the construction of mental
models (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002), and it can block the
representation of certain possibilities (Johnson-Laird, Girotto,
& Legrenzi, 2004). According to this theory, the strategies
that individuals develop to deal with a set of problems should
be distinguished from the underlying cognitive processes of
building and manipulating models.
In what follows, we report two experiments designed to
investigate whether there was any difference in deductive
reasoning between East Asians and Westerners. Experiment
1 called for the participants to evaluate whether or not sets of
assertions were logically consistent. If East Asians reason
dialectically and are more tolerant of contradictions, then they
should be more likely than Westerners to judge that
inconsistent sets of assertions are consistent, and less likely
than Westerners to judge that consistent sets of assertions are

not very patriotic, hot-blooded, and joins the army
The initial clause comes from the tendency of individuals to
interpret the absence of a predicate, such as very patriotic,
which occurs in other models, as equivalent to its negation. In
contrast to the mental models above, the fully explicit models
of the initial disjunction, which do represent clauses that are
false in a possibility (using negation) are as follows:
very patriotic
not very patriotic
very patriotic
very patriotic

460

not hot-blooded
hot-blooded
hot-blooded
not hot-blooded

not joins army
not joins army
not joins army
joins army

• You will be given 16 logical problems. In each problem,
you will be given some assertions describing a target
object. Please use the information in all the sentences to
write a description of the individual. But, if you do not
think that a consistent description is possible, please
respond , “none”.

No model in this set corresponds to the conjunction that is
definitely true, and so the overall description of the man is, in
fact, inconsistent. Yet, because of the principle of truth, the
description should yield an illusion of consistency, and so
participants should be likely to write the description: not very
patriotic, hot-blooded, and joins the army. Analogous
problems should lead to illusions of inconsistency, in which
participants respond that the assertions are inconsistent, when
in fact they are consistent (see Table 1 below). If East Asians
tend to accept logical contradictions, then they should be
more likely than Westerners to succumb to illusions of
consistency, and less likely than Westerners to succumb to
illusions of inconsistency.

After the Chinese participants read the instructions, the first
author answered their queries in Cantonese; and after the
American participants read the instructions, he answered
their queries in English. Each participant then received two
blocks of the eight problems. (The Chinese students
received one block in English and another in Chinese.) The
order of the two blocks was counterbalanced. Each problem
was presented on a separate sheet of paper, and the
participants had four minutes to solve it.

Method and procedure
We selected eight forms of problem from Legrenzi et al.
(2003) shown in Table 1. There were two illusions of
consistency, which we abbreviate as “C/I”, where “C” for
“consistency” denotes the predicted response and “I” for
“inconsistency” denotes the correct response. There were
two control problems for them (C/C) for which the model
theory predicts that individuals should make the correct
responses. Likewise, there were two illusions of
inconsistency (I/C) and their two controls (I/I). Each
problem consisted of a disjunction of two assertions
followed by a conjunction. The left hand column shows the
disjunctions, and the corresponding conjunction for each
problem. The table also shows the mental models and the
fully explicit models for each of initial disjunctions. The
comparison between the conjunction in a problem and the
mental models of the disjunction yields the predicted
response according to the model theory; and the comparison
between the conjunction in a problem and the fully explicit
models of the disjunction yield the correct response.
In place of A, B, and C, the actual problems had sensible
clauses, such as those in our previous example: the man is
very patriotic, the man is hot-blooded, and the man will join
the army. The first author, who is bilingual in Chinese
Cantonese and English, translated the materials from
English into Chinese (traditional script). A second ChineseEnglish bilingual speaker translated the materials from
Chinese back into English, and the two translators resolved
all translation disagreements through discussion. The
participants received each problem twice, but with different
contents allocated at random.
Twenty volunteers at the Chinese University of Hong
Kong (mean age 20.4 years) and twenty undergraduate
students at Princeton University, USA (mean age 20.0
years), participated in the experiment for monetary
compensation and course credit respectively. All Hong
Kong participants were native speakers of Cantonese who
understood English well. They received the instructions in
both Chinese and English, and the key instructions were:

Table 1. The form of the eight sorts of problem in
Experiment 1 (from Legrenzi et al., 2003), and the mental
models and the fully explicit models of the initial
disjunction. The symbol “¬” denotes negation. C/I and C/C
denote problems that should yield an illusion of consistency
and their control problems respectively, and I/C and I/I
denote problems that should yield an illusion of
inconsistency and their control problems respectively.
The problems

Mental models of
disjunction

Only one is true:
A or B or both.
B and C.
Definitely true:
1. B and C.
(C/I)
2. A and B.
(C/C)
3. ¬B and C. (I/C)
4. ¬A and ¬B. (I/I)
Only one is true:
If A then B.
B and C.
Definitely true:
5. B and C.
6. A and B.
7. ¬A and ¬B.
8. A and ¬B.

a
a

a

b
b
b

b
b
…

c

c

Fully explicit
models of
disjunction
a
b
a
¬b
a
¬b
¬a
b

a
¬a
¬a
¬a

b
b
¬b
¬b

¬c
c
¬c
¬c

¬c
¬c
c
¬c

(C/I)
(C/C)
(I/C)
(I/I)

Results and discussion
Table 2 presents the percentages of both groups’ predicted
errors, correct responses where they differed from the
predicted responses, and matching errors, i.e., descriptions
that included the predicates in the conjunction that was
definitely true but that either made no mention of the third
predicate or asserted that it might, or might not, be present.
Fourteen Princeton participants made a greater number of
correct responses for the control problems than for the
illusion problems (Binomial test, p<.05 with one tie). For
problems presented in English, 10 Hong Kong participants

• In this experiment, we are interested in how culture can
influence the way people reason logically. This is not a
test of intelligence.

461

made a greater number of correct responses for the control
problems than for the illusion problems (Binomial test, n.s.
with three ties). But, for problems in Chinese, 15 Hong
Kong participants made a greater number of correct
responses for the control problems than for the illusion
problems, and this difference was reliable (Binomial test,
p<.01 with one tie). No reliable difference occurred between
the Hong Kong and Princeton participants for the four sorts
of problems (Mann-Whitney U=23.5, z=.90, p=.37).
However, the Hong Kong participants had a marginal
tendency to make more correct responses to the problems in
English (42%) than to the problems in Chinese (34%;
Wilcoxon signed test, z=1.88, p=.06, two-tailed). The theory
predicts the occurrence of illusions of consistency and of
illusions of inconsistency, but there were fewer illusions of
inconsistency (I/C) than illusions of consistency (C/I;
Wilcoxon test, z=2.16, p<.05).

on knowledge and Westerners should make deductions
where a task allows both sorts of inference. Although this
hypothesis is not easy to test, we were able to examine it
using problems (from Johnson-Laird et al., 2004) of the
following sort:

Table 2. The percentages of predicted responses, correct
responses (if they differ from the predicted responses),
responses that were matching errors, for the four sorts of
problem in Experiment 1. The balances of the percentages
are miscellaneous errors each made on fewer than 15% of
trials.

The other sort of inference is a deduction that does not go
beyond the information in the premises:

Hong Kong
Chinese
English
problems problems

Forms of problem

If a pilot falls from the plane without a parachute then he
dies.
This pilot did not die, however.
Why not?
The problem is ambiguous, because it allows two sorts of
inference. One sort is an induction based on knowledge,
e.g.:
The plane was on the ground and so the pilot didn’t fall
far.

The pilot didn’t fall from the plane without a parachute.
If East Asians are more likely than Westerners to invoke
knowledge and experience in their reasoning, then they
should make more inductions than Westerners.

Princeton

Method and procedure

C/I:
Predicted error response
Correct response
Matching error

30
15
55

28
23
40

29
11
60

C/C:
Predicted correct response
Matching error

60
28

58
28

41
53

I/C:
Predicted error response
Correct response
Matching error

15
60
15

15
63
15

23
45
21

I/I:
Predicted correct response
Matching error

55
28

58
36

69
23

Thirty volunteers at the Chinese University of Hong Kong
(mean age of 20.4 years) and twenty-one undergraduates at
Princeton University, USA (mean age of 19.9 years)
participated in this experiment for monetary compensation
and course credit respectively. The participants were told
that their task was to answer three questions and to respond
as quickly as possible because we were interested in their
spontaneous responses. In fact, there was no time limit.
The participants were then given three ambiguous problems
based on different contents. The Hong Kong participants
received two problems in English and one problem in
Chinese; the Princeton participants received three problems
in English. Twenty of the Hong Kong participants received
the problems after they had completed an unrelated
deductive reasoning task (Experiment 1), and ten of them
did not. Ten of the Princeton participants received the
problems after they completed Experiment 1, and eleven of
them did not.

The principal result was that both the East Asians and
Westerners succumbed to illusions of consistency, and
performed better with control problems. This result is
contrary to the view that East Asians are more tolerant of
contradictions.

Results and discussion
Both groups of participants tended to respond
deductively: the means were 1.57 deductive responses out
of three from the Hong Kong participants and 1.86 from the
Princeton participants, and the difference was not reliable
(Mann-Whitney U=288.0, z=.80, p=.42). The remaining
responses were inductive. The Hong Kong participants did
not differ reliably in the number of deductive responses
between the problems in Chinese and the problems in
English. However, as Table 3 shows, both groups were

Experiment 2
The aim of the second experiment was to examine whether
East Asians tend to reason on the basis of their knowledge,
beliefs, and experience, whereas Westerner tend to reason
logically. That is, East Asians should make inductions based

462

naïve reasoners in Hong Kong and America were able to
develop successful strategies to solve these puzzles (Lee,
Goodwin, & Johnson-Laird, 2006).
What effects, if any, does culture have on reasoning? One
effect is likely to concern the contents of inferences:
different cultures have different beliefs, and so the premises
of their inferences, whether explicit or implicit, are likely to
differ too. But, no robust evidence exists for cultural
differences in the underlying cognitive processes of
reasoning. Those differences that have been reported (e.g.,
Peng & Nisbett, 1999; Dias et al., 2005) appear to be in the
characteristic strategies that individuals use to reason. Our
results, and the transfer effects of deduction on Experiment
2, are compatible with this account. Individuals assemble
such strategies “bottom up” from an exploration of
sequences of operations carried out by basic cognitive
processes. As a result, strategies often differ from one
individual to another (see van der Henst et al., 2002), and
cultural conventions could also lead to the development of
preferred strategies for reasoning. Nisbett (2003) describes
Eastern reasoning as holistic and dialectical, and Western
reasoning as analytical and logical. Our results, however,
imply that these descriptions characterize historical
traditions and perhaps the spontaneous strategies that
individuals adopt when they first tackle a set of reasoning
problems in psychological experiments. These strategies,
however, are not deep-seated, or built into the underlying
processes of reasoning. Hence, our participants revealed no
such biases, and the popularity of Su Doku puzzles reveals
no such biases, either. Nisbett may agree with this
hypothesis: he has commented that the differences are
matters of habit. He has also described a Canadian
psychologist as thinking in East Asian ways after an
extended time in Asia (Nisbett, 2003, p.68).
We leave the last word to John Locke (1690/1959), the
arch Empiricist whom one might expect to argue that
individuals in different cultures learn to reason in different
ways. In fact, he wrote (p. 389):

more likely to make a deductive response after they had
carried out the previous deductive experiment than
otherwise (Fisher-Yates exact test, p<.01 and p=.056
respectively). Among Hong Kong participants, this effect
occurred for problems in both languages. This result showed
that both East Asians and Westerners tended to use the same
strategy – deductive reasoning – when they had recently had
occasion to use it.
Table 3: The number of participants in Experiment 2 who
drew more deductive than inductive inferences after they
had carried out an unrelated deductive task (Experiment 1),
and not after they had done so.
Hong Kong participants
More
deductive
responses
9
After Experiment 1
7
Not after Experiment 1
Princeton participants
More
deductive
responses
9
After Experiment 1
4
Not after Experiment 1

More
inductive
responses
1
13
More
inductive
responses
2
6

General Discussion
Neither of our experiments found any significant differences
between the reasoning of East Asians and Westerners. In
Experiment 1, East Asians were no more likely than their
Westerners to succumb to illusions of consistency, i.e., the
illusion that a set of inconsistent premises are in fact
consistent, nor were they less likely to succumb to illusions
of inconsistency, i.e., the illusion that a set of consistent
premises are in fact inconsistent. The failure to find a
difference does not seem to be a result of lack of statistical
power, because both groups did perform reliably better with
control problems than with the illusions of consistency. The
experiment also corroborates an unpublished study by
Yingrui Yang et al. (2003), who found that Chinese and
American participants performed comparably on a set of
deductive problems that depended on quantifiers. In
Experiment 2, East Asians were no more likely than
Westerners to respond to ambiguous problems with
inductions based on knowledge as opposed to pure
deductions. Once again, we doubt whether this failure to
find a difference is a result of lack of statistical power,
because both groups were more likely to make a deduction
if they had previously carried out an unrelated deductive
task.
A recent phenomenon also suggests that deductive
competence is a cultural universal. Su Doku puzzles depend
solely on deduction. They were invented in the USA, but
first became popular in Japan, and then spread to England in
2004, and latterly to Western Europe, Australia, and the
USA. Recent studies from our laboratory have revealed that

He that will look into many parts of Asia and
America will find men reason there perhaps as acutely
as himself, who yet never heard of a syllogism, nor can
reduce any one argument to those forms.
But the mind is not taught to reason by these rules; it
has a native faculty to perceive the coherence or
incoherence of its ideas and can range them right
without any such perplexing repetitions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation to the second author to study strategies
in reasoning (BCS-0076287). We thank Virginia Kwan for
her translations, Sam Glucksberg, Vittorio Girotto, and
Geoff Goodwin for their helpful comments, and Fanny
Cheung and Winton Au at the Chinese University of Hong
Kong for their help.

463

Locke, J. (1690/1959). An essay concerning human
understanding (Vol.2). (Ed. A.C. Fraser). New York:
Dover.
Luria, A.R. (1976). Cognitive Development: Its Cultural
and Social Foundations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Nisbett, R.E. (2003). The geography of thought. New York:
Free Press.
Nisbett, R.E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291-310.
Norenzayan, A., Smith, E.E., Kim, B.J., & Nisbett, R.E.
(2002). Cultural preferences for formal versus intuitive
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 26, 653-684.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2001). The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5, 349-357.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R.E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and
reasoning about contradiction. American Psychologist, 54,
741-754.
Scribner, S. (1977). Modes of thinking and ways of
speaking: culture and logic reconsidered. In P.N. JohnsonLaird, & P.C. Wason (Eds.) Thinking: Readings in
Cognitive Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. Pp. 483-500.
Unsworth, S.J., & Medin, D.L. (2005). Cultural differences
in belief bias associated with deductive reasoning?
Cognitive Science, 29, 525-530.
Van der Henst, J.-B., Yang, Y., & Johnson-Laird, P.N.
(2002). Strategies in sentential reasoning. Cognitive
Science, 26, 425-468.
Yang, Y., Zhao, Y., Zeng, J., Guo, J., Ju, S., & Bringsjord,
S. (2003). Cross-language validations of mental logic and
mental models. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy,
NY, USA, unpublished manuscript.

References
Chomsky, N. (1995) The minimalist program. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Cole, M., Gay, J., Glick, J.A., & Sharp, D.W. (1971) The
cultural context of learning and thinking. New York:
Basic Books.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies
with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Dias, M., Roazzi, A., & Harris, P.L. (2005). Reasoning from
unfamiliar premises: a study with unschooled adults.
Psychological Science, 16, 550-554.
Hauser, M., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W.T. (2002). The
language faculty: What is it, who has it, and how did it
evolve? Science, 298, 1569–1579.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006). How we reason. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press. In press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Conditionals:
a theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference.
Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Girotto, V., & Legrenzi, P. (2004).
Reasoning
from
inconsistency
to
consistency.
Psychological Review, 111, 640-661.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, P., & Legrenzi,
M.S. (2000). Illusions in reasoning about consistency.
Science, 288, 531-532.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Legrenzi, P., & Legrenzi, M.S. (1972).
Reasoning and a sense of reality. British Journal of
Psychology, 63, 395-400.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Savary, F. (1999). Illusory
inferences: A novel class of erroneous deductions.
Cognition, 71, 191-229.
Lee, N.Y.L., Goodwin, G.P., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006).
The psychology of Su Doku problems. In: Proceedings of
the Twenty-Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, Vancouver, Canada.
Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2003).
Models of consistency. Psychological Science, 14, 131137.

464

