UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
As Useful as a Bicycle to a Fish: Exploration versus Constraint in Creativity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/697070x7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Dix, Alan
McKnight, Lorna
Ormerod, THomas C.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

As Useful as a Bicycle to a Fish: Exploration versus Constraint in Creativity
Lorna McKnight (l.mcknight@lancaster.ac.uk), Thomas C. Ormerod (t.ormerod@lancaster.ac.uk),
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, LA1 4YF, UK.

Corina Sas (c.sas@lancaster.ac.uk), Alan Dix (alan@hcibook.com)
Department of Computing, Lancaster University, LA1 4YW, UK.
prior knowledge is the Geneplore model of Finke, Ward and
Smith (1992). This model proposes that successful creative
idea generation consists of two critical phases: the
generation of ideas, which invokes processes such as
retrieval, association, synthesis, transformation, and
analogical transfer; and exploration of ideas, which involves
discovery and assignment of attributes, conceptual
interpretation and functional inference. Finke et al refer to
the products of these phases as preinventive structures, that
is, ideas that can subsequently be refined into design
outcomes through successive generation and evaluation
cycles via the imposition of product constraints. The model
is in some respects prescriptive, in that it presents an
idealised model of how successful creativity might happen,
with no inherent preconceptions or limitations about the
types of creativity that it can accommodate.

Abstract
We report a study that examined the roles of exploration and
constraint in design creativity. 48 student participants
undertook mental and physical variants of a design synthesis
task requiring the creation of objects from presented shape
components. In contrast with previous research, creativity
scores were not affected by a preinventive phase in which
forms are assembled prior to the provision of a design goal.
Instead, a preinventive phase led only to higher ratings of
design originality and lower ratings of design practicality. No
differences in creativity were found between mental and
physical synthesis. The results suggest that a preinventive
phase does not enhance the exploration of novel combinations
but instead increases the degree of design constraint.

Introduction
Creative design has been identified as one of the key
challenges for theories of human cognition (Simon, 1981),
but progress in understanding its cognitive determinants has
been slow. An agreed definition for creativity remains
elusive, though it is generally accepted to involve the
generation of ideas or artefacts judged to be both original
and practical (e.g., Boden, 2004; Warr & O'Neill, 2005): a
new design idea will not be judged as creative if it cannot be
implemented or used for its intended purpose. Further
difficulties arise in the measurement of creativity, since
assessment of a creative act is inherently subjective.
Measures may vary over time and between cultures.
Moreover, controversy exists as to whether the focus in
understanding creative ability should be on measuring
individuals’ traits (Marakas & Elam, 1997) or on processes
and skills acquired through training and experience
(Sternberg, Kaufman & Pretz, 2002).
Despite these difficulties, a consistent finding in
laboratory studies of creativity (e.g., Smith, Ward &
Schumacher, 1993; Wiley, 1998; Marsh, Ward & Landau,
1999) and realistic studies of design (e.g., Jansson & Smith,
1991) is that prior knowledge can inhibit idea generation.
For example, Marsh et al describe as unconscious
plagiarism participants’ generation of stimuli that were
clearly influenced by exemplars available in the task
environment, despite a requirement for novelty. An
implication of this finding is that creativity will be enhanced
by activities that encourage exploration of a new space of
possibilities free from the influence of prior knowledge and
expectations.
An influential cognitive model of the creative process that
reflects the importance of unshackling exploration from

1811

PREINVENTIVE
EXPLORATION
AND
INTERPRETATION

GENERATION
OF PREINVENTIVE
STRUCTURES
FOCUS OR EXPAND
CONCEPT

PRODUCT
CONSTRAINTS

Figure 1: The Geneplore model of creativity (Finke, Ward
& Smith, 1992).
Evidence for the Geneplore model comes from Finke’s
(1990) studies of mental synthesis. In this task, participants
mentally generate and then report structures that address a
design goal (e.g., a category that the resulting object should
belong to or a function that it should serve) by combining a
presented selection of generic three-dimensional shapes.
The resulting products are then assessed by independent
judges as to their originality and practicality. These
measures are combined to produce a creativity score in
which both originality and practicality must be above a high
criterion. It is worth noting that the mental synthesis task, at
least as used by Finke, does not test the cyclical nature of
the model: in particular, typically in Finke’s studies a single

structure was developed during generation and evaluation,
which was then interpreted as a design solution.
In a series of experiments, Finke demonstrated that
creativity scores were enhanced if participants were instructed
to synthesise a mental structure before knowing the design
goal. This ‘preinventive phase’ was intended to force
participants to follow phases of structure generation and
subsequent interpretation. The preinventive structures should
be free of interpretive bias when they were initially created,
which should in turn increase the extent to which participants
explore the space of possible interpretations. In these studies,
generating preinventive structures before knowing the
category or function under which the final product should fall
was found to reduce the number of practical inventions, but
produced the greatest number of creative inventions overall.
However, these findings were based on cross-experiment
comparisons rather than within-experiment tests.
Finke’s results have been very influential in design
research (e.g., Kokotovich & Purcell, 2000), but to date no
study has endeavoured to replicate his studies using the
same methodology. The original studies are reported as
book chapters, so only limited details about the
methodology and materials are available. The products of
the studies were rated by two judges who were both 'trained'
(though no details are available concerning the training). No
details were published about either the internal consistency
of these judges, or the level of consensus between them.
One aim of the current study was to provide as close a
replication as possible of Finke’s (1990) second and sixth
experiments, the critical comparison between presence and
absence of a preinventive phase, given the available
information on methodology.
According to the Geneplore model, a preinventive phase
works because it allows participants to generate and explore
shape combinations independent of prior knowledge about
how they combine and operate in existing artefacts.
However, an important aspect of Finke’s method was that,
on each trial, participants in preinventive phase conditions
combined shapes to synthesise a single form, to which the
design goal was then applied. In contrast, participants
informed of the design goal from the outset had the
opportunity to synthesise and compare a number of potential
combinations. If exploration lies at the heart of design
creativity, one might expect the creativity of control
participants to increase relative to preinventive phase
participants because they had the opportunity to explore
design alternatives. The fact that the opposite result arose in
Finke’s studies suggests that exploration may help to
construct novel pre-design combinations of components but
not to generate design alternatives
An alternative explanation of Finke’s finding is that a
preinventive phase acts as a constraint rather than as an
opportunity to explore shape combinations. Preinventive
form participants may be more creative because they have to
fit an unpredictable design requirement to a predetermined
form, which has the effect of increasing the originality of

the resulting design. The decline in the number of practical
inventions produced by preinventive phase participants is
consistent with this view. If you are forced to reconceptualise a fixed object in terms of an unexpected
design goal, then it is likely to be highly novel at the cost of
being unusable or ineffective: a bicycle makes a highly
original fishing rod, but not a very practical one. A second
aim of the current study was to provide evidence that might
discriminate between explanations based on exploration
versus constraint. If the former holds, then a preinventive
phase should increase both originality and practicality. If
the latter holds, then originality should increase and
practicality should decline.
Although Finke’s studies involved three-dimensional
shapes, the forms generated were imaginary rather than
implemented. Typically, designers work with some external
medium (e.g., sketching, building models). Thus, a third aim
of this paper was to investigate whether the effects of a
preinventive phase on physical synthesis are the same as on
mental synthesis. Previous studies have examined physical
synthesis, though these have not strictly replicated Finke's
original experiments. For example, Pike (2002) found that a
preinventive phase encouraged novel combinations of
physical building blocks which in turn contributed to more
creative products. However, in contrast to Finke’s studies,
participants were informed that the study was about
creativity, they were not blind to conditions, and had been
lectured on the psychology of creative learning beforehand.
Also, they were not required to use their preinventive
structures in their final designs. Their study also used only
self-reported measures of creativity and motivation.
Ishii and Miwa (2002) also explored physical manipulation
in creativity, stating that "…the creative process should be
characterized as both the external (physical) operation that
tries to embody ideas into the physical world and the internal
(mental) operation that considers ideas of products in the
mind" (p178). Unlike Pike (2002), they report measures of
originality and practicality, but physical synthesis was only
used in the final building of products, not in preinventive
exploration. They also used specialist materials (LEGO™
Mindstorms), which have inherent properties that might
constrain creativity of the solutions.
Theoretically, one might expect differences in creative
performance when participants use physical media. Various
accounts of ‘distributed cognition’ (e.g., Zhang & Norman,
1994; Hutchins, 1995) suggest that features of a task can be
represented and/or processed either internally in a person’s
mind, or externally in the physical or visual task
environment, taking the view that human knowledge is
embodied not only in individuals but in objects and tools as
well. On the one hand, physical objects might allow new
combinations to be discovered by chance combinations that
are hard to conceive mentally. On the other hand, physical
media bring with them constraints like gravitational force,
composite structure and textural cues that might limit
creative performance. Noguchi (1999) found that the type of

1812

materials given to participants could affect their reported
creativity, depending on the constraints inherent in the
materials, although in this case the materials given had to be
used in the finished design, rather than being representative
of any material. In further support of this theory, research on
the impact of sketching on creativity has shown that
externalisation of a task through drawing can aid novel
combinations of objects and interpretations of designs. In
particular, Verstijnen, van Leeuwen, Goldschmidt, Hamel
and Hennessey (1998) found sketching to be necessary for
restructuring designs: in its absence people were more likely
to persist with their original ideas. However, they did not
examine physical manipulation of objects used for the tasks.

Experiment

components (see Figure 2). Following Finke’s method, the
likelihood of selection was weighted so that generic shapes
were selected most frequently. The shapes on the top row of
Figure 2 (sphere, half-sphere, cube, cone, cylinder) had a
50% chance of being selected, the second row (wire, tube,
flat square, bracket, rectangular block) a 33% chance, and
the bottom row (hook, pair of wheels, cross, ring, handle) a
16% chance. For the physical manipulation conditions,
shapes were made out of modelling dough. Flour-based
dough allowed the shapes to be attached to each other, but
did not harden. These shapes were made using moulds so
that they were the same size and shape for all participants.
Design categories were randomly selected from a list of 8
(shown in Table 1), with no category appearing more than
once for a single participant.

An experiment was conducted to provide a withinexperiment replication of Finke’s (1990) Experiments 2 and
6, and to examine differences between mental and physical
synthesis. All conditions were kept as similar as possible to
the available details of Finke’s original method, with the
only intentional variation being the physical synthesis trials.
If the Geneplore model holds, then a preinventive phase
should enhance creativity irrespective of how objects are
generated. Alternatively, the presence of physical
components might variously affect synthesis through
enabling new ways of exploring combinations or through
the imposition of additional constraints.

Method
Participants
An opportunity sample of 48 undergraduate and
postgraduate students recruited by advertisement were paid
£5 each to participate. Of these, 20 were male, 28 were
female, and all were blind to conditions.
Design
The experiment had three factors: Phase (preinventive phase
or control), Synthesis (mental or physical), and Rater (self,
independent or informed raters). Phase was a Between
factor, and Synthesis and Rater were Within factors.

Figure 2: Object shapes (taken from Finke, 1992).
Materials
Shapes for each trial were selected quasi-randomly (using a
computerised random number generator) from 15 basic 3D

1813

Table 1: Design categories (taken from Finke, 1992).
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Category
Furniture
Personal items
Transportation
Scientific instruments
Appliances
Tools and utensils
Weapons
Toys and games

Examples
chairs, tables, lamps
jewellery, glasses
cars, boats
measuring devices
washing machines, toasters
screwdrivers, spoons
guns, missiles
baseball bats, dolls

Procedure
On each trial in preinventive phase conditions, participants
were shown three shapes and had 1 minute to combine them
to make "one single shape that does not represent anything
in particular, but is merely an arrangement that you think is
interesting and potentially useful in a very general sense".
They then drew this form. Following this they were given a
design category and spent a further 1 minute applying it to
their design. They then wrote a brief description and
labelled the resulting invention. Trials in the control
conditions were identical except that participants were given
the design category from the outset and had 2 minutes to
conceive a design to meet the category before they drew,
labelled and described their invention.
In Finke’s study, four examples were shown to participants
before trials began. These examples consisted of two
'uncreative' and two 'creative' inventions. Details of only one
of each were published, so additional designs were created
(exemplified in Figure 3) that were assumed to reflect the
verbal descriptions given by Finke: a drafting pencil and
wheelchair ('uncreative'), and a musical spheres game and an
ice basher ('creative'). As in Finke’s study, participants did
not know they were taking part in a creativity experiment, nor
were they told that they should try to be creative. Each
participant received six trials, three with each medium. For
each trial, a set of three shapes and a category were chosen.
The same sets were replicated across four participants and the
presentation order was counterbalanced across participants.

For trials requiring mental manipulation of the shapes,
participants were presented with a printed sheet showing
pictures of the shapes to be used (sampled from Figure 2).
Where physical manipulation was required, on each trial
three shapes made out of modelling dough were presented.
Participants were told they might vary the size, position or
orientation of any part in their design but should not bend or
deform the parts, with the exception of the wire and the
tube, which are bendable. The parts could be put inside one
another; they might be hollow or solid, and in both the
mental and physical conditions the shapes could be
imagined to be made out of any material, including wood,
metal, plastic, rubber or glass, or any combination of these
materials. All three shapes were to be used, and, unless the
same shape was specified more than once, only one should
be used, with the exception of the wheels, which were in
pairs. Participants were told that their designs need not be
complete, and that they could imagine additional parts that
would make it work such as motors, circuit boards and cogs.

also rated how easy and how enjoyable they found each
trial. Four independent judges also rated all designs for
originality and practicality using the same scales. Judges
were recruited in the same manner as the participants, and
were paid £15 for their time. In addition, two informed
judges also rated all designs by the same method, using the
same criteria (an approximation to Finke's 'trained' judges).
These judges were knowledgeable about the experiment, but
for all judges the designs were presented randomly and they
remained blind to conditions.
Each judge rated individually, with designs being shown
in series on a computer screen. Judges were instructed to
ignore the drawing skills of participants, and instead to base
their judgements on the idea represented by each drawing
and description. Judges were told to judge a design as
'unclassifiable' if no description was given or if they found
the description uninterpretable. They were first shown the
example designs (e.g., Figure 3) and then received five
practice judgement trials. Independent judges were not told
the experiment was a study of creativity or to rate the
designs on how creative they were. The judging process was
conducted in sessions lasting for at most an hour.

Results

Figure 3: Design example: a musical spheres game (a
'creative' example).

Most participants completed the task without difficulty:
participants failed to produce a design on only 21 out of 288
trials. Of these, 11 were failures to produce a design in the
no-preinventive form condition, and 10 were failures to turn
preinventive forms into inventions. These trials were
excluded from the judging process. No participants in the
preinventive phase condition were unable to create a
preinventive form from the three shapes specified.
Finke reported that more 'highly creative' designs were
found in the preinventive phase condition. Highly creative
designs were ones that received a 'perfect score' of 10 (5 on
both scales from both of Finke’s judges). Designs with a
score of 8 or higher were classed as creative. In the present
experiment, however, no designs achieved an average score
as high as 8 across all independent judges, the highest being
7.67. Although some designs did receive scores of 5 on both
scales from some judges, there was never unanimous
agreement. We chose to classify as 'highly creative' those
designs that achieved a score above 7, which represents a
score of at least 3 on each scale, with neither originality nor
practicality being rated as low as 1. This only gives 22 out
of 267 completed designs (8.24%), but there were
marginally more of these designs occurring in preinventive
phase conditions (13) than in control conditions (9).
Table 2 shows the mean ratings of originality and
practicality for each rating group for mental and physical
synthesis with and without a preinventive phase. Analysis of
variance was conducted for originality and practicality
measures between Phase, Synthesis and Rater factors.
Analysis of variance was also conducted on the creativity
scores, but no effects were significant. These scores
represent the sum of originality and practicality, and an

Design Judging
After completing all the trials, participants were asked to
rate each of their inventions on originality and practicality
using Likert scales ranging from 1 (low) to 5 (high). They

1814

Designs in preinventive phase conditions (mean = 2.47)
inspection of the means shows that summing these measures
were rated as more original than designs in control
effectively cancels out any differences across conditions.
conditions (mean = 2.23). A significant effect of Rater was
Thus, we do not report creativity scores further.
found, F(2,46) = 32.95, MSe= .375, p<.01. Self-ratings
An effect of Phase approaching significance was found in
the originality ratings, F(1, 46) = 3.47, MSe= 1.25, p<.07.
Table 2: Mean ratings for each experimental condition

Preinventive
phase
Control

Mental

Self ratings
Original
Practical
2.65
2.67

Independent ratings
Original
Practical
2.69
2.83

Informed ratings
Original
Practical
2.05
3.57

Physical

2.88

2.83

2.57

2.84

2.01

3.74

Mental

2.33

2.84

2.41

3.22

1.80

4.23

Physical

2.49

2.78

2.43

3.09

1.90

3.75

(mean = 2.59) and independent ratings (mean = 2.53) of
originality were higher than informed ratings (mean = 1.94).
No other effects were significant with the originality
measure.
A significant effect of Phase was found in the practicality
ratings, F(1,46) = 4.38, MSe= 0.95, p=.04. Designs in
preinventive phase conditions (mean = 3.08) were rated as
less practical than designs in control conditions (mean =
3.32). A significant effect of Rater was again found, F(2,
46) = 70.91, MSe= .41, p<.01. Self-ratings (mean = 2.78)
and independent ratings (mean = 2.99) of practicality were
lower than informed ratings (mean = 3.82). There was also a
significant interaction between Phase and Synthesis: mental
synthesis (mean = 3.43) produced more practical designs
than physical synthesis (mean = 3.21) in control conditions,
while physical synthesis (mean = 3.14) produced more
practical designs than mental synthesis (mean = 3.02) in
preinventive phase conditions.
Self report ratings by experiment participants show that
preinventive phase conditions (mean = 3.35) were rated
significantly higher than control conditions (2.96) in terms of
ease, F(1,46) = 5.45, MSe= .654, p = 0.02. However, there
was no significant difference for enjoyment (preinventive
phase conditions = 3.10, control conditions = 3.26). No
effects of Synthesis were significant in either measure.
However, consistency between independent judges was
not high, with a Cronbach's alpha score of 0.55 for
originality ratings, 0.44 for practicality and 0.57 for the
overall creativity scores. Looking at the raw data, it would
seem that there was greater consensus on clearly unoriginal
designs (including common objects such as lamps, chairs,
cars and guns), but when the designs were more unusual,
there was less consensus. Items that seemed highly original
to some judges may simply have been uncommon items that
those judges had not encountered before; other judges had
(or believed that they had), and so gave them lower scores.
There was also disagreement on the practicality scores:
despite instructions, it seemed the judges had different
internal measures of what constitutes a practical design. For

example, some judges would rate a teleporter as being
highly practical, as it would be extremely useful, whereas
others would rate it as not practical at all, since it is
infeasible using current technology.
The knowledgeable and independent judges rated designs
in a very similar manner, although the knowledgeable judges
gave slightly lower scores for originality on average than the
independent judges across all conditions. Consistency
between the knowledgeable judges was higher on originality
and overall creativity, with respective alpha scores of 0.73
and 0.70, but only achieved a score of 0.37 on practicality.

Discussion

1815

The results cast doubt on the previous findings of Finke
(1990), and raise questions about the predictive validity of the
Geneplore model. First, the ratings do not confirm the
predictions of the Geneplore model. A preinventive form led
to more original but less practical designs, as in Finke's
experiments, but in contrast to his results, designs did not also
differ in overall creativity scores according to whether they
were produced after a preinventive phase or not. This
outcome confirms the predictions of the alternative account
based on constraint. In the mental synthesis paradigm, the
requirement to impose a design goal on a single preinventive
form limits the participant's ability to adapt a form to suit the
design, so designs are more likely to be original. However,
the imposition also makes designs less practical. In essence,
the mental synthesis task does not address the cyclical nature
of genuine design processes, in which adaptation and pursuit
of alternative designs are fundamental to truly creative design
expertise (Ball & Ormerod, 1995). The result is important
because it challenges the widely held view that encouraging
designers to explore the task environment prior to
presentation of design goals enhances creativity: it may, but it
is not tested by the mental synthesis paradigm.
The interaction between Phase and Synthesis is
unexpected, but we believe it may be consistent with a
constraint account of the preinventive phase. Much of the
effect seems to come from the control conditions, in which
designs produced mentally were judged as more practical

than those produced physically. One possible explanation is
that, when participants combine objects mentally to meet a
design goal presented from the outset, their attempts are
informed by prior knowledge of previous practical designs.
Exploring design possibilities with reference to prior
knowledge may be limited by physical building blocks that
carry with them affordances or limits on feasible
combinations. In other words, physical objects may limit the
degrees of freedom available to participants to reproduce
practical ideas, whereas mental objects allow exploration to
enhance the practicality of the resulting artefact. In
preinventive phase conditions, participants are forced to fit a
design goal to a fixed shape combination, so prior knowledge
of previous practical solutions to that goal cannot play a role
in developing the shape combination. When the task of
fitting a goal to a fixed shape is carried out mentally, there are
fewer practical limits (e.g., gravity, friction) on how the fit is
made than in physical conditions. Thus, our putative
explanation for this interaction is based on the differential
role across conditions played by prior knowledge and
physical affordances in informing the practicality of resulting
artefacts. This explanation is, of course, speculative and
requires further empirical investigation.
A further concern about the validity of the mental
synthesis task stems from the ratings procedure. Despite the
increased rigour of the current experiment, the obtained
ratings are far from convincing: inter-rater reliability was
low even within rater groups, and rating groups differed still
further. Practicality in particular appears to be a highly
subjective measure. Moreover, our UK sample of raters
appears generally much more conservative than the North
American raters used by Finke. Future work with the mental
synthesis paradigm requires more stable and objective
measures than subjective ratings.
Finally, the study raises questions about the utility of
definitions of creativity that hinge on a combination of
originality and practicality. Previous work has sought
definitions of creativity that assume additivity of these
dimensions; in the current study however, they appear not to
be additive but irrespective of conditions. Either the two
measures should not be considered to be equally weighted
in their importance to creativity, or the synthesis task fails to
yield a significant number of creative inventions overall,
which would seriously call the Geneplore model into
question.

Acknowledgments
The study was conducted as part of the first author’s PhD
research funded by a Doctoral Training award from the UK
EPSRC.

References
Ball, L.J. & Ormerod, T.C. (1995). Structured and
opportunistic processing in design: a critical discussion.

International Journal of Human Computer Studies, 43,
131-151.
Boden, M.A. (2004). The creative mind: myths and
mechanisms. London: Routledge.
Finke, R. (1990). Creative imagery: discoveries and
inventions in visualization. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Finke, R., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. (1992). Creative
cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the wild. Boston: MIT
Press.
Ishii, N., & Miwa, K. (2002). Interactive processes between
mental and external operations in creative activity: a
comparison of experts' and novices' performance.
Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Creativity &
Cognition (pp. 178-185). New York: ACM Press.
Jansson, D.G. & Smith, S.M. (1991). Design fixation.
Design Studies, 12, 3-11.
Kokotovich, V. & Purcell A.T. (2000). Mental synthesis and
creativity in design: an experimental examination. Design
Studies 21 (5), 437-449.
Marakas, G.M. & Elam, J.J. (1997) Creativity enhancement
in problem solving: through software or process?
Management Science, 43, 1136 -1146.
Marsh, R.L., Ward, T.B. & Landau, J.D. (1999). The
inadvertent use of prior knowledge in a generative
cognitive task. Memory & Cognition, 27(1), 94-105.
Noguchi, H. (1999). How do material constraints affect
design creativity? Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on
Creativity & Cognition (pp. 82-87). New York: ACM
Press.
Pike, C. (2002). Exploring the conceptual space of LEGO:
teaching and learning the psychology of creativity.
Psychology Learning and Teaching, 2(2), 87-94.
Simon, H. A. (1981). The sciences of the artificial, 2nd
edition. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Smith, S.M., Ward, T.B. & Schumacher, J.S. (1993).
Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation
task. Memory & Cognition, 21(6), 837-845.
Sternberg, R.J., Kaufman, J.C. & Pretz, J.E. (2002) The
creativity conundrum: A propulsion model of kinds of
creative contributions. New York : Psychology Press.
Verstijnen, I.M., van Leeuwen, C., Goldschmidt, G., Hamel,
R. & Hennessey, J.M. (1998). Creative discovery in
imagery and perception: combining is relatively easy,
restructuring takes a sketch. Acta Psychologica, 99, 177200.
Warr, A. & O'Neill, E. (2005). Understanding design as a
social creative process. Proceedings of the 5th Conference
on Creativity & Cognition (pp. 118-127) New York:
ACM Press.
Wiley, J. (1998). Expertise as mental set: the effects of
domain knowledge in creative problem solving. Memory
& Cognition, 26 (4), 716-730.
Zhang, J. & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in
distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

1816

