UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Exposure to Post-outcome Information "Debias" the Hindsight Bias?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jr8164k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Ash, Ivan K.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Exposure to Post-outcome Information “Debias” the Hindsight Bias?
Ivan K. Ash (iash@odu.edu)
Department of Psychology
Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA 23529-0267
on almanac trivia questions (Hell et al., 1988).
Understanding the cognitive mechanisms that lead to this
effect is important for several reasons. The robustness and
ubiquity of the hindsight bias phenomenon suggests that it
can offer a window into how humans store and retrieve
information and use information to make judgments
(Hawkins & Hastie, 1990; Hoffrage & Pohl, 2003).
Furthermore, the fact that it has been observed in many “real
life” situations, such as jurors’ decisions and medical
diagnoses, has profound practical implications (ChristensenSzalanski & Willham, 1991). Therefore, the goal of
providing and testing a theoretical explanation for the
hindsight bias phenomenon is important for both scientific
and practical reasons.

Abstract
The present study investigated the effects of post-outcome
information on retrospective judgments.
Participants
completed a within-subjects scenario-based hindsight
paradigm. After being exposed to outcome information
participants were dismiss, exposed to outcome congruent
post-outcome information, or exposed to outcome
incongruent post-outcome information. Results revealed the
largest hindsight bias in the incongruent post-outcome group.
These results are discussed in terms of their fit with
competing cognitive reconstruction models of retrospective
judgment making and hindsight bias.
Keywords: Hindsight Bias; Judgment Formation; Surprise;
Expectation; Representational Change.

Theoretical Explanations of the Hindsight Bias

The Hindsight Bias Effect

“Creeping determinism” accounts (Fischhoff, 1975;
Carli, 1999; Wasserman, Lempert, & Hastie. 1991) propose
that outcome information is automatically integrated in
one’s memory representation and that this updated
representation is used to make the retrospective judgment.
This account would expect memory updating anytime one is
exposed to post-prediction information that activates
memory elements supporting a particular outcome.
Therefore, this theory proposes that anytime individuals are
exposed to post-prediction information that supports a
potential outcome, their retrospective judgments will be
more in favor of that outcome.
Metacognitive cue based accounts (Ofir & Mazursky,
1990;1997) propose that when making a retrospective
judgment people first judge whether or not they found an
outcome surprising and then use this metacognitive
information to estimate their predictive state of mind.
According to this view, expected or unsurprising outcomes
give people an “I would have known that!” feeling. This
theory proposes that this metacognitive reaction causes
people to be overconfident about their predictive accuracy,
which leads to inflated retrospective judgments. It is then
this over-estimation that causes the hindsight bias effect.
Furthermore, this view proposes that unexpected or
surprising outcomes give people an “I would have never
known that!” feeling. This metacognitive reaction leads
people to be under-confident in their predictive accuracy.
This serves to deflate retrospective judgments, thereby
reducing or perhaps reversing the hindsight bias effect.
Finally, the surprise cued sense-making account (Pezzo,
2003) proposes that hindsight bias happens when people
successfully “make sense” of outcome information.
Successful “sense-making” leaves people with an updated
representation of the situation that favors the given outcome.
On retrospective judgments, people use this updated

Imagine that it is November 7, 2000 around lunchtime.
Today is Election Day in the U.S., however none of the
polls have closed anywhere in the nation. Someone you are
having lunch with asks, “What do you think each
presidential candidate’s chances of winning are?” What
would you have said?
Sanna and Schwarz (2003) had undergraduates predict the
percentage of votes that each of the presidential candidates
would receive. On average, participants predicted that the
Gore/Lieberman ticket would win the popular vote by a
margin of 4.45%. After a hotly contested election, several
recounts, and a Supreme Court decision, the final official
popular vote count had Gore/Lieberman ahead of
Bush/Cheney by only 0.35% percent. After the media had
announced the official results of the election, Sanna and
Schwarz asked the same participants to attempt to remember
what vote-predictions they had made before they knew the
actual outcome of the election.
On this retrospective
judgment, participants’ average margin between the two
tickets was reduced to 0.58%. This was significantly lower
than the original margin they had predicted in foresight. In
other words, participants’ post-outcome retrospective
answers were closer to the actual election results than their
pre-outcome predictive answers thereby overestimating the
accuracy of their initial beliefs as if they “knew-it-all
along.”
This hindsight bias or the “knew-it-all along” effect is
one of the most frequently cited judgment biases in the
literature and has been shown to be robust across a wide
variety of domains and task environments such as: medical
diagnoses (Arkes, Faust, Guilmette, & Hart, 1988), legal
judgments (Kamin & Rachlinski, 1995), jurors’ decisions
(Casper, Benedict, & Perry, 1989), victim degradation in
rape scenarios (Carli, 1999), stock purchases (Louie, 1999),
sporting event results (Roese & Maniar, 1997), and answers
991

accessibility experiences (Sanna, Schwarz, & Stocker, 2002;
Schwarz et al., 1991).
It has been hypothesized that these two different sources
of information can have different effects on one’s subjective
feeling of outcome certainty. If the accessible content
provided by the memory search activates memory elements
that support the alternative outcome, this lead to an “I never
would have known that” feeling. However, if the
accessibility experiences provided by the search give an
individual the subjective feeling that it was difficult to think
of information that would support alternative outcomes, this
may in fact reinforce a persons feeling of certainty about the
“true” outcome. Therefore, the “I would have known that”
account of hindsight bias would be able to explain any result
of any study using a reason-generation paradigm to provide
the post-outcome information.
The only theory that these results would seem to rule out
is the “sense-making” explanation of hindsight bias. This
theory proposes that when outcomes are “surprising” people
attempt to make sense of the outcome and that it is this
sense-making process that leads to hindsight bias.
According to this view, attempting to think outcome
incongruent information may make the outcome seem more
surprising. This explanation proposes that surprise is the cue
that activates the sense-making processes that lead to
hindsight bias. Therefore, studies that show that thinking of
outcome incongruent information attenuates the bias are not
well explained by this theory.
However, Sanna et al. (2002) found generation paradigm
evidence that supports the pattern suggested by this sensemaking theory. They found that asking participants to list
two reasons why the alternative outcome could have
happened had no significant effect on the magnitude of the
hindsight bias. However, asking participants to list ten
thoughts on why the alternative outcome could have
happened significantly increased the magnitude of the
hindsight bias. However, because the generation paradigms
only ask participants to think of incongruent information,
this design did not test the other prediction of the “sensemaking” account. Namely that congruent post-outcome
information should make an outcome seem more expected,
thereby removing the cue for “sense-making” and
attenuating the hindsight bias.
In summary, the effects of post-outcome information on
the hindsight bias effect are interesting for both practical
and theoretical reasons. Practically providing post-outcome
information is one of the simplest potential treatments for
the hindsight bias effect. Theoretically, the different theories
make opposing predictions about what effects congruent
and incongruent post-outcome information should have on
the hindsight bias effect. Therefore, systematic observation
into the effects of post-outcome information will help us
rule out at least one explanation for the effect.
Unfortunately, incomplete designs that test only incongruent
information and reliance on a reason-generation paradigm
have lead to inconsistent and uninterruptible results.

representation to reconstruct their predictive judgment,
which leads to hindsight bias. Only unexpected or surprising
outcomes should not intuitively “make sense.” Therefore,
according to this theory, hindsight bias should only occur
after exposure to surprising or unexpected outcome
information. Expected or unsurprising outcomes should
initially “make sense” and therefore not activate any sensemaking processes. Therefore, according to this theory,
hindsight bias should not occur after exposure to expected
outcome information.

“Debiasing” with Post-outcome Information
One of the first things psychological researchers tend to
do after the discovery of a robust judgment or reasoning
bias is attempt to devise treatments that will counteract or
eliminate the bias. This pursuit is well justified for both
pragmatic and theoretical reasons. Pragmatically hindsight
bias can be found in many situations in which the
consequence can be quite detrimental, such as juror
decision-making and medical diagnosis. Therefore, any
treatment that can reduce or eliminate this bias is useful in
and of itself. Furthermore, finding the boundary conditions
in which an effect occurs can also be useful in guiding
theory development and testing psychological models of a
phenomenon.
One of the earliest proposed interventions to “de-bias”
individuals’ retrospective-judgments was to ask subjects to
search for reasons why the given outcome may not have
occurred (Slovic & Fishhoff, 1977). The assumption was
that accessing information that supports other possible
outcomes would help individuals regain their pre-outcome
perspective. Indeed several investigations have asked
individuals exposed to outcome information to search for
reasons as to why the true outcome may not have occurred
before making their retrospective judgments. The general
finding is that this manipulation can attenuate the hindsight
bias effect (e.g., Arkes et al., 1988; Koriat, Lichtenstein, &
Fischhoff, 1980; Slovic & Fischhoff, 1977).
The results from these reason-generation studies have
been interpreted as support for the “creeping determinism”
explanation of the hindsight bias. According to this view,
thinking of reasons why an outcome may not have occurred
will increase the accessibility of information supporting the
alternative outcome, thereby counteracting the effects of the
outcome information.
However, the metacognitve cue or “I would have known
that!” explanation of hindsight bias predicts this same
pattern, albeit for different reasons. Under this explanation,
thinking of reasons why the given outcome may not have
occurred may decrease a person’s metacognitive feeling of
certainty, thereby counter acting the bias. However, it has
been pointed out that attempting to recall information from
memory actually activates two distinct types of information
for an individual: (1) the items, elements, or reasons that are
activated as a result of the memory search or the accessible
content and (2) the metacognitive assessment of the ease or
difficulty to which this information was found or the

992

Table 1: Predictions about the effects of post-outcome
information and its congruency with outcome on the
hindsight bias effect (HSB = Hindsight Bias).

Experiment
The goal of the present study was to test the effects of
post-outcome information on hindsight bias in a way that
allowed for the manipulation of outcome congruency, and
did not rely on a generation paradigm. The present study
used a within-subjects scenario based hindsight bias design.
In this design participants first read a narrative story that set
up a situation but did not reveal the outcome to the situation.
This pre-outcome story was designed to present an equal
amount of information supporting each of the two possible
outcomes. Next participants were asked to make a
predictive judgment as to the likelihood of the two possible
outcomes. After making their predictions, participants were
exposed to one of the two possible outcomes. The outcome
only group only received the outcome information. The two
other groups were exposed to post outcome information that
was either congruent or incongruent with the given
outcome. A week later the participants returned to the lab
and made a retrospective judgment where they were asked
to remember their original ratings. Hindsight bias is then
assessed as a change between predictive and retrospective
judgments in favor of the given outcome.
By providing the participants with the post-outcome
information, we are able to test for the effects of accessible
content without confounding it with effects of accessibility
experiences. Furthermore, this paradigm allows us to
manipulate outcome and post-outcome information
independently, thereby offering a complete test of the
opposing theories of hindsight bias.

Theory
Creeping
Determinism
Metacognitive
Reaction
Surprise Cued
Sense-making

Post-outcome information condition
Incongruent
None
Congruent
less HSB
Usual
more HSB
HSB
no or reverse Usual
more HSB
HSB
HSB
more HSB
Usual
less HSB
HSB

Method
Participants
One-hundred thirty-three introductory psychology students
from the University of Illinois at Chicago participated in
this study for course credit (Incongruent = 46, No Postoutcome = 43, Congruent =44).

Materials
Pre-outcome information: Two texts were created so
that they met the following criteria: 1) the domain or subject
matter of the text had to be a subject that would be familiar
enough for most undergraduates to intelligently comprehend
the situation and recognize what evidence should afford
different outcomes, 2) the events had to be fictional so that
participants could not enter the experiment already knowing
the true outcome, 3) the agents had to be fictional or
historically obscure so that individuals would not come to
the study with an initial preference for positive or negative
outcomes for any of the characters, 4) the situations
described in the scenarios had to afford two mutually
exclusive outcomes, 5) the stories’ structures had to afford
rearrangement of the order in which the agents were
presented (to control for order effects) without any loss of
story coherence, 6) the text had to have an equal amount of
information that supported or opposed either of the two
potential outcomes, 7) the pre-outcome scenarios had to end
with the upcoming event without alluding to the outcome of
the event. One text developed to meet these criteria
described an upcoming professional tennis match between
two fictitious players. A second text was developed that
used the same structure but described an ancient battle
between two opposing armies.
Outcome information: Two outcome information texts
were designed for each of the two stories. These texts were
designed to meet the following criteria: 1) the text clearly
and unambiguously informed the participant of the “true”
outcome of the text, 2) the text did not present any further
information that was not given in the pre-outcome text, 3)
the text did not allude to what factors or events played a role
in the outcome. One text was created to describe each of the
two possible outcomes to the different scenarios.

Predictions
“Creeping Determinism” theory predicts that: 1)
Retrospective judgments will favor the given outcome. 2)
Congruent post-outcome information will further activated
outcome supporting memory elements thereby exacerbating
the hindsight effect. 3) Incongruent post-outcome
information will activate memory elements that support the
alternative outcome thereby attenuating the hindsight bias.
The metacognitive cue explanation of hindsight bias,
predicts that: 1) Retrospective judgments will favor the
given outcome. 2) Congruent post-outcome information will
make individuals feel even more confident in their initial
accuracy, thereby increasing the effect. 3) Incongruent postoutcome information will make individuals less confident in
their predictive accuracy and this should lead to
retrospective ratings that are more in favor the alternative
outcome, which will reduce or reverse the hindsight bias
effect (see Ofir & Mazursky, 1990; 1997).
The surprise cued sense-making theory predicts that: 1)
Retrospective judgments will favor the given outcome. 2)
Congruent post-outcome information will make activation
of “sense-making” processes less likely, thereby attenuating
the overall hindsight bias effect. 3) Incongruent postoutcome information will make activation of “sensemaking” processes more likely, thereby increasing the
overall hindsight effect (see Table 1 for a summary of these
predictions).
993

questions were presented in exactly the same way as the
previous weeks section only at the top of the screen
participants were reminded to try to remember their original
opinion. This rating was used as the measure of participants’
retrospective judgments which were compared to their
initial judgments to assess hindsight bias.

Post-outcome information: The two possible postoutcome texts for the tennis story set up a discussion
between opposing player’s fans in the tennis text. Likewise,
the post-outcome texts for the battle scenario set up an
academic disagreement among historians.
The postoutcome information only presented the arguments for one
side of the discussion. Therefore, the passages only
reinforced information that supported one of the two
possible outcomes. No new information was presented in
the post-outcome texts. The statements all referred back to
information presented in the pre-outcome text. These
materials allowed for the post-outcome information to
reactivate information that favored a certain outcome
without providing information or facts that were not
available for the predictive judgment.

Results
Surprise Ratings: To investigate the effect of postoutcome information on outcome surprise ratings a 2 (text:
tennis or battle) X 3 (post-outcome information: congruent,
none, incongruent) between subjects ANOVA was
conducted on participants’ surprise ratings. Results revealed
a main effect of condition F (2, 127) = 6.26, p < .01, η2=
0.09 (see Figure 1). The congruent post-outcome
information led to the smallest mean surprise rating while
the incongruent post-outcome lead to the largest (p < .05,
Scheffe’s test). The average no post-outcome condition
surprise rating fell only slightly higher than the congruent
condition, and was not significantly different than either of
the other groups.

Design and Procedure
This study consisted of two sessions that took place one
week apart. All stimuli were presented and measures were
collected via an Eprime application run on personal
computers. Participants were run in groups of 1 to 20. In
the first session participants were assigned one of the two
text conditions. The information in these texts was block
randomized into eight different sequences to control for
order effects.
In session one, participants first read the pre-outcome
information one sentence at a time. Next they made a series
of ratings including their predictive judgment. For example,
participants in the tennis text condition read a passage
which described an upcoming match between professional
tennis stars Mark Krause and Nathan Mitchell. After
reading the text, they were presented which a judgmentprompt stating, “Either Mark Krause won the match OR
Nathan Mitchell won the match. Use the scale below to
indicate your opinion of how likely the two outcomes are
based on the story.” Below this question was a continuum
that was flanked on either side by “Krause Wins” and
“Mitchell Wins.” Participants indicated their response by
moving the marker on the scale between the two possible
outcomes. Locations closer to an outcome’s anchor
indicated judgments that that outcome was more likely. The
continuum allowed for 78 possible marker locations. After
making their ratings participants were randomly assigned to
an outcome condition (e.g. Krause wins or Mitchell wins)
and one of three post-outcome conditions (None, Mitchell
Justification, or Krause Justification). Pairing possible
outcomes with post-outcome stimuli led to the three postoutcome congruency conditions (congruent, no postoutcome, and incongruent). After reading the outcome and
post-outcome information, participants made a rating
indicating how “surprising” they found the outcome using a
continuum anchored on “Not Surprising” and “Very
Surprising”. Finally participants were ask not to discuss the
experiment with other students and dismissed.
Participants returned a week later for the second session.
At this time, participants were asked to attempt to remember
their exact ratings from the previous week’s questions. The

Figure 1: Surprise Ratings as a Function of PostOutcome Condition. (* = sig. different groups, error
bars = SEM).
Very Surprising

50

*

45
40
35

*

30

Not Surprising

25
20
15
10
5
0
Congruent

None

Incongruent

Post-outcome Information

Hindsight Bias: Initial analyses revealed no effects of
text, therefore this variable was collapsed across in order
have greater power to investigate the effects of the
congruency manipulation on hindsight bias. A 2 (judgment:
predictive or retrospection) X 3 (post-outcome information:
congruent, none, incongruent) mixed design ANOVA was
conducted on predictive and retrospective outcome
likelihood judgments. These ratings were centered on the
middle value of the rating continuum and recoded so that
higher positive scores represent judgments in favor of the
given outcome while lower negative score represent
judgments in favor of the alternative outcome (possible
range –38.5 to 38.5). Results revealed a main effect of
judgment such that participant’s retrospective judgments
were more in favor of the given outcome (M = 5.33, SD =
21.86) than their predictive judgments (M = -0.86, SD =
18.36), F (1, 133) = 10.06, p < .01, η2= 0.07. Therefore,

994

when collapsing across post-outcome conditions, this study
replicated the standard hindsight bias effect.
However, this simply shows that individuals in this study
showed the traditional hindsight bias effect. All theories
predicted hindsight bias in general. Where the theories differ
is in their predictions about the nature of the judgment X
post-outcome interaction. However, no judgment X postoutcome interaction was detected by the current analysis.
However, given the normal size of the hindsight bias, the
failure to detect moderation is not surprising. In a metaanalysis of 122 published studies investigating the hindsight
bias, Christensen-Szalanski & Willham, (1991) found that
the average hindsight bias effect on scenario based designs
is rather small (d = 0.34), but very reliable across studies.
The size of the hindsight bias in the current study is similar
to the average effect identified by Christensen-Szalanski and
Willham (present study d = 0.31). In order to detect
moderation in such a subtle effect, a much larger sample
size would be necessary (about four times as many
participants to reach 80% Power, see Cohen, 1988). The
chances of detecting this type of interaction effect in the
present study were unacceptably low (17%). Therefore, in
order to test the predictions of the different hindsight bias
theories, the size of the hindsight bias effect in each of the
post-outcome conditions was compared by calculating
Cohen’s d. By focusing on effects sizes, we can access
whether the magnitude of the hindsight bias effect followed
the one of the two overall patterns predicted by the different
theories (see Table 1) in a way that is not as susceptible to
Type II error.
Figure 2 displays the hindsight bias effects as a function
of post-outcome congruency conditions. A positive change
in ratings between the predictive and retrospective
judgments is indicative of the hindsight bias. The size of the
hindsight bias effect for the no post-outcome condition can
be thought of as a baseline to measure the effect that the
outcome information itself had on retrospective judgments.
In the no post-outcome condition participants displayed the
usual small effect, d = 0.25. In the congruent post-outcome
condition participants showed a same small effect, d = 0.25.
Finally, in the incongruent post-outcome condition
participants showed a larger, medium-sized effect, d = 0.48.
In summary, the no post-outcome and congruent postoutcome conditions showed the same normal sized
hindsight bias effect. However, the incongruent postoutcome information condition led to greater surprise
ratings and a larger hindsight bias effect.

Figure 2: Predictive and Retrospective Likelihood
Ratings as a Function of Post-outcome Condition. (d =
Cohen’s d, error bars = SEM)

Given

40

Predictive
Retrospective

30
20

d = 0.25

d = 0.25

d = 0.48

10

Alternative

0
-10
-20
-30
-40
Congruent

None
Post-outcomeCondition

Incongruent

One of the initial methods people proposed for “debiasing”
was to expose people to post-outcome information that
reminded them of why other outcomes may have occurred.
This method for counteracting the hindsight bias appeals to
common sense and is consistent with some of the theoretical
explanations of the hindsight bias. However, the effects of
post-outcome information and it’s congruency with outcome
information has never been systematically investigated in an
unconfounded and complete design. As mentioned earlier,
most prior studies focused solely on incongruent postoutcome information and relied on a generation paradigm
that confounded accessible information with accessibility
experiences.
The present study investigated the effects of post-outcome
information by actually manipulating the nature of the postoutcome information presented to the participants. This
simple manipulation revealed a rather interesting and somewhat counter intuitive result. The “creeping determinism”
and metacognitive cue theories of hindsight bias both
predict that exposure to post-outcome information
presenting reasons why the given outcome may not have
happened should attenuate the hindsight bias.
This
prediction also makes intuitive sense. If the outcome
information is biasing one toward the given outcome, then
being reminded of reasons for the alternative outcome
should counteract this bias and remind one to his or her preoutcome state of mind.
However, the present study did not show any evidence
that outcome-incongruent post-outcome information
attenuated the magnitude of the hindsight bias effect. In
fact, the effect size analysis suggested the exact opposite
effect. Exposure to post-outcome information that was
incongruent with the given outcome actually increased the
magnitude of the hindsight bias effect. Therefore, it seems
that attempting to “debias” people’s retrospective judgments
by reminding them of information that supports other
possible outcomes could actually make the hindsight bias
worse.

Discussion
Ever since Fischoff’s (1975) initial investigations into
retrospective judgment-making showed that people’s
recollections or reconstructions of prior predictions are
influenced by outcome knowledge, investigators have been
proposing explanations of this hindsight bias and attempting
to find ways to “debias” people’s retrospective judgments.

995

These results not only call into question one of the most
intuitive ways to counteract the hindsight bias effect, but
also stand in contrast to the predictions of two widely cited
explanations for the effect. Both the “creeping determinism”
and metacognitve-cues accounts of hindsight bias predicted
that incongruent post-outcome information should attenuate
the bias while congruent post-outcome information should
exacerbate it. These predictions were not supported.
However, the predictions of the “surprise cued sensemaking” approach were supported. The incongruent
condition post-outcome information made the outcome
seem more surprising, and also lead to a larger hindsight
bias effect.
However, surprise cued sense-making theory is primarily
descriptive in nature, and more research needs to be done to
flush out the component processes and assumptions put
forth by this view of representational change and
retrospective judgment making. First of all, “sense-making”
is not an explicitly defined cognitive mechanism. Instead it
is a descriptive term that refers to the problem-solving,
memory and reasoning processes that are involved in active
comprehension. Therefore, defining the component
processes and heuristics people use to make-sense of an
outcome is necessary if one wants to use these processes to
explain the hindsight bias. Furthermore, this theory
proposes that “surprise” plays a role in cueing the sensemaking process without offering a clear theory of surprise.
The necessity for an explicit surprise theory is clear
when considering the effects of the congruent post-outcome
information. This information had no effect on the
magnitude of the hindsight bias. Sense-making theory can
provide a backwards explanation for why there was no
reduction in hindsight bias for this condition but this
explanation is contingent on the observation that the
manipulation did not have a substantial effect on surprise
ratings. Therefore, without an explicit theory of surprise and
expectation this model of hindsight bias is unable to make
clear a priori predictions.
Finally, this theory assumes surprise-cued sense-making
processes lead to an updated memory representation, and
that this updated representation is used in retrospective
judgment making. However, exactly how the representation
changes and exactly how people use this representation to
retrospectively estimate their predictive judgments also
needs to be defined. Therefore, the present study can be
seen as a starting point for a program of research that is
designed to lead to an explicit and mechanistic account of
hindsight bias that defines 1) how people represent
information about events or situations, 2) how this
information is used to make predictive judgments, 3) how
outcome information cues sense-making processes, 4) what
the component process of sense-making are, 5) how these
processes effect people’s representation of a situation, and
6) how people use this information to make retrospective
judgments.

References
Arkes, H. R., Faust, D., Guilmette, T. J., & Hart, K. (1988). Eliminating
the hindsight bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 73, 305-307.
Carli, L. L. (1999). Cognitive reconstruction, hindsight, and reactions to
victims and perpetrators. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
25, 966-979.
Casper, J. D., Benedict, K., & Perry, J. R. (1989), Cognitions, attitudes, and
decision making in search and seizure cases. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 18, 93-113.
Christensen-Szalanski, J. J., & Willham, C. F. (1991). The hindsight bias:
A meta-analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 48, 147-168.
Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight ≠ foresight: The effect of outcome
knowledge on judgment under certainty. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 18, 93-119.
Hawkins, S. A. & Hastie, R. (1990). Hindsight biased judgments of past
events after the outcomes are known. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 311327.
Hell, W., Gigerenzer, B., Gauggel, S., Mall, M., & Müller, M. (1988).
Hindsight bias: An interaction of automatic and motivational factors?
Memory and Cognition, 16, 533-538.
Hoffrage, U. & Pohl, R. F. (2003). Research on hindsight bias: A rich past,
a productive present, and a challenging future. Memory, 11, 329-335.
Kamin, K. A., & Rachlinski, J. J. (1995). Ex post ≠ ax ante: Determining
liability in hindsight. Law and Human Behavior, 19, 89-104.
Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1980). Reasons for
overconfidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 6, 107-118.
Louie, T. A. (1999). Decision makers’ hindsight bias after receiving
favorable and unfavorable feedback. Journal of Applied Psychology,
84, 29-41.
Ofir, C., & Mazursky, D. (1990). “I could never have expected it to
happen”: The reversal of hindsight bias. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 46, 20-23.
Ofir, C., & Mazursky, D. (1997). Does a surprising outcome reinforce or
reverse the Hindsight Bias? Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 69, 51-57.
Pezzo, M. V. (2003). Surprise, defence, or making sense: What removes
hindsight bias? Memory, 11, 421-441.
Roese, N. J., & Maniar, S. D. (1997). Perceptions of Purple: Counterfactual
and hindsight judgments at Northwestern Wildcats football games.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 1245-1253.
Sanna, L. J., & Schwarz, N. (2003). Debiasing the hindsight bias: the role
of accessibility experiences and (mis)attributions. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 287-295.
Sanna, L. J., Schwarz, N., & Stocker, S. L. (2002). When debiasing
backfires: Accessible content and accessibility experiences in debiasing
hindsight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28, 497-502.
Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, H., &
Simons, A. (1991). Ease of retrieval as information: Another look at
the availability heuristic. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 61, 195-202.
Slovic, P., & Fischhoff, B. (1977). On the psychology of experimental
surprises. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 3, 544-551.
Wasserman, D., Lempert, R. O., & Hastie, R. (1991). Hindsight and
causality. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 30-35.

Acknowledgments
This research was completed as part of a doctoral thesis
at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and was supported
by a University Fellowship from that institution. I would
like to thank my advisor, Dr. Jennifer Wiley, and my
dissertation committee for their helpful and insightful
advice at every stage of this project. I would also like to
thank Patrick Cushen, Melinda Jensen, and Jimmy Wong
for their assistance in collecting this data.
996

