UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Chance Discovery as a First Step to Economic Innovation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mm7c1dt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Keskinen, Soili
Sitala, Reijo
Taatila, Vesa
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Chance Discovery as a First Step to Economic Innovation
Jyrki Suomala (jyrki.suomala@gmail.com)
University of California, Santa Barbara
Department of Psychology, CA 93106-9660, USA
and
Laurea University of Applied Sciences, Vanha maantie 9,
02650 Espoo, FINLAND

Vesa Taatila (vesa.taatila@laurea.fi)
Laurea University of Applied Sciences, Nummentie 6
08100 Lohja, FINLAND

Reijo Siltala (reijo.siltala@utu.fi)
University of Turku, Department of Teacher Education in Rauma, Seminaarinkatu 1
26100 Rauma, FINLAND

Soili Keskinen (soili.keskinen@utu.fi)
University of Turku, Department of Teacher Education in Rauma, Seminaarinkatu 1
26100 Rauma, FINLAND

Abstract
This cognitive-historical study describes three cases in which
business innovators created original ideas for innovation. The
paper compares business creativity and Thagard’s model of
creativity in science and technology. By virtue of this
comparison, we outline a new approach that provides an
account of the importance of chance discovery and autonoetic
representation in economic innovation. During chance
discovery, an innovator builds an autonoetic mental
representation of a possible future situation. The study
emphasizes that a creative process in a business is dependent
not only on unexpected findings or puzzling phenomena, but
also on expectations regarding the future. The study regards
the concepts of chance discovery and autonoetic
representation more as complementary to, rather than
competing with, Thagard’s model of creativity.

Introduction
How does a scientist create a novel study problem? How do
engineers create a plan for a novel artifact? How does an
individual create an innovative business model? These
questions all relate to human creative cognitive processes in
science, technology and business. The possibility to create a
novelty is one of the most essential cognitive skills of the
human mind. Whereas the creativity genre for most cases in
cognitive-historical studies (Nersessian, 1995; Dasgupta,
2003) and the philosophy of science (Thagard & Croft,
1999; Thagard, 2003, 2005) has been science and
technology, this study describes creativity in the economic
business context. The study describes three seminal creative
episodes (SCEs) in which business innovators created
original ideas for economic innovation.
Creativity is a process whereby an individual exceeds a
conventional habit. According to Mayer (1995), a creative

process brings into existence something genuinely new that
is valued enough to be added to the culture. A conventional
habit includes typical practical and theoretical actions and
goals in a domain. Professional experts in a particular
domain, including scientific experts, have learned essential
skills and knowledge of this domain. Science and
technology represent creative domains, as most of the work
scientists and engineers carry out is a conventional habit.
Thus, experts do what coheres with existing knowledge and
beliefs in their domain; their work involves filling in the
details on matters that are basically already understood or
applying standard techniques to new specific cases
(Alvarez, 1998). However, occasionally there are puzzling
situations that offer an opportunity for ampliative thinking
and a really major discovery or invention.
How does an individual change conventional habits for a
novel route? Traditional philosophers of science prefer a
logical explanation, in which novelty in science is
inductively or deductively derived from previous
conventional knowledge (Popper, 1959; Hempel, 1965).
Then the ideal of reasoning is based on argument and logic.
Sociologists prefer social explanation, in which an
individual’s social interests are used to explain scientific
change (Downes, 1993; Latour & Woolgar, 1986). The
problem with logical and sociological approaches is that
they neglect the role of an individual’s capability to use
many different source of information in the creative process.
Thagard (1999, 2003, 2005; Thagard & Croft, 1999)
describes the change from conventional habit to new
discovery as a combination of puzzling phenomena,
questioning and searching. Whereas creativity in science
and technology was supposed to arise purely from a
cognitive process, Thagard (2002) argues that emotions play
a large role in creativity in science and technology.

2204

mean to achieve the the target can have the full range of
verbal, visual, sensory and other types of representations
(Thagard, 2005). A narrowly verbal account of practical
abduction, such as that favored by logicians, would clearly
not fully reflect the multimodal character of practical
abductive inference.
From this point of view, an innovation is a psychological
process that fits something to be created into pattern
established by mental representations (Thagard, 2003). The
HTC model argues that the most essential part of human
mental representations is based on semantic and procedural
knowledge in an individual’s memory system (Sahdra &
Thagard, 2003).
In conclusion, the HTC model contains four phases:
recognition of puzzling phenomena; goal generation;
searching; and discovery. Thus, creativity is not only matter
of logic, but requires mental representations such as
concepts, images, and pattern matching that go beyond the
types of structures and inferences allowed in the logical
framework (Thagard, 2000). The HTC model captures much
of what is central in ampliative reasoning in science and
technology. Now we are ready to concentrate on our own
research material and to consider whether the HTC model
also applies to start-up economic innovation.

Therefore, we refer to this account of creativity as the hot
thought creativity (HTC) model.
According to the HTC model, a creative process begins
when an individual encounters a puzzling and unexpected
phenomenon. A phenomenon is puzzling because it is not
coherent with the conventional human cognitive system and
breaks the conventional habit of a scientist or inventor.
Thagard (1999) emphasizes that puzzling phenomena
produce emotions such as curiosity, surprise, and
serendipity. In addition, practical need and frustration
produce emotional curiosity and can break a conventional
habit. The HTC model emphasizes that puzzling phenomena
should be sufficiently interesting and baffling for an
individual to want to continue the discovery process.
When an individual notices something puzzling about a
phenomenon, he tries to understand it. The first step in
understanding a puzzling phenomenon in science is to
generate a suitable question and in technology, to generate
suitable goals (Dasgupta, 1996). Then more constrained
processes characterizable as a search can be used to generate
answers in science and suitable means in technology
(Thagard & Croft, 1999). Whereas the standard problemsolving model (Newell and Simon, 1972; Klahr, 2000)
assumes that creative agents work with a problem that is
presented to them, the HTC model assumes (Thagard, 1999)
that the most critical phase in creativity is the generation of
questions and goals. Questions and goals are produced in
response to surprise, curiosity, need, and other questions;
both involve emotions such as puzzlement and excitement
(Thagard, 1999, 2005).
The HTC model describes searching in science as finding
suitable answers for questions generated on the basis of
puzzling phenomena. Scientific questions are abductively
answered by generating hypotheses that explain the
puzzling phenomena that generated the question (Thagard &
Croft, 1999). In technology, searching involves identifying a
desirable goal and trying to produce it (Thagard & Croft,
1999). We refer this process in technology as practical
abduction. The form of practical abduction is roughly as
follows. There is a target B that needs to be reached. With Y
it is potentially possible to carry put B. So Y is plausible
and acceptable, because it is coherent with the inventor’s
goals and beliefs. Thus, Y is satisfactory enough to carry out
B and so Y is feasible.
Target B is not necessary clear. In a business context, it is
usual to have many potential, different goals. So, the goal
space could be a set of many different possibilities B1 to
Bn. In the same way, the means are a set of different
possibilities Y1 to Yn. In evaluating different possibilities, a
person judges the situation, individual competences and the
competence of their network (Taatila, 2004).
The finding of a novel goal B and a novel mean Y to
achieve it is based on goal generation and searching
prompted by the innovator. According to HTC, it would be
psychologically unrealistic to assume that Y and B must be
sentences or propositions. In contrast, practical abduction
can be fully multimodal, in that both puzzling target and the

Creativity in an Economic Context

2205

Economic innovation consists of the generation of a new
idea and its implementation as a new product, process, or
service, leading to the dynamic growth of the enterprise and
profit creation (Taatila, Suomala, Siltala & Keskinen, in
press; Urabe, 1988). Economic innovation can involve a
new product, the further development of an existing
product, a new service, or a new marketing system. The
term economic innovation is used in this paper to indicate
interest in finding novelty products and services that create
economically viable innovations, instead of just any
novelties, that may lack a positive financial outcome. Thus,
our approach to economic innovation is similar to that of
creative studies to creativity in general, i.e. that creativity is
the production of useful, new products and ideas
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1996; Mumford, Baughman & Sager,
2003).
This study is a part of the wider research program “Business
co-evolution – innovation mechanisms in the network
economy” (Keskinen 2004). other sections of the study have
been described elsewhere (Taatila et. al., in press).
To increase understanding of the creative processes in
economic innovation, we consider three start-up cases who
were interviewed using theme interview methods in Santa
Barbara County, California. The first innovation is a
surgical robot called an automated endoscopic system for
optimal positioning (AESOP). The second innovation is a
revolutionary oxygen device for patients suffering from
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) called
INOGEN ONE. The third innovation is a photocopy service
called KINKO’s. For each case, one innovator—nominated
by business experts from the Chamber of Commerce in
Santa Barbara and from the University of California at Santa
Barbara (UCSB)—who invented the idea participated in an

interview. The interview events were audiotaped and
transcribed. The interviews were carried out between
December 2004 and January 2005, and each lasted between
43 and 70 min. This paper concentrates on idea generation
in the innovation process. The research questions are: How
do innovators get an idea for a business economy
innovation? Is the process similar to the HTC model
described? In interviews, the first author of the paper asked
innovators to describe the situation in which she or he
became aware of the idea. All interviewers clearly
remembered the situations. They have given permission for
the authors to use their own and their company names in our
research reports.

AESOP
AESOP was the first commercial surgical robot in the world
when the company Computer Motion, Inc., brought it onto
the market in 1994. In 2003, Computer Motion merged to
Intuitive Surgical company and Yulun Wang founded a new
company called InTouch Health®. The idea of AESOP was
born in 1991 after discussions between the founder of the
company, Yulun Wang, and medical doctor and surgeon,
Ron Lattimer, in Santa Barbara. Then the development
process began and AESOP became a profitable product in
1997.
In 1988, Wang completed his Ph.D. in robotics at the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at
UCSB. He developed a new computer architecture for robot
control. With this technology it was possible to apply
robotics that need extreme precision. During his Ph.D.,
Wang learned many underlying technical tools and had the
chance to work at the Center of Robotic Systems and
Microelectronics at UCSB.
Because he wanted to be an entrepreneur since his
childhood, Wang founded the Computer Motion company in
1989. In his interview he recalled: “I think I’ve always
thought about being an entrepreneur. I don’t know why, I
had the choice of going into academics or going into
industry and I always felt that I wanted to build and design
innovative new products.” Although he founded the
company in 1989, he did not know then what his business
should involve. At the beginning, as the inventor of a new
computer architecture for robot control, Wang got
consulting jobs with Hughes Aircraft, General Motors,
Toyota, and the US Navy. In addition, he obtained
government grants from NASA, NSF and NIH, but he did
not know the domain.
In his interview he said: “I think at that point of time I was
looking at many ideas simultaneously, and then you keep
pushing them all forward and see which ones fall down and
which ones keep moving”. The conventional intellectual
habit of the robotics experts involved the defense sector and
the automobile industry. Because these traditional robotics
fields were both in a downturn at that time, Wang was
actively looking for suitable new applications for robotics.
Because the traditional areas were not promising and the
medical domain was, he tried to look for possibilities in
medicine. He started talking to his friends who had trained
as physicians, which led to meeting with a medical doctor
and surgeon, Ron Lattimer. In his interview, Wang

described the appointment with Ron Lattimer as follows:
“… that was a significant moment … very first time the
concept of AESOP came into being was when Ron Lattimer
said ‘why don’t you hold my scope for me … why can’t you
hold the camera for me?’ Lattimer continued: ‘if I can have
direct control of that camera that would be very helpful for
me’. And that’s how the whole idea of how AESOP came.”
The background to Lattimer’s question was that there was
a huge change in minimally invasive surgery, called
laparoscopic surgery. Doctors were carrying out these
procedures through little holes and viewing them with a
camera. When a surgeon holds surgical instruments with
both hands, somebody else has to hold the camera. Wang
described the situation: “And when someone else holds that
camera, it’s like if you and I were in a dark room, but I had
to hold the flashlight and you had to tell me where to put it,
it’s not very accurate. You say, ‘look to the right’, I don’t
know how far right you’re talking about.” So what Lattimer
told Wang was that if doctors could have direct control of
the camera, that would be very helpful. A clear goal for an
innovative product and business was born.

INOGEN ONE

2206

INOGEN ONE is a revolutionary oxygen device for patients
suffering from COPD. The INOGEN ONE company
brought it onto the market in 2004 and today the company is
profitable. The idea was born at the end of 2000, when
UCSB student Alison Perry was at home on Christmas
vacation.
During fall 2000, students Alison Perry, Byron Myers and
Brenton Taylor wanted to enter the business plan
competition at UCSB. They entered the competition because
they wanted to learn business and because it was possible to
win $10 000 as the first prize. Thus, they needed to identify
a product or service they could develop into a business. The
idea was born during the winter break in December, 2000,
when Alison Perry went home to Santa Rosa in California
for the holidays. Her grandmother joined the family for
Christmas. She suffered from COPD and needed to use
oxygen therapy. She had a traditional oxygen device that
tethers patients to an oxygen tank and she could venture
only as far as her lifeline would allow. In her interview,
Alison Perry described the situation as follows: “And this
innovation was derived mainly because my grandmother
was using the oxygen equipment and I realized how her
quality of life just diminished, the second that she got put on
the oxygen, and so as a result we saw a huge need of people
wanting to be more free and mobile and being able to live
on their own schedules and that’s where the company idea
came out, was why can’t we make something more
miniature that would help a lot of these people out and that’s
what we set out to do and that’s what we’ve done”.
Actually, she said it haphazardly, “wouldn’t it be great if
there was something smaller, why can’t there be? I just
started mulling it over and it sounded like a good idea and I
kind of watched her and looked at the device.”
The idea for an innovative patient-friendly medical device
was born. With this idea, Perry came back to UCSB and
told Taylor and Myers about her idea. First they hesitated,
but accepted the idea very soon. They participated in the

business competition with this idea and won the first prize
of $10 000 in May 2001. Later the same year they founded
the company INOGEN. The company’s first product
INOGEN ONE was on the market in October 2004.

KINKO’s
University of Southern California (USC) student, Paul
Orfalea, founded an innovative photocopy service company
named KINKO’s close to UCSB in fall 1970. This type of
service for college students was very novel at that time.
KINKO’s has grown into a international photocopy
company and at the beginning of 2004 it was sold to FedEx
for $2.4 billion.
Since Orfalea’s childhood it was self-evident that he
would like to found his own business. All his relatives had
their own businesses. Before the photocopy idea born,
Orfalea had work experience in his father’s clothing
company. He also tried to sell vegetables and fruit in the
market. However, he was not successful in these domains
and he actively looked for a new opportunity for his own
business.
In spring 1970, Paul Orfalea participated in a study
project with his college friend at USC. Because he could not
read well, he could not help much in the way of either
research or writing. Instead, he became the gofer for his
college friend. Therefore, one of his jobs was to make
copies for his friend. One day he went to the university’s
copy center. When he was in line to use the photocopy
machine, he noticed something very interesting, the copy
center itself. In his interview he recalled: “I saw people in
line and I figured, well if they’re in line there, why wouldn’t
there be a line in Santa Barbara.” In his autobiography he
writes: “I went to the university’s copy center, paper in
hand, on the day it was due. Right off, I saw something far
more interesting: the copy center itself. This was spring of
1970 and people were scurrying around making voluminous
copies of legal paperwork for the trial of accused serial
killer Charles Manson. I came running back to class, nearly
out of breath.” (Orfalea & Marsh, 2005, 6-7). In class he
said for his friend: “Danny, I’ve got this great idea!”
(Orfalea & Marsh, 2005, 7). He realized he could start a
copy shop at Isla Vista, close to UCSB. The place was
familiar to Orfalea, because his girlfriend was s student
there.
The novelty of Orfalea’s business was the supply of a full
service. In the morning, on their way to the campus,
students ordered copies from Kinko’s and picked them up in
the evening. This benefited both customers and Kinko’s.
The company was profitable after 4 months.

Results and Discussion
There are three similarities between the different SCEs.
First, the business innovators had goals to create their own
business models. Orfalea and Wang had the goal of starting
their own companies since childhood. Perry’s goal of
starting her own company was tied to a business
competition plan at UCSB. Second, the reason for beginning
the innovation process was a practical need and the goal

came from commercial motivation. Although commercial
motivation and practical need were at the origin of the
process, we should not neglect the intrinsic pleasure and
curiosity of business innovators in building an innovative
business idea. Third, the basic business innovations created
in the SCEs were the same until the company was
profitable. We are aware that a good innovation does not
end with idea generation in the SCEs described here; rather,
it ends with implementation and profitable marketing.
However, from a cognitive point of view, innovation-based
goal generation is the most difficult part of innovation
process. After the goal is generated, a focused and
constrained search for idea implementation is possible.
The first difference between the HTC model and start-up
innovations is the different starting situations. According to
the HTC model, the discovery and invention process begins
when an individual encounters a puzzling and unexpected
phenomenon. In start-up economic innovation, the process
begins when a business innovator decides to found a
business. When the business innovators created more
specific business models in the SCEs, this involved finding
an expected rather than an unexpected goal. The process
was not as unexpected or puzzling as in the HTC model,
because they had actively sought a business possibility
before the SCE. During the SCE, the goal came clearer and
more arguable. However, the SCE is undoubtedly
emotionally a high impact episode.
Before innovations were created in the SCEs, the business
innovators had a fuzzy idea of a profitable business. Their
chain of reasoning may be described in the following way.
(1) I would like to set up my own business (B).
(2) With innovation (Y), can I get my own business?
(3) I need to create something (Y) in order to achieve B.
When an individual has a general goal to create his own
business B, he is looking for the possibility to carry out Y.
We refer to this type of discovery as chance discovery and
define this more specifically as follows. Chance discovery
involves discovering Y when the individual has a general
and fuzzy goal B. Y should be coherent with the innovator’s
original goal and his previous experience and mental
representations. In addition, the individual judges Y, based
on their belief as its relates to individual competencies and
their nerwork competencies (Taatila, 2004).
To say a chance discovery involves discovering
innovation Y when the individual has a general goal to set
up their own business B is not to say that every innovation
process follows the same order from phase (1) to phase (3).
Many innovations have arose in a academic context without
the intention of developing a business. In addition, many
innovations have been developed in companies without any
direct idea to going to market immediately. In these cases,
phase (2) came before phase (1). However, the assumption
behind this study is that a creative process is dependent not
only on unexpected findings or puzzling phenomena, but
also on the expectations we have regarding our future.
Tawfik (2004) describes chance as a high impact event,
situation or change. These situations are rare, but their
effects are so significant that it is advantageous to utilize
them as early as possible. Tawfik (2004) explains the
concept of the chance discovery as a process of discovering

2207

such situations. In addition, the chance discovery predicts
future outcomes.
Our definition of chance discovery differs from Tawfik’s
definition in one essential way. All situations of SCEs in
this study are ordinary, not rare. However, the innovators
transformed an ordinary situation, where there is no problem
to be solved, into a situation where an idea ready for
implementation exists. In an ordinary situation, the mind
worked in a creative way. Despite that difference in
definitions, both views of chance discovery predict future
outcomes.
The second difference between the start-up cases and
Thagard’s cases are different positions in relation to the
domain. The HTC model is based on creative individuals in
science and technology who are experts in their domain. In
contrast, the start-up innovators in this study are at the
beginning of their careers. How do mental representations
and the interpretation of seminal creative situations differ
between creative experts and novices? We argue that
experts interpret unexpected findings based on their
expertise. They construct mental representations based on
their knowledge, skills and past experiences, which an
expert has in his/her working memory and long-term
memory. In contrast, the start-up innovators had a general
goal to found a business. They had to keep track of what
was going on in their potential domain. This process does
not involve a search through predefined representations, but
rather the identification of a goal for a business by virtue of
new representations forged from many resources. The
construction of their potential chance is sensitive to the
domain facing the start-up innovators. Whereas experts
build multimodal representations based on previous learned
knowledge and skills, start-up innovators build multimodal
representations based on active goals. In this case, goals are
representational structures that guide the innovators in their
pursuit of a reference state (Markman & Brendl, 2000).
During the chance discovery process, situations are
evaluated relative to active goals. Because the goal to found
a business can be long-standing, sometimes for many years,
this goal is chronically active (Markman & Brendl, 2000).
This does not mean that an individual is aware of the goal
all of the time, but it is likely that chronic goals affect the
individual’s perception and evaluation of different events.
Goals have an important effect on how an individual
organizes and categorizes the world, and help to organize
the long-term representation of our knowledge (Dunbar,
2002). How can an individual build goal-based multimodal
representations from future events?
We use Geary’s (2005) description of a human autonoetic
mental model. This concept is a fusion of Tulving’s (2002)
autonoetic awareness and Johnson-Laird’s (1983) mental
models. In essence, an individual can create a self-centered
mental simulation of the “perfect world” in the future using
an autonoetic mental model. A perfect world is one in which
the individual is able to organize and control his own life in
ways that will enhance his expected standard of living.
According to Geary (2005), autonoetic awareness can be
integrated with the motivation to control. The motivation to
control is facilitated by the ability to mentally simulate
potential future scenarios and changes in situations.

Autonoetic awareness is not simply self-awareness, but also
involves the ability to mentally relive past experiences and
to project oneself into the future (Geary, 2005).
When start-up innovators pursue a goal to found their own
business, they build an autonoetic mental representation
relating to future situations. In the SCEs, the innovators
evaluated a chance based on this future scenario. As in the
HTC model, the SCE interpretation is multimodal. The
concept of autonoetic representation is an addition to this
multimodality. The idea of innovation becomes a target for
implementation when it is sufficiently interesting and
baffling. The innovators believed that they had enough
cognitive, social and material resources to implement their
ideas for products or services.
.

Conclusion
This study presents three cases in which an original idea
was created for economic innovation. Before the SCE, all
cases had a long-standing goal to pursue their own business.
Thus, the finding of a business idea in the SCEs was
expected, in contrast to the HTC model. In the HTC model,
experts begin the creative process when they encounter an
unexpected finding or puzzling phenomenon. Because of
this difference, we call the SCE a chance discovery.
The reasoning process during any SCE is based on
multimodal representations. An essential part of this
multimodal
representation
is
autonoetic
mental
representation, whereby an individual can mentally simulate
future situations. We regard the concepts of chance
discovery and autonoetic representation as complementary
to, rather than competing with, Thagard’s HTC model.
This study highlights that a creative process is dependent
not only on unexpected findings or puzzling phenomena,
but also on the expectations we have regarding our future.
Otherwise, our account of the creative process is similar to
Thagard’s HTC model. Three cases of economic innovation
are hardly sufficient to conclusively generalize an
explanation as to why an individual creates novelty in
certain situations. However, the AESOP, INOGEN ONE,
and KINKO’s cases are rich examples of the creative mind
at work in the business world.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Richard E. Mayer for his invaluable help
when first author was as Visiting Researcher in his
laboratory at UCSB. This research has been supported by
the research programme on Social Capital and Networks of
Trust (SoCa) of the Academy of Finland and Technology
Agency of Finland (TEKES).

References

2208

Alvarez, W. (1998). T. Rex and the crater of doom. Vintage:
New York.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the
Psychology of Discovery and Invention. New York, NY:
Harper Collins Publishers.
Dasgupta, S. (1996). Technology and creativity. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.

Dasgupta, S. (2003). Multidisciplinary creativity: the case of
Herbart A. Simon. Cognitive Science, 27, 683-707.
Downes, S. M. (1993). Socializing naturalized philosophy
of science. Philosophy of Science, 60, 452-468.
Dunbar, K. N. (2002). Understanding the role of cognition
in science: The science as category framework. In P.
Carruthers, S. Stich & M. Siegal (Eds.), The cognitive
basis of science (pp. 154-170). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Geary, D. C. (2005). The origin of mind. Evolution of brain,
cognition, and general intelligence. Washington, WA:
American Psychological Association.
Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation.
New York: The Free Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Keskinen, S. (2004) Business coevolution – innovation
mechanisms in the network economy –program
descriptionathttp://www.agora.jyu.fi/soca/indexeng.php?p
age=keskinen_eng, extracted 14.4.2006.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring Science: The cognition and
development of discovery processes. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Latour, B. & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life: The
construction of scientific facts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Markman, A.B., & Brendl, C.M. (2000). The influence of
goals on value and choice. In D.L. Medin (Ed.), The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, Vol. 39. (pp. 97129) San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Mayer, R. E. (1995). The search for insight: Grappling with
gestalt psychology’s unanswered questions. In R. J.
Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of insight
(pp. 3-32). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mumford, M.D., Baughman, W.A. & Sager, C.E. (2003).
Picking the right material: Cognitive processing skills and
their role in creative thought. In M.A. Runco (Ed.),
Critical Creative Processes (pp. 19 – 68). Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press.
Nersessian, N. (1995). Opening the black box: Cognitive
science and history of science. Osiris, 10, 194-215.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Orfalea, P. & Marsh, A. (2005). Copy this! Lessons from a
hyperactive dyslexic who turned a bright idea into one of

2209

America’s best companies. New York: Workman
Publishing.
Popper, K. R. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery.
London: Hutchinson.
Sahdra, B. & Thagard, P. (2003). Procedural knowledge in
molecular biology. Philosophical Psychology, 16, 477–
498.
Taatila, V. (2004). The Concept of Organizational
Competence. A Foundational Analysis. Jyväskylä Studies
in Computing 36, Jyväskylä, Finland.
Taatila, V., Suomala, J., Siltala, R. & Keskinen, S. (in
press). Framework to study the social innovation
networks. European Journal of Innovation Management.
Tawfik, A.Y. (2004). Inductive reasoning and change
discovery. Minds and Machines, 14, 441-451.
Thagard, P. (1999). How scientists explain disease.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Thagard, P. (2000). Coherence in thought and action.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (2002). The passionate scientist: Emotion in
scientific cognition. In P. Carruthers, S. Stich & M. Siegal
(Eds.), The cognitive basis of science (pp. 235-250).
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Thagard, P. (2003). Curing cancer? Patric Lee’s path to
reovirus treatment. International Studies in Philosophy of
Science, 16, 179-193.
Thagard, P. (2005). How to be a successful scientist. In M.
E. Gorman, R. D. Tweney, D. C. Gooding & A. P.
Kincannon (Eds.), Scientific and technological thinking
(pp. 159-171). Mawah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Thagard, P., & Croft, D. (1999). Scientific discovery and
technological innovation: Ulcers, dinosaur extinction, and
the programming language JAVA. In L. Magnani, N.
Nersessian, & P. Thagard (Eds.), Model-based Reasoning
in Scientific Discovery (pp. 125-137). New York, NY:
Plenum Publishers.
Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain.
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 1-25.
Urabe, K. (1988). Innovation and the Japanese management
system. In K. Urabe, J. Child & T. Kagono (Eds.),
Innovation and Management, International Comparisons,
(pp. 3-25). Berlin: De Gruyter & Co.

