UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Chunking Patterns Reflect Effector-dependent Representation of Motor Sequence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/43f212sr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bapi, Raju S.
Doya, Kenji
Miyapuram, Krishna P.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Chunking Patterns Reflect Effector-dependent Representation of Motor Sequence
Krishna P. Miyapuram (kpm23@cam.ac.uk)

Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB23DY, UK
& Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500046, India

Raju S. Bapi (bapics@uohyd.ernet.in)

Computational Intelligence Lab, Department of Computer and Information Sciences
& Center for Cognitive Science, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500 046 India

Kenji Doya (doya@atr.jp)

Department of Computational Neurobiology, Computational Neuroscience Laboratories
ATR International, Kyoto, Japan
& Neural Computation Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
Gushikawa, Okinawa, Japan
Abstract
Sequential organization is central to much of human intelligent
behavior ranging from everyday skills such as lacing shoes to
using a computer. It is well known that such sequential skills
involve chaining a number of primitive actions together.. A
robust representation of skills can be formed by chunking together several elements of a sequence. We demonstrate, using a 2x6 finger movement task, that during the process of acquiring visuomotor skills the chunking patterns remained unaltered when utilizing an effector dependent representation of
the sequence. In the 2x6 task, subjects learned a sequence
of 12 visual cues displayed as six sets of two elements each
and performed finger movements on a keypad.Two experiments Normal-Motor and Normal-Visual were conducted on
nine subjects and two observations were collected from each
subject. Each experiment consisted of a Normal and a Rotated
condition. In the Rotated (Motor and Visual) conditions, subjects were required to rotate the visual cues by 180 degrees
and press the corresponding keys. The display sequence was
also rotated for the Motor condition, requiring an identical set
of effector movements to be performed as in the Normal condition. Chunking patterns were identified using the response
times (RTs) for individual sets of the sequence. A pause between set RTs demarcates an ensuing chunk. We demonstrate
that usage of an effector dependent representation is supported
by the observation of identical chunking patterns between the
Normal and Motor conditions, and the lack of similarity in
chunking patterns between the Normal and Visual conditions.

Motivation
A variety of day-to-day tasks such as lacing shoes, riding a
bicycle and using a computer involve sequencing a number
of primitive actions to achieve a desired goal. Lashley (1951)
highlighted the ubiquity of sequential nature or serial order in
our behavior
“. . . the coordination of leg movements in insects,
the song of birds, the control of trotting and pacing in
a gaited horse, the rat running the maze, the architect
designing a house, the carpenter sawing a board present
a problem of sequences of action . . . ”
It is well known that the human brain clusters the amount
of available information into a number of chunks. When
we recall a mobile phone number such as 9440746382, we

1835

might actually chunk this sequence as 94407 46 382, or as
944 07 463 82. Miller (1956) suggested that the capacity of
short-term working memory is roughly 7 ± 2 chunks. Sakai,
Kitaguchi, and Hikosaka (2003) have shown that the performance of a shuffled sequence deteriorated when the chunk
patterns of the original sequence were compromised than
when they were preserved. Thus each chunk is processed
as a single memory unit. Bapi, Pammi, Miyapuram, and
Ahmed (2005) have suggested that hierarchically organizing
sequences into chunks enables efficient retrieval compared
to linear representation of sequences. Pammi, Miyapuram,
Bapi, and Doya (2004) have shown that greater reorganization of sequences into chunks is more likely when the amount
of information to be processed at a time is kept smaller, well
within the capacity of short term memory.
Fitts (1964) proposed that acquisition of a skill involves
transition from an initial, attentive phase to an automatic
phase after repeated practice. In an earlier behavioral study
((Bapi, Doya, & Harner, 2000)), we investigated transfer effects in a modified m × n motor sequence learning paradigm
(Hikosaka, Rand, Miyachi, & Miyashita, 1995). Further,
we demonstrated that sequence learning is mediated by an
effector-independent, visuo-spatial representation in the early
phase and an effector-dependent, motor representation enables efficient performance in the late phase. Sakai et al.
(2003) have also found that the temporal patterns of sequence
performance transferred from the non-dominant to dominant
hand, but not vice versa. In this context, it is interesting to
investigate if the chunking patterns are effector dependent or
not.

Experimental Procedures
In the current experiment, subjects are presented with a series
of visual stimuli on a display grid. They discover the correct
sequence of key presses on a keypad corresponding to the visual stimuli by trial and error. In the 2 × 6 task, two squares
(called a set) are illuminated simultaneously on a 3 × 3 display grid. Subjects are required to press two corresponding
keys successively on a keypad. Upon successful completion
of a set, the next set is presented and so on. The entire se-

Figure 1: 2x6 Trial and Error Learning Task (Top panel). One set of the sequence for Normal-Motor experiment is shown on
left side of bottom panel and the Normal-Visual experiment is shown on the right side. The display to keypad rotation was 180
for both the Motor and Visual Rotated Settings.
quence to be learnt consists of six such sets and is called a
hyperset. The trial was reset to the beginning of the hyperset (sequence) upon error. Subjects repeatedly practiced the
same sequence upon trial success (see Figure 1 top panel).
Each subject used a different sequence. Hence our results are
not specific to any sequence. Further we avoided any repetition or transposition of sets within a hyperset to avoid any
effects due to the physical structure of the sequence. Sakai
et al. (2003) have used similar strategy to show that subjects
spontaneously chunk a sequence and that the chunking was
not specified by external parameters of the sequence. Sakai
et al. (2003) have tested effector dependence by testing transfer across hand, while in our study, we address this question
by rotating either the display sequence or the effector movements. Further, unlike Sakai et al. (2003) in which subjects
performed the sequence with their index finger only, we asked
subjects to align their index, middle and ring fingers to the
three (left, middle and right) columns of the keypad respectively to minimize any additional arm movements, thus reducing the movement times.
Nine subjects participated on two experiments using two
different sequences. Subjects repeated the two experiments
on a different day using another pair of sequences. In one
experiment, Normal-Motor, subjects learned to perform the
same sequence of finger movements in response to a Normal
and a 180◦ Rotated display (Figure 1, bottom left panel). In
the second experiment, Normal-Visual, subjects were shown
identical visual stimuli, but were required to generate two
sequences (Normal and 180◦ Rotated) of finger movements
(Figure 1, bottom right panel). While in the normal setting the
display and keypad were arranged in the usual upright position, the display-to-keypad rotation was 180◦ for the Rotated
(Motor or Visual) conditions. Thus, in both the Rotated con-

1836

ditions, subjects have to mentally rotate the presented pattern
to generate the motor response. The difference between the
two rotated conditions was that in the Motor condition subjects use same effector movements as in the Normal using a
different display sequence, while in the Visual condition subjects use a different sequence of effector movements keeping
the display sequence same as that of Normal.
Subjects used different hypersets for the two experiments
(Normal-Motor and Normal-Visual) and for the two repetitions to prevent any transfer of sequence knowledge from one
experiment to another. We hypothesized that if chunking of
visuomotor sequences is mediated by effector dependent representation (i.e., in motor coordinates, say, in the finger/arm
coordinates), then patterns of chunking with the keypad-hand
conditions that retain the effector (finger) movements (such as
the Normal and Motor) should be similar, while they would
be different between the conditions that do not preserve effector movements (Normal and Visual).
In our previous behavioral study (Bapi et al., 2000) using
a similar paradigm, training was given in the normal condition and sequence recall was assessed during test blocks
in rotated settings. In the current experiment subjects alternated between Normal and Rotated conditions for a total of
18 blocks of 36 seconds each, thus measuring the progress
of learning in the rotated conditions at different stages. We
assume that the chunking patterns would have stabilized by
the late stage of learning and hence discuss the results from
the last six blocks of these experiments. Sakai et al. (2003)
have used the errors in the early stage of learning to predict
the chunking patterns. As the main focus of the paper is to
investigate the effector dependence of chunking patterns, we
present the relevant correlational analysis and the corresponding results.

Figure 2: Correlation between Normal and Rotated Settings. The bar graphs show the average response times (sec) for each of
the six sets in the sequence for one pair of experiments. The dot plot on the right shows the correlation coefficient for all the
nine subjects and two repetitions. The dashed line indicates the critical value of pearson correlation coefficient (R) for p=0.05
with 4 degrees of freedom.

Results

Acknowledgments

To identify the chunking pattern, we extracted the response
times for individual sets for all successful trials in the last
six blocks of each experiment. The average values of these
response times gives the temporal profile corresponding to
chunking of the sequence. Significant pauses between response times for individual sets within the sequence were
used to mark the beginning of a chunk. The chunking pattern was determined for the Normal and Rotated condition
for each experiment separately for all subjects.
Figure 2 (left and middle panels) shows the chunking patterns for the two experiments for a representative subject. It
was observed that chunking patterns were similar for the Normal and Motor conditions, while those in Normal and Visual condition differed. In the Normal-Motor experiments,
the chunking pattern was first three sets as one chunk and
then the next three sets as the second chunk in both the Normal and Rotated conditions as revealed by the pause between
the third and fourth sets (see, Fig. 2 left panel). However,
in the Normal-Visual experiments, the chunking pattern was
first two and last four sets for the Normal condition, which
is clearly not the case for the Visual condition (see, Fig. 2
middle panel). As subjects used different hypersets in the
Normal-Motor and Normal-Visual experiments, the chunking
patterns cannot be compared across the two experiments.
We then tested for the similarity of the chunking pattern
between the Normal and corresponding Rotated condition
for each experiment (Normal-Motor and Normal-Visual) by
computing the correlation coefficient and its two-tailed significance. Figure 2 (right panel) depicts the correlation coefficients for all the subjects which clearly demonstrate that
in 15 out of 18 experiments a significant correlation between
the Normal and Motor conditions was observed. On the other
hand, 17 out of 18 experiments had lacked a significant correlation between the Normal and Visual conditions.
These results suggest that chunking patterns are similar
across conditions that use similar effector movements inspite
of using different visual guidance cues. Further more, the
chunking patterns are different when the effector movements
were different although the visuo-spatial cues remained unaltered. We thus conclude that chunking patterns reflect the
motor sequence representation and that these are effectordependent.
1837

This Study was supported by grants from Kawato Dynamic
Brain Project under the ERATO scheme of Japan Science
and Technology Co., Japan. Authors would like thank Francis X. Graydon for help with running the experiments. We
thank anonymous reviewers for their suggestions to improve
the manuscript.

References
Bapi, R. S., Doya, K., & Harner, A. M. (2000). Evidence
for effector dependent and independent representations and
their differential time course of acquisition during motor
sequence learning. Experimental Brain Research, 132,
149-162.
Bapi, R. S., Pammi, V. S. C., Miyapuram, K. P., & Ahmed.
(2005). Investigation of sequence learning: A cognitive
and computational neuroscience perspective. Accepted in
Current Science Journal.
Fitts, P. M. (1964). Perceptual motor skill learning. In A. W.
Melton (Ed.), Categories of human learning (p. 243-285).
New York: Academic press.
Hikosaka, O., Rand, M. K., Miyachi, S., & Miyashita, K.
(1995). Learning of sequential movements in the monkey:
Process of learning and retention of memory. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 74, 1652-1661.
Lashley, K. S. (1951). The problem of serial order in behavior. In L. A. Jeffress (Ed.), Cerebral mechanisms in
behavior. New York: Wiley.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Pammi, V. S. C., Miyapuram, K. P., Bapi, R. S., & Doya, K.
(2004). Chunking phenomenon in complex sequential skill
learning in humans. In N. R. Pal, N. Kasabov, R. K. Mudi,
S. Pal, & S. K. Parui (Eds.), Neural information processing (Vol. 3316, pp. 294–299). Springer-Verlag Heidelberg
LNCS.
Sakai, K., Kitaguchi, K., & Hikosaka, O. (2003). Chunking
during human visuomotor sequence learning. Experimental
Brain Research, 152, 229–242.

