UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context Effects on Frame Probability Independent of Verb Sense Ambiguity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/52r8x4nj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Keller, Frank
Scheepers, Christoph

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context Effects on Frame Probability Independent of Verb Sense Ambiguity
Frank Keller (keller@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK
Christoph Scheepers (c.scheepers@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Department of Psychlogy, University of Glasgow
58 Hillhead Street, Glasgow G12 8QB, UK
from .42 to .66 for the transitive/intransitive ambiguity (Lapata et al., 2001).
The divergent results may be explained by two potential
factors. Firstly, Roland & Jurafsky (1998) found that different corpora (Brown, Wall Street Journal, Switchboard) yield
frame probabilities that are significantly different from one
another. They attribute this finding to the fact that the corpora
differ in discourse type (narrative text, newspaper text, spoken
dialog). Roland & Jurafsky (1998) also showed that corpusderived frame probabilities differ from probabilities obtained
experimentally. Again, this can be explained in terms of discourse type: experimental probabilities are typically obtained
using isolated sentences, while corpus probabilities are obtained from connected discourse.
Secondly, Roland & Jurafsky (2002) investigated the effect
of verb sense on frame probability by sense tagging corpus
instances of ambiguous verbs. The results show that different
senses of the same verb differ in frame probability, just as different verbs differ in frame probability. This result was confirmed experimentally by Hare et al. (2003), who conducted
a sentence completion experiment and a reading experiment
using sense ambiguous verbs. The verbs were not presented
in isolation, but in a context that was manually constructed so
as to enforce a particular verb sense. The results showed that
verb sense had a significant influence on frame probability.
In the present paper, we investigate the effect of the local,
immediate discourse context of a verb on its frame probability. Recall that Roland & Jurafsky (1998) only investigated
global effects of discourse type (spoken vs. written, etc.). Secondly, we determine whether context effects are independent
of verb sense ambiguity. The results of Hare et al. (2003) appear to suggest that frame probability is primarily determined
by context-triggered variations in verb sense rather than context per se. A third aspect is that we study verb frame probability in German, thus providing a crosslinguistic extension
of current results for English.

Abstract
Verb frame probability has received wide attention in the
parsing literature and in psycholinguistic research. Although
frame probabilities obtained from corpora have been shown
to correlate with experimental data, the correlation is less
than perfect and varies across corpora. We argue that this
variability can be explained in terms of discourse context,
based on experimental data that show that context has an
influence on frame probability for the NP/VP ambiguity
in German. This effect is observed for both semantically
ambiguous and unambiguous verbs, and hence cannot be
explained solely in terms of verb sense ambiguity.

Introduction
Many verbs are ambiguous as to their subcategorization
frame. An example is know in (1), which can take either a
noun phrase or a sentential complement as its argument (NP/S
ambiguity). Information about verb frames is crucial for a
parser when choosing between several possible structures in
which a verb can occur.
(1) a. NP frame: The teacher knew the answer to the question.
b. S frame: The teacher knew the answer was false.
It is often assumed that the relationship between a verb and
its arguments is probabilistic, i.e., the parser has access to information as to how likely a verb is to take a given argument.
This probabilistic view of verb frames plays an important role
in the computational linguistics literature: most modern parsing systems make use of verb frame probability (Charniak,
2000; Collins, 1997, among others). Also in the psycholinguistic literature, many parsing models incorporate a notion
of frame probability (Garnsey et al., 1997; Jurafsky, 1996;
MacDonald, 1994; Trueswell et al., 1993, among others).
However, researchers in computational linguistics and psycholinguistics have traditionally used different means of estimating verb frame probabilities: corpus estimates on the one
hand, and production experiments on the other. Early studies have shown that these two methods fail to yield the same
frame probabilities (Merlo, 1994), while more recent results
using a large, balanced corpus have found a significant correlation between frame probabilities estimated from corpora
and from production experiments (Lapata et al., 2001). However, the correlation is far from perfect, with correlation coefficients ranging from .69 to .81 for the NP/S ambiguity, and

Influence of Context on Frame Probability
German exhibits a verb frame ambiguity that is closely related to the NP/S ambiguity in English. Certain verbs can
take either an accusative NP or an infinitival VP complement
(NP/VP ambiguity). An example is the verb erwägen ‘consider’ in (2), which occurs with the NP frame in (2a) and with
the VP frame in (2b).

1599

Method

(2) a. Peter erwägte das Vorhaben für lange Zeit.
Peter considered the project for long time
‘Peter considered the project for a long time.’
b. Peter erwägte das Vorhaben durchzuführen.
Peter considered the project to-realize
‘Peter considered to realize of the project.’

Participants Fifty subjects were recruited from the student population of Saarland University. All subject were selfreported native speakers of German. Participation was voluntary and unpaid.
Materials For the item pool, we selected 98 German verbs
that can take both an NP and a VP complement (some of the
verbs also allowed an S frame). The verbs were randomly
divided in two files of 49 verbs. For each file, we the generated 25 different random sequence lists containing the relevant 49 verbs interspersed with 51 filler verbs (ditransitive
and intransitive verbs).

In the following, we will report the results of three experiments that tested if contextual information can override verb
bias for NP/VP ambiguous verbs in German. Instead of using
manually constructed materials, we obtained our stimuli by
extracting suitable sentences and their contexts from a corpus
of newspaper texts. This ensures that the materials are representative of naturally occurring text and reduces the potential
for experimenter bias in generating the materials.
We used a straightforward operational definition of context: the context of a target sentence is formed by the sentences that precede it. We will not make any assumptions regarding the discourse properties of the context. Rather, our
aim is to show that context effects exists; investigating the
discourse mechanism that underly these effects will be left to
further research (but see Section for a discussion). The following are two representative materials from Experiment 2,
again using the verb erwägen ‘consider’:
(3)

(4)

Procedure Each subject was randomly assigned to one of
the 50 random sequence lists of verbs. The subjects’ task was
free production: they were asked to write down a sentence
for each verb with ‘whatever comes to their minds first’. The
experiment was administered using paper and pencil.

Results

Rußland strebt offenbar einen Kompromiß im
Streit
Russia aims seemingly a
compromise in-the dispute
mit Japan um die Rückgabe der Kurilen-Inseln an: Die
with Japan about the return
the Kuril-islands PART the
russische Führung erw¨
agt
Russian leadership considers
‘Russia seems to aim for a compromise in the dispute with
Japan regarding the return of the Kuril islands: The Russian
leadership considers
’
Nach
Angaben
eines Regierungsvertreters
according-to information a
government-representative
sieht
ein neuer Fünfjahresplan vor, die j¨
ahrliche
envisages a
new five-year-plan PART the annual
Arbeitszeit der Japaner auf 1800 Stunden zu verkürzen.
working-time the Japanese to 1800 hours to shorten
Damit
würde die Wochenarbeitszeit von 44 auf 40
with-this would the working-week
from 44 to 40
Stunden beschr¨
ankt. Zur Kompensation der Gehaltsausf¨
alle
hours limited
for-the compensation the salary-losses
erw¨
agt die Regierung
considers the government
‘According to a government representative, a new five year
plan envisages the reduction of the annual working time of the
Japanese to 1800 hours. This would mean a reduction of the
working week from 44 to 40 hours. To compensate for losses
’
in salaries, the government considers

The responses were manually annotated as NP frame
(see (2a)), VP frame (see (2b)), S frame (if the verb was used
with a sentential complement), or Other. A total of 24 verbs
were attested in both the NP frame and the VP frame. Verbs
were classified as VP biased if there were more VP responses
than NP responses, and as NP biased if there were at least
70% NP responses. A stricter criterion was applied for the
NP bias verbs, as there was an overall NP preference in our
sample. This classification resulted in a set of 12 VP biased
and 12 NP biased verbs.

Example (3) represents an NP context, i.e., the original target
sentence, as taken from the corpus, comprised an NP continuation. By contrast, (4) is an example for a VP context, i.e.,
the original target sentence ended in a VP complement.

Experiment 1
Before examining the influence of context on verb frame preference, we conducted a pretest that established out of context preferences for a large number of verbs that exhibit the
NP/VP ambiguity. The results of this pretest will then be used
to filter out highly biased experimental items; the out of context data can also serve as a baseline against which to compare the preferences generated by the contextualized items in
Experiments 2 and 3.

1600

Experiment 2
The aim of this experiment was to establish whether contextual information can override verb frame preferences. In order to achieve maximally realistic contexts, the experimental
materials were derived from naturally occurring corpus instances of the verbs under investigation. The present experiment focuses on VP biased verbs, while Experiment 3 deals
with NP biased verbs.

Method
Participants Twenty-four subjects from the same population as in Experiment 1 participated in this experiment.
Materials This experiment used the VP biased verbs that
were identified in Experiment 1. We extracted all instances
of these 12 verbs from the Frankfurter Rundschau corpus
(34.3 million words of newspaper text). For each verb, 100 instances were randomly sampled and manually annotated for
verb frame. Three VP biased verbs were discarded, as they
were rare or unattested in the NP frame. The remaining nine
verbs displayed a mild VP bias overall (see the column ‘No
Context’ in Table 1).
Experimental materials were constructed for each of the remaining nine verbs by randomly selecting four NP instances
and four VP instances from the corpus sample. For each instance, the sentence the verb occurred in, plus one to three
preceding sentences were retained as contexts. The number
of sentences was chosen so that the contexts were roughly
equally long. The contexts were simplified by removing re-

Table 1: Overall results of Experiment 2 (VP biased verbs).
The ‘No Context’ column lists frame probabilities out of context (estimated in Experiment 1), averaged over the nine verbs
in this experiment. ‘NP Context’ and ‘VP Context’ give the
number of completions in these two contexts (frame probabilities in brackets).
Frame
NP
VP
S
Other
Total

No Context
.30
.56
.06
.08
1.00

NP Context
237 (.55)
175 (.41)
15 (.03)
5 (.01)
432 (1.00)

VP Context
155 (.36)
237 (.55)
38 (.09)
2 (.00)
432 (1.00)

Table 2: Overall results of Experiment 3 (NP biased verbs).
The ‘No Context’ column lists frame probabilities out of context (estimated in Experiment 1), averaged over the nine verbs
in this experiment. ‘NP Context’ and ‘VP Context’ give the
number of completions in these two contexts (frame probabilities in brackets).

Total
392 (.45)
412 (.48)
53 (.06)
7 (.01)
864 (1.00)

dundant subordinate clauses, and by standardizing punctuation. This resulted in contexts that were on average 35 words
long. For each context, all the text following the verb was removed (except for subject NPs, which can be post-verbal in
German).
In total, there were 72 experimental contexts (nine verbs
in two contextual conditions; four different versions of each),
which were allotted to two stimulus sets, such that (a) each
item occurred exactly once per set, but in a different version
between sets, and (b) half of the items per set were NP contexts, the other half VP contexts.
Procedure The two stimulus sets were presented to two
groups of subjects (N = 11 and N = 13, respectively) in
a completion experiment administered over the web using
the WebExp software package (for details see http://www.
webexp.info/). Subjects were instructed to read the materials and generate an appropriate completion. Responses were
again annotated as NP frame, VP frame, S frame, or Other.

Results

Frame
NP
VP
S
Other
Total

No Context
.78
.13
.05
.04
1.00

NP Context
323 (.69)
101 (.22)
38 (.08)
6 (.01)
468 (1.00)

VP Context
267 (.57)
125 (.27)
54 (.12)
22 (.05)
468 (1.00)

Total
590 (.63)
226 (.24)
92 (.10)
28 (.03)
936 (1.00)

df = 1; p < .001; LRCS2 = 30.29; df = 1; p < .001); complementary to that, there were reliably more VP completions
given a VP rather than NP context (LRCS1 = 16.28, df = 1,
p < .001; LRCS2 = 15.85, df = 1, p < .001); finally, there
were also more S completions given a VP rather than NP context (LRCS1 = 7.45, df = 1, p < .01; LRCS2 = 6.45, df = 1,
p < .01). In conclusion, this interaction clearly demonstrates
an influence of discourse context on the preferred verb frame.

Experiment 3
The aim of the third experiment was to determine whether
context effects also generalize to NP biased verbs. This is
by no means obvious, as the out of context preferences (see
Experiment 1) of our two groups of verbs differed considerably: NP biased verbs showed a 78% preference for
NP completions, whereas for VP biased verbs, the VP preference amounted to a mere 56%. It is therefore conceivable
that NP biased verbs are immune to context effects, due to
their comparatively strong out of context preference for the
NP frame.

The completion frequencies obtained in this experiment are
given in Table 1. The results were evaluated using hierarchical log-linear models, an extension of the chi-square test
commonly used for frequency data (Howell, 2002, provides
an introduction). The analysis used the factors Context (NP,
VP), Completion (NP, VP, S),1 and either Subject (N = 24) or
Item (N = 36). The inclusion of Subject (or Item, respectively)
ensured that expected frequencies were adjusted for interindividual variation. Following standard conventions, effects
in the context of Subject are reported as LRCS1 (by subjects
likelihood ratio chi-square), effects in the context of Item as
LRCS2 (by items likelihood ratio chi-square).
There was a significant main effect of Completion
(LRCS1 = 329.63, df = 2, p < .001; LRCS2 = 312.60, df = 2,
p < .001). As can be seen from Table 1, this is due to the fact
that S completions were less frequent than NP or VP completions (which were about equally likely).
Crucially, we also found a significant interaction between
Context and Completion (LRCS1 = 32.08, df = 2, p < .001;
LRCS2 = 30.42, df = 2, p < .001), which can be decomposed
as follows (see Table 1): there were reliably more NP completions given an NP rather than VP context (LRCS1 = 31.11;

Method
Participants Twenty-six subjects from the same population
as in Experiments 1 and 2 participated in this experiment.
Materials For this experiment, materials were extracted
from the Frankfurter Rundschau corpus using the same procedure as in Experiment 2. Again, three verbs were discarded
due to insufficient corpus evidence, leaving nine verbs for the
experimental materials. For each of them, four NP and four
VP contexts were randomly sampled. The resulting 72 items
were divided into two sets.
Procedure The two sets of materials were each presented
to a group of subjects (both N = 13) in a completion study.
The same procedure as in Experiment 2 was used.

Results
The descriptive statistics (across all nine verbs) are given in
Table 2. Statistical procedures were the same as in Experiment 2. As expected, there was a significant main effect of
Completion (LRCS1 = 398.33, df = 2, p < .001; LRCS2 =
385.57, df = 2, p < .001) due to the fact that NP completions
were clearly the most frequent, followed by VP completions
and S completions.

1 Other completions were ignored as their frequencies were negligible.

1601

Crucially, the overall interaction between Context and
Completion was also reliable (LRCS1 = 10.37, df = 2, p <
.01; LRCS2 = 9.57, df = 1, p < .01), indicating that the
general NP bias in the given sample of verbs did not undermine the impact of context on frame probability. Loglinear contrasts confirmed that the frequency of NP completions was significantly higher in NP rather than VP contexts
(LRCS1 = 10.80, df = 1, p < .005; LRCS2 = 9.94, df = 1,
p < .005), that the frequency of VP completions was significantly higher in VP rather than NP contexts (LRCS1 = 6.72,
df = 1, p < .01; LRCS2 = 4.24, df = 1, p < .04), and finally,
that the frequency of S completions was marginally higher in
VP rather than NP contexts (LRCS1 = 3.13, df = 1, p < .08;
LRCS2 = 2.95, df = 1, p < .09). Hence, this experiment confirms the results from Experiment 2 by showing that context
effects on frame probability generalize to verbs with a strong
NP complement bias.

versuchen, probieren ‘attempt, try’
=> erfahren ‘experience’
=> erleben ‘experience’
=> aufnehmen ‘take in’

As can be seen from the example in (5), GermaNet (like
WordNet) organizes synsets in taxonomies: for each of the
senses, a set of hypernyms (superordinate classes) is specified, for example schmecken ‘taste’ is a hypernym of versuchen, probieren ‘attempt, try’. A hierarchy of hypernyms is
assumed, rooted in a small number of top-level classes, such
as aufnehmen ‘take in’ or Körperverb ‘verb of bodily care
and function’ in this example. For details on the structure of
the WordNet verb taxonomy see Fellbaum (1998, p. 69–104).
While WordNet is a well-established resource that has been
used in psycholinguistic research by a number of authors
(including Hare et al. 2003), we wanted to validate its entries against another source of lexical information. We therefore crossreferenced the GermaNet sense distinctions against
Wahrig (2002), a standard reference dictionary for German.
Wahrig’s lexicographic approach is based on a contextual definition of word meaning, and thus differs quite substantially
from that taken by GermaNet. The underlying assumption is
that different word senses occur in different contexts; Wahrig
uses a fairly homogeneous definition of context which includes syntactic context (e.g., the subcat frames of a verb)
and collocational context (e.g., the occurrence of a verb with
particular nouns).
To summarize, GermaNet and Wahrig take very different
approaches to word senses, by focusing on semantic relations
and on syntactic contexts, respectively. As we will see below, both resources nevertheless agree on the classification of
verbs as unambiguous or ambiguous; this provides strong evidence for the independent validity of this classification, which
is crucial to the reanalyses of the data from Experiments 2
and 3 that we are about to present.

Verb Sense Ambiguity and Context
So far, the experimental results cannot tell us whether differences in frame probability were triggered by context per se,
or if context merely enforced a particular verb sense, which
then elicited the observed variation in frame probability (in
line with Hare et al.’s 2003 results).
In an additional set of analyses, we therefore divided the
verbs used in our experiments into two sub-groups: those with
only a single sense and those with at least two senses. The
number of senses was determined using two lexical resources:
GermaNet and Wahrig. In the following, we will first give an
overview of these two resources and the sense distinctions
they make. Then, we will present the results of a re-analysis
of the data from Experiments 2 and 3 with verb sense as an
additional factor.

Operationalizing Sense Ambiguity
GermaNet (Hamp & Feldweg, 1997) is a lexical database
for German; its design follows closely that of the WordNet
database for English (Miller et al., 1990). In GermaNet (like
in WordNet), no attempt is made to decompose the meaning of a word (e.g., by analyzing kill as cause to die). Instead, WordNet takes a relational approach to word meaning,
i.e., it tries to formalize the relationships of the words in the
lexicon with each other. More specifically, each word is assigned one or more synsets, i.e., sets of synonymous words.
Each synset represents a word sense by virtue of including all
words that share this sense. An example is given in (5) for the
verb versuchen ‘attempt’, which has two senses in GermaNet
(the glosses have been added by the authors).

Sense Ambiguity as an Additional Factor

To operationalize the notion of sense ambiguity, we looked
up the verbs from Experiment 2 both in GermaNet and in
Wahrig. The number of verb senses for ambiguous verbs differed between the two resources, presumably because of the
different criteria used to make sense distinctions (see previous
section for details). However, GermaNet and Wahrig show a
high degree of agreement regarding the classification of verbs
as unambiguous (one sense) or ambiguous (more than one
sense). In total, three of the verbs from Experiment 2 had only
one sense, while five verbs had more than one sense.2
We reanalyzed the data from Experiment 2 by combining
the new factor Verb Sense (ambiguous vs. unambiguous) with
(5) 2 senses of versuchen ‘attempt’
Context (NP, VP) and Completion (NP, VP, S), and found no
Sense 1
reliable three-way interaction between the factors (LRCS 1 =
versuchen, probieren ‘attempt, try’
1.94, df = 2, p = .37; LRCS2 = 3.05, df = 2, p = .22). This
=> schmecken ‘taste’
=> wahrnehmen ‘perceive’
suggests that the context effects reported earlier are indepen=> anprobieren ‘try on’
dent of whether the verb is semantically ambiguous or not, a
=> kleiden ‘clothe’
conclusion that is confirmed by separate analyses for the two
=> pflegen ‘groom’
subgroups:
there was a significant interaction of Context and
=> ?Koerperverb ‘verb of bodily care’
=> wandeln, aendern, veraendern ‘transform,
change, modify’
=> wandeln, aendern, veraendern ‘transform,
change, modify’
Sense 2

2 GermaNet

and Wahrig disagree about beschließen ‘decide’. We
followed Wahrig and classified this verb as unambiguous because
the alternative sense of beschließen (‘terminate’) only appears in
very specific, infrequent collocations.

1602

Completion both for the ambiguous verbs (LRCS1 = 27.14,
df = 2, p = .001; LRCS2 = 29.94; df = 2; p < .001) and
for the unambiguous verbs (LRCS1 = 6.99, df = 2, p = .03;
LRCS2 = 7.34; df = 2; p < .03), indicating that context can
influence frame probability even in the absence of verb sense
ambiguity.
In order to test if this finding generalizes to NP biased
verbs, we carried out the same reanalysis for the data from
Experiment 3. There were four ambiguous and five unambiguous verbs. GermaNet and Wahrig agree with respect to
this classification on all verbs (though again the number of
senses for ambiguous verbs differs between the two lexical
resources).
Log-linear analyses including Verb Sense (ambiguous vs.
unambiguous), Context (NP, VP) and Completion (NP, VP, S)
found no reliable three-way interaction between the factors
(LRCS1 = 1.66, df = 2, p = .43; LRCS2 = 2.13, df = 2, p =
.34).
Separate analyses for each type of verb revealed no reliable
interaction between Context and Completion for ambiguous
verbs (LRCS1 = 2.97, df = 2, p = .23; LRCS2 = 2.41, df = 2,
p = .30), although the relevant descriptive figures pointed in
the expected directions. For unambiguous verbs, however, the
interaction was significant (LRCS1 = 9.45, df = 2, p < .01;
LRCS2 = 10.06, df = 2, p < .01), confirming that context can
influence frame probability even in the absence of verb sense
ambiguity.

ent for an argument NP. Participants may therefore be more
likely to produce a VP. Example (4) illustrates this: none of
the NPs provided in the context can be used as a plausible
argument for erwägen ‘consider’.
Another interesting result warrants discussion: context effects seem to depend on the baseline bias of a verb. For Experiment 2 (VP biased verbs), Table 1 shows that in the NP context, there is a clear increase in the proportion of NP completions (.55) compared to the baseline (.30), while the proportion of VP completions (.41) decreases relative to the baseline
(.56). In the VP context condition, however, there is hardly
any context effect: the proportions of both NP and VP completions (.36 and .55, respectively) stay virtually unchanged
compared to the baselines (.30 and .56, respectively).
The inverse pattern occurs in Experiment 3 (NP biased
verbs), as indicated in Table 2. Here, the VP context leads
to a sharp decrease of the proportion of NP completions (.57)
compared to the baseline (.78), while the number of VP completions rises (.27) over the baseline (.13). In the NP context,
however, the number of NP and VP completions (.69 and .22)
changes only marginally relative to the baselines (.78 and
.13); the change is even contrary to the expected direction.
This means that for both experiments, there is a baseline effect: context only changes the probabilities for the frame for
which the verb does not already have an out of context (baseline) bias. It seems that context can override the baseline bias,
but it cannot strengthen it further.

Discussion

Conclusion

The results obtained in Experiments 2 and 3 allow us to draw
a distinction between two kinds of context effects. On the
one hand, context may disambiguate a sense-ambiguous verb,
thus triggering the frame bias associated with this particular
sense (Hare et al., 2003). This provides an explanation for the
interaction between context and completion that we found for
ambiguous verbs (in Experiment 2). However, the fact that
such an interaction was also present for unambiguous verbs
(in Experiments 2 and 3) indicates that verb sense ambiguity
is not the whole story. Context also triggers other factors that
can influence the subcat behavior of verbs; presumably, these
factors act independently of, and in addition to, verb sense
ambiguity.
As explained in Section , our experiments relied on an
operational definition of context as ‘sentences that preceded
the target sentence’. Our experimental materials were not selected to have specific contextual properties; hence, we cannot make any strong claims as to the factors that cause the
context effects that we observed. However, an inspection of
the materials suggests that discourse reference might play an
important role in triggering the context effects we observed.
To illustrate the point, take (3) and (4) as an example. In the
NP context example (3), the context for erwägen ‘consider’
contains the NP Rückgabe ‘return’. The target sentences can
be completed straightforwardly with the pronouns sie ‘it’ or
diese ‘this’ referring to this NP. Instead of using a pronoun,
one could also repeat the full NP Rückgabe ‘return’ or semantically related words such as Abgabe ‘hand-over’ or Teilung
‘partioning’. All of these cases result in NP completions,
which are therefore favored by the context. A VP context,
on the other hand, typically fails to provide a potential refer-

The parsing literature has emphasized that verb frame probability plays an important role for computer systems that parse
naturally occurring text, as well as for the human language
processor facing the same task. Previous corpus studies have
shown that verb sense has an influence on verb frame probability (Roland & Jurafsky, 2002), and that context can enforce sense distinctions, which then trigger differences in
frame probability (Hare et al., 2003). However, these studies were not designed to investigate whether there are context effects on frame probability that are independent of verb
sense, which is what we addressed in this paper. We showed
that the discourse context a verb occurs in has an influence
on its frame probability in a sentence completion task. Crucially, this finding not only holds for sense-ambiguous verbs,
but also for unambiguous verbs, indicating that context can
have an effect on frame probability even in the absence of a
verb sense ambiguity.

Implications for Psycholinguistics
From a psycholinguistic point of view, the present data have
two major implications. First, our results show that speakers’ completions closely mirror sentence continuations derived from corpora (at least with respect to the subcat frames
that speakers produce). This suggests that corpus data are a
good predictor of moment-by-moment behavior within the
context of a completion experiment, and indeed, that corpora
are a valuable tool in making predictions about language processing.
Second, the present results highlight the importance of context for frame probability: the degree to which a verb prefers
one subcat frame over another is highly dependent on the con-

1603

text in which the verb is embedded. Frame probability thus
appears to be no ‘static’ lexical feature of verbs, but rather
depends on a number of (yet to be explored) contextual variables. Previous psycholinguistic research (e.g., Hare et al.
2003) has acknowledged the importance of context on frame
probability, but mostly in the role of a mediator between alternative verb senses, which are assumed to be a primary factor
in determining frame probability. The present data go beyond
this assumption (though they are certainly not contradicting
it) by suggesting the existence of context effects on frame
probability even in the absence of verb sense ambiguity. The
contextual mechanisms that are responsible for modulating
frame probability in sense-unambiguous verbs are yet to be
specified (we assume that discourse reference might play an
important role), but clearly, verb sense ambiguity cannot be
the whole story in explaining context effects on frame probability.
Finally, our studies also constitute an important methodological advance: they used experimental stimuli obtained by
random sampling from a corpus, thus guaranteeing truly natural contexts (i.e., in contrast to earlier work, our materials
were not ‘designed’ to elicit the desired effects). This is a step
towards the true random sampling of materials, a desideratum
of psycholinguistic methodology going back to Clark (1973).

sociation for Computational Linguistics and the 8th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, (pp. 16–23), Madrid.
Fellbaum, C. (ed.) (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Garnsey, S. M., Pearlmutter, N. J., Myers, E. M., & Lotocky, M. A.
(1997). The contributions of verb bias and plausibility to the comprehension of temporarily ambiguous sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 58–93.
Hamp, B., & Feldweg, H. (1997). GermaNet: A lexical-semantic net
for German. In P. Vossen, G. Adriaens, N. Calzolari, A. Sanfilippo, & Y. Wilks (eds.), Proceedings of the ACL/EACL Workshop
on Automatic Information Extraction and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for NLP Applications, (pp. 9–15), Madrid.
Hare, M., McRae, K., & Elman, J. L. (2003). Sense and structure:
Meaning as a determinant of subcategorization preferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 233–443.
Howell, D. C. (2002). Statistical Methods for Psychology. Pacific
Grove, CA: Duxbury, 5th edn.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and syntactic
access and disambiguation. Cognitive Science, 20, 137–194.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review,
104, 211–240.
Lapata, M., Keller, F., & Schulte im Walde, S. (2001). Verb frame
frequency as a predictor of verb bias. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 30, 419–435.

Implications for Computational Linguistics
With respect to computational parsing models, our results
suggest that a parsing system, in order to correctly predict the
subcategorization frame of a verb, needs to have information
about the sense of the verb and its discourse context. Most
current parsing models (e.g., Charniak 2000; Collins 1997)
use frame probabilities that are estimated without taking verb
sense or context into account. An exception is the parsing
framework proposed by Roland (2001), which is broadly
compatible with our results. In a nutshell, this model works as
follows: on encountering a verb v, the model uses c, the context leading up to v, to predict the subcategorization frame
of v. Using latent semantic analysis (Landauer & Dumais,
1997), the model determines which one of the previously seen
contexts is most similar to the current context c. It then makes
a prediction about the subcategorization frame of v based on
the subcategorization frames of the verbs whose contexts are
most similar to c.
The model of Roland (2001) does not contain an explicit
representation of verb senses. Rather, the subcategorization
frame of a verb is inferred on the basis of the context that precedes it. This means that this model should be able to account
for the data presented in this paper, which show that context
has an effect on verb frame probability even in the absence of
verb sense ambiguity.

MacDonald, M. C. (1994). Probabilistic constraints and syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 157–
201.
Merlo, P. (1994). A corpus-based analysis of verb continuation frequencies for syntactic processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 23, 435–457.
Miller, G. A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C., Gross, D., & Miller, K. J.
(1990). Introduction to WordNet: An on-line lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235–244.
Roland, D. (2001). Verb Sense and Verb Sucategorization Probabilities. Ph.D. thesis, University of Colorado, Boulder.
Roland, D., & Jurafsky, D. (1998). How verb subcategorization frequencies are affected by corpus choice. In Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics and
36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, (pp. 1122–1128), Montréal.
Roland, D., & Jurafsky, D. (2002). Verb sense and verb subcategorization probabilities. In P. Merlo, & S. Stevenson (eds.), The Lexical Basis of Sentence Processing: Formal, Computational, and
Experimental Issues, (pp. 325–346). Amsterdam: John Bejamins.
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Kello, C. (1993). Verbspecific constraints in sentence processing: Separating effects of
lexical preference from garden-paths. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 528–553.
Wahrig, G. (2002). Deutsches Wörterbuch. Gütersloh/Munich: Bertelsmann Lexikon Institut, 7th edn.

References
Charniak, E. (2000). A maximum-entropy-inspired parser. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, (pp. 132–139),
Seattle, WA.
Clark, H. H. (1973). The language-as-fixed-effect fallacy: A critique
of language statistics in psychological research. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 335–359.
Collins, M. (1997). Three generative, lexicalised models for statistical parsing. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the As-

1604

