UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-Cuing versus Self-Cuing—What Enhances Performance in a Brainstorming Task?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rv7g946

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Diehl, Michael
Mueller, Sabine Ch.
Ziegler, Rene

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-Cuing versus Self-CuingWhat Enhances Performance in a Brainstorming Task?
Sabine Ch. Mueller (Sabine.Mueller@uni-tuebingen.de)
Michael Diehl (Michael.Diehl@uni-tuebingen.de)
René Ziegler (Rene.Ziegler@uni-tuebingen.de)
Institute of Psychology, University of Tuebingen,
Friedrichstr. 21, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
The basic processes underlying idea production are
knowledge retrieval strategies. For this reason it seems to be
of relevance to concentrate on cognitive processes in order
to find ways to improve people’s performance when
brainstorming alone or in a group.

Abstract
Group brainstorming and collaborative remembering are two
research lines studying social influence on cognitive
processes of knowledge retrieval. Both show that coacting
others impair performance due to production blocking and/or
retrieval strategy disruption. There is no evidence indicating
performance enhancing effects of being cued. In two
experiments, we investigated whether retrieval cues under
conditions that avoid production blocking and retrieval
strategy disruption might enhance brainstorming performance.
Results of the first study show that using the last ideas out of
one’s own retrieval clusters as self-cues improved individual
idea generation. This result was replicated in the second study
and contrasted with the effects of cross-cuing. Whereas
participants in the cross-cuing condition did not produce
significantly more ideas than those in a control condition
without cuing, participants in the self-cuing condition
outperformed those of both other conditions. These results are
in line with a retrieval strategy interpretation: although cuing
usually disrupts retrieval strategies and thus reduces
performance, self-cuing can optimize retrieval strategies and
thus enhance performance. Cross-cuing, however, can at most
be ineffective.

Individual and Group Remembering

Keywords: brainstorming; cognitive stimulation; cross-cuing;
self-cuing; retrieval strategy disruption; part-list cuing.

Collaborative remembering in groups, meaning the recall of
studied information by a group of people working together,
has been researched in experimental psychology of memory.
Meudell, Hitch & Kirby (1992) argued that if two people
merely combined their separate recalls, then, necessarily,
the collaborating pair would tend to outperform either
individual through social facilitation. In other words, people
might cross-cue each other in a way, so as to generate items
not available to either member of the pair individually.
Meudell et al. (1992) devised four experiments to examine
cross-cuing in pairs. All these experiments used variants of
the same design in which all the subjects first recalled
information on their own. Then some people were assigned
to pairs and were asked to recall the information
cooperatively. As it was known what each member of the
pair could recall on their first (solitary) recall attempt, it was
possible to identify whether any new recollections appeared
in the joint recall protocol of the pairs. A control group was
also run consisting of individuals who recalled first on their
own and then, at later time, in pairs. Once again the same
information was recalled in pairs as in isolation. All four
experiments provided the same results: pairs of people did
not generate more new information than did the people in
the control group. Meudell et al. (1992) concluded that there
was little evidence to support the hypothesis that pairs of
people might in some way cross-cue each other so as to
generate new memories.
Meudell, Hitch & Boyle (1995) tested different cross-cuing
conditions by requiring subjects to recall categorized lists of
words. The opportunity for the facilitation of memory
through cross-cuing did not lead to new information by
collaborating pairs compared to individual controls. In the
discussion of these findings, they debated the possibility of
pairs inhibiting each other rather then cross-cue each other
in the used experimental setting. They suggest that a social
phenomenon takes place within pairs that involves
inhibition rather than facilitation. They also mention the
assumption that a “part-list” effect (Slamecka, 1968) is
involved in the found results. This effect arises if a list of

Brainstorming
Osborn (1957) assumed that people in problem-solving
situations produce a greater number of creative and good
ideas if they attempt to produce those ideas in an
unconstrained, uncritical brainstorming environment.
Empirical studies, however, soon showed that collaborative
idea generation in face-to-face groups result in lower
performance when compared to nominal groups (Taylor,
Berry & Block, 1958). Nominal groups are control groups
of the same number of people working alone (cf. Diehl &
Stroebe, 1995). The superiority of nominal groups regarding
the quality and quantity of produced ideas has been
replicated in several empirical studies (Lamm &
Trommsdorff, 1973; Mullen, Johnson & Salas, 1991).
Mutual production blocking (the fact that in face-to-face
groups only one person can speak at a time and the other
group members have to listen without being able to express
their own ideas) has been shown to be the main cause of this
productivity loss in face-to-face-groups (Diehl & Stroebe,
1987, 1991).

1844

words is presented to subjects for learning and then a subset
of words is made available as potential aids to retrieval of
the others. In fact, the presence of this part of the list
actually inhibits the retrieval of the non-cued words
compared to the control condition where no subset of the
original list is provided at retrieval.
Basden & Basden (1995) offered an explanation for the
part-list cuing effect that they called retrieval strategy
disruption. They reported some experimental results that
supported the hypothesis that inhibition results when a
whole-list retrieval strategy is abandoned for a less effective
part-list retrieval strategy.
Weldon & Bellinger (1997) reported two experiments that
compared recall in nominal and collaborative groups with a
group size of three. They reported that collaborative groups
in both experiments recalled less than nominal groups and
they showed that group members failed to retrieve items
that they had previously recalled alone as individuals. They
called this collaborative inhibition.
In the same year Basden, Basden, Bryner & Thomas (1997)
generalized their explanation of the part-list cuing effect to
collaborative recall settings in which each participant is
exposed to the recall of the other group members. Because
each participant’s retrieval strategy is unique, the optimal
retrieval orders would be at variance with one another. Each
member in a collaborating group will not be able to stick to
his or her own retrieval strategy in the face of the
(subjectively seen as) “out-of-order” retrievals by other
group members. Just as for participants faced with part-list
cues, the person remembering in a group is likely to adopt a
less efficient retrieval strategy than he or she would use
when tested in isolation. As a consequence of this disrupted
retrieval, recall in collaborative groups should be lower than
that in nominal groups. Taking these considerations into
account, Basden et al. (1997) ran a set of experiments on
cross-cuing in the recall of studied information by groups of
individuals working together compared to nominal control
groups. The reported results showed that cross-cuing leads
to collaborative inhibition. They therefore concluded that
collaborative inhibition like part-list cuing is produced by a
disruption of individual retrieval strategies in groups. This
results in disorganized and less effective retrieval by each
individual in the group.
Finlay, Hitch & Meudell (2000) replicated the inhibition
effect found in previous studies of collaborative recall.
Collaborative pairs consistently recalled fewer items than
nominal pairs and failed to retrieve items they recalled in a
previous individual free recall. Finlay et al. (2000) tested a
number of predictions drawn from the retrieval strategy
disruption explanation concluding that retrieval processes
differ in individual and collaborative recall and that
collaborative inhibition is due to people’s tendency to
disrupt one another’s retrieval strategies in face-to-face
groups.
There are methodological difficulties in the interpretation of
the reported findings regarding cross-cuing in collaborating
groups. Studying collaborative remembering in face-to-face

groups is always influenced by the fact that only one person
can speak at a time and the other group members have to
listen without being able to express their own contributions.
This mutual production blocking has been shown to be the
main cause of productivity losses in brainstorming face-toface-groups and we assume the same is true for face-to-face
groups dealing with other memory tasks.
To test the assumed retrieval strategy disruption effect
(Basden et al., 1997) independent from the influence of
production blocking, we suggest using a different paradigm
in future experiments, namely, a computer based paradigm.
In brainstorming research, it could be shown that the
performance level of nominal groups can be reached by
computer based groups when all ideas can be entered
simultaneously without members being blocked by each
other (Gallupe, Bastianutti & Cooper, 1991).
However, even under conditions without production
blocking, no increase in performance due to cross-cuing
(Ziegler, Diehl & Zijlstra, 2000) could be shown. The lack
of cognitive stimulation through the ideas of other people
may be explained by the fact that the ideas of other group
participants inhibit individual generation of ideas by
retrieval strategy disruption. To be able to generate ideas
creatively, it is necessary that knowledge becomes activated
and accessible. If the retrieval strategies are interrupted, it is
hard to combine different knowledge items into ideas.
We suggest that it is important to design experiments that
control for the processes of production blocking and
retrieval strategy disruption so as to study which kind of
cuing can be efficient to enhance retrieval processes and
therefore idea generation.

Self-cuing versus Cross-cuing
The current experiments used a paradigm which avoided
mutual production blocking and retrieval strategy
disruption. Cues were only available on demand at a time
when the participants did not generate any more new ideas
on their own. We implemented this cue on demand - action
to be sure that the participants were really aligning their
attention to the given cues. We wanted to test our
hypothesis that self-cuing under certain conditions can
enhance the performance of individuals.
Diehl (1991) showed that ideas following each other belong
to the same semantic category if a person is brainstorming
alone, i.e. ideas are produced in semantically related
clusters. The individual clustering corresponds with the
individual semantic memory structure. Clusters are broken
off and people switch to a new semantic category if the
process of thinking becomes too difficult and the pauses
between the generated ideas begin to lengthen. The
assumption that ideas that are located at the end of a cluster
(ideas that have a long pause after their naming) are
especially useful for cognitive stimulation is based on
assumptions drawn from cognitive theories. The long-term
memory is assumed to be organized in categories, localized
sets of strongly connected and interrelated features. These
categories are connected in a rich network with many

1845

associations and different levels (e.g. Anderson & Bower,
1973). When searching a category does not lead to the
production of more new ideas, people switch to a new
category. Before switching categories, usually the pauses
between the generated ideas become longer because the
associations to these ideas are less strong and are therefore
hardly accessible. We hypothesized that if people were cued
with the last idea out of a cluster, this self-cue would
enhance performance by making those ideas and
associations accessible that they would not be aware of on
their first search. Self-cuing should make it possible to
continue the retrieval of items from clusters that were
broken off.

Experiment 1
The possibility to measure the individual temporal structure
of idea production and to select ideas online allowed for a
software-based selection of cues/ideas. The last idea of a
cluster is characterized by the criterion long pause after the
last mentioned idea. Looking at the individual differences of
idea production processes, we developed an algorithm that
uses individual time lengths in between the ideas. A “long
pause” is therefore “long” compared to the other pauses of
the person from whom the ideas are selected. The algorithm
we developed selected 10 ideas/self cues for each person.
To test whether long pause and after the last mentioned idea
are both necessary conditions to detect these cues, we chose
the following design which provided every possible
combination of rules connected to our assumption for the
selection algorithm and also included a control group
without stimulation to have a comparable baseline (Mueller
& Diehl, 2005).

Method
Participants
Participants in the first study were 77 students (29 males, 48
females) of the University of Tuebingen. Students’ age
ranged from 20 to 41 years (M=25.32; SD=4.81). Students
were either paid 8 Euros for their participation or received
credit for their participation.

the pause (before vs. after the last idea) as principles for
selecting ideas out of the individual idea production process.
A control group as a baseline without cuing was also run.
Procedure. First the participants were informed verbally
about the task and the brainstorming rules. The
brainstorming topic was “What can you do to improve your
health in everyday life?”. Participants were then seated in
front of a computer and asked first to generate ideas on their
own and type them into the computer (for 15 minutes). The
sequence and temporal structure of ideas were recorded by
the software. According to the detected pauses between the
mentioned ideas and the rules specified in the different
conditions, 10 ideas/self cues were identified online.
In the second part of the experiment (lasting 20 min), the
selected ideas were given to the participants on the screen
on demand by clicking on a button. To make sure that no
retrieval strategy disruption or self inhibition would occur in
the experiment, participants were instructed to request a
cue/idea only if they could not think of a new idea on their
own.
Dependent variables. The major dependent variables were
quantity of ideas (number of non-redundant ideas) and
quality of ideas produced. To define high quality ideas
different quality measures were used (originality, feasibility
and effectiveness ratings on a 5-point scale). Multiple cutoffs on these dimensions resulted into the upper 33% of
ideas. The number of ideas defined as high quality ideas
within the different conditions were used as a dependent
variable.
Scoring
Quality. The ideas recorded by the computer were assessed
independently by 2 raters blind to condition. All ideas were
rated for originality, feasibility and effectiveness on three 5point scales. One rater classified all ideas, a second rater
classified a subset of ideas (25 % of all idea). Reliability
was assessed based on this subset. Intraclass correlations
were calculated for all measures showing correlations
between .60 and .79, all of them significant (p>.05).

Design

Data analysis
Table 1: Design first study

Position of pause

Results: quantity of ideas.

Length of the pause
Long pause
Short pause

Pause before last
idea

N=14

N=12

Pause after last
idea

N=14

N=12

Table 2: Mean number of ideas
Position of pause

Control condition without cuing (N=25).
Independent variables. A 2*2 factorial design was used,
crossing length of the pause (long vs. short) with position of
1846

Length of pause
Long pause
Short pause

Pause before last
idea

M=28.07;

M=35.00;

SD=16.40

SD=19.54

Pause after last
idea

M=42.14;

M=26.83;

SD=23.02

SD=10.73

Control condition: M=27.00; SD=12.91

A planned contrast between the experimental conditions and
the control condition on the quantity of ideas showed no
significant main effect for cognitive stimulation per se
(t(72)=1,68; p=.098). An ANOVA on the quantity of ideas
showed no significant main effect for length of pause and
position of pause but a significant interaction between
length and position of pause (F(1,51)= 4,84; p=.033). The
criterion length of pause makes no difference if the pause is
before the cue. If pause after the cue is used as a selection
rule however, cuing is successful given a long pause.

The number of participants in the cross-cuing condition was
higher because we needed pairs in this condition. The cues
were again selected in the first part of the brainstorming
session according to the rule long pause after the last
mentioned idea and in the cross-cuing condition person A
received the cues of person B and vice versa.

Method
Participants and task

Results: quality of ideas.

Length of the pause
Long pause
Short pause

Participants in the second study were 169 students (86
males, 83 females) of the University of Tuebingen.
Students` age ranged from 18 to 52 years (M=24.74;
SD=4.75). Students were paid 8 Euros or received credit for
their participation.
Design

Table 3: Mean number of high quality ideas
Position of pause
Pause before last
idea
Pause after last
idea

M= 9.36;

M= 8.50;

SD=6.71

SD=5.02

M=14.07;

M=12.67;

SD=6.22

SD=12.89

Table 4: Design second study

Control condition: M=8.88; SD=4.86
A planned contrast between the experimental conditions and
the control condition on the number of high quality ideas
(upper 33% regarding originality, feasibility and
effectiveness) showed no significant main effect for cuing
t(72)=1,29; p=.202. An ANOVA on the number of high
quality ideas showed no significant main effect for length of
pause. A nearly significant main effect for position of pause
was found F(1,51)=3,83; p=.056). If the pause after the last
mentioned idea is used as a criterion, the quality of the
produced ideas increases. Length of the pause as criterion
appears not to be relevant for the number of high quality
ideas produced.

Discussion
Self-cuing did not stimulate idea generation per se. Selfcuing with the last idea out of a cluster according to the
operationalisation long pause and after the last mentioned
idea improved idea generation regarding the number of
ideas. With respect to the number of high quality ideas, it
seems to be of relevance that the self-cue is selected
according to the pause after the idea.

Experiment 2
Looking at the results of the first study, we assume that selfcuing is an effective way to stimulate people in a
brainstorming task if they are selected from the cluster ends.
Cross-cuing with ideas of other people will not increase
performance because they will not act as successful search
cues in an associative memory system of another person.
Therefore, we compared a cross-cuing setting similar to the
self-cuing setting of the first experiment.
To test the assumption that self-cuing is superior to crosscuing and no cuing, we designed the following experiment.
1847

Stimulation
Self-cuing

N=49

Cross-cuing

N=76

No cuing

N=44

Independent variables. In a 1*3 factorial design self-cuing,
cross-cuing and no cuing (control) conditions were carried
out.
Procedure. The only difference compared to the procedure
of the first experiment was a change in the topic of the
brainstorming task (“What can you do to protect the
environment in your everyday life?”). The self-cuing
condition replicated the long pause after the last ideacondition of the first experiment. In the cross-cuing
condition, the participants received the ideas of another
person working simultaneously but alone and vice versa
according to the same selection rules used in the self-cuing
condition.
Dependent variables. The dependent variables were
quantity of ideas (number of non-redundant ideas) and
quality of ideas produced on the given topic. The quality
dimensions originality, feasibility and effectiveness were
ratings on a 5-point scale and according to multiple cut-offs,
the upper third of the ideas were defined as high quality
ideas.
Scoring
Quality. The ideas were assessed on three 5-point scales
independently by 2 raters blind to condition on the
dimensions originality, feasibility and effectiveness.
Intraclass correlations were calculated for all dimensions,

showing correlations between .60 and .91 which were all
significant (p<.05).

Data analysis

The number of high quality ideas produced, however, did
not differ significantly between the different cuing
conditions. Self-cues and cross-cues did not make a
qualitative difference regarding the produced ideas.

General Discussion

Results: quantity of ideas.

Self-cuing according to the selection rules used for detecting
the last idea of a cluster seems to be a good way to stimulate
people in a brainstorming task in the used computer
paradigm. This is in line with retrieval strategy
interpretations: self-cuing can optimize knowledge retrieval
strategies and thus enhance performance in a task that
requires knowledge activation and retrieval to recombine
knowledge items in a creative way to produce ideas. We
found that cross-cues are not better than thinking without
any cue given. However their stimulating potential is
significantly poorer when compared to the self-cuing
condition with ideas from the cluster ends. The used
paradigm allows us to conclude that even under conditions
free of blocking without retrieval strategy disruption, and
with ensured attention focused on the given cross-cues from
another person, these were not stimulating in the sense that
they cued more ideas than a person can retrieve without any
cuing. However, we did find a way to enhance individual
performance in an idea generation task with online selected
self-cues from the individual’s cluster ends.
For future research, we suggest using a non confounded
research paradigm to ensure that the retrieval strategy
disruption explanation for the lower performance of
collaborative remembering in groups is correct. The
described positive effects of self-cues from the cluster ends
should be studied in future research to find out more about
the underlying processes of knowledge retrieval strategy
optimization.

Table 5: Mean number of ideas
Stimulation
Self-cuing

M=26.43; SD=13.40

Cross-cuing

M=21.77; SD=11.11

No cuing

M=19.20; SD=13.43

Planned contrasts were calculated: First, the conditions
cross-cuing and no cuing were contrasted. They showed no
significant difference (t(166)=1,09; p=.276).This allowed
for the next planned contrast in which self-cuing was
contrasted with cross-cuing and no cuing taken together.
This showed a highly significant difference (t(166)=2,79;
p=.006). Participants in the self-cuing condition
outperformed both other conditions.
Results: quality of ideas.
Table 6: Mean number of high quality ideas
Stimulation
Self-cuing

M=10.75; SD=6.16

Cross-cuing

M=10.09; SD=6.55

No cuing

M=9.72; SD=7.52

Acknowledgments

Planned contrasts on the mean number of high quality ideas
were calculated: First cross-cuing and no cuing were tested
against each other. They showed no significant difference
(t(166)=0,29; p=.772).
This allowed for the next planned contrast in which selfcuing was tested against cross-cuing and no cuing. No
significant difference was found (t(166)=0,74; p=.462). The
number of high quality ideas in the compared conditions did
not differ significantly.

Special thanks to the German Research Foundation
for the fellowship of the first author within the Virtual
Graduate Program “Knowledge acquisition and knowledge
exchange with new media”.

References

Discussion

Anderson, J.R. & Bower, G.H. (1973). Human associative
memory. Washington, D.C.: Winston.
Basden, D.R. & Basden, B.H. (1995). Part-list cuing
inhibition as retrieval strategy disruption. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 21, 1656-1669.
Basden, B.H. Basden, D.R., Bryner, S. & Thomas R.L.
(1997). A Comparison of group and individual
remembering: Does collaboration disrupt retrieval
strategies? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23 (5), 1176-1189.

Participants in the cross-cuing condition did not produce
significantly more ideas than those in the condition without
cuing. Participants in the self-cuing condition produced
many more ideas than those in the cross-cuing condition and
in the control group.
This shows again that self-cues from the cluster ends can
increase people’s performance much better in cuing new
ideas than the ideas from another person can.
1848

Meudell, P.R., Hitch, G.J. & Boyle, M.M. (1995).
Collaboration in recall: Do pairs of people cross cue
each other to produce new memories? Quaterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48A, 141-152.
Mueller, S.Ch. & Diehl, M. (2005). Cognitive stimulation
in computer-supported idea generation. Poster
presented at the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Stresa, Italy.
Mullen, B., Johnson, C. & Salas, E. (1991). Productivity
loss in brainstorming groups: A meta-analytic
integration. Basic and Applied Social Psychology,
12(1), 3-23.
Osborn, A.F. (1957). Applied imagination. New York.
Scribner.
Slamecka, N. J. (1968). An examination of trace storage
in free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76,
504-513.
Tayler, D.W., Berry, P.C., & Block, C.H. (1958). Does
group participation when brainstorming facilitate or
inhibit creative thinking? Administrative Science
Quaterly, 3, 23-47.
Weldon, M.S. & Bellinger, K.D. (1997). Collective
memory: Collaborative and individual processes in
remembering. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 1160-1175.
Ziegler, R., Diehl, M. & Zijlstra, G. (2000). Idea
Production in nominal and virtual groups: Does
computer-mediated communication improve group
brainstorming? Group processes and intergroup
relations, 3(2), 141-158.

Diehl, M. (1991). Kollektive Kreativität. Zur Quantität
und Qualität der Ideenproduktion in Kleingruppen.
[Collective creativity: On quantity and quality of idea
generation in small groups.] Habilitationsschrift
University of Tuebingen.
Diehl, M. & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in
brainstorming groups: Toward the solution of a riddle.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3),
497-509.
Diehl, M. & Stroebe, W. (1991). Productivity loss in ideagenerating groups: Tracking down the blocking effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61 (3),
392-403.
Diehl, M. & Stroebe, W. (1995). Brainstorming. In
Manstead, A.S.R & Hewstone, M. (Eds.). The
Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social Psychology.
Cambridge (USA): Blackwell.
Finlay, F., Hitch, G.J. & Meudell, P.R. (2000). Mutual
inhibition in collaborative recall: Evidence for a
retrieval-based account. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26
(6), 1556-1567.
Gallupe, R.B., Bastianutti, L.M. & Cooper, W.H. (1991).
Unblocking brainstorms. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 76, 137-142.
Lamm, H. & Trommsdorff, G. (1973). Group versus
individual performance on tasks requiring ideational
proficiency (brainstorming): A review. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 3(4), 361-388.
Meudell, P.R., Hitch, G.J. & Kirby, P. (1992). Are two
heads better than one? Experimental investigations of
the social facilitation of memory. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 6, 525-543.

1849

