UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Decomposing the Mean: Using Distributional Analyses to Provide a Detailed Description of
Addition and Multiplication Latencies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7769z6f1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
LeFevre, Jo-Anne
Penner-Wilger, Marcie

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Decomposing the Mean: Using Distributional Analyses to Provide a Detailed
Description of Addition and Multiplication Latencies
Marcie Penner-Wilger (mpwilger@connect.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 CANADA

Jo-Anne LeFevre (jo-anne_lefevre@carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 CANADA

Abstract
In the current paper, distributional analyses were used to
provide a detailed description of addition and multiplication
latencies. University students (n = 32) solved single-digit
problems and reported their solution methods. Mean response
times were decomposed into mu, reflecting the position of the
distribution, and tau, reflecting the skew of the distribution
(mean RT = mu + tau) for retrievers, occasional procedure
users, and frequent procedure users. By decomposing the mean
we were able to determine if observed effects of problem size
and group reflected an overall slowing of responses (reflected
in mu) or a slowing on some trials only (reflected in tau).
Findings provide evidence for tau as an index of procedure use
and highlight differences across operations in the locus of the
problem-size effect, a robust finding that larger problems (e.g.,
8 x 7, 9 + 6) take longer to solve than smaller problems (e.g., 4
x 3, 2 + 4).

Introduction
North American adults use a variety of procedures to solve
single-digit arithmetic problems, supplementing the direct
retrieval of facts from memory. Studying adults’ solution
procedures is vital to an understanding of how we represent
and process mathematical information. Research on adults’
selection of procedures has provided insights into the most
fundamental phenomena in mathematical cognition. Adults
report a number of non-retrieval procedures for solving
simple arithmetic problems including: transformation (e.g., 8
+ 3 = 8 + 2 + 1; 3 x 4 = 3 x 3 + 3) and counting (e.g., 8 + 3 =
8, 9, 10, 11). The percentage of procedure use reported varies
by operation and problem size. Participants report greater
reliance on non-retrieval procedures for addition than for
multiplication, and for large than for small problems
(Campbell & Xue, 2001; Hecht, 1999).
The most robust effect in mathematical cognition is the
problem-size effect, the finding that larger problems (e.g., 8 x
7, 9 + 6) take longer to solve and are more prone to errors
than smaller problems (e.g., 4 x 3, 2 + 4). The problem-size
effect is greater in multiplication than addition and greater for
North American than Chinese educated adults (Campbell &
Xue, 2001). LeFevre, Sadesky, and Bisanz (1996) found that
the problem-size effect in addition was all but eliminated
when they separately analyzed trials on which participants
reported using direct retrieval of facts from memory.
1944

Similarly, LeFevre, Bisanz, et al. (1996) found that for
multiplication, the problem-size effect was substantially
reduced when only retrieval trials were considered. These
findings suggest that the problem-size effect may be due in
large part to the use of procedures other than direct retrieval
on larger (versus smaller) problems. Moreover, the loci of the
problem-size effect may be different across individuals who
use different solution methods. Campbell & Xue (2001)
outlined three potential sources of the problem-size effect:
reduced efficiency of retrieval, reduced efficiency of nonretrieval solution procedures, and greater use of procedures
for large problems.
Current models of adult arithmetic performance (Campbell,
1995; Verguts & Fias, 2005) are limited to retrieval processes
and do not incorporate non-retrieval solution procedures.
Thus, existing models are limited to the reduced retrieval
efficiency account of the problem-size effect. Campbell’s
network interference model (1995) is an implemented model
of single-digit addition and multiplication performance. In the
network interference model, the problem-size effect in both
multiplication and addition arises due to magnitude-related
retrieval interference, such that the magnitudes of larger
problem answers are less distinguishable. The model
produces a problem-size effect in addition and multiplication,
with a greater effect in multiplication.
Verguts and Fias’ interacting neighbors model (2005) is an
implemented neural network model of single-digit
multiplication. In the interacting neighbors model, the
problem-size effect arises due to the structure of the network.
The network is structured similar to a multiplication table.
Problem nodes receive excitation and inhibition from
neighboring nodes based on the agreement or disagreement of
answers in the ones and tens place. Large problems are
subject to greater inhibition and reduced excitation because
neighboring nodes have conflicting digits in the ones and tens
place. The model produces a problem-size effect in
multiplication.
Penner-Wilger and colleagues (Campbell & Penner-Wilger,
2006; LeFevre, DeStefano, Penner-Wilger, & Daley, 2006;
Penner-Wilger, Leth-Steensen, & LeFevre, 2002) used
distributional analyses of response latencies in arithmetic
tasks to provide a detailed description of arithmetic
performance. By applying the ex-Gaussian distributional

model to latency distributions, mean response times can be
decomposed into components mu and tau (Heathcote, 1996).
Mu reflects the position or leading edge of the distribution;
increases in mu reflect an overall slowing or shift of the
distribution. Tau reflects the positive skew of the distribution;
increases in tau reflect a slowing on some trials or skewing of
the distribution. Mean response time is simply the sum of mu
and tau. Distributional analyses provide more detailed
descriptions than traditional measures (i.e., mean or median)
and, like response times, distributional shapes can be used to
make inferences about underlying processes. Thus,
distributional analysis allows for the testing of hypotheses
that are indistinguishable when comparing mean response
times.
Penner-Wilger, Leth-Steensen, and LeFevre (2002) used
distributional analyses to explore differences in the locus of
the problem-size effect across cultures for multiplication.
Participants had been educated in either Canada or China.
Similar groups of individuals from Canada and China had
previously been shown to solve problems using different
methods on the basis of self-reports (Campbell & Xue, 2001).
Chinese groups reported almost exclusive use of direct
retrieval of answers from memory. In contrast, North
American groups reported using a variety of solution
procedures.
Penner-Wilger et al. (2002) predicted that mu would reflect
differences in retrieval efficiency for small and large
problems. They assumed that retrieval is slower as the
strength of association between the problem and answer is
reduced or as interference from competing answers is
increased (Campbell, 1995). Furthermore, Penner-Wilger et
al. predicted that tau would reflect differences in the
proportion or efficiency of non-retrieval procedures for small
and large problems. Non-retrieval procedures, such as
repeated addition or transformation are generally slower than
retrieval, especially for large problems (LeFevre et al., 1996;
LeFevre, Bisanz et al., 1996). In accord with these
predictions, ex-Gaussian analyses showed that the problemsize effect for participants educated in China was reflected
only in mu. For participants educated in Canada the problemsize effect was reflected in both mu and tau. The different
pattern of results for the two groups supported the assumption
that the underlying mental processes of the two groups
differed. Moreover, tau seemed to be indicative of the extent
to which non-retrieval solution procedures were used.
Although preliminary, Penner-Wilger et al.’s findings
suggested that tau showed promise as an unbiased indicator
of procedure use.
The primary goal of the current study was to explore
whether differences across operations in the loci of the
problem-size effect were evident at the detailed level afforded
by distributional analyses. To this end, we (a) replicated the
multiplication condition of Penner-Wilger et al. (2002) with
North American participants, (b) extended the analysis to
single-digit addition, and (c) collected self-reports of solution
methods to further examine the relation between reported
procedure use and tau. As in LeFevre et al. (2003),

participants were grouped into three categories (retrievers,
occasional procedure users, and frequent procedure users)
based on their reported percentage of retrieval use for each
operation. A secondary goal of the current study was to
further evaluate the use of tau as an objective indicator of
procedure use.

Method
Participants
Thirty-two graduate or upper-level undergraduate students
(19 male, 13 female, median age 23 years) participated in this
experiment and received a $20 honorarium. All participants
had completed their primary and secondary education in
North America.

Materials
Participants completed 36 trials within each of eight blocks
per session for a total of 288 problems per session and 576
problems in total over two sessions. Stimuli consisted of all
pairings of operands 2 through 9 and their reverse. Each
operand pair appeared once in each block with its reverse
appearing in the following block. Tie problems (e.g., 3 + 3)
appeared once in each block. Within each block, problems for
each trial were presented in random order. As commonly
operationalized in the mathematical cognition literature, small
problems were defined as those operand pairings with
products less than or equal to 25, and large problems were
defined as those with products greater than 25.

Procedure

1945

Testing of multiplication and addition occurred at separate
sessions one week apart, with the order of operation
counterbalanced. Participants were seated comfortably in a
quiet room in front of a computer monitor. Instructions were
displayed on the monitor and read by the experimenter. Both
accuracy and speed in the arithmetic task were stressed.
Participants were also given instructions to indicate, after
solving each problem, their solution procedure from a list of:
transform, count, remember, and other. They were given
examples of each solution method before the experiment
began. This technique was previously used by Campbell &
Timm (2000), who found that participants’ self-reported use
of solution methods was comparable to previous results from
open-ended self-reports (e.g., “Tell me how you solved this
problem”) both in terms of amount and pattern of reported
procedure use.
For each experimental trial, an asterisk was presented in the
centre of the screen, and flashed twice, with the problem
appearing on what would have been the third flash, one
second from the start of the trial (e.g., 2 x 2 = ). The operation
sign appeared in the same position as the asterisk. The
problem remained on the screen until the participant made a
verbal response, or until a 10 s deadline was reached. The
experimenter recorded the response. Immediately following,
the participant was prompted to indicate how they solved the
problem from a list of possible procedures: Transform, Count,
Remember, Other. The experimenter recorded the response

and the next trial began. The experimental trials lasted
approximately 40 minutes, and participants were given a
break halfway through.

Results
Participants were grouped using self-reports of solution
methods. Separate groups were created for addition and
multiplication based on percentile ranks of percentage
reported use of retrieval. Retrievers were defined as
individuals who reported a percentage of retrieval that was
greater than or equal to the 75th percentile of the group of
participants (i.e., 95% retrieval for addition, 9 participants;
99% for multiplication, 15 participants).
Occasional
procedure users were defined as individuals who reported
retrieval less than the 75th percentile but greater than the 25th
percentile (54-94% retrieval for addition, 15 participants; 7798% for multiplication, 9 participants). Frequent procedure
users were defined as individuals who reported retrieval less
than the 25th percentile (53% retrieval for addition, 8
participants; 78% for multiplication, 8 participants).
All reported findings are significant at p < .05 unless
otherwise noted. Dependent measures included percent error,
mean response time, and the ex-Gaussian parameters mu and
tau, obtained by fitting the ex-Gaussian distribution to the
data of individual participants, separately for small and large
problems. For each dependent measure, a 2 (problem size:
large, small) x 3 (group: retrievers, occasional, frequent)
repeated measures ANOVA was performed separately for
addition and multiplication with group as a betweenparticipants factor. For all analyses, post-hoc pairwise
comparisons were used to compare across groups. Of the
18432 total trials, 191 (1.0 %) were invalid due to either a
premature firing of the voice-activated relay or a failure of the
participant to respond within the 10 s time limit, and 531 (2.9
%) of the responses were incorrect, leaving 17710 (96.1 %)
correct trials available for latency analyses. Figure 1 shows
the problem size x group interactions for all latency variables;
95% confidence intervals were calculated based on the
approach recommended by Loftus & Masson (1994).

ms, respectively). This finding is expected given that
procedures take longer to implement than retrieval. As
hypothesized, there was also an interaction between problem
size and group, F (2,29) = 12.4, MSE = 12647. As shown in
Figure 1 (top left panel), retrievers did not show a significant
problem-size effect. In contrast, procedure users (both
frequent and occasional) solved large problems more slowly
than small problems, reflecting their greater reliance on lessefficient procedures for large problems, consistent with the
findings of LeFevre et al. (1996).

Addition
Percent error Participants made more errors on large
problems than on small problems (3.3 vs. 1.1 %), F (1,29) =
12.7, MSE = 5.3. Percent error also varied by group, F (2,29)
= 4.4, MSE = 8.0, such that frequent procedure users made
significantly more errors (3.8 %) than occasional procedure
users and retrievers (1.3 and 1.5 %, respectively). This
finding is not surprising given the number of steps
implemented in procedures on which to make an error. The
interaction between problem size and group approached
significance, F (2,29) = 3.2, MSE = 5.3, p =.05.
Mean response time Participants solved large problems
more slowly than small problems (1181 vs. 935 ms), F (1,29)
= 71.0, MSE = 12647. Response times also varied by group, F
(2,29) = 11.9, MSE = 127278, such that frequent procedure
users (1386 ms) solved problems significantly more slowly
than occasional procedure users and retrievers (987 and 800

1946

Mu In contrast to mean response time, there was no
significant problem-size effect in mu. Mu varied by group, F
(2,29) = 4.2, MSE = 65718, such that mu was significantly
larger for frequent procedure users (895 ms) than occasional
procedure users and retrievers (707 and 651 ms respectively),
thus, frequent procedure users showed an overall slowing in
addition response times. Also in contrast to mean response
time, there was no significant interaction between problem
size and group. As shown in Figure 1 (center left panel), the
problem-size effect evident in mean response times was not
significant for any of the groups in mu.
Tau As hypothesized, tau was greater for large problems than
small problems, (406 vs. 206 ms), corresponding to the
finding that participants use a greater proportion of nonretrieval procedures for large than small problems, F (1,29) =
40.1, MSE = 14921. Also as hypothesized, tau varied by
group, F (2,29) = 17.4, MSE = 28739, such that tau was
significantly greater for frequent procedure users (490 ms)
than occasional procedure users (279 ms) and occasional
users than retrievers (149 ms). Thus, tau reflected nonretrieval procedure use, supporting the position that tau values
can be used to distinguish the three groups. As hypothesized,
there was also an interaction between problem size and group,
F (2,29) = 7.2, MSE = 14921. As shown in Figure 1 (bottom
left panel), retrievers did not show a problem-size effect in
tau. In contrast, procedure users (both frequent and
occasional) showed significant problem-size effects,
reflecting a greater reliance on non-retrieval procedures,
decreased efficiency of such procedures, or both, for large
problems.
In summary, for addition we found a problem-size effect,
effect of group, and problem size x group interaction in mean
response times. When mean response time was decomposed
into mu and tau, the problem-size effect was isolated to tau,
reflecting a slowing on some trials rather than overall slower
latencies for large problems. This finding is consistent with
the view that North American adults show an increased
reliance on procedures other than retrieval for large problems
as compared to small problems. The effect of group was
reflected both in mu, suggesting an overall slowing for
frequent procedure users, and in tau, suggesting an increased
slowing on some trials as procedure use increases. The
finding that retrievers do not show a problem-size effect
provides additional support for these interpretations of
performance. Tau values serve to distinguish all three groups

in addition, thus, tau proves to be a strong indicator of nonretrieval procedure use for addition. The problem size x group
interaction in mean response time arises in tau, such that
procedure users show a problem-size effect in tau, whereas
retrievers do not.

interference or decreased associative strength between large
problems and answers, F (1,29) = 34.5, MSE = 1896. Mu
also varied with group, F (2,29) = 3.9, MSE = 18229, such
that it was larger for occasional procedure users than
retrievers (763 versus 651 ms respectively). Although it may
seem unexpected that mu is larger for occasional procedure
users, the performance of frequent and occasional procedure
users is indistinguishable in mean response times yet reflects
a trade-off between mu and tau such that mu is significantly
higher for occasional procedure users but tau is significantly
higher for frequent procedure users. The interaction between
group and problem size approached significance, F (2,29) =
3.2, MSE = 1896.4, p = .05. As shown in Figure 1 (center
right panel), retrievers did not show a problem-size effect. In
contrast, procedure users (both frequent and occasional)
showed significant problem-size effects suggesting that
retrieval efficiency was reduced for large problems.

Figure 1: Mean response time and component ex-Gaussian
parameters mu and tau (in ms), for addition and
multiplication as a function of problem size for frequent
procedure users, occasional procedure users, and retrievers.

Tau As hypothesized, tau was greater for large problems than
small problems (531 vs. 260 ms), corresponding to the
finding that participants use a greater proportion of nonretrieval procedures for large than small problems, F (1,29) =
71.6, MSE = 15249.6. Also as hypothesized, tau varied with
group, F (2,29) = 7.1, MSE = 61137.2, such that it was
significantly smaller for retrievers (250 ms) than occasional
procedure users and frequent procedure users (402 and 534
ms respectively). Thus, tau differentiated between retrievers
and procedure users (both frequent and occasional). In
multiplication, however, tau does not distinguish the groups
as clearly as for addition, where all three groups could be
differentiated based on tau values. The proportion of nonretrieval procedures reported for multiplication is notably less
than for addition, making distinctions among groups more
challenging. As hypothesized, there was an interaction
between problem size and group, F (2,29) = 4.2, MSE =
15249. As shown in Figure 1 (bottom right panel), though all
groups show a problem-size effect, the effect is reduced for
retrievers.
In summary, for multiplication we again found a problemsize effect, effect of group, and problem size x group
interaction in mean response times. When mean response
time was decomposed into mu and tau, we found that the
problem-size effect arises both in mu and in tau, thus
reflecting an overall slowing as well as a slowing on some
trials for large problems. This finding replicates PennerWilger et al. (2002) and is consistent with reduced retrieval
efficiency, increased reliance on non-retrieval procedures,
and reduced efficiency of such procedures for large problems.
The effect of group arises both in mu, reflecting an overall
slowing for occasional procedure users (compared to
retrievers), and in tau, reflecting an increased slowing on
some trials for procedure users. Tau values serve to
distinguish retrievers from procedure users in multiplication.
Thus, tau still proves to be an indicator of non-retrieval
procedure use for multiplication, despite the lower levels of
procedure use within the groups. The problem size x group

Multiplication
Percent error Participants made more errors on large
problems than on small problems (5.5 vs. 1.3 %), F (1,29) =
9.2, MSE = 27.5. There was no significant main effect of
group and no significant interaction between problem size
and group.
Mean response time Participants solved large problems
more slowly than small problems (1278 vs. 936 ms), F (1,29)
= 101.2, MSE = 17171. Response times also varied by group,
F (2,29) = 6.5, MSE = 112740, such that frequent procedure
users (1234 ms) solved problems significantly more slowly
than retrievers (904 ms), which is expected given that
procedures take longer to implement than retrieval. As
hypothesized, there was also an interaction between problem
size and group, F (2,29) = 5.9, MSE = 17170.5. As shown in
Figure 1 (top right panel), all groups showed a problem-size
effect but the effect is smaller for retrievers than for other
participants, consistent with the findings of LeFevre, Bisanz,
et al. (1996).
Mu Consistent with the findings of Penner-Wilger et al.
(2002), mu was greater for large than for small problems (741
vs. 675 ms), suggesting an overall slowing due to greater
1947

interaction in mean response time arises in tau, such that the
problem-size effect in tau increases with procedure use.

Discussion
Across operations, the same pattern of effects is evident in
mean response times: a problem-size effect, effect of group,
and problem size x group interaction. These same patterns of
results, however, arise from different distributional effects.
The current experiment revealed a notable difference across
operations; the problem-size effect in multiplication reflects
both shifting and skewing of the response time distribution,
whereas, the problem-size effect in addition reflects only
skewing of the distribution. This difference is important, as
the problem-size effect is a ‘landmark finding’ in
mathematical cognition (Zbrodoff & Logan, 2005). PennerWilger et al. (2002) concluded that the problem-size effect in
multiplication (for participants using a mix of solution
methods) arises both from reduced retrieval efficiency (a mu
or shift effect) and reduced procedural efficiency or increased
reliance on procedures (tau or skew effect). The current
findings support that conclusion.
For addition, however, retrievers do not show a problemsize effect in mu or tau, suggesting retrieval efficiency is not
reduced for large addition problems. This crucial difference is
an important criterion for models of arithmetic performance.
The problem-size effect for addition is reflected only in tau
suggesting that the problem-size effect arises from reduced
procedural efficiency or increased reliance on procedures.
Thus, our results suggest that the loci of the problem-size
effect are different across operations.
All models of arithmetic performance must account for the
problem-size effect. As discussed previously, current models
of adult arithmetic performance do not incorporate nonretrieval solution procedures, thus, converging evidence
suggests they cannot fully account for North American
performance. We can, however, evaluate the current models
based on the present findings. For addition, we found that the
problem-size effect was reflected in tau, supporting the view
that for addition the problem-size effect arises due to reduced
efficiency of procedures and/or increased use of procedures.
Additional support for this view comes from participants’ self
reports; procedure use increased in our sample from 21.4 %
for small problems to 36.3% for large problems. Moreover,
retrievers did not show a problem-size effect in addition.
These findings suggest that the addition portion of
Campbell’s (1995) model may be inaccurate. If the problemsize effect in addition arises from procedure use, then there
should not be an effect in a retrieval-only model. Campbell,
however, does find a problem-size effect for addition. These
findings also suggest that the Verguts and Fias (2005) model
could not be extended to addition, as the authors themselves
conclude.
For multiplication, we found that the problem-size effect
was reflected in both mu and tau, supporting the view that for
multiplication the problem-size effect arises due to reduced
retrieval efficiency as well as reduced efficiency of
procedures and/or increased use of procedures. Additional
support for this view comes from participants self reports;
procedure use increased in our sample from 5.3 % of small
problems to 14.0% for large problems. Moreover, retrievers

did show a problem-size effect in multiplication. Thus,
current retrieval models can account for a portion of the
problem-size effect in multiplication. Hecht (1999, 2006)
advocates for the modification of Shrager and Seigler’s
(1998) model of children’s arithmetic performance to a model
of adult performance. The Strategy Choice and Discovery
Simulation (SCADS) model incorporates both retrieval and
non-retrieval solution procedures and, as such, holds promise
for fully accounting for the problem-size effect.

Conclusion
In the current paper, distributional analyses were used to
provide a detailed description of single-digit addition and
multiplication latencies. The results provide detailed criteria
that must be met by future models of arithmetic performance.
Two findings are of particular interest. First, the distributional
analyses revealed differences across operations in the locus of
the problem-size effect. These differences, not evident in
mean response times, may point to differences in the
representation of addition and multiplication knowledge not
yet reflected in models of arithmetic performance. Second, as
posited by Penner-Wilger et al. (2002) tau served as an index
of procedure use in addition and multiplication. Future work
will continue to explore the use of tau as an objective
indicator of procedure use, with the goal of providing
researchers with another tool to examine the substantial
individual differences in basic arithmetic. Thus, the current
experiment highlights the usefulness of distributional
analyses both in mathematical cognition and more generally
in cognitive research.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada through postgraduate scholarships to Marcie Penner-Wilger and through
Discovery grants to Jo-Anne LeFevre.

References
Campbell, J. I. D. (1995). Mechanisms of simple addition and
multiplication: A modified network-interference theory and
simulation. Mathematical Cognition, 1, 121-164.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Penner-Wilger, M. (2006). Calculation
latency: The mu of memory and the tau of transformation.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 217-226.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Timm, J. C. (2000). Adults’ procedure
choices for simple addition: Effects of retrieval
interference. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7, 692699.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Xue, Q. (2001). Cognitive arithmetic
across cultures. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 299-315.
Heathcote, A. (1996). RTSYS: A DOS application for the
analysis of reaction time data. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 427-445.
Hecht, S. A. (2006). Group differences in simple arithmetic:
Good retrievers, not-so-good retrievers, and perfectionists.
Memory and Cognition, 34, 207 - 216.

1948

Hecht, S. A. (1999). Individual solution processes while
solving addition and multiplication math facts in adults.
Memory and Cognition, 27, 1097-1107.
LeFevre, J., Bisanz, J., Daley, K. E., Buffone, L., Greenham,
S. L., & Sadesky, G. S. (1996). Multiple routes to solution
of single-digit multiplication problems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 125, 284-306.
LeFevre, J., DeStefano, D., Penner-Wilger, M., & Daley, K.
E. (2006). Selection of procedures in mental subtraction.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, in press.
LeFevre, J., Sadesky, G. S., & Bisanz, J. (1996). Selection of
procedures in mental addition: Reassessing the problem
size effect in adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 216-230.
LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B. L., Hiscock, K., Daley, K. E., &
Morris, J. (2003). Young adults’ strategic choices in
simple arithmetic: Implications for the development of
mathematical representations. In A. J. Baroody & A.

Dowker (Eds.), The development of arithmetic concepts
and skills: Recent research and theory. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Loftus, G. R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using confidence
intervals in within-subjects designs. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 1, 476-490.
Penner-Wilger, M., Leth-Steensen, C., & LeFevre, J. (2002).
Decomposing the problem-size effect: A comparison of
response time distributions across cultures. Memory &
Cognition, 30, 1160–1167.
Verguts, T., & Fias, W. (2005). Interacting neighbors: A
connectionist model of retrieval in single-digit
multiplication. Memory and Cognition, 33, 1 - 16.
Zbrodoff, N. J., & Logan, G. D. (2005). What everyone finds:
The problem-size effect. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.),
Handbook of mathematical cognition. New York:
Psychology Press.

1949

