UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Children Need Concrete Instantiations to Learn an Abstract Concept?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5dr0z639

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Heckler, Andrew F.
Kaminski, Jennifer A.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Children Need Concrete Instantiations to Learn an Abstract Concept?
Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
210A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Andrew F. Heckler (heckler.6@osu.edu)
Department of Physics, Ohio State University
191 W. Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

analogous roles. However, when elements play different roles
across domains, transfer typically goes awry (Ross, 1987,
1989).
Another factor that has been shown to affect transfer is the
degree of concreteness of the learning domain (Goldstone &
Sakamoto, 2003; Sloutsky, Kaminski, Heckler, 2005).
Concrete instantiations communicate more information than
their abstract counterparts. For example, consider the increase
in information from an abstract stick figure to a detailed
drawing, to a photograph. Sometimes this additional
information may help communicate the to-be-learned concept
and thus concreteness is “Relevant Concreteness”. Other
times it may be extraneous, creating “Irrelevant
Concreteness”.
A recent study examined the effects on learning and
transfer of relevant and irrelevant concreteness (Kaminski,
Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2005). College undergraduate students
learned a simple mathematical concept that was instantiated
through different artificial domains. The goal of the study
was to investigate whether instantiating an abstract concept
in a concrete manner would have benefits or costs for
learning and transfer. The type of instantiation learned was a
between-subjects factor. Participants learned instantiations
that were generic, communicated relevant concreteness,
communicated irrelevant concreteness, or communicated
both relevant and irrelevant concreteness. For relevant
concreteness, the storyline and symbols were designed to
help communicate the relevant mathematical structure.
Colorful, patterned symbols were used to add extraneous,
perceptually engaging irrelevant concreteness. Relevant
concreteness was shown to have an advantage for quick
learning over irrelevantly concrete or generic instantiations.
However with slightly lengthier training, the advantage of
relevant concreteness over generic disappeared. Most
importantly, both relevant and irrelevant concreteness
hindered transfer, while generic instantiations promoted
transfer (for the hindering effects of concreteness on transfer
see also Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003 & Sloutsky, Kaminski,
Heckler, 2005).
The results of this study are striking because they
contradict the intuition that facilitating learning will translate

Abstract
The effects of relevant concreteness on learning and transfer
were investigated. Sixth grade students learned artificial
instantiations of a simple mathematical concept. Some students
were presented with instantiations that communicated
concreteness relevant to the to-be-learned concept, while others
learned generic instantiations involving abstract symbols.
Results suggest that relevant concreteness may have some
advantage over generic for learning. However, relevant
concreteness hinders transfer of conceptual knowledge to novel
isomorphic situations, while generic instantiations promote
transfer.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology;
Learning; Transfer; Analogical reasoning.

Education;

Introduction
Concrete instantiations are popular tools for teaching
abstract concepts in elementary and middle school (see
Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996; Ball, 1992, for reviews).
For example, children learn mathematical concepts such as
place value with base ten blocks and fractions with
representations of portions of pizza. However there is little
empirical evidence of the effectiveness of such material for
learning abstract concepts or for any advantage over generic,
symbolic representations. Supporting evidence is often
anecdotal or limited to demonstrations of knowledge in the
learning domain. The goal of learning an abstract concept is
not simply knowledge of one instantiation; it is the ability to
transfer, or apply conceptual knowledge to a novel
isomorphic situation.
Successful learning does not necessarily result in successful
transfer (e.g. Gick & Holyoak, 1980, 1983). One factor that
influences transfer of conceptual knowledge or problem
solving strategies is the degree of similarity between the
learned domain and the target domain. Superficial similarity
between the domains such as storyline can facilitate the
retrieval of an analogous, previously learned domain
(Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993). Also, elements that
are similar across domains can promote transfer if they play
411

well documented that children have difficulty using concrete
objects as symbols for other entities (DeLoache, 2000). While
older children overcome this obstacle, increasing
concreteness of entities can increase the difficulty of symbol
use; and decreasing the concreteness can facilitate symbol use
for younger children. For children to use an object as a
symbol for something else, they must achieve
representational insight in which they recognize that an
object can have a dual representation, both as a concrete
object itself and as an abstract referent to something else
(see DeLoache, 2000; Uttal, Liu, & DeLoache, 1999). Dual
representation is not achieved in a stage-like, all or nothing,
manner. Instead, it depends on the particular stimuli and
situation.
Uttal, Liu, and DeLoache (1999) argue that the often
ineffective use of manipulatives for teaching mathematical
concepts can be attributed, at least in part, to children’s
difficulty achieving dual representation. Children often fail
to recognize the manipulatives as an instantiation of the tobe-learned concept (see also Ball, 1992).
Therefore, there are sufficient reasons to believe that
concreteness may hinder children’s ability to transfer
conceptual knowledge. The purpose of the present research
was to investigate the effects of relevant concreteness on
children’s ability to learn and transfer conceptual knowledge.
In particular, children learned either a generic instantiation or
a relevantly concrete instantiation of the same mathematical
concept used in our earlier studies. Then they were presented
with a novel isomorphic transfer domain and asked to answer
questions about it.

into facilitating transfer. However, the previous study
involved only adult participants. Therefore, an important
question remains unanswered. Is it possible that concreteness
is helpful, but only for younger participants who cannot
acquire an abstract concept otherwise? In particular, children
may need a concrete instantiation to begin to grasp an abstract
concept. This argument finds support in constructivist
theories of development (e.g. Inhelder & Piaget, 1958) that
posit that development proceeds from the concrete to the
abstract and therefore learning should do the same. According
to such theories, children under the age of twelve years are in
the concrete operational stage of development in which
thinking and problem solving are bound to the concrete. In
addition, concrete instantiations may be more appealing to
children than traditional generic symbols; and therefore
children may be more engaged in learning (see Ball, 1992;
Moyer, 2001).
On the other hand, there are several reasons to believe that
concreteness will be at least as detrimental for children’s
transfer as it is for that of adults. First, successful transfer
between a known base domain and a novel isomorphic target
domain requires the recognition of common relational
structure between domains; and there are several factors that
affect this recognition. Superficial features of a representation
may compete with relational structure for attention
(Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003). Therefore, the potential to be
distracted from relational structure is greater for concrete
instantiation than for generic instantiations. In addition,
relational structure common to two situations is less likely to
be noticed when the situations are represented in a more
concrete, perceptually rich manner than in a more generic
form (Gentner & Medina, 1998; Markman & Gentner, 1993).
And finally, irrelevant information that may be
communicated in a concrete instantiation can be
misinterpreted as part of the relevant structure (Bassok &
Olseth, 1995; Bassok, Wu, & Olseth, 1995).
Children may be more susceptible to the distractions of
concreteness because they may be less able to control their
attentional focus than adults (see Dempster & Corkill, 1999;
Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004). Children tend to notice object
or attribute similarities between domains rather than relational
similarities. When asked to match objects across two
situations that share both object and relational commonalities,
children tend to prefer object matches (Kotovsky & Gentner,
1996). Older children are better able than younger children to
form matches bases on relations. Kotovsky and Gentner
propose that this relational shift from attention to surface
features to attention to relational structure is a result of
knowledge of the given relation. For example, older children
who are familiar with the concept of monotonic increase are
able to form matches based on this relation, whereas younger
children who are not familiar with this relation are less able to
do so.
Another reason to believe that concrete instantiations may
make transfer difficult for children is that for successful
transfer, the elements of the learning domain may act as
symbols for the elements of the transfer domain. It has been

Experiment
Method
Participants Nineteen sixth-grade students (seven female,
twelve male, mean age = 11.8 years) from two middle
schools in suburbs of Columbus, Ohio participated in the
experiment. Children were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions that specified the type of instantiation (i.e., generic
or concrete) they learned.
Materials and Design The experiment consisted of two
phases. In phase 1, participants learned a mathematical
concept, using either a generic or relevantly concrete
instantiation, with the type of instantiation varying between
subjects. In phase 2, participants were tested on an
isomorphic transfer domain.
The to-be learned concept was the same concept used in
our previous research (Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2005;
Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005). This was a
commutative group of order three. In other words the rules
were isomorphic to addition modulo three. The idea of
modular arithmetic is that only a finite number of elements
(or equivalent classes) are used. Addition modulo 3 considers
only the numbers 0, 1, and 2. Zero is the identity element of
the group and is added as in regular addition: 0 + 0 = 0, 0 + 1

412

= 1, and 0 + 2 = 2. Furthermore, 1 + 1 = 2. However, a sum
greater than or equal to 3 is never obtained. Instead, one
would cycle back to 0. So, 1 + 2 = 0, 2 + 2 = 1, etc. To
understand such a system with arbitrary symbols (not integers
as above) would involve learning the rules presented in Table
1. However, a context can be created in which prior
knowledge and familiarity may assist learning. In this type of
situation the additional information is relevant to the concept.
To construct a condition that communicates relevant
concreteness, a scenario was given for which students could
draw upon their everyday knowledge to determine answers to
test problems. The symbols were three images of measuring
cups containing varying levels of liquid (see Table 1).
Participants were told they need to determine a remaining
amount when different measuring cups of liquid are
combined. In particular,
So for example, combining

and

Table 1: Stimuli and rules across domains.
Relevant
Concreteness
Elements

Rules of Commutative Group:

will fill a container.
and

would have

Associative

For any elements x, y, z:
((x + y) + z) = (x + (y + z))

Commutative

For any elements x, y: x + y = y + x

Identity

There is an element, I, such that for any element, x:
x+I=x

Inverses

For any element, x, there exists another element, y,
such that x+ y = I

Specific Rules:
is the identity

remaining. Additionally, participants were told that
they should always report a remainder. Therefore they should
report that the combination of
have remainder

and

. In this domain,

These
combine

is the identity

Remainder

Operands

Result

would
behaves like 0

under addition (the group identity element).
and

No Relevant
Concreteness

acts like 1;

acts like 2. For example, the combination of

and
does not fill a container and so
remains. This
is analogous to 1 + 1 = 2 under addition modulo 3.
Furthermore, the perceptual information communicated by
the symbols themselves can act as reminders of the structural
rules. In this case, the storyline and symbols may facilitate
learning.
In the Generic condition, the concept was described as a
symbolic language in which three types of symbols combine
to yield a resulting symbol (see Table 1). Combinations are
expressed as written statements.
Training and testing in both conditions were isomorphic
and presented via computer. Training consisted of an
introduction and explicit presentation of the rules through
examples. For instance, participants in the relevantly concrete
conditions were told that combining

and

application of multiple rules. The following are examples of
test questions in the not relevantly concrete conditions.
(1) What can go in the blanks to make a correct statement?
___ ,

, ___ ,

Æ

?

(2) Find the resulting symbol:
,

,

,

Æ

_____.

Participants in the Relevant Concreteness condition saw the
analogues of these questions.
After training and testing in the base domain a novel
transfer domain was presented. The same transfer domain
was used for both conditions and was described as a
children’s game involving three objects (see Table 2).
Children sequentially point to objects and a child who is “the
winner” points to a final object. The correct final object is
specified by the rules of the game (rules of an algebraic
group). Participants received no explicit training in the target
domain. They were not explicitly taught the rules of the
system. Instead they were told that the game rules were like
the rules of the system they just learned and they need to

has a

remainder of
. Analogously, in the not relevantly
concrete conditions where students were told that symbols
combine to yield a resulting symbol the analogue to the above
rule was presented as
,
Æ
. Questions with
feedback were given and complex examples were shown.
After training, the participants were given a 16-question
multiple choice test designed to measure the ability to apply
the learned rules to novel problems. Many questions required

413

figure them out by using their newly acquired knowledge (i.e.
transfer). After being asked to study a series of examples
from which the rules could be deduced, 16-question multiplechoice test was given. The test was isomorphic to the test
given in phase 1. Questions were presented individually on
the computer screen along with four key examples at the
bottom of the screen. The same four examples were shown
with all test questions. Following the multiple-choice
questions, participants were asked to match each element of
the transfer domain to its analogous element in the base
domain and then to rate the similarity of the learning and
transfer domains.
In previous experiments involving adults (Kaminski,
Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2005), no participant was able to score
above change on a test of the target domain without first
learning an isomorphic domain. It is unlikely that children
would score above chance in this domain without having
previously learned an isomorph. Therefore, in the present
experiment, target scores that are above chance suggest
successful transfer of conceptual knowledge. Also, note that
in a separate experiment, adults who read descriptions of the
learning and transfer domains, but received no explicit
training of the rules, found both the generic and concrete
domains equally similar to the target domain. Thus, any
differences in transfer performance across conditions cannot
be attributed to differential similarity of learning and transfer
domains.

Mean Test Score (max = 16)

14

11

Rel Conc

10

Generic

9
8
7
learning

transfer

Figure 1: Mean Test Scores.
Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.

As shown in Figure 1, in both conditions participants
successfully learned in the base domain, with mean learning
scores being significantly above chance score of 6, one
sample t-tests, ts > 8.67, ps < .001 (see Figure 1). At the
same time, there was a clear advantage of generic
instantiations for transfer. These findings were supported by
a two by two mixed ANOVA revealing a significant
interaction, F (1, 15) = 13.9, p < .003. While there was a
marginal advantage of Relevant Concreteness for learning,
independent samples t-test t (15) = 2.00, p = .063, there was a
marked advantage of Generic instantiation for transfer,
independent samples t-test t (15) = 2.49, p < .03. Furthermore,
in the Relevant Concreteness condition, transfer scores were
no different than a chance score of 6, one sample t-test t (7) =
1.128, p = .296.
Additional analyses focused on the ability to match
corresponding elements across domains, which differed
markedly between the Generic condition and the Relevant
Concreteness condition. Only one of eight participants in the
Relevant Concreteness condition correctly matched elements.
While seven of nine participants in the Generic condition
made the correct correspondences, χ2 (df=1, N=17) = 7.2, p <
0.008. Furthermore, there was a very high correlation
between matching ability and test score, point biserial
correlation, rpb = .83. The mean transfer score for those who
made the correct matching was 12.5 (SD = 3.02), while the
mean score for those who did not make the correct matching
was 6.22 (SD = 1.39). This difference was clearly significant,
independent samples t-test, t (15) = 5.61, p < .001.
Similarity ratings also differed as a function of ability to
match elements. Participants who correctly matched elements
rated the domains as highly similar, mean = 4.5 (SD = .756)
on a scale from 1 (completely different) to 5 (almost
identical). At the same time, participants who did not match
elements correctly gave a mean similarity rating of 2.7 (SD =
.866). Again this was a significant difference, independent
samples t-test, t (15) = 4.62, p < .001. Taken together, these
findings suggest that that those participants who aligned the
two domains exhibited a greater ability to match elements
between the domains, perceived the domains as more similar,

Results and Discussion
Two participants (one Generic, one Relevant Concreteness)
were eliminated from the analysis because their scores in the
learning domain (Phase 1) were two standard deviations
below the mean score of their respective conditions.
Table 2: Stimuli for transfer domain.

Elements:
If the children point
to these objects:

12

6

Procedure Training and testing were presented to individual
participants on a computer screen in a quiet room. They
proceeded through training and testing at their own pace; and
their responses were recorded. A female experimenter was
present while students completed the activity.

Examples:

13

The winner points
to this object

414

and once learned they can give children the power to gain
knowledge of novel analogues.

and exhibited greater transfer. Furthermore, the likelihood of
alignment was greater with generic than with relevantly
concrete instantiations.

Acknowledgments

General Discussion

This research is supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky and by a grant from the Institute of Educational
Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education
(#R305H050125) to Andrew F. Heckler and Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

The results of this study demonstrate that children do not
need a concrete instantiation to acquire an abstract concept.
Some concreteness, relevant concreteness, can help to
communicate the relevant structure in the context of
learning; relevant concreteness was shown to have a slight
advantage over generic instantiations of the same concept
for initial learning. However, generic instantiations can also
be learned well by children. Most importantly knowledge
acquired through a generic instantiation can be transferred
to a novel isomorph, while knowledge of a relevantly
concrete instantiation does not transfer spontaneously. For
relevantly concrete instantiations, the structural knowledge
appears to be bound to the learning domain so that it cannot
be easily recognized elsewhere.
These findings suggest that transfer could be construed as
a process of analogical reasoning. Analogy involves several
subprocesses: (1) representation of the target domain, (2)
retrieval of prior domain, (3) alignment of elements and
mapping of structure across domains, and (4)
implementation of the analogy (see Rattermann, 1997 for
review). Of crucial importance is alignment and mapping of
structure (see Gentner, 1983). In the present study,
participants were explicitly told that their knowledge of the
first domain could be applied to the second. Therefore,
failure for participants to transfer was not due retrieval
failure. Failure was also not due poor learning, as the
Relevant Concreteness participants actually had higher
learning scores than the Generic participants. Transfer
failure appears to be due to inability to align and map
structure. Relevant Concreteness participants were not able
to recognize structure and match elements across domains.
The fact that participants who were able to match
elements scored highly on the transfer test and those who
were not able to match scored poorly supports the notion
that structural alignment is a necessary step in transfer
across isomorphs. Also, in agreement with structure
mapping theories (Markman & Gentner, 1993), participants
who were able to align found the learning and transfer
domains to be highly similar, while those who were not able
to align did not.
The results of this study have important implications for
teaching. If indeed the goal of teaching abstract concepts,
such as mathematical and scientific concepts, is transfer,
then elaborate teaching of concrete instantiations is not
likely to help attain that goal. Moreover, generic external
representations such as traditional symbolic notation can be
well learned by children and will increase the likelihood of
transfer.
In conclusion, while the ease of learning can make
relevantly concrete instantiations appealing for teaching,
these instantiation are unlikely to promote transfer. Generic
instantiations, on the other hand, can be learned by children

References
Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1996).
Situated learning and education. Educational Researcher,
25, 5-11.
Ball, D. L. (1992). Magical hopes: Manipulatives and the
reform of math education. American Educator, 16, 14-18.
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between cases of continuous and
discrete models of change. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 15221538.
Bassok, M., Wu, L., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Judging a book
by its cover: Interpretative effects of context on problemsolving transfer. Memory & Cognition, 23, 354-367.
DeLoache, J. S. (2000). Dual representation and young
children’s use of scale models. Child Development, 71,
329-338.
Dempster, F. N., & Corkill, A. J. (1999). Inference and
inhibition in cognition and behavior: Unifying themes for
educational psychology, Educational Psychology Review,
11, 1-88.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., Forbus, K. D. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability
from inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
524-575.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology,
15, 460-466.
Goldstone, R. L. & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46(4), 414-466.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical
thinking from childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic
Books.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
Relevant concreteness and its effects on learning and
transfer. In B. Bara, L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli
(Eds.), Proceedings of the XXVII Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.

415

Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarity: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Uttal, D. H., Liu, L. L., & DeLoache, J. S. (1999). Taking a
hard look at concreteness: Do concrete objects help young
children learn symbolic relations? In C. S. Tamis-LeMonda
(Ed.) Child psychology: A handbook of contemporary
issues (pp. 177-192). Philadelphia: PA: Psychology Press.

Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
431-467.
Moyer, P. S. (2001). Are we having fun yet? How teachers
use manipulatives to teach mathematics. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 47, 175-197.
Napolitano, A. C., Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture worth
a thousand words? Part II: The flexible nature of
modality dominance in young children, Child
Development, 75(6), 1850-1870.
Rattermann, M. J. (1997). Commentary: Mathematical
reasoning and analogy. In L. D. English (Ed.)
Mathematical Reasoning: analogies, metaphors, and
images (247-264). Mahwah, New York: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

416

