UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does "Different" Imply a Difference? A Comparison of Two Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wb54203

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Gentner, Dedre
Sagi, Eyal

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does “Different” Imply a Difference? A Comparison of Two Tasks
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Eyal Sagi (ermon@northwestern.edu)

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract

similar pairs have larger common systems and thus more
slots for alignable differences). These claims concerning the
relation between differences and commonalities distinguish
structure-mapping from other theories of similarity such as
feature-set intersection models and mental distance models,
as amplified below.
The prediction that differences are easier to detect for
high-similar pairs than for low-similar pairs was borne out
in a speeded difference task. Gentner and Markman (1994)
gave participants the task of finding one difference between
as many word pairs as possible in a rather brief time period.
Participants identified differences for many more highsimilar pairs than low-similar pairs. Gentner and Gunn
(2001) asked people to compare word pairs and write a
commonality, and then gave them a speeded-difference task.
Participants generated more differences (mostly alignable
differences) for the previously compared pairs than for new
pairs, showing the close connection between alignment and
difference-noticing. More relevant here, participants also
generated more differences for high-similar pairs than for
low-similar pairs.
In a test of this framework for perceptual comparison,
Markman and Gentner (1996) gave participants image pairs
and asked them to list either differences or commonalities.
Again, participants listed more differences for highly similar
images than for less similar ones. These findings are
consistent with the structure-mapping claim that participants
will find it easier to note differences between concepts and
images that are fairly similar (and consequently more
alignable) than between concepts and images that are
substantially different (and therefore difficult to align) (e.g.,
Kurtz, Miao, & Gentner, 2001).

One of the most interesting predictions of structure-mapping
theory (Gentner, 1983) is that differences are more easily
identified when the comparison involves stimuli that are
easily aligned. Evidence for this claim comes from studies in
which participants state differences between stimuli pairs
(e.g. Gentner & Markman, 1994). These results are at odds
with results from tasks in which participants are asked to
determine whether pairs of images differ or not. In such tasks,
it is often found that participants are faster to make such a
determination when the images differ than when they are
similar (Luce, 1986). However, comparing these results is
difficult because the two lines of research employ different
experimental designs and methodologies. This paper
describes two experiments that contrast the two results within
the same framework in an attempt to examine more closely
the differences between the tasks.
Keywords: Comparison, Perception, Similarity

Introduction
According to structure-mapping theory (Falkenhainer,
Forbus, & Gentner, 1989; Gentner, 1983, 2003; Gentner &
Markman, 1993, 1994; Markman & Gentner, 1993) the
process of comparison involves the alignment of the two
representations compared. The alignment of two
representations goes beyond the identification of shared
features; it also requires finding correspondences between
the relations that connect the features.
Because structure-mapping postulates that similarity
involves relational as well as featural correspondences, it
can predict the discovery of alignable differences: features
that differ between the stimuli but occupy a similar position
in the structure. For example, a structural alignment
between a bird and a person might involve a correspondence
between the bird’s wing and the person’s hand, despite the
closer local resemblance between the bird’s foot and the
person’s hand. Once an alignment has been established,
differences between the objects being compared are easily
spotted. According to structure-mapping, commonalities
and differences that are connected to the common structure
are more salient than those that are not. This means that
alignable differences are more salient than non-alignable
differences. This makes intuitive sense, for it leads to a
focus on differences that are relevant to the common causal
or perceptual structure that is the focus of the comparison.
But it leads to the rather paradoxical prediction that in
general, there will be more salient differences for highsimilar than for low-similar pairs (because in general, high-

Same-different judgments

On the face of it, the above findings seem at odds with a
venerable body of research on tasks involving samedifferent judgments. A well-established result is that the
more similar two images are, the more difficult it is to
identify that they are different (e.g. Farell, 1985; Goldstone
& Medin, 1994; Luce, 1986; Posner & Mitchell, 1967;
Tversky, 1969). That is, the more similar two things are, the
longer people require to say “different” and the more likely
they are to erroneously identify the pair as “same.” This
result runs in the opposite direction from the previously
described findings in which participants found it easier to
identify differences in similar images than in dissimilar
ones.
A possible resolution would be to assume that alignment
is crucial in the identification of a difference between two

261

judgment; in addition, people are assumed to weight
distinctive features more heavily for difference judgments.
The greater the number of distinctive features, the easier it
should be both to detect that two objects are different and to
find distinctive features. For instance, the top-left image in
Figure 1 varies from the top-right one on a single feature –
the color of the innermost circle. However, when comparing
the top-left image with the bottom-left one, almost any
feature becomes a distinctive feature. According to featureinteraction models, it should therefore be much easier to tell
the top-left image from the bottom-left one than from the
top-right one. The sheer number of distinctive features
should also make it easier to identify a difference between
the two leftmost images than between the two topmost
images.
Both mental distance models and feature models would
therefore predict a positive relation between the two tasks:
the fewer the differences that exist between two objects, the
harder it should be both to detect that they are different and
to identify a specific difference between them.
Structure-mapping theory makes a different prediction.
Because the similar images (e.g., shields A and B in Figure
1) share many features as well as a common organizing
structure (and the shared features are structurally consistent
with the shared structure), they should be highly alignable.
In contrast, images A and C should be difficult to align,
because of their low degree of structural overlap. Structuremapping theory would therefore predict that participants
will find it easier to identify a specific difference between A
and B than between A and C.

images, but plays no role (or only a minor role) in the
decision as to whether the two images are different. This
could come about because the two tasks call on two distinct
similarity processes. Alternatively, it could be that the two
tasks tap into different stages of the same process. This
second possibility fits with a proposal by Markman and
Gentner (2005): that the local-to-global alignment process
postulated in structure-mapping can yield two kinds of
output: one, based on a full structural alignment, and the
other based on a readout from the initial parallel matching
step. The full process is relatively slow, and provides a
specific alignment: a common structure, and typically some
alignable differences and candidate inferences. In contrast,
the fast early readout gives rise to estimates of overall
similarity without taking structure into account.
Our goal in this research is to compare these two distinct
tasks—a same-different judgment and a differenceidentification task. In order to make such a comparison
possible, the two tasks had to be made as similar as
possible. Same-difference tasks typically use reaction times
and error rates as dependant measures. Therefore, we
adapted these measures for an identification-of-differences
task. As discussed below, Experiment 1 employs reaction
time as the primary measure for both tasks.
In Experiment 1 we designed a highly controlled set of
stimuli wherein similar pairs differ on a single, salient,
feature while dissimilar pairs differ on a multitude of salient
features (see Figure 1)1. According to many models of
comparison, this should make the task of identifying a
difference more difficult. For instance, mental distance
models (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986; Shepard, 1974; Shoben,
1983) model similarity in terms of the distance between
points within a multi-dimensional mental space. Their
relative position within this space can then be used to
determine what relevant differences (and similarities) exist
between the objects, as well as measure how different the
two objects are from one another. Generally speaking, the
farther apart two points are within the space, the easier it
should be both to detect that they are different and to find
specific differences (difference in dimensional values)
between them. For example, the top two images in Figure 1
are very similar and therefore the mental distance between
them should be quite small. The same is true for the bottom
two images. In contrast, the distance between the two
bottom images and the ones on top would be much greater
because of the many differences that exist between them.
In feature-intersection models (e.g. Tversky, 1977),
objects are represented by sets of independent features.
Comparison is based on the examination of those sets,
extracting shared and distinct features. Similarity is
increased by shared features and decreased by distinctive
features. The reverse applies when computing a difference

Experiment 1
Following structure-mapping theory, we predicted that
responses in the difference-identification task should take
longer than those in the same-different task. Further, based
on Markman and Gentner’s two-phase conjecture, (a)
participants in the difference-identification task should be
faster to respond to a similar pair than to a dissimilar one;
whereas (b) participants in the same-different task should be
faster to make a “different” judgment for a dissimilar pair
than for a similar one.

Method
Participants The participants were undergraduate students
at Northwestern University who participated for class credit;
24 in the same-different condition and 20 in the differenceidentification condition.
Materials The materials for this experiment were 60 images
designed in the likeness of Heraldic shields. Forty of the
images were pairs of highly similar and alignable images.
The difference between the two images in such a pair was in
a single design element (e.g. the crest, a background pattern,
etc.). These 20 pairs were then combined into groups of 2
pairs, such that the images of one pair would be highly
dissimilar to the images of the other pair (see Figure 1).
Each such group was then arranged in two possible

1

A word on terminology is in order. We follow the conventions of
field in contrasting high-similar pairs with low-similar pairs.
Analogy theory makes a finer set of distinctions, as discussed
below, but to link with the field, we use the traditional dichotomy
for these studies.
262

condition, the time between the onset of presentation of an
image pair and the pressing of the space key was recorded.

arrangements of image pairs – one arrangement consisting
of two pairs that were each similar (high-sim pairs), and the
other consisting of two pairs that were dissimilar (low-sim
pairs). The remaining 20 images were used to create 20
pairs of identical images (‘same’ pairs).
Each participant saw 10 high-sim pairs and 10 low-sim
pairs. Additionally, participants in the same-different
condition saw 20 ‘same’ pairs, so that only half of the
images viewed by these participants were different.
Finally, 10 pairs consisting of arrangements of
geometrical forms were used for training. Of these 10 pairs,
5 were identical pairs and 5 were non-identical pairs. The 5
identical pairs were only presented to participants in the
same-different condition.

C

The mean results are shown in Figure 2. As predicted,
participants were faster to make a ‘different’ judgment for
low-sim pairs (M = 0.95sec) than for high-sim pairs (M =
1.36sec), but were slower to identify a difference between
low-sim pairs (M = 9.26sec) than between high-sim pairs (M
= 6.73sec). The average response time for each of the two
types of experimental image pairs (high-sim and low-sim)
was calculated for each participant and the results were
analyzed using a repeated-measures ANOVA of Task x
Similarity. This analysis revealed a highly reliable
interaction between the between-s variable of task (samedifferent judgment vs. difference-identification) and the
within-s variable of similarity (high-sim vs. low-sim). This
interaction is shown in Figure 2, F(1,42) = 17.00, MSe =
47.41, p < .001.

B

Mean response time (sec)

A

Results and discussion

D

Figure 1: Sample stimuli from experiment 1. Images in
the same row represent high-sim pairs; images in the
same column represent low-sim pairs

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
S/D Judgment
high-sim

Diff. Ident.
low-sim

Figure 2: Results from experiment 1 (error bars
represent the standard error of the mean)

Procedure Participants were seated in front of a
computer and presented with the instructions on the
computer screen. After reading the instructions participants
completed the training phase. Following the training phase,
participants were presented with the experimental image
pairs. These images were presented in two blocks of equal
length. The presentation of each pair was preceded by a
half-second fixation period during which a crosshair
appeared at the center of the screen.
In the same-different condition, participants were
instructed to indicate whether each pair consisted of
identical images or non-identical images. Participants
indicated their decision by pressing the left- or right- control
key on the computer keyboard. Left-right position was
reversed for half the participants. The time between the
onset of presentation of an image pair and a participants’
response was recorded.
In the different-identification condition, participants
were instructed to press the space key after identifying a
difference between each presented image pair. Following
each such presentation, participants then typed a specific
difference between the images. As in the same-different

Additionally, there were also reliable main effects for
both similarity (F[1,42] = 8.7, MSe = 24.26, p < .01) and
task (F[1,42] = 84.77, MSe = 1020.52, p < .001).
Importantly, planned contrasts for both tasks revealed that
the observed performance differences in response time
across similarity levels were statistically reliable in both
cases (same-different judgment – F[1,23] = 133.44, MSe =
2.11, p < .001; difference-identification – F[1,19] = 10.4,
MSe = 63.93, p < .01).
An item ANOVA revealed similar results – a reliable
interaction (F[1,76] = 6.62, MSe = 44.58, p < .05) and a
reliable main effect of task (F[1,76] = 204.24, MSe =
1375.18, p < .001). However, the item analysis revealed
only a marginally significant main effect of image-pair type
(F[1,76] = 3.29, MSe = 22.16, p < .1).
The results of Experiment 1 bear out the experimental
hypothesis—that two different processes or two stages of
the same process are involved in the two tasks. Participants
were faster to distinguish two images when they were
dissimilar, but slower to identify a specific difference
between them. The vastly different mean response times are

263

Because of the large effect size observed for the samedifferent condition in Experiment 1, we decided that fewer
participants were needed in that condition in Experiment 2.

also consistent with this proposal: same-different judgments
required only about 1.16 seconds, while identifying a
difference required 8 seconds. Of course, the differenceidentification times may have included some internal
verbalization. Still, the difference is suggestive of different
processes or stages.

Method
Participants The participants were undergraduate students
at Northwestern University who participated for class credit;
11 in the same-different condition and 40 in the differenceidentification condition.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that the differences observed
in the literature are congruent with the hypothesis
Participants were faster to identify specific differences
between similar (and alignable) images. In contrast,
participants that were asked to judge whether two images
were different or not were faster for dissimilar (difficult to
align) images.
However, before embracing this possibility we need to
ask whether it would hold for more naturalistic materials.
The stimuli used in Experiment 1 were artificial and bore
limited resemblance to images and stimuli participants are
likely to encounter in the real world. Furthermore, because
of the limited number of features and differences between
the images, it is possible that participants elected to
represent and compare the images in a strategic manner that
was different than what they would normally use.
Experiment 2 aimed to replicate the results of
Experiment 1 using stimuli that are less artificial and more
akin to real-world images. We used sketches of plants taken
from the Dover series (Harter, 1998). These stimuli differ in
several ways from the artificially generated heraldry-like
images in Experiment 1. First, as just noted, they are
considerably more complex and variable. Second, we expect
that in encoding the plant images in Experiment 2,
participants will bring to bear more real-world knowledge.
For instance, the identification of an image as a flower
contributes to the identification of parts of it as petals,
whereas the same parts might be identified as leaves in an
image of a bush.
Additionally, as discussed above, the response patterns
in Experiment 1 showed that participants took much more
time comparing images in the difference-identification task
than in the same-different task. Although this may point to a
deep difference between the processes, we must also
consider the possibility that the difference stems from task
demands instead of a difference in processes. Perhaps
participants in the same-different condition were satisfied
with making intuitive snap judgments, whereas participants
in the difference-identification condition wanted to make
sure of the difference they identified. In order to minimize
such effects, in Experiment 2 we presented the images for a
short period of time (1500ms). However, in order to
maintain the flow of the experiment, this form of
presentation requires a slight change in the response time
measure for the difference-identification task – instead of
pressing ‘space’ after identifying the difference, participants
are simply asked to type it in, and the measure used is the
time they take before they start typing.

A

B

C

D

Figure 3: Sample stimuli from experiment 2. Images in
the same row represent high-sim pairs; images in the
same column represent low-sim pairs
Materials The stimuli for this experiment were 60 detailed
drawing of plants. The arrangement of pairs was as for
Experiment 1. Forty drawings were used for the
experimental stimuli. As shown in Figure 3, each drawing
belonged to both a similar (high-sim) pair, and a dissimilar
(low-sim) pair. Participants saw each drawing only once (in
either a high-sim pair or a low-sim pair). Twenty additional
drawings were used to create 20 ‘same’ pairs. Each
participant saw 10 high-sim pairs and 10 low-sim pairs.
Additionally, participants in the same-different condition
saw 20 ‘same’ pairs, making 20 ‘same’ and 20 ‘different’
pairs. The training phase used the same 10 pairs of images
that were used in Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure for Experiment 2 was similar to
that for Experiment 1. However, images were displayed for
a fixed period of 1500ms. After that time the images
disappeared. Participants in the same-different condition
were presented with a blank screen until they made their
decision, while participants in the difference-identification
condition where presented with a prompt asking them to
type a difference. For participants in the same-different
condition, response time was measured from the onset of the
presentation of the images. Response time for participants in
the difference-identification condition was measured as the
time for the first press of a key after the appearance of the
prompt asking the participant to type a difference.

264

Results and discussion

a same-different judgment than when they are concerned
with the specific differences that exist between two images.
It appears that the similarity of the two objects hinders fast
judgments of difference, but aids in the identification of
differences between the images.
This dissociation suggests that a same-different
judgment can be performed without performing a deep
comparison of the compared images – a comparison which
would inevitably reveal specific differences between them,
if any exist. This is also supported by the fact that
participants in the same-different condition were
consistently much faster than participants in the differenceidentification condition. This difference in the speed of
response is consistent with the possibility that a more
intricate process is required to identify specific differences
than to judge whether two images differ.
The observed pattern of results is consistent with a twoprocess hypothesis, whose signatures are (1) a rapid samedifferent judgment process that is fastest (at detecting
difference) for highly dissimilar pairs; and (2) a slower
difference-identification process that is fastest for highly
similar pairs. Pattern (1) is consistent with either a mentaldistance model or a feature-intersection model. But these
models have no way to predict Pattern (2), nor can they
readily explain the disassociation between the two tasks2.
Pattern (2) is consistent with the predictions and prior
findings of structure-mapping theory. Pattern (1) is
inconsistent with the predictions that follow from a full
structural alignment. However, as noted above, it would
follow if we assume that a same-different judgment can be
done using a “ quick and dirty” readout of approximate
overall similarity, as conjectured by Markman and Gentner
(2005).

Mean response time (sec)

The average response time for each of the two types of
experimental image pairs (high-sim and low-sim) was
calculated for each participant and the results were analyzed
using a repeated-measures Task x Similarity ANOVA. This
analysis revealed a reliable interaction between the betweens variable of task (same-different judgment vs. differenceidentification) and the within-s variable of similarity (highsim vs. low-sim). This interaction is shown in Figure 4,
F(1,49) = 4.78, MSe = 3.13, p < .05. As predicted,
participants were faster to make a ‘different’ judgment for
low-sim pairs (M = .78sec) than for high-sim pairs (M =
1.04sec), but were slower to identify a difference between
low-sim pairs (M = 2.58sec) than between high-sim pairs (M
= 1.99sec).
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
S/D Judgment
high-sim

Diff. Ident.
low-sim

Figure 4: Results from Experiment 1 (error bars
represent the standard error of the mean)
Additionally, there were also a reliable main effect for
condition (F[1,49] = 11.04, MSe = 32.79, p < .01). There
was no statistically significant main effect for similarity
(F[1,49] = .71, MSe = .46, n.s.). As in Experiment 1,
planned contrasts for both tasks revealed that the observed
performance differences were statistically reliable in both
cases (same-different judgment – F[1,10] = 19.99, MSe =
.377, p < .01; difference-identification –F[1,39] = 8.52, MSe
= 6.95, p < .01).
An item ANOVA provided similar results – a reliable
interaction (F[1,76] = 24.52, MSe = 3.59, p < .001) and a
reliable main effects of task (F[1,76] = 262.98, MSe = 38.46,
p < .001) and similarity (F[1,76] = 4.124, MSe = .60, p <
.05).
Experiment 2 replicated the results of Experiment 1.
Participants find it easy to identify differences between two
highly alignable images, but difficult to decide that these
two images differ. Furthermore, this result does not appear
to depend on the amount of time participants spend looking
at the image pairs, but rather depends on whether a pair of
images is alignable or not.

Further Issues
In general, the striking performance differences
described in this paper between two seemingly similar tasks
suggest that participants utilize a different strategy to
perform same-different judgment than to identify specific
differences. This poses an interesting question for future
research – what is it that makes these two tasks so different?
To address this question, it is helpful to make a further
set of distinctions that derive from analogy theory. Rather
than a dichotomy between high vs. low similarity, structuremapping makes a 2x2 distinction: high vs. low structural
alignability and high vs. low surface similarity. A pair is
structurally alignable to the extent that a structurally
consistent
interconnected
system
of
relational
2
One way that these theories might explain Pattern (2), at least
in Experiment 1, is by invoking the fact that the low-similar pairs
had many differences, while the high-similar pairs had only one.
Thus, participants could have been slower on the low-similar pairs
because they had to choose between a larger number of
differences. However, this explanation will not account for the
same pattern in Experiment 2, for which all pairs (high- and lowsimilar) had a large number of differences.

General discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 provide evidence that the
participants engaged in different processes when faced with
265

Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural
alignment in comparison: No difference without
similarity. Psychological Science, 5, 152-158.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak K. J. (1983) Schema Induction and
Analogical Transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38
Goldstone, R. L., & Medin, D. L. (1994). The time course
of comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 29-50.
Harter, J., Ed. (1998) Plants: 2,400 Copyright-Free
Illustrations of Flowers, Trees, Fruits and Vegetables.
Dover Pictorial Archive Series. Mineola, NY: Dover
Publications
Holyoak K. J. & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Holyoak K. J. & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps: Analogy
in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E. & Holyoak K. J. (1997) Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Keane, M. T. (1988) Analogical mechanisms. Artificial
Intelligence Review, 2, 229-251.
Keane, M. T. (1990) Incremental analogizing: Theory and
model. In K. J. Gilhooly, M. T. Keane, R. Logie, & G.
Erdos (Eds.), Lines of thinking: Reflections on the
psychology of thought (Vol. 1). New York: Wiley.
Kurtz K. J., Miao, C., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning by
analogical bootstrapping. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 10, 417-446.
Larkey, L. B. & Love, B. C. (2003). CAB: Connectionist
Analogy Builder. Cognitive Science, 27, 781-794
Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times: Their role in inferring
elementary mental organization. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and
differences in similarity comparisons. Memory &
Cognition, 24, 235-249.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (2005). Nonintentional
similarity processing. In R. Hassin, J.A. Bargh and J.S.
Uleman (Eds.), The new unconscious (pp. 107-137). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Posner, M. I. & Mitchell, R. F. (1967) Chronometric
analysis of classification, Psychological Review, 74(5),
392-409.
Shepard, R. N. (1974). Representation of structure in
similarity data: Problems and prospects. Psychometrika,
39, 373-421.
Shoben, E. J. (1983). Applications of multidimensional
scaling in cognitive psychology. Applied Psychological
Measurement, 7, 473-490.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Tversky, B. (1969). Pictorial and verbal encoding in a shortterm memory task. Perception & Psychophysics, 6, 225233.

correspondences can be found between the items. A pair is
surface-similar to the extent that the items share most of the
surface features, and lack large numbers of distinctive
features. A “ high similar pair” is one that is literally similar:
that is, both structurally alignable and surface-similar. A
“ low-similar pair” is nonalignable (or weakly alignable) and
surface-dissimilar.
Studies of the same-different task (including the present
one) have traditionally conflated similarity and alignability.
By deconflating them, we may be able to discover more
about these two processes: for example, perhaps samedifferent judgments rely on surface similarity, while
difference identification relies on alignability. A study by
Gentner and Gunn (2001) suggests an approach. They found
evidence that listing commonalities lead to elevated
performance in a subsequent difference-identification task,
while providing a thematic relation diminished
performance. Such a method might be used to tease apart
the effects of similarity and alignability.

Summary
Our findings suggest that same-different judgments are
qualitatively different from the identification of differences.
More specifically, the alignability of the images plays a
more important role in the identification of differences than
in same-different judgments. This dissociation between the
tasks is difficult to explain within the scope of mental
distance and feature-intersection models.
Because it appears that alignability plays an important
role in the identification of differences, it is possible that
models of analogy (e.g. Gentner 1983, 2003; Gick &
Holyoak, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989, 1995; Hummel
& Holyoak, 1997; Keane, 1988, 1990; Larkey & Love,
2003) might provide interesting insights into the differences
that exist between these two intuitively similar tasks.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grant N00014-02-1-0078 from
the ONR Cognitive Science Program.

References
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Farell, B. (1985). Same-Different Judgments: A review of
current controversies in perceptual comparisons.
Psychological Bulletin, 98, 419-456.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’ re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and cognition (pp. 195-235).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory and
Cognition, 29, 565-577.

266

