UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Implicit Metacognition Provide a Tool for Self-Guided Learning in Preschool Children?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8s000397

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Balcomb, Frances
Gerken, LouAnn

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Implicit Metacognition Provide a Tool for Self-Guided Learning in Preschool
Children?
Frances Balcomb (francesb@u.arizona.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1303 E University Blvd
Tucson, AZ 85719 USA

LouAnn Gerken (gerken@u.arizona.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1303 E University Blvd
Tucson, AZ 85719 USA

Abstract
Many core cognitive processes, such as associative learning, are
thought to appear early in infancy and develop rapidly throughout
childhood, while more complex processes such as metacognition
are thought to appear significantly later. However, there is an
apparent paradox in that the rapid growth in cognitive development
cannot be explained by passive learning mechanisms only, yet for
children to actively guide their own learning, they must be at least
somewhat self-referential. In the experiments reported here,
metacognition was assessed using non-verbal tasks originally
developed for non-human animals. Children aged 3.5 were able to
demonstrate metacognition by strategically responding on a task in
which they had to access their knowledge states. In addition,
results indicate that children whose metacognitive assessments
more closely matched their actual memory performance also
showed superior overall learning compared to children whose
metacognitive assessments were less accurate, suggesting that
metamemory skill is correlated with memory itself. The results
imply that metacognition may be intrinsically related to core
cognitive processes and implicitly emergent in children as the
processes themselves emerge, providing an explanation for how
they are able to guide learning, even as infants.

Introduction
A key component of learning involves seeking out and
encoding of new information and avoiding relearning
already known information. In fact, people are active
learners, and the ability to guide learning allows selectivity
and efficiency; without it, reliance on passive mechanisms
would result in redundancy, disorganization, coding of
circumstantial but unrelated conjunctions, and slow learning
of significant ones. For example, in language paradigms
there is evidence that adults are able to use sensitivity to
different types of information (such as perceptual salience,
co-occurrence, or predictive values) in ongoing stimulus
streams to optimize learning depending on the
characteristics of the input (Gomez, 2002). We know, too,
that infants are especially good at selective learning at very
early ages. Indeed, infants' differential preference for what
is novel vs. what is familiar in commonly-used testing
methods is typically attributed to their seeking an optimal
level of new and old information to promote learning
(Hunter, Ames, & Koopman, 1983). Rather than being
merely associative learners and pattern matchers, they can

select ‘good’ from ‘bad’ information sources (Namy &
Waxman, 2000), and informationally rich from coincidental
co-occurrences as infants (Aslin, Saffran, & Newport, 1998;
Newport & Aslin, 2004). How infants accomplish these
feats of learning remains a puzzle, and the questions about
underlying mechanisms are debated in a variety of fields
including computational modeling, linguistics, and
cognitive development.
What is proposed here is that executive function skills,
including metacognition, may be inherently intertwined
with core processes, existing implicitly at very early ages
and only emerging explicitly when children are much older.
Thus infants can accomplish strategic learning by
influencing control over processes like memory encoding
through such cognitive behaviors as sustaining attentional
focus. These behaviors are influenced by implicit access to
internal states of knowledge, with the goal of most
efficiently maximizing learning while avoiding redundancy.
This implicit monitoring and control of core processes
reflects procedural metacognition.
Attribution of metacognition in this way, therefore, does
not imply a complex system with two distinct cognitive
mechanisms, one to perform a core function and another to
evaluate and monitor. What is proposed here is that
metacognition may be implicit, and occurs as an integral
part of the cognitive process itself.
For example,
metamemory may be a resultant process of memory, such
that during the retrieval process some items are marked as
‘more certain’ and others as ‘less certain’ either by
familiarity, a sense of recognition, a threshold of recall
strength, or other factor. If, indeed, a feeling of knowing is
subserved by a simple mechanism integrated into the
memory process itself, we might begin to understand how
very young children appear well able to capitalize on
information in memory to learn rapidly and efficiently,
without demonstrating explicit awareness of their states of
knowledge.

Metacognition in Children

1003

In general many researchers believe that preschoolers do not
have very sophisticated metacognition skills.
Young
children are not credited with strategic responding based on
self-assessments until late preschool at the earliest, despite

having developed an extensively organized knowledge base
and cognitive strategies by then. Much research has
demonstrated a significant effect of age on a variety of
metacognitive tasks in school age children, indicating that
by age 3, children are reliably able to show some early
metacognitive indicators, like the use of verbs ‘think’ and
‘know’ (Kuhn, 2000). However, it is not until at least age
four, and more typically at older ages, that children are able
to demonstrate success with standard metacognition tasks
relying on explicit reporting. Performing in these tasks,
children demonstrate continued development until middle
school. For example, in one study, kindergarten, first, and
third grade children were presented with line drawings, and
asked to name them. If a child failed to correctly name an
item s/he was asked if s/he would recognize the correct label
if s/he heard it. Subsequently, children were presented with
an array of nine pictures and one verbal label, and asked to
point to the matching picture. Children of all ages were able
to predict, to some degree, which picture-label matches they
were able to recognize, with a significant increase in
accuracy with age (Wellman, 1977).
More recent research has demonstrated that children as
young as four years old are able to accurately predict
recognition performance to some degree when the stimuli
used are more familiar (pictures of other children either
well-known, less well-known or unfamiliar) and the task
demands are less (Cultice & Somerville, 1983).
Furthermore, recent work has indicated that children's
metacognition estimates may be confounded by actual
memory contents (Butterfield, Nelson, & Peck, 1988), or by
confusion between wishful thinking and realistic estimates
of performance (Schneider, 2000). Finally, although most
developmental research supports the idea that metacognitive
skills are more accurate in older children than younger
children (Flavell & Wellman, 1977; Kuhn, 2000; Schneider,
1999), there are some exceptions (Butterfield et al, 1988;
Lockl & Schneider, 2002)
These results suggest that metacognition may exist at
younger ages than has traditionally been thought and maybe
highly intertwined with source knowledge in children, rather
than emerging separately upon already established
structures.

choosing an ‘uncertain’ response. Humans were more likely
to choose the ‘uncertain’ response for items in the middle of
the list (more difficult) than items in the beginning and end
of the list, while monkeys were more variable in their
success. In a subsequent study animals were trained on a
visual matching task using paired polygon shapes (Shields
1999, as cited in Smith, Shields, & Washburn, 2003). At
test, one member of a pair was presented, and the monkey
was given the option to take the task for the risk of a food
reward or a long time out, depending on success or failure,
or to skip it for a lesser food reward but no time out. When
accuracy on skipped trials was compared to that of trials
taken, the monkeys did not show differential performance.
In other words, monkeys did not show evidence of
optimizing performance by skipping the items they didn't
know. In a follow up study, monkeys were given the same
task with the difference that on test the monkey saw not
only the target, but also the other member of the pair, along
with an incorrect foil. In this condition, in which all the
information was present, monkeys were successful at
choosing to take only the trials on which they were more
accurate, indicating at least some ability to monitor their
own states of knowledge. The work with non-humans
suggests that we need to re-examine our view that
metacognitive skill is late emerging in human children
To summarize, the results of metacognition in both young
children and non-human animals suggest that they may have
implicit access to internal knowledge states. If children are
able to use this information to strategically direct learning in
optimal trajectories, we could begin to explain their very
rapid learning at very young ages. The purpose of the
current research was to examine the implicit metamemorymemory relationship in preschool children using methods
adapted from comparative literature.

Experiment I

Metacognition in Non-humans

This experiment was designed to determine whether young
children would demonstrate the ability to assess their state
of knowledge with a visual pairs task in which there were
two stimuli sets, a familiar and a less familiar set. In this
task children were exposed to some visual pairs multiple
times and exposed to others only once. Thus all pairs
consisted of familiar animals, but some should have been
better learned and thus better known than others. At test,
children were shown one item of a pair and chose to either
or accept or decline taking a trial in which they selected the
mate of that item. It was predicted that children would
choose to accept more trials with more-familiar versus lessfamiliar pairs.

The apparent lack of directed learning or metacognitive
ability in human children is surprising, given that many nonhuman animals demonstrate ‘uncertainty’ behaviors and
respond strategically. This strategic responding may be a
demonstration of metacognition, and has been studied with
animals in memory tasks. Recent research with rhesus
monkeys has indicated that they are able to manifest at least
rudimentary metacognition skills.
Metacognition has been studied in a variety of nonhuman
animals including dolphins, pigeons and monkeys. In a
metacognition study with rhesus monkeys Smith et al.
(1998) presented a serial list to adult humans and monkeys
and gave them a choice of responding to the task, or

Subjects
Subjects were 9 children aged 3:0-4:2 (m=3:6).

Materials

1004

Stimulus materials consisted of 20 visual pairs presented on
a DVD. A pair consisted of colored line drawing of an

animal paired with a picture of a common object like a
bicycle. Audio files for training and test stimuli were
recorded by a female native English speaker using Sound
Studio 2.1.1. Pairs were presented in movie format created
with iMovie HD on a Macintosh Mini computer. First the
picture of the animal appeared with a sentence giving its
name (e.g. ‘this is Andy.’) Next an object appeared with a
sentence describing the animal-object relationship (e.g. ‘He
likes to drive a fire truck.’) Finally, the animal and object
appeared together with an additional sentence about the
relationship (e.g. ‘He drives a fire truck to all the fires.’)
Each picture appeared for 4 seconds, with a 1 second gap
between. Movies were burned to DVD. There were 2 DVD
movies. The home DVD contained 10 animal-object pairs
repeated three times. The lab DVD showed 20 animal-object
pairs; the 10 familiar pairs, and 10 novel pairs, intermixed
throughout. At test, children judged their knowledge of all
20 animal-object pairs. Thus, all pairs had been seen equally
recently, but some were more familiar and some were less
familiar, as defined by amount of viewing time. Test
stimuli consisted of the animal-object pairs, and also
included a line drawing of a colored arrow. The arrow
served as an ‘opt out’ option, such that if children could
touch the arrow to skip trials. Audio stimuli for test
consisted of the questions ‘Do you know what s/he likes?’
and four types of positive (e.g. ‘yay!’), one negative (‘Uhoh, that's not it!’) and one neutral (‘We don't know what
s/he likes’) feedback sound file.
Testing was conducted on a Dell Inspiron 1100 laptop
with a Keytec Magic Touch touch-screen mounted on a 15”
LCD upright monitor. The experiment was run using the
DMASTR software developed at Monash University and at
the University of Arizona by K. Forster and J. Forster

had been paired with the animal from the judgment task (the
mate), and one of an item that had been paired with some
other animal (the foil). If the child chose the correct
response (the mate), s/he received positive feedback, but if
s/he selected the incorrect target (the foil), s/he received
negative feedback.
There were two training sets, to ensure that children
understood the procedure. The first training consisted of 3
common animals and common associates (e.g. a dog and a
bone, with eyeglasses as a foil), and 3 novel imaginary
animals. The experimenter completed the first training with
children, ensuring that they skipped the novel animals, and
chose to take the task with familiar animals. To encourage
children to transfer the procedures to the animals from the
DVD, the second training consisted of two familiar animals
from the DVD, and two less familiar. (These items were
not used on the subsequent test.) Children completed the
second training with the experimenter verbally reviewing
the child's responses after each item. The actual test
(judgment and mate selection) consisted of 14 pairs of
animals and objects, which children completed without
help. After each trial, the experimenter echoed the feedback
given by the computer.

Results

Procedures

The design of the experiment ensured that half of the pairs
would be better known than the other half. Therefore, it was
predicted that children would choose to accept trials
involving familiar pairs significantly more often than trials
involving less familiar pairs.
Only two children appeared to follow a simple rule of
accepting all seven of the familiar items and declining all
seven of the less familiar; the rest accepted some items from
both sets. The number of ‘accept’ and number of ‘decline’
trials was totaled for each pair type (familiar and less
familiar.) Children made more accept responses with more
familiar animals (M=5.4 SD=1.8) than with less familiar
animals (M =3.2, SD= 3.2; t(8)=1.86, p = 0.04, one-tailed).
To determine whether children not only made more accept
responses with more familiar animals but also got more of
these trials correct, the percent correct was calculated for all
familiar trials and compared to percent correct for
unfamiliar trials Results indicated that children were
significantly more accurate on more familiar trial items
(M=91, SD=19) than less familiar (M=55, SD=35;
t(11)=2.11, p=0.02, one-tailed).

The experiment consisted of a learning phase and test phase.
Learning
The DVD with ten items was sent to children's homes and
parents were asked to ensure that their children watched all
three repetitions. After that, they were allowed to watch it
as often as they liked. When children came into the
laboratory, they watched the 20-item DVD. Subsequently,
they went into a different room for training and testing.
Testing
At test, children had two potential tasks. The judgment of
memory (judgment task) was performed on every trial.
Children were shown a picture of one of the animals from
the learning phase along with an arrow. They touched the
arrow on the touch screen if they thought they did not
remember the item that had been paired with the animal
(indicating a ‘decline’ response), which resulted in a new
trial. They touched the animal if they thought they
remembered the paired item (indicating ‘accept’), which
started the second task, the mate selection task. On the mate
selection task, two pictures appeared, one of the item that

Discussion

1005

The purpose of this study was to determine whether children
were able to demonstrate metacognition non-verbally on a
visual paired associates task, by choosing to accept test
trials with items expected to be more accessible in memory.
Results indicate that children made significantly more
accept responses with more familiar pairs than with less
familiar pairs, supporting the existence of early
metacognition. This result is similar to one of the studies
done with monkeys using serial list learning, in which

monkeys were expected to skip memory items that were
predicted to be more difficult (Smith et al., 1998.) Since
monkeys did not show consistent results, but adults did, it
was interesting to discover that young children can readily
indicate their implicit knowledge state when asked in the
right way.
However, it is possible that children’s responses on the
judgment task was based only on association of a particular
response (accept or decline) with a type of stimulus
presented (more familiar vs. less-familiar, or seen at home
vs. not seen at home.) For example, when declining to take
the trial for the animal named 'Andy,' children might not be
able to search their memory for the appropriate paired
associate and find it lacking, but rather might simply
respond based on the feeling that they had not seen Andy
very frequently. Given that children did choose a mix of
both familiar and unfamiliar pairs, and their overall
accuracy was quite high, this explanation is unlikely to
provide a complete description of the results. However, this
explanation could account for the main effect of more
accept responses for more familiar pairs. Therefore, a
follow up study was conducted to examine whether
children's choice to decline or accept the task was based on
judgments of knowing specific pairs, as opposed to pairs
from different sets.

Experiment 2
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to further examine the
extent to which children are able to indicate metacognitive
competence by accepting or declining trials based on
memory of matched pairs. In this study, memory of the
paired associates was examined in a subsequent memory
task in which children had to select one of two objects (the
mate vs. a foil) on every trial. The second task was added to
determine if children had poorer memory for the trials that
they had declined in the metamemory task. In addition,
Experiment 2 explored the possible relation between
metamemory and memory by asking whether those children
who made the most accurate assessments of their memory
also showed better memory for the visual pairs than children
who either overestimated or underestimated their knowledge
of the pairs.

accessible. These items were not used in the subsequent
tests. There were 11 test trials.

Procedures
The experiment consisted of a learning phase and two
separate tests; the first test was the same two-task test as in
Experiment 1 (the judgment task, and if the child made an
accept response, the mate selection task).The second test
was a separate recognition memory test (memory test),
which assessed children’s memory for the items they had
declined in the combined test. (See Figure 1.)
Learning: In the instruction phase children watched the
DVD once.
Testing: Children completed the metamemory test first,
followed by the memory test.
Metamemory- test: Training and test procedures were the
same as in Experiment 1 with the exception that rather than
seeing only the animal and arrow, children saw a picture of
the animal, an arrow, the object mate of the animal, and a
foil (which was an associate for a different animal). The
child was asked, ‘do you know what s/he likes?’
Immediately after the question, the mate and foil
disappeared, and the child selected the animal or arrow with
only those two images present. This design was modeled
after the task with which rhesus monkeys were successful at
indicating metacognitive competence on visual matching
tasks (Shields et al, 1999). As previously discussed,
monkeys were able to decline less well known items and
accept more well known items only when they saw the
target, the match and the foil at the time of choice.
Memory test: After the metamemory test, children were
presented with an 11-trial recognition memory test. On each
trial, children saw one of the 11 animals, the animal’s object
mate and another object that was the mate of a different
animal. They were simply asked to find select which object
had been paired with the animal.

Subjects
Subjects were 25 children aged 3:5-3;7 (m=3:6).

Materials
Fifteen of the visual matching pairs used in Experiment 1
were selected and made into one movie in which all pairs
appeared once. This movie was viewed for the first time
when children arrived at the laboratory. Therefore, at test,
all items had equal exposure. Test apparatus and the first
training were identical to that of Experiment 1. The second
training consisted of 4 animals; the first and last animals of
the DVD (which, according to list learning effects should be
better accessible to memory) and two animals from the
middle of the movie, which should similarly be less

Figure 1: Test Procedures for Experiment 2

1006

For some children, some trials of the memory test involved
being tested on an animal a second time if they had accepted
the trial involving that animal on the metacognitive test.
The same positive and negative feedback sound files were
used as in the metacognition test trials.

Results
One child declined all trials. Sixteen children accepted and
declined at least one trial. Eight children accepted all trials.
The first analysis was conducted to examine if children
demonstrated better accuracy on items they accepted than
on those they declined on the metamemory test, indicating
accurate judgment of their knowledge. For the 16 children
who both accepted and declined at least one trial, the
percent correct on the metacognitive test for accepted trials
was compared to the percent correct on the memory test for
items children declined on the metamemory. As predicted,
children were significantly more accurate on ‘accept’ items
(M=80, SD = 22) than ‘decline’ (M=64, SD=40; t(15)=1.83,
p=0.04, one-tailed).
A second analysis was conducted to examine whether
better metamemory performance was related to better
memory performance. Each child took all 11 memory trials,
therefore the total number of correct responses was known.
For each child, the number correct on the memory test was
compared to the number of items the child expected to get
correct, as indicated by the number of items s/he accepted,
to determine overall metamemory performance. A
difference score was calculated (total correct minus total
accepted) and converted into z scores. Children were ranked
as to how far their performance estimates differed from their
actual performance, with zero (no difference) being optimal.
Children were divided at the median in two groups, ‘higher
accuracy’ (HA) and ‘lower accuracy’ (LA).
The accuracy on the memory test of HA versus LA
children was compared. Results indicate that children in the
HA group were significantly more accurate on the memory
test (M=83 SD=14) than children in the LA group (M=64,
SD=24; t(20)=2.09, p=0.03, two-tailed). To ensure that this
difference was not an effect of the HA children learning
during the metamemory task and applying what they learned
to the subsequent memory task, a comparison was made of
HA versus LA children for ‘accept’ trials on the
metamemory task. Results indicate that children in the HA
group were significantly more accurate on ‘accept’ trials
(M=84 SD=15) than children in the LA group (M =68,
SD=27; t(17)=1.74, p = 0.04, two-tailed), indicating that
children whose overall estimates of memory were better
also had better recognition memory performance. Children
who either over or underestimated their memory abilities
showed poorer overall memory.

Discussion
These experiments indicate that young children are able to
demonstrate evidence of implicit metamemory skills before
the age at which they can verbalize about their knowledge,

and in addition, that metamemory may be linked to source
memory itself.
The results are a first step toward addressing the paradox
of excellent learning abilities in infants and young children
with their here-to-fore assumed poor metacognitive skills.
The picture that is beginning to emerge is one in which
learners are able to keep track of what they do and do not
know from very early in life. Some aspects of this ability
can be tapped in non-verbal metacognition tasks such as
ours by the pre-school years (and perhaps before). However,
the ability to verbalize about the contents of one's memory
develops later. Thus, knowing and being able to make use of
the contents of one's mind represents a continuum of taskparticular abilities.
There are alternate explanations for the performance seen
here. Perhaps, in generating a memory search, children
used different markers than a feeling of knowing per se as
decision criteria. For example, children may have chosen to
accept trials based on a sense of ’liking’ for certain items
over others. An alternate explanation is a simple threshold
account. By this account, when a child generates a memory
search that results in an activation of a memory
representation above a certain threshold the child
experiences successful recall and chooses to ‘accept,’
otherwise s/he experiences recall failure and responds
‘decline.’
However, perhaps it is these very ‘alternate’ explanations
that comprise metacognition. A feeling of knowing can
arise from a feeling of liking, or a feeling of liking may be
what marks an item as being ‘known’, and disliking what
marks it as ‘not-known.’ What is interesting is that these
mechanisms appear to be successful, as evidenced by the
accuracy on accepted versus declined items. Also, the fact
that such judgments, resulting from simple processes or not,
accord with but do not perfectly match actual memory
suggests that they reflect at the least, differential selection
processes for the qualitatively different judgment and
memory tasks.
If memory responses and judgment
processes were one and the same, then children’s judgment
and memory performance would be expected to more
exactly correspond. For example, if judgment response was
set by a simple threshold such that pairs exceeding a certain
strength were given the value ‘accept’ and pairs below given
the value ‘decline,’ children would be expected to do one of
two things; either they would have 100% accuracy on
accepted items and a mix on decline, or 100% inaccuracy on
decline and a mix of accuracy on accepted. If one makes
the model more complicated by adding an area in the
middle, in which any pair with intermediate strength can be
accepted or declined, then that must be an area of
uncertainty, in which a judgment response is selected by
both the memory search and an additional, different process.
In addition, single mechanism accounts would fail to
describe what differentiates animals and age groups that
appear aware of uncertainty but fail to respond adaptively
from those who appear both aware of and able to respond
strategically to uncertainty. This difference would seem to

1007

imply that at some level of cognitive development, the
ability to recognize uncertainty becomes coupled with an
ability to then respond to it with a response that is
qualitatively different, and results in greater outcome utility
per trial. To selectively indicate ‘not-knowing’ requires
realizing both a value for the knowledge itself (select the
correct target), and a value for that value (accept or decline
the task.) A simple retrieve-accept fail to retrieve–decline
model, or a model based on a feeling of liking would require
more elaboration to describe what differentiates random
responses to uncertainty from more strategic responses.
A second finding from this research was that children
who demonstrated better metamemory performance also
demonstrated better overall recognition memory
performance than children who either over- or
underestimated their memory. This intriguing finding
suggests that metacognition is linked to the process on
which it acts, such that performance in one domain is
inherently linked to performance in the other. This linkage
further suggests that individuals who differ in core
processes like memory may also differ in the control and
monitoring processes that act upon them. Recent focus on
individual differences reveals that adults, also, vary in their
ability to optimally respond to uncertain tasks, and that this
difference may be correlated with other cognitive and
personality variables (Washburn, Smith, & Taglialatela,
2005.) The current results suggest that metacognition and
cognition are inherently interrelated, and that metacognition
may emerge implicitly very early, in fact as early as when
core processes emerge, providing a mechanism by which
infants and children can actively direct learning.

Future Directions
Current research in our lab is underway to examine whether
children's early metacognition skills rely crucially on
recognition memory, or whether they are able to generate
accurate metacognition assessments from retrieval processes
only. A further important test of this hypothesis is to
examine whether children do, indeed, strategically guide
their learning based on such implicit metacognition. Future
work is planned to look at the relationship of metacognition
and other cognitive skills that would seem to rely on the
ability to have some awareness of one's own mental state,
for example decision-making abilities.

Butterfield, E., Nelson, T., & Peck, V. (1988).
Developmental Aspects of the Feeling of Knowing.
Developmental Psychology, 24, 654-663.
Cultice, J., & Somerville, S. (1983). Preschoolers' Memory
Monitoring: Feeling-of-Knowing Judgments. Child
Development, 54, 1480-1486.
Flavell, J., & Wellman, H. (1977). Metamemory. In R. Kail
& J. Hagen (Eds.), Memory in Children. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gomez, R. (2002). Variability and Detection of Invariant
Structure. Psychological Science, 13, 431-436.
Kuhn, D. (2000). Metacognitive Development. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 178-181.
Hunter, M., Ames, E., & Koopman, R. (1983). Effects of
Stimulus Complexity and Familiarization Time on Infant
Preferences for Novel and Familiar Stimuli.
Developmental Psychology, 19, 338-352.
Lockl, K., & Schneider, W. (2002). Development Trends in
Children's Feeling-of-Knowing Judgments. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 26, 327-333.
Namy, L. & Waxman, S. (2000). Naming and Exclaiming:
Infants’ Sensitivity to Naming Contexts. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 1, 405-428.
Newport, E., & Aslin, R. (2004). Learning at a Distance I.
Statistical Learning of Non-Adjacent Dependencies.
Cognitive Psychology, 48, 127-162.
Schneider, W. (1999). The Development of Metamemory in
Children. In D. Gopher & A. Koriat (Eds.), Attention and
Performance XVII: Cognitive Regulation of Performance;
Interaction of Theory and Application. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Schneider, W. (2000). Performance prediction in Young
Children: Effects of Skill, Metacognition and Wishful
Thinking. Developmental Science, 1, 291-297.
Smith, D., Shields, W., & Washburn, D. (2003). The
Comparative Psychology of Uncertainty Monitoring and
Metacognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26, 317373.
Smith, D., Shields, W., & Washburn, D. (1998). Memory
Monitoring by Animals and Humans. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 12, 227-250.
Washburn, D., Smith, D., & Taglialatela, L. (2005).
Individual Differences in Metacognitive Responsiveness:
Cognitive and Personality Correlates. Journal of General
Psychology, 132, 446-461.
Wellman, H. (1977). Tip of the Tongue and feeling of
Knowing Experiences: A Developmental Study of
Memory Monitoring. Child Development, 48, 13-21.

References
Aslin, R., Saffran, J., & Newport, E. (1998). Computation of
Conditional Probability Statistics by 8-Month-Old Infants.
Psychological Science, 9, 321-324.

1008

