UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Don't Just Tell Them, Show Them! Teachers Can Intentionally Alter their Instructional
Gestures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0cn8z2ht

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Alibali, Martha W.
Bieda, Kristen
Hostetter, Autumn B.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Don’t Just Tell Them, Show Them!
Teachers Can Intentionally Alter their Instructional Gestures
Autumn B. Hostetter (abhostetter@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin–Madison
1202 W. Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706 USA

Kristen Bieda (bieda@wisc.edu)
Department of Curriculum and Instruction, University of Wisconsin-Madison
225 N. Mills St., Madison, WI 53706 USA

Martha W. Alibali (mwalibali@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin–Madison
1202 W. Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706 USA

Mitchell J. Nathan (mnathan@wisc.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
1025 W. Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706 USA

Eric J. Knuth (knuth@education.wisc.edu)
Department of Curriculum and Instruction, University of Wisconsin-Madison
225 N. Mills St., Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
Because gestures can ground abstract ideas in the physical
world and make connections between ideas, they play a
potentially important role in the classroom. This study
examined whether teachers can intentionally alter their gesture
production. Six teachers taught a brief mathematics lesson three
times, once without any special instructions, once attempting to
use gestures to link ideas, and once attempting to inhibit all
gestures. All 6 teachers were able both to increase and inhibit
their gesture production when asked to do so. These results
suggest that teachers can alter their gesture production. This is
promising evidence that interventions that require teachers to
alter their gestures are feasible.

Introduction
Teachers often face the challenging task of helping their
students see connections between different ideas, events, or
lessons. For example, a science teacher may wish to
demonstrate the similarities between the organs inside the pig
her students are dissecting and the organs inside their own
bodies. A reading teacher may wish to demonstrate the
relations between the events in the story the students are
reading and events in the real world. A math teacher may
wish to illustrate the connections between the equations the
students are writing and the physical situation the equations
model.
Explaining connections between ideas is a complex process,
one that is successful only if students can ground their
understanding of one event or idea in their understanding of
the other. One tool that teachers may use to help students see
connections and ground their understanding of abstract ideas
in the physical world is representational gestures.

Representational gestures accomplish this grounding by
directing attention to the referents for speech or by physically
realizing those referents. Pointing gestures can explicitly
direct students’ attention to a physically present referent.
Iconic gestures can use the shape or motion of the hands to
mime a key aspect of the referent.
The imagistic information conveyed by gestures may benefit
learning. Dual Coding Theory (Paivio, 1986) suggests that
memory is enhanced when imagistic information is
incorporated during encoding. Indeed, there is growing
evidence that students benefit from their teachers’ gestures.
Research shows that children can detect conceptual
information that others express in gestures (Kelly & Church,
1998). Furthermore, the information that teachers express in
gestures appears to influence learning. Many studies have
shown improved performance on a posttest after a lesson that
contained gestures compared to a lesson that did not contain
gestures (Church, Ayman-Nolley, & Maldonado, 2005; Perry,
Birch, & Singleton, 1995; Valenzeno, Alibali, & Klatzky,
2003). For example, Church, Ayman-Nolley, and Maldonado
(2005) found that 4th grade students who witnessed a lesson
about equations that contained both speech and gesture solved
three times more equations correctly on a posttest than
students who witnessed a lesson that did not contain gestures.
Gestures appear to be a helpful classroom tool, and indeed,
teachers spontaneously use gestures in their lessons. Flevares
and Perry (2001) found that first-grade teachers used 5 to 7
“nonspoken representations” per minute in lessons about
place value, and most involved gestures. Alibali and Nathan
(2005) describe the gestures of one teacher giving a math
lesson about how to compute the area of a rectangle. The
teacher used gesture to trace the length of the rectangle while

1523

referring to the letter l in the equation A = lw. He then
mentioned the width of the rectangle while tracing the short
side of the rectangle. Such gestures clearly link the words and
symbols being spoken and written to more tangible objects in
the student’s environment (e.g., aspects of the pictured
rectangle).
Although it appears that at least some teachers
spontaneously use gestures to supplement their lessons in
effective ways, it is not clear if all teachers understand the
importance of gestures and use them effectively. To fully
harness the potential of gestures in the classroom, it may be
necessary to provide teachers with explicit instructions
regarding the use of gestures to supplement and ground their
speech. Such an intervention assumes, however, that speakers
can control and change their gestures when asked to do so.
This assumption may or may not have merit.
Many of the gestures speakers produce seem to be
unintentional. Speakers often don’t remember gesturing, and
they have a difficult time accurately describing their gestures
after the fact. This suggests that speakers may not consciously
plan or alter their gestures; however, there is some evidence
that speakers’ gestures are influenced implicitly by their own
communicative intent as well as by the knowledge and
physical position of their audience.
McNeill and Duncan (2000) have shown that gestures often
express information that is not encoded explicitly in speech.
For example, due to the linguistic structure of their language,
it is somewhat tedious for Spanish speakers to encode manner
in speech. They often omit manner information from their
speech (e.g., “he went down the hill”), but often include such
information in gesture (e.g., making a repetitive circular
motion to represent rolling). This suggests that gestures
supplement speech in order to fully convey ideas that are
difficult to encode linguistically.
Using a more experimental approach, Melinger and Levelt
(2004) found that when speakers are given a specific
communicative goal that includes conveying multiple pieces
of information, many speakers convey some of the key
information only in their gestures and not in their speech.
Melinger and Levelt argue that such gestures are intended to
communicate because they contain information that is part of
the speaker’s communicative goal.
In addition to conveying necessary information in their
gestures, speakers also alter the form of their gestures
according to their audience’s knowledge about the material
being spoken about. Gerwing and Bavelas (2004) have shown
that gestures are less likely to convey specific information
when the speaker and listener share common ground about
the gestures’ referents. Alibali and Nathan (in press) found
that a teacher altered her gestures in response to students’
questions and when problems were more complex. Thus,
speakers appear to alter their gestures depending on the
communicative context.
Finally, there is also some evidence that gestures are planned
and executed so that they will make sense based on the
observation angle of the audience. Özyürek (2002)
demonstrated that speakers perform the same gesture

differently depending on the location of the neutral space
between speaker and listener.
All of this evidence (Alibali & Nathan, in press; Gerwing &
Bavelas, 2004; McNeill & Duncan, 2000; Melinger & Levelt,
2004; Özyürek, 2002) suggests that speakers implicitly plan
their gestures so that they will be effective given the
communicative situation. The purpose of the present study
was to determine whether speakers (specifically teachers) can
also intentionally change their gestures when they have an
explicit goal to do so. Teachers were asked to give a math
lesson three times. After giving the lesson the first time, the
teachers were given a brief tutorial about the effectiveness of
linking important ideas in their gestures. They were then
asked to give the lesson a second time, making an effort to
incorporate as many gestures into their lesson as possible.
Finally, they were asked to give the lesson a third time, this
time attempting to refrain from gesturing as much as possible.
We hypothesized that if teachers are able to bring their
gestures under conscious control and learn how to use them
effectively after a brief tutorial, then teachers will produce
more gestures after receiving instruction about the importance
of doing so. Furthermore, if gestures can be brought under
explicit conscious control, then teachers may also be able to
inhibit their gestures when asked to do so. If teachers can
indeed intentionally alter their gestures, they may be able to
learn how to use gestures effectively in instruction.

Method
Participants
Six teachers (4 female, 2 male) volunteered to participate.
Each teacher had at least one year of experience teaching
math at the middle school level, and each was taking
advanced classes in the Educational Psychology or
Curriculum and Instruction department at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Teachers were recruited via word of
mouth and were compensated $25.00 for their participation.

Materials

1524

A pan balance problem that depicted two pans resting on a
triangular fulcrum was taken from Greenes and Findell
(1998). Two spheres were shown on the left pan and one
sphere and two cylinders were shown on the right pan. The
balance holding the two pans was resting on the horizontal
plane, thus representing the weight of the two pans in perfect
balance. See Figure 1.
This pan balance problem was reproduced on a 3 foot x 5
foot poster. The poster was laminated and taped to a
whiteboard. The teachers used dry erase markers to write on
the board surrounding the poster during their lesson. The pan
balance problem was also reproduced on a sheet of paper for
the teachers to use in planning their lesson.
The experimenter used a different pan balance problem to
explain the task to each teacher. This problem was drawn on

Figure 1: The pan balance used by the teachers in their lesson.
Teachers explained how to write an equation based on the
picture (e.g., 2s = 2c + s) and then how to simplify the
equation to represent the weight of one sphere
(e.g., s = 2c).
a piece of paper and was accompanied by a an equation that
correctly represented it. The teacher’s lessons were videotaped using a color Sony DCR-VX2000 camera attached to a
tripod. To assure a quality audio recording as well, a Samson
T32 Wireless microphone was attached to each participant’s
clothing.

Procedure

Following this baseline lesson, the experimenter gave the
teacher a brief tutorial about the effectiveness of using hand
gestures to link ideas. The experimenter briefly described the
concept of a linking gesture and gave the teachers several
examples of how to incorporate linking gestures into their
lessons. For example, when talking about the similarity
between the fulcrum in the pan balance and the equal sign in
the equation they were writing, the teachers could point to
both the fulcrum and the equal sign simultaneously.
Similarly, the teachers could link each shape in the picture to
its corresponding variable by pointing first to the shape and
then to the symbol in the equation. Once the teacher
confirmed that he or she understood the concept of a linking
gesture, the board was erased and the teacher gave the lesson
a second time. In this gesture condition, however, they were
asked to try to reinforce their lessons with hand gestures.
Each teacher was then asked to give the same lesson a third
time in an inhibit condition. In this condition, the teachers
were asked to refrain from gesturing during the lesson. The
teachers were allowed to use one hand to write the symbols
and equation on the whiteboard, but they were asked to keep
their hands as still as possible otherwise. The experimenter
suggested that the teachers hold onto a stack of papers, put
their hands in their pockets, or cross their arms to remind
themselves not to gesture. The experimenter erased the board
and the teacher gave the lesson a third time.
Following the three lessons, the teachers were debriefed and
given additional information about the importance of gestures
in teaching. They were thanked and compensated for their
participation.

Teachers arrived individually to a quiet conference room
where an experimenter and an audio-video specialist were
present. The teachers were told that the experiment addressed
whether or not teachers can intentionally alter the gestures
they use while they are teaching.
After signing the consent form, each teacher received
materials and instructions for the brief math lesson they were
Coding
going to teach. The teachers were told to imagine that they
Each teacher’s three lessons were transcribed verbatim. Two
were in a classroom full of students who had little or no
coders then used the audio-visual program Transana
knowledge of algebra (roughly 6th grade students). Their task
(Fassnacht & Woods, 2005) to identify and code the gestures
was to explain to their hypothetical students how to turn a
and linking episodes produced by the teachers.
drawing of a physical system into an algebraic equation (see
Each representational gesture was identified from the stream
Figure 1). They were instructed to demonstrate how to write
of manual activity and classified into one of three categories:
the equation using variables to represent the shapes pictured,
iconic, point, or writing. An iconic gesture was any gesture
and then simplify the equation to represent the weight of one
that took the shape of the information being conveyed. For
sphere in terms of the other shapes. The experimenter briefly
example, if a teacher made an O-shape by curling the fingers
highlighted some important connections that should be
of one hand while saying, “we have one sphere”, this gesture
mentioned in the lesson, such as the link between the fulcrum
was coded as an iconic gesture. A point gesture was any
in the pan balance and the equal sign in the equation. The
gesture that directed the audience’s attention toward a specific
teachers were also told that they should use a strictly lecture
feature of the picture or equation, usually by touching the
format for their lesson; although the experimenter would be
relevant feature with the extended index finger of one hand.
listening attentively during the lesson, the teachers should not
Pointing gestures were considered as separate gestures if they
ask her questions or ask her to work through the problem with
were temporally separated from one another. For example, if
them. Otherwise, each teacher was free to design the lesson
a teacher pointed to a sphere and then pointed to an “s” in the
however he or she wanted. Teachers were given up to 10
equation, this was counted as two pointing gestures. In
minutes to prepare their lessons, but none required the full
contrast, if a teacher pointed to the sphere with her right hand
amount of time.
while simultaneously pointing to the “s” in the equation with
Once the teacher was ready to begin the lesson, the audioher left hand, the action was counted as one pointing gesture.
visual specialist attached a small microphone to his or her
Although
clothing and positioned the camera to capture a waist-up view
of the teacher’s lesson. When ready, the teacher gave the
lesson, taking as much time as needed.
Table 1. Examples of Linking Episodes Made in Speech and Gesture

1525

Speech
“This thing is just like a see
saw you might see on the
playground.”
“We write an S for each
sphere we see on the pans.”
“And then we can say that
the halves of the pan are
equal because they’re
balanced”
“Two S’s…”
“And over here we have 1s
plus 2c”

Gesture
Right forearm rests on
top of left fist and rocks
back and forth,
alternating the height of
the wrist and elbow.
Right hand writes s + s
on the board.
Left hand points to left
side of pan, then to right
side of pan, then back to
the left side.
Right hand points to the
spheres on the left pan.
Left hand points to right
side of pan while right
hand writes 1s + 2c on
the board.

Type of Gesture

Type of Link

Mode of Link

Iconic

Pan to Other

Speech Link

Writing

Pan to Equation

Speech Link

Point

Pan to Pan

Both Gesture and
Speech
Link

Point

Pan to Equation

Combined Gesture and
Speech Link

Pan to Equation

Gesture Link

Point
Writing

writing is not usually considered a gesture, we counted it as a
gesture in this context because the teachers often used writing
to convey or link information (particularly in the inhibit
condition). Writing gestures were recorded in bouts; as long
as the teacher was writing continuously on the board, the
writing was counted as one writing gesture. Whenever the
teacher paused writing for more than one second, a new
writing gesture was counted if she began to write again. Most
writing gestures occurred with speech. For example writing
2s on the board while saying “We can write 2s to represent
the two spheres” was counted as one writing gesture. Writing
gestures in all three conditions were constrained to writing
aspects of the equation.
The coders also identified linking episodes in the teachers’
speech and gestures (see Alibali & Nathan, in press). A
linking episode was defined as an instance where the teacher
made a connection between two events or objects. Links
could be made between the two sides of the pan balance,
between the two sides of the equation, between the pan
balance and the equation, between the pan balance and other
real-world objects (e.g., a see saw on the playground), or
between the equation and other objects. Furthermore, each
linking episode could be made entirely in speech, entirely in
gesture, in both speech and gesture (i.e., the entire link made
in each modality), or in a combination of gesture and speech
(i.e., part of the link expressed in speech and part in gesture).
For example, a teacher who said “two S’s” while pointing to
the two balls on one of the pans linked the balls with the
variable representing the balls through a combination of
speech and gesture. The link was not made entirely in speech
or entirely in gesture; rather it was the combination of gesture
and speech that linked these ideas. See Table 1 for examples
of each type of linking episode.

Reliability
The two coders both coded a randomly selected three-minutesegment taken from each of the conditions given by one
teacher. Agreement for identifying individual gestures was
93%. Agreement for classifying each gesture as pointing,
iconic, or writing was 89% (N = 89). The coders’ agreement
for identifying linking episodes was 85%, with 89%
agreement for classifying each episode as involving speech,
gesture, or both (N = 36).

Results
Analysis of Gestures
To determine whether teachers were able to alter their gesture
production in accordance with the explicit instructions they
received, we conducted a 3 (condition: baseline, gesture,
inhibit) x 3 (type: point, iconic, writing) repeated measures
ANOVA. A main effect of condition emerged, F(2, 20) =
107.60, p < .001. Teachers produced more gestures following
explicit instructions about the importance of including
gestures in their lessons (M = 70.00, SD = 10.77) than they
produced initially without any instructions regarding gestures
(M = 51.17, SD = 7.73). They produced the fewest number of
gestures after being told to inhibit their gestures (M = 13.83,
SD = 2.32). There was also a main effect of type of gesture,
F(2, 20) = 28.36, p < .001. Points (M = 25.17, SD = 2.83)
were more prevalent in the teachers’ lessons than iconic (M =
6.83, SD = 5.34) or writing (M = 13.00, SD = 3.19) gestures.
Finally, an interaction between gesture type and condition
emerged, F(4, 20) = 39.73, p < .001. The tendency to produce
more gestures in the gesture condition than in the baseline
condition was true for pointing gestures, but not for iconic or
writing gestures. The tendency to produce fewer gestures in
the inhibit condition than in the baseline condition was true
for pointing and iconic gestures, but not for writing gestures.
See Figure 2.

1526

60

Point
Iconic
Writing

50
40
30
20
10
0
Baseline

Gesture

Inhibit

Condition

Figure 2. The mean number of gestures used by teachers in
each of the three conditions. Error bars were calculated using
MSerror as the measure of population variance.
Analysis of Linking Episodes
We were also interested in whether or not teachers could use
gestures specifically to link information after being instructed
to do so. We compared linking episodes that contained
gestures (coded as gesture links and combined gesture speech
links, see Table 1) and linking episodes that did not contain
gestures (speech links) in the three experimental conditions.
The 3 (condition: baseline, gesture, inhibit) x 2 (type of link:
gesture, speech) repeated measures ANOVA revealed a main
effect of condition, F(2, 10) = 7.73, p = .009. Speakers
produced fewer linking episodes after receiving instructions
to inhibit their gestures (M = 19.67, SD = 8.69) than after
receiving instructions to enhance their gestures (M = 39.00,
SD = 16.38), t(5) = 3.36, p = .02, or after receiving no
instructions regarding gestures (M = 29.00, SD = 9.30), t(5) =
4.03, p = .01.
The ANOVA also revealed an interaction between
condition and type of linking episode, F(2, 10) = 11.33, p =
.003. Teachers produced more linking episodes that involved
gestures after receiving instructions regarding the importance
of linking ideas through gestures (M = 26.50, SD = 11.55)
than after receiving no instructions (M = 17.33, SD = 7.61),
t(5) = 2.98, p = .03. Teachers produced fewer linking
episodes involving gestures after receiving instructions to
inhibit their gesture production (M = 6.00, SD = 5.05) than
after receiving no instructions t(5) = 3.93, p = .01, or after
receiving instructions about the importance of gestures, t(5) =
4.35, p < .001. In contrast, the number of linking episodes
made entirely in speech did not differ across conditions, F(2,
10) = .217, p = .81. See Figure 3.

no instruction. Teachers were also able to inhibit their
gestures when asked to do so.
When asked to supplement their lesson with gestures, the
teachers specifically increased their pointing gestures, and not
their iconic or writing gestures. There are several possible
reasons why this differential increase may have occurred.
First, the experimenter’s tutorial included several examples of
how to enhance gestures during the gesture condition. All of
the examples were demonstrated with points. Although the
experimenter did not explicitly state that points should be
used to link ideas, the teachers may have modeled their
gestures after those demonstrated by the experimenter, even
without explicit instruction to do so. Second, it is possible that
the teachers felt that pointing gestures would be the most
effective type of gesture when their goal was to use gestures
specifically to link ideas. Finally, it is also possible that
pointing gestures are the simplest type of gesture to plan and
produce, making them the easiest type for teachers to add to
their lesson without taxing cognitive resources. These three
explanations are not mutually exclusive, and it is possible that
all three led to the teacher’s preferential use of pointing
gestures when they were asked to increase their use of
gestures.
The study also suggests that teachers were able to use
gestures in specific ways based on the instruction they
received. The teachers used gestures specifically to link ideas,
as the tutorial had instructed. Teachers linked more ideas with
gestures following the tutorial than they did in the baseline
condition. This increase of gestures to link information cannot
be explained by a general increase in linking episodes, as
teachers did not make more links in speech following the
tutorial.
In addition to increasing the number of pointing gestures
they produced, teachers were also able to inhibit their gestures
when asked to do so. Teachers produced far fewer iconic and
pointing gestures in the inhibit condition. This
35
30

Gesture
25

Speech only

20
15
10
5
0
Baseline

Gesture

Inhibit

Condition

Discussion
The purpose of this experiment was to determine whether or
not teachers could intentionally alter the gestures they
produce during instruction. The results indicate an affirmative
answer. Teachers produced more gestures following a tutorial
about the effectiveness of gestures than they produced with

1527

Figure 3. The mean number of linking episodes that
contained gestures and that did not contain gestures in each of
the three conditions. Error bars were calculated using MSerror
as the measure of population variance.

evidence converges with the finding that teachers could also
increase their gesture production to suggest that teachers can
bring their gestures under conscious control.
m.li
The results of this study are important for two reasons. First,
they suggest that speakers can intentionally control their
gestures, and they therefore have implications for theories
about the mechanisms that give rise to gesture production.
Second, they suggest that interventions involving teachers’
gestures are feasible.
The present findings show that speakers can intentionally
alter their gesture production. Although these results cannot
speak to whether or not gestures are used intentionally in
every situation, they do suggest that it is possible for speakers
to consciously control their gestures at least in some
situations. This adds to existing evidence about how speakers
implicitly alter their gestures (Alibali & Nathan, in press;
Gerwing & Bavelas, 2004; Melinger & Levelt, 2004;
Özyürek, 2002).
More specifically, however, the present results suggest that
teachers are responsive to instructions regarding their gesture
production, in much the same way that teachers can monitor
and control their pedagogical speech. We tend to expect that
teachers can direct their speech through training, and indeed,
teacher education methods courses are based fundamentally
on that premise. This study shows that gestures, like speech,
can be similarly controlled. From a pedagogical perspective,
this is important, since gestures are an instructional tool that
allows teachers to direct learners’ attention, build on the
students’ existing knowledge, and refer to the physical
context to ground abstract ideas. However, in order to harness
the full potential of gestures, teacher education methods
courses and professional development programs may need to
include explicit instruction about the importance of using
gestures during instruction. The present findings suggest that
it is reasonable to expect teachers to alter their gestures based
on such interventions.
In conclusion, the present study shows that teachers, and
speakers more generally, can bring their gestures under
conscious control and use them effectively based on a brief
tutorial. Future research is needed to more fully investigate
the effects of producing gestures for teachers and students.
However, it seems that teachers don’t have to just tell their
students that ideas are related; they can show them too!

Acknowledgments
We thank Andrew Garfield for his audio-video assistance,
and David Woods for his technical support with the program
Transana. This research was supported by a grant to Martha
Alibali, Mitchell Nathan, and Eric Knuth from the Graduate
School at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

References
Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (in press). Teachers’ gestures
as a means of scaffolding students’ understanding:
Evidence from an early algebra lesson. In

R. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron, & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Video
research in the learning sciences. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Alibali, M. W. & Nathan, M. J. (2005, April). Teachers use
gestures to link multiple representations of mathematical
information. In N. Enyedy (Chair), Gestures and embodied
action in teaching, learning, and professional practice.
Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the
American Educational Research Association, Montreal,
Canada.
Church, R. B., Ayman-Nolley, S., & Maldonado, L. (2005).
Using gesture in the classroom: Can we apply what we
have learned in the lab? In M. Singer (chair), Can a picture
be worth a thousand words? A look at how the nonverbal
medium can reflect and influence underlying thought.
Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the Jean
Piaget Society, Vancouver, BC.
Fassnacht, C., & Woods, D. (2005). Transana v2.0x.
http://www.transana.org. Madison, WI: The Board of
Regents of the University of Wisconsin System.
Flevares, L. M., & Perry, M. (2001). How many do you see?
The use of nonspoken representations in first-grade
mathematics lessons. Journal of Educational Psychology,
93, 330-345.
Gerwing, J., & Bavelas, J. B. (2004). Linguistic influences on
gestures' form. Gesture, 4, 157-195.
Greenes, C., & Findell, C. (1998). Groundworks: Algebra
puzzles and problems (Grades 4, 5, 6 and 7). Chicago:
Creative Publications.
Kelly, S. D., & Church, R. B. (1998). A comparison between
children's and adults' ability to detect conceptual
information conveyed through representational gestures.
Child Development, 69, 85-93.
McNeill, D., & Duncan, S. (2000). Growth points in thinkingfor-speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture
(pp. 141-161). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Melinger, A., & Levelt, W. J. M. (2004). Gesture and the
communicative intention of the speaker. Gesture, 4, 119141.
Özyürek, A. (2002). Do speakers design their cospeech
gestures for their addressees? The effects of addressee
location on representational gestures. Journal of Memory
and Language, 46, 688-704.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding
approach. New York: Oxford University Press.
Perry, M., Berch, D., & Singleton, J. (1995). Constructing
shared understanding: The role of nonverbal input in
learning contexts. Journal of Contemporary Legal Issues,
6, 213-235.
Valenzeno, L., Alibali, M. W., & Klatzky, R. L. (2003).
Teachers' gestures facilitate students' learning: A lesson in
symmetry. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 28,
187-204.

1528

