UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
DREAM and False Memories of Personality: The stuff that impressions are made of

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74r4f1sr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Ferreira, Mário A.B.
Garcia-Marques, Leonel
Garcia-Marques, Teresa

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

DREAM and False Memories of Personality:
The stuff that impressions are made of
Leonel Garcia-Marques (garcia_marques@sapo.pt)
Faculdade de Psicologia e de Ciências da Educação
Universidade de Lisboa, Alameda da Universidade
1649-013 Lisboa – Portugal

Mário A. B. Ferreira (mabf@fpce.ul.pt)
Faculdade de Psicologia e de Ciências da Educação
Universidade de Lisboa, Alameda da Universidade
1649-013 Lisboa – Portugal

Teresa Garcia-Marques (gmarques@ispa.pt)
Instituto Superior de Psicologia Aplicada, Rua Jardim do Tabaco, 34,
1149-041, Lisboa – Portugal
.
(intelligent, skilful, industrious, warm, determined, practical
and cautious) and the cold list (intelligent, skilful,
industrious, cold, determined, practical and cautious).
Participants of both groups were asked to form an
impression of the type of person who could be described by
those traits. Immediately after, participants wrote short
descriptions of their impressions and chose the trait from
each of 18 antonym trait pairs that best fit their impressions
of the target. Participants of the warm and cold groups made
markedly different trait choices although the two lists
differed only in one of the stimulus traits. The impact of the
replacement of warm by cold was nevertheless very
specific. Trait pairs such as generous-ungenerous or
sociable-unsociable were greatly affected (e.g., 91% of the
warm group chose generous whereas only 8% of the cold
group made the same choice). Trait pairs like persistentunstable or honest-dishonest were not affected at all (e.g.,
100% vs. 97% of the warm and cold groups, respectively,
chose persistent). These results defied generations of
researchers. Rosenberg, Nelson and Vivekanathan (1968)
using a variety of research techniques (e.g., trait sorting,
content analysis, etc.) showed that this pattern of results can
be accounted if we conceive impressions formation as a
process of target placement in a bi-dimensional semantic
space formed by two relatively independent evaluative
dimensions: one intellectual and one social. In fact, and
according to the multidimensional analyses performed by
Rosenberg et al. (1968), the list of traits used by Asch
(1946) loaded heavily on the “intellectual” dimension,
except for warm and cold, which loaded on the “social”
dimension. Thus replacement of warm by cold should have
a great impact regarding other “social” trait pairs but no
effect regarding “intellectual” traits. And that was indeed
the case. This semantic structure that represented the layman
intuitions of what traits go together in the same target was
called implicit theory of personality and it helped social
psychologists to understand why during impression
formation, participants went often beyond the information
given, actively inferring non-presented traits and

Abstract
We argue that false memories are a by-product of flexible
memory structures. In this work we extend false memory
effects to a novel associative memory structure – the implicit
theory of personality (Rosenberg et al., 1968). In our study,
we adapted the DREAM paradigm to impression formation
and obtained false memories effects parallel to those effects
obtained in the DREAM paradigm. Moreover, this extension
allowed us to document the moderation of false memories by
processing goals suggesting that processing goals can
moderate spreading activation processes.
Keywords: Impression formation; False memories; memory:
social cognition

Introduction
Research using the DREAM (Deese-Roediger-McDermott)
paradigm has shown that false memories are a cost that
adaptive associative memory structures have to endure.
False memories have been obtained with semantic
associates of a critical concept (Deese, 1959; Roediger &
McDermott, 1995), with phonological neighbours
(Sommers & Lewis, 1999) or even with table-related
numerical near-neighbours (Pesta, Sanders & Murphy,
2001). In this work we extend the effect to yet another
associative structure – the implicit theory of personality
(Rosenberg, Nelson & Vivekanathan, 1968). In doing so,
we are able not only to re-interpret classical effects in the
literature of impression formation (i.e., the warm-cold
effect, Asch, 1946) but also, to contribute a better
understanding of how processing goals interact with
associative structures.

The Warm-Cold Effect in Impression Formation
and its interpretation: The Implicit Theory of
Personality as an Associative Structure
Asch (1946) presented two groups of participants with two
very similar lists of traits. The two lists were: the warm list
250

of the implicit personality theory space is poor or absent,
active inference processes go beyond available information
and compensate for this omission leading to the activation
of the corresponding semantic trait areas. In the warm-cold
paradigm, the only available information regarding the
social dimension is the distinctive trait (warm or cold), thus
participants must go beyond available information and infer
traits from the semantic neighbouring areas of warm or cold
(i.e., the social dimension). We will call these divergent
false memories, distinctive false memories. Figure 1
illustrates the processes of formation of distinctive and nondistinctive false memories. Specifically, if a list of
“intellectual” traits with a distinctive “social” trait (or viceversa) is presented to participants instructed either to
memorize the words or form an impression of the
personality of a person described by those traits, it is
predicted that a) both groups of participants will exhibit
non-distinctive false memories (they will falsely recognize
non-presented word from areas neighbouring the semantic
space of the list words); b) impression formation sets will
produce more distinctive false memories than memory sets
(i.e., participants from the impression formation group will
falsely recognize more non-presented words from areas
neighbouring the semantic space of the distinctive word).

incorporating them in their impressions of the personality of
the targets.

False memories in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott
(DREAM) paradigm
Roediger and McDermott (1995) replicated and extended a
paradigm first introduced by Deese (1959). In this
paradigm, the words that are most often free associated with
a critical concept are used to form a stimulus list (e.g., the
words, sour, candy, sugar, bitter, good, taste, tooth, nice,
honey, soda, chocolate, heart, cake, tart and pie formed the
sweet list). When participants hear lists such as this (that do
not include the critical word) and they are immediately
asked to recall it, they very often falsely recollect the (nonpresented) critical word (sweet). The level of false recall of
the critical word is equivalent to the level of veridical recall
of words presented in the middle of the list. In recognition
tests, the level of false recognition of the critical word is
even greater and is accompanied by strong
phenomenonological and source illusions (Payne, Ellie,
Blackwell & Roediger & McDermott, 1995; Neuschatz,
1996). Opponent theories of false memories like the
Activation-Monitoring framework explain these results as
the outcome of two opposing processes an automatic
spreading-activation process that describes how activation
converges from the associates to the critical concept and the
failure of a deliberate monitoring process that is supposed to
discriminate presented from non-presented information
(Roediger, McDermott & Watson, 2001). In sum, false
memories are not, in our days, taken to be bizarre or sui
generis effects but, instead they supposedly represent the
cost of a flexible and adaptive associative memory that
possesses considerable learning powers and inference skills
(Roediger, 1996).

figure 1 Distinctive and Non-distinctive False Memories

Method

False Memories and Impression Formation
Like we aforementioned, false memories effects have been
shown in a variety of associative structures (i.e., semantic or
phonological networks and table-related numbers). We
hypothesized that these effects would also underlie
impression formation and, in particular, the warm-cold
effect. Namely, we contend that when participants form an
impression of the target’s personality from the traits they
were presented with, they attempt to position the target in
the intellectual / social semantic space described by
Rosenberg et al. (1968). That is, we think that impression
formation encoding processes involve not only the
assemblage of specific semantic trait space but also setting
off a goal to position the target in that space. In the case of
the warm-cold paradigm, the activation of the several
intellectual traits presented on Asch´s list would gradually
converge to their non-presented semantic neighbours that
loaded more heavily in the intellectual dimension eventually
leading to false memories of them, much like it occurs in the
DREAM paradigm. We will call these converging false
memories, non-distinctive false memories. Moreover, we
suggest that the impression formation goal may moderate
spreading activation processes such that whenever the
available target information regarding one of the dimensions

Figure 1. Patterns of activation for non-distinctive (filled
lines) and distinctive (pointed lines) false memories.
Participants
117 (99 female and 18 male) students from the University of
Lisbon participated in the experiment in exchange for
course credits.

Stimulus materials
In order to assemble the stimulus materials, we first asked a
different sample of 25 students to provide short trait-based
descriptions of liked and disliked persons (both their
personal acquaintances and persons they didn’t know
personally). From these descriptions we chose the most
frequent 40 positive and 40 negative traits. Following
Rosenberg et al. (1968), another sample of 27 students
sorted the 80 traits in 12 groups according to what traits
more often go together in different people. From these
sorting data, we performed a MDS analysis that basically
reproduced the Rosenberg et al. (1968)’s results reproducing
the bi-dimensional structure identified by them (stress =
.21). We also performed a 4-Way Cluster Analysis, which
251

target person. In each case, 90 seconds mediated between
lists. The first and last lists were fillers and constant across
conditions, only the middle list was critical and changed
according to the independent variables. After hearing the
three lists, participants performed a distracter task for 10
minutes. After the distracter task, participants performed
the recognition test. We follow the instructions used in
Roediger and McDermott (1995) such that, whenever
participants recognized a trait they were asked to report
whether they remember some of the circumstances in what
the item was presented (a R response) or simply knew
somehow that the item had been presented (a K response).
Again, we followed the instructions of Roediger and
McDermott (1995) that, in turn, followed Gardiner (1988).
At the end of the sessions, participants were fully debriefed
and thanked.

reproduced the four quadrants of the MDS. We also used the
4-Way Cluster Analysis to select the 15 words of each
cluster closest to the cluster centroid. We used the 5 words
closer to each centroid as the critical lures (never to be
presented to participants) and the 10 next words to form two
lists (the intellectual and the social list). We chose four
distinctive words among the opposite pairs of each
dimension that were closer to the respective centroid. Thus
for the intellectual dimension, cultured and uncultured were
chosen. For the social dimension, warm and cold were
chosen.
In sum, in this study we used two lists of 10 words for the
intellectual and for the social dimension (we only formed
lists using the positive pole) and 4 critical distinctive words
(warm vs. cold and cultured vs. uncultured). We always
presented each list of one dimension with the distinctive
word (either positive or negative in valence) from the other
dimension. The distinctive word was always presented in
the eighth position. In the present experiment, list items
always belonged to a different trait dimension than did the
distinctive item (intellectual versus social dimension or
vice-versa).
In addition we also formed 2 filler lists with 9 and 10
words that loaded less in both dimensions. The critical list
was always presented in between the two filler lists.
The recognition test contained the 20 critical lures (5 per
quadrant), 20 list words (5 presented words per list), the 4
distinctive words, 10 words presented in the filler lists.

Results and Discussion
Our critical data regards both the proportion non-distinctive
false memories (falsely recognized items that semantically
correspond to the semantic quadrant of the list items) and
the proportion of distinctive false memories (falsely
recognized items that semantically correspond to the
semantic quadrant of the distinctive item). Remember that
list items always belonged to a different trait dimension than
did the distinctive item (intellectual versus social dimension
or vice-versa).
Non-Distinctive False Memories We performed a 2
Processing Goals (Memory vs. Impression Formation) X 2
List (Intellectual vs. Social) x 2 Distinctive Item Valence
(Positive vs. Negative) between-participants ANOVA on
the proportion of non-distinctive false memories. Only a
non-interpretable interaction between Processing Goal and
List emerged, F (1, 109) = 7.75, p = .006, MSe = .09, η2 =
.07, showing that whereas for the social list, Impression
Formation made more false recognitions than Memory
participants (M = .49 vs. M = .23), the reverse occurred for
the intellectual list (M = .39 vs. M = .45).
In any case, the overall mean proportion of nondistinctive false memories was M = .40. We interpret the
considerable level of non-distinctive false memories
obtained as a corroboration that false memories can also be
obtained within an impression formation semantic structure
(the so called implicit theory of personality).

Design
The design was a 2 Processing Goal (Memory vs.
Impression Formation) X 2 Lists (Intellectual vs. Social) X
2 Distinctive Word Valence (Positive vs. Negative) X 2
False Memories (Non-distinctive vs. Distinctive) mixed
design, the last factor being within-participants.

Procedure
The experiment was run in small groups of 4 to 8
participants. Participants first read instructions that either
asked to memorize the lists of words they were going to be
presented with or to form an impression of the personality
of different target persons described by set of adjective traits
provided by people who were well acquainted with the
targets. In memory conditions, participants were asked to try
memorize the words verbatim so that they could reproduce
them successfully in a memory test, and to recapitulate the
list mentally for 90 seconds before the presentation of the
next list. In impression formation conditions, participants
were asked to try imagined the type of person the target
might be and to recapitulate their impressions for 90 second
before the presentation of the adjective trait list describing
the next target person. After reading these instructions,
participants heard the three CD-recorded lists. In the
memory condition, the experimenter announced each list
designating it with a letter label (a, b and c) and asked the
participants to memorize the words. In the impression
formation condition, the experimenter announced each list
designating it by common first and family name (e.g., Peter
Jones) and asked participants to form impressions of the

Non-Distinctive False Memories (Remember vs. Know).
Participants’ phenomenological reports of their nondistinctive false recognitions as remember (R) or know (K)
were included in a subsequent analysis. This resulted in a 2
Processing Goals (Memory vs. Impression Formation) X 2
List (Intellectual vs. Social) x 2 Distinctive Item Valence
(Positive vs. Negative) X Phenomenological Report
(Remember vs. Know) mixed-model ANOVA, with the last
factor being within-participants on non-distinctive false
memories. Only the main effect for Phenomenological
Report and an interaction qualifying it between Processing
Goal and Phenomenological Report emerged. The former,
F (1, 109) = 28.71, p = .001, MSe = .19, η2 = .21, reflects a
somewhat surprising prevalence of Know (M = .55) relative
252

Distinctive False Memories (Remember vs. Know).
Participants’ phenomenological reports of their distinctive
false recognitions as remember (R) or know (K) were
included in a subsequent analysis. This resulted in a 2
Processing Goals (Memory vs. Impression Formation) X 2
List (Intellectual vs. Social) x 2 Distinctive Item Valence
(Positive vs. Negative) X Phenomenological Report
(Remember vs. Know) mixed-model ANOVA, with the last
factor being within-participants on non-distinctive false
memories. Only one effect involving Phenomenological
Report was significant – the main effect. F (1, 109) = 7.66, p
= .007, MSe = .53, η2 = .07, reflecting the prevalence of
Know (M = .52) relatively to Remember (M = .24) reports.
The same result pattern as the one found in the case of nondistinctive false memories.

to Remember reports (M = .23). The interaction with
Processing Goal [F (1, 109) = 10.65, p = .001, MSe = .19, η2
= .09] revealed that this difference was greater for Memory
(M =. 64 vs. M = .12) than for Impression Formation
participants (M = .46 vs. M = .34). This prevalence of
Know over Remember reports in both Impression
Formation and Memory conditions stands in contrast with
the results of Roediger and McDermott (1995) for general
semantic lists. This difference may indicate that the
memory illusions typically obtained in the original DREAM
paradigm are phenomenologically more compelling than the
memory illusions obtained in the present paradigm.
Distinctive False Memories. We performed a 2 Processing
Goals (Memory vs. Impression Formation) X 2 List
(Intellectual vs. Social) x 2 Distinctive Item Valence
(Positive vs. Negative) between-participants ANOVA on
the proportion of distinctive false memories1. The three
factors were significant.
First and foremost, the Processing Goal main effect
emerged, F (1, 109) = 5.89, p = .017, MSe = .03, η2 = .05,
attesting the fact that, as predicted, Impression Formation
made more false recognitions than Memory participants (M
= .15 vs. M = .08).
A List effect was also reliable, F (1, 109) = 12.81, p =
.001, MSe = .03, η2 = .10, indicating that, participants made
more false recognitions for the Social than for the
Intellectual list (M = .17 vs. M = .06).
The last main effect to emerge was the Distinctive Item
Valence, F (1, 109)= 29.94, p= .001, MSe = .03, η2= .21,
reflecting the difference between the proportion of false
recognitions made when the distinctive item was positive
(M= .20) relative to when the item was negative (M= .03).
Finally, the Processing Goal X List interaction was also
significant, F (1, 109) = 4.17, p = .044, MSe = .03, η2 = .02,
showing that the difference between Impression formation
and Memory participants in the proportion of distinctive
false memories was higher for the Social (M = .24 vs. M =
.10) than for the Intellectual list (M = .07 vs. M = .05).
In sum, our main prediction was confirmed; the goal of
forming and impression made Impression Formation
participants to show a higher level of distinctive false
memories than Memory participants. In our view, this
difference is due to the active attempt from Impression
Formation participants to position the target in the implicit
theory of personality space. It is our contention that this
finding illustrates how a processing goal can moderate
automatic spreading-activation effects.

Veridical Memories. We performed a 2 Processing Goals
(Memory vs. Impression Formation) X 2 List (Intellectual
vs. Social) x 2 Distinctive Item Valence (Positive vs.
Negative) between-participants ANOVA, on the proportions
of hits (list items recognized). Only one effect emerged, a
Processing Goal main effect. F (1, 109) = 4.03, p = .047,
MSe = .04, η2 = .04, showing that Impression Formation (M
= .86) recognized more list items than Memory participants
(M = .77). Moreover, Impression Formation (M = .87)
recognized the distinctive item more than did the Memory
participants (M = .69), χ2 (1) = 5.83, p = .016. Thus
Impression Formation performed better than Memory
participants. This result reproduces a classical difference
found in the social cognition literature (Hamilton, Katz &
Leirer, 1980), and probably reflects the fact that forming
impressions of the personality requires more integrative and
elaborative processes of encoding that are beneficial to later
retrieval.

Discussion
Our results corroborate the presence of non-distinctive false
memories, already identified in several semantic spaces,
within an impression formation semantic structure (the so
called implicit theory of personality).
In addition, the results suggest that under an impression
formation goal another type of false memories arise,
namely, distinctive false memories.
Flexible associative memory structures are able to store
information but must go further than storage to compensate
for inevitable information loss that occurs in our complex
world. Thus these structures need to infer, to complete and
to go beyond the information given in order to accomplish
our learning needs. False memories may represent the
implicit cost of these considerable learning powers and
should be encountered in all associative memory structures.
The present study enables us to illustrate that false
memories can also occur in a novel semantic structure – the
so-called, implicit personality theory (Rosenberg et al.,
1968). Moreover, we think we have shown that impression
formation encoding processes involve not only a specific
semantic trait space, the position of the target in that space
but also the setting off of active inference processes that
compensate for missing or poor information moderating
automatic spreading-activation effects. In this sense, we

1

Preliminary analyses showed the assumption of homoscedasticity
did not hold. For this reason, we recoded the data in a dichotomous
way (0 vs. 1 or more false memories) and performed a logistic
regression on this score using Processing Goal, List, Distinctive
Item Valence and their interactions as predictors. The three factors
were significant, thus replicating the above-presented results (only
the interaction Processing Goal X List failed to emerge. For
coherence and commodity of presentation, we kept the ANOVA
results in the text.

253

Pesta, B., Sanders, R., & Murphy, M. (2001). Misguided
multiplication: Creating false memories with numbers
rather than words. Memory & Cognition, 29, 478-483.
Roediger, H. L., III. (1996). Memory illusions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 76–100.
Roediger, H. L. III, & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating
false memories: Remembering words not presented in
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Roediger, H. L., III, Watson, J. M., McDermott, K. B., &
Gallo, D. A. (2001). Factors that determine false recall: A
multiple regression analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 385-407.
Rosenberg, S., Nelson, C., & Vivekanathan, P. S. (1968). A
multidimensional approach to the structure of personality
impressions. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 9, 283-294.
Sommers, M.S. & Lewis, B.P. (1999). Who really lives next
door: Creating false memories with phonological
neighbors. Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 83-108.

contend that our data suggests that impression formation
occurs in a flexible semantic space.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported in part by
the Grant POCTI/PSI/47252/2002 from the FCT (Portugal).

References
Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41, 258-290
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 58, 17-22.
Hamilton, D. L., Katz, L. B., & Leirer, V. O. (1980).
Cognitive representation of impressions: Organizational
processes in first impression formation. Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 39, 1050-1063.
Payne, D. G., Elie, C. J., Blackwell, J. M., & Neuschatz, J.
S. (1996). Memory illusions: recalling, recognizing, and
recollecting events that never occurred. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 261-285.

254

