UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Presentation Speed of a Dynamic Visualization on the Understanding of a
Mechanical System

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9m22176h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Fischer, Sebastian
Lowe, Richard K.
Schwan, Stephan

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Presentation Speed of a Dynamic Visualization on the
Understanding of a Mechanical System
Sebastian Fischer (s.fischer@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany

Richard K. Lowe (r.k.lowe@curtin.edu.au)
Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth 6845, WA, Australia

Stephan Schwan (s.schwan@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany
Abstract

dynamic visualisation (such as the size, shape, colour,
and arrangement of its component entities) and its temporal properties (such as playing speed, direction, and
continuity) have the potential to affect the relative perceptual salience of displayed information.

In an experimental study, the role of temporal variation
of a realistic animation was examined. The animation
of a complex mechanical system, a pendulum clock, was
presented in a between subject design at normal or fast
speed. Presentation speed was found to affect distribution of attention and understanding of the functionality of the clockwork mechanism. Verbal reports in the
fast condition contained more statements on the weight,
which is a central part of the clocks’ mechanism. When
giving a written description of the clock, subjects who
saw the fast presentation produced more correct and less
false concepts about the key components of the clockwork. For complex subject matter, it seems possible
that speed could be used strategically by instructional
designers to raise the perceptual salience of thematically
relevant aspects of the display, by means of faster or
slower presentation speeds.

Instructional Uses of Temporal
Manipulations

Accordingly, research into learning from dynamic visualizations has produced mixed findings. For example, while Schwan and Riempp (2004), found that usercontrollable videos facilitated the learning of knot-tying
tasks, no corresponding facilitation effect was found in
studies by Lowe (2003) of learning meteorological prediction skills from a user-controllable weather map animation. A likely reason for the mixed results is that
such studies differed in a number of key respects. One
important way they differ is in the type of content that is
presented, which can range from concrete subject matter
such as mechanical devices to highly abstract material
such as visualizations of mathematical algorithms. In
addition to these content differences, there are also differences in how literally the specific content is depicted.
The issue here is one of the extent to which the visuospatial and temporal properties of the depiction resemble
those of the real life referent. In terms of visuospatial
properties, the appearance of the depicted content can
be presented with varying degrees of realism, ranging
from extremely realistic portrayals (as with films, videos,
and realistically rendered animations) through to highly
schematic renditions that embody extensive manipulation of the referent (such as animated diagrams). With
temporal properties, the behaviour of the depicted content can also be presented with varying degrees of realism. At one extreme, the dynamic visualization has a
strict moment-to-moment correspondence with the referent situation; at the other, temporal characteristics such
as presentation speed and order have been extensively
manipulated.

This paper focuses upon temporal properties of a dynamic display and explores the effect of presentation
speed on the processing of information in an animated
depiction of a complex mechanical device (a pendulum
clock).
Dynamic visualizations of various types are increasingly used in educational resources for presenting subject matter that involves change over time. Intuitively,
these representations appear well suited to helping learners understand change phenomena because they provide
explicit depiction of the referent situation’s dynamics instead of requiring the learner to reconstruct the dynamics via mental animation from static graphics. Nevertheless, dynamic visualizations have not proven to be a
universal panacea for the challenges involved in comprehending change phenomena. Merely providing changerelated information as an analogue dynamic representation does not guarantee that learners will necessarily
be able to extract its key aspects (Lowe, 1999, 2003,
2004). Particularly when the subject matter is complex
and unfamiliar, learners appear to respond to the consequent high level of information processing demands by
selectively attending to aspects of the display that have
greatest perceptual salience relative to the rest of the
display. Unfortunately, such aspects are not necessarily those of most relevance to the central theme of the
presentation. Both the visuospatial characteristics of a
1305

Strict maintenance of the actual temporal properties
of a referent system in its depiction can pose processing challenges for learners. For example, because animation is a fleeting form of representation (Ainsworth
& Van Labeke, 2004), there is potential for learners to
miss key information because it is displayed only very
briefly or to lose information because it is ‘overwritten’
in working memory by what is presented subsequently
(Lowe, 1999). Such failures to extract or retain key information are likely to prejudice the individual’s capacity

ical pendulum clock used in this study portrays such
a complex dynamic device which is characterized by a
cyclic system with a hierarchically-organized event structure embodied in three main sub-systems: (i) a drive
mechanism (ii) a transmission system, and (iii) an analogue time display. Each of these sub-systems consists
of a number of interconnected components that vary in
their visuospatial and temporal properties. Table 1 summarises key information about these sub-systems.
A precondition for building a satisfactory mental
model of a complex dynamic phenomenon from an animation is that the behaviour of its key functional components is extracted from the presentation. For a pendulum clock these key components are the pendulum,
escapement and, most fundamentally the weight, which
as the drive mechanism comprise the central sub-system
of the clock. When the phenomenon involves many
and varied entities as well as a wide range of dynamic
changes, there will be considerable competition for the
viewer’s limited attentional capacities. Particular aspects of the display will be noticed to the neglect of
others, according to their specific visuospatial and temporal properties relative to the broader display context.
For example, large, fast-moving entities near the centre
of the display are more likely to attract attention than
small, slow-moving entities near its periphery. Changing
the overall speed of an animation potentially alters the
relative perceptibility of particular aspects of the display
due to the dynamic contrast effect (Lowe, 2005).
In the animation used for the present experiment,
clock components were rendered at the same level of
brightness in a limited range of ‘natural’ colours. This
treatment allowed the components to be clearly distinguished from one another while avoiding colour cueing
of some aspects over others. Inspection of Table 1 and
Figure 1 shows that there are considerable differences in
the visuospatial and temporal properties of the clock system’s various components. As a consequence, it is likely
that some aspects of its normal operation (i.e., when
running at a realistic speed) would be more intrinsically
perceptible than others. For example, the pendulum is
large, distinctively-shaped, and its movement occupies
much of the visual field whereas many of the gears are
small, similarly-shaped, and their movements occupy little of the visual field.
In order to understand the clock’s operation from the
animation, it is necessary to build a high quality dynamic
mental model of the device. The effectiveness of this
model construction activity is likely to depend on both
bottom-up and top-down processing of the presented information. Bottom-up aspects processing will largely
be influenced by perceptual attributes of the animated
display, while background knowledge about mechanical
pendulum clocks and the nature of the task will guide
top-down processing. As discussed above, the components shown in the clock animation vary along a number
of perceptually-relevant dimensions with respect to their
visuospatial and temporal properties. However, the way
in which attention is directed amongst these components
will be only partly determined by their relative percepti-

to construct a high quality mental model of the referent
situation and so have negative effects on learning. The
current preoccupation with behavioural realism (Lowe,
in press) in the design of educational animations should
perhaps be challenged because of potential conflicts between a realistic presentation regime and constraints on
human processing of temporal information. Rather than
privileging the temporal properties of the subject matter
in its depiction, it may be that dynamic visualizations
would be more effective if these properties were manipulated in order to facilitate their processing by learners.
Extensive manipulation of the visuospatial characteristics of static graphics has a long history within educational materials. It is well accepted as a way of making
those representations more effective for learners. For example, it is standard practice in explanatory diagrams
to omit material, simplify entities, re-organise structure,
and visually emphasise key aspects. With today’s technology, instructional designers now have the option to
incorporate analogous manipulations of temporal properties in dynamic visualizations (Schwan, Garsoffky, &
Hesse, 2000; Schwan & Garsoffky, 2004). Precedents
already established in the film and television industry
may help point towards some possibilities, e.g. the use
of time-lapse and slow-motion in movies, commercials
and sports reports (Visch & Tan, in press). Despite
the accepted use of altered speed in films and television
for affective and aesthetic purposes, systematic empirical investigation of its effects on learning-related perceptual and cognitive processing is lacking. One of the few
studies concerning presentation speed was carried out
by Newtson and Rindner (1979) who found that showing a filmed problem solving sequence in slow-motion
or time-lapse had effects on segmentation, memory, and
estimates of future performance.
Changing the presentation speed of an animation
could have a number of possible perceptual and cognitive consequences. One possibility is that the amount of
information that can be processed is affected. For example, a slower presentation may allow viewers to deal
with more of the available information because the speed
is better matched to the limits of their available processing capacity. Alternatively, changing the speed may
have a much more fundamental effect at the level of the
relative perceptual salience of the different entities portrayed. For example, at a faster playing speed, an entity
that was previously low in perceptual salience because it
did not contrast sufficiently with its surroundings could
become more noticeable.

Mechanical Pendulum Clocks as
Complex Dynamic Phenomena
Complex dynamic phenomena can be conceptualised as
a hierarchy of event chains that exist at several different
temporal scales. On each level, the event chains may run
independently. They can be triggered by event chains
on another level and progress linearly, but they can also
be cyclic, depending fully or partly on their own previous states and events. The levels may be interrelated
by cross-level constraints. The animation of a mechan1306

Table 1: Sub-systems.
Sub-System
Drive
mechanism

Components
Weight

Function
Energy source

Visuospatial Character
Small, bottom-centre, cylinder
plus vertically oriented chain

Pendulum

Pulse generator

Escapement

Energy release
controller

Large, on the right side, vertically oriented
Medium sized, most right gear
with specially shaped teeth
and anchor
Small and medium sized gears,
placed central, with highly
symmetric shape
Small, in the center, with horizontal orientation
Medium sized, centered on the
left,
Large, centered on the left
Small, at the upper left

Transmission Gears
System

Hour hand

Energy
distribution and
transmission
Mounting and
connecting gears
Display hours

Minute hand
Second hand

Display minutes
Display seconds

Arbors
Analogue
Display

Temporal Character
Very slow, linear downward
movement over a large distance
Fast oscillation ranging over a
medium size area
Fast seesaw movement of the
anchor in a small region on top
of the escape wheel
Fast, medium and slow rotations of different gears in both
directions
Fast, medium and slow spinning causes textural change
Very slowly circling over a
medium sized area
Slowly circling over large area
Fast circling over small area

Hypotheses
On the level of attentional processes, it was expected
that different presentation speeds would affect distribution of attention and lead to different attentional profiles. Indicators for attention should be found in verbal
reports and pointing behaviour during animation perception. On the level of comprehension, improved mental model building and understanding was expected, if
a changed presentation speed increases attention to thematically relevant components. For the pendulum clock
this should be achieved by increasing attention to the
key components of the drive mechanism (i.e. pendulum,
escapement and particularly the weight).
Figure 1: Frame from pendulum clock animation.

Method
Participants

bility. Direction of attention will also be shaped by what
the individual viewer already knows about clocks in general and mechanical pendulum clocks in particular. For
example, unless the viewer has specific expertise about
clock mechanisms, s/he will know far more about the
visible aspects of the clock (the hands, weight, and pendulum) than the hidden parts of its mechanism. Further,
if the task is to understand the mechanism, attention is
likely to be preferentially directed to those components
that are known from everyday experience to be crucial
to its operation (such as the weight and the pendulum).
In this study, animations showed the clock operating
either at normal speed or greatly speeded up. It seems
reasonable to expect that bottom-up and top-down aspects of processing would interact, with the effect of
changes in perceptual salience of clock components due
to speed differences being modulated by background
knowledge of component functionality. This leads to a
number of hypotheses:

Thirty-six students from the University of Tübingen
were paid for their participation. Four were excluded
from the analysis: two already had an exceptionally high
level of expertise about clocks, one demonstrated a lack
of motivation, and one misinterpreted the thinking aloud
instruction as meaning free association. For the remaining 32 subjects the average age was 23.8 years (24 female
and 8 male). In each condition there were 16 subjects,
11 female and 5 male in the normal, and 13 female and
3 male in the fast condition.

Apparatus

1307

Animations were shown full screen on a multimedia
PC with 3 GHz connected to a 19” TFT Display with
60 Hz and 479 mm screen diagonal at a resolution of
1280 x 1024 pixel.

Stimulus Material
The clockwork animations were modeled and rendered
using Blender1 and the Python scripting language. For
each condition, a separate animation was rendered, one
with the animation’s speed set to real time and the other
one set to 210 times normal speed. This factor was chosen to minimize temporal aliasing effects through the
sampling rate determined by the animation frame rate
of 25 Hz. Adjustments were made in the display of the
fast animation to ensure that for the different angular
velocities of the gears, the motion impression was appropriate and not disturbed by a reverse rotation effect.
This effect, also called the wagon wheel illusion, is not
restricted to media presentations, but also occurs in real
life and under constant light conditions (Purves, Paydarfar, & Andrews, 1996; Kline, Holcombe, & Eagleman,
2004).
The final animation2 shown to the subjects started
with a front-on viewpoint of the clock face. The clock
was not operating at this point and the viewpoint moved
on a circular path around the center of the clockwork,
providing a 20-second introduction to the overall structure of the mechanism. The viewpoint then arrived at a
perspective showing the clockwork at 140 degrees from a
rear-side view as shown in Figure 1. The viewpoint and
the length of the arbors was chosen to minimize occlusions and clearly display each gear’s movement. The final
view of this introductory presentation was then faded out
and the clockwork in the same position, but in motion
rather than static, was faded in. The animation continued for 5 minutes and was then repeated, being faded out
and again in immediately. This repetition was necessary,
because the length of the weight’s chain was chosen according to the viewpoint distance. A longer chain would
have resulted in the weight being out of viewing range
the most time, and a more distant viewpoint would have
lost details of the clockwork. By repeating the animation
sequence, the time that subjects had to examine the animation was doubled, leading a total length of 10 minutes
20 seconds for the animation. Pilot testing indicated this
period was sufficient to understand the clock.

ing them while pointing to the appropriate item on the
screen. The animation therefore was rewound and shown
again for just a few seconds. These terms were necessary
for answering the questionnaires. A pencil and paper
questionnaire with open questions was given to elicit a
short description of how the clock functions then an electronic questionnaire was given containing statements to
be assessed by the participants for their accuracy. A
final questionnaire measured cognitive load.

Measurement

Procedure

Prior Knowledge Subjects rated their general
physics knowledge (based on high school level) and their
specific knowledge about mechanics. The seven step
scales ranged from ‘little’ to ‘very high’.
Cognitive Load Cognitive load was self-rated by an
adapted pencil and paper version of NASA-TLX using
five scales with seven steps on mental demands, difficulty,
own performance, effort and frustration.
Pointing Each pointing gesture that was clearly directed to pendulum, escapement, chain, weight, second
hand, or minute-or-hour-hand was counted, regardless of
being accompanied by the mentioning of the appropriate
word or not. If two seconds elapsed before or after the
pointing gesture, the pointed part was named appropriately, the time stamp of the pointing was adapted to the
time of the mentioning.
Mentioning Each mention of the pendulum, escapement, chain, weight, second hand, or minute-or-hourhand was counted, from either direct mentions or their
synonyms. For example ‘Schwinger’ (oscillator) for pendulum or ‘Hemmungsrad’ (escape wheel) for escapement.
Mentioning of the chain wheel was also counted for the
chain.
Concepts Think-aloud protocols and written descriptions were evaluated for the occurrence of correct and
false concepts. Negation of a concept was coded in case
a subject explicitly negated a concept. Concepts mentioned as part of an explicit question were ignored. The
correct concepts taken into account were chosen according to their central importance for a complete description
of the basic functional mechanism of the clock (e.g. ‘the
pendulum hinders the weight from falling down’). There
were four different correct concepts for weight and pendulum respectively, and three for escapement. The false
concepts were determined by extracting from the transcripts the frequently mentioned false statements about
each of the three central clock parts (e.g. ‘the weight is
for balance’). Four false concepts about the weight, five
about the pendulum and three three escapement were
coded.
For the purpose of analysis, occurrences of correct and
false concepts for each part were counted on a subject
level, ignoring repetitions. To compensate for the different numbers of possible correct and false concepts respectively for each part, the ratio of occurring to possible
concepts was calculated. If a concept was negated, all
previous occurrences of the concept were ignored. For

Subjects were first given a short introduction explaining
that the aim of the study was to investigate the appropriateness of animations for understanding mechanical
devices. Subjects were asked to verbalize their thoughts
while being videoed from behind to capture pointing behavior. After an initial questionnaire for prior knowledge, a warm-up task in which participants were asked
to describe Renoir’s painting ‘Moulin Galette’ was used
to accustom participants to thinking aloud and being
video recorded. The animation was then shown, with
participants set the task of trying to understand how
the clock functions.
After the animation, the terms ‘Anker’ (anchor) and
‘Hemmungsrad’ (escape wheel) were introduced by nam1

Available at http://www.blender.org
The first two minutes of the stimulus material are available at http://www.iwm-kmrc.de/cybermedia/cs06-tempo
2

1308

the verbal reports, if a later-mentioned correct concept
implicitly contradicted a previously mentioned false concept, this false concept was not taken into account (e.g.
when a subject stated that the weight drives the clock,
and had previously stated the same for the pendulum).

Design

Table 2: Pointing and mentioning frequencies for Pendulum, Escapement, Weight, Second hand, and minuteor-hour-Hand (SD in brackets).

P
E
W
S
H

The Design was a two groups design with Tempo (normal
vs. fast) as independent variable. Within subject variables were Correctness (correct vs. false concepts), and
Part (clock parts). For mentioning and pointing, clock
parts were the weight, pendulum, escapement, second
hand and hour-or-minute hand. For concepts the clock
parts were the weight, pendulum, and escapement.

Pointing
Normal
Fast
3.06 (3.26) 5.75 (4.75)
2.12 (1.54) 3.50 (2.16)
4.44 (3.10) 7.93 (7.15)
1.75 (1.91) 3.19 (2.32)
2.44 (2.37) 2.75 (3.96)

Mentioning
Normal
Fast
5.88 (4.19) 6.94 (5.21)
0.06 (0.25) 0.06 (0.25)
4.88 (3.81) 7.88 (5.38)
3.63 (2.06) 2.56 (2.63)
7.00 (3.31) 5.06 (3.07)

Results

Concepts in Verbal Reports Kappa values for concepts in verbal reports were in the range from κ = .73
to κ = 1.0, except for escapement with κ = .65. The
percentage of concepts occurring in the verbal reports
was evaluated using a three-factorial ANOVA Tempo x
Correctness x Part. No main effects were significant.
The two way interaction Tempo x Part was significant
with F (2, 58) = 4.88, p < .05. Three way interaction Tempo x Correctness x Part was significant with
F (2, 58) = 4.41, p < .05. Pairwise comparisons for the
three way interaction using Sidak revealed that for the
weight, there were more correct concepts than false concepts in both tempo conditions, normal p < .05 and fast
p < .001. Also, there were more correct concepts for the
weight in the fast condition than in the normal condition,
p < .05.

Closed Questionnaires
Prior Knowledge The participants’ self-rating of
their general and mechanical physics knowledge were
well correlated (r = .68, p < .001), and were therefore
condensed into one overall prior knowledge measure. All
analysis using ANOVA were also conducted with prior
knowledge as covariant, which reduced the number of
significant results in some cases, but never resulted in a
previously not already shown effect. Reported results all
consider prior knowledge unless otherwise stated.
Cognitive Load Cognitive load measure provided no
differences between the subjects in the normal and the
fast tempo condition.

Online Measures

Table 3: Percentage of concepts in verbal reports for
Pendulum, Escapement, and Weight (SD in brackets).

Pointing Pointing of the chain and the weight was aggregated, because they are both parts of the same functional component. Overall kappa for pointing was κ =
.81. Two-factorial ANOVA with Tempo x Part showed a
significant main effect for Tempo. In the fast condition
subjects pointed more often, F (1, 29) = 4.20, p < .05.

P
E
W

Correct concepts
Normal
Fast
25.0 (22.4) 15.6 (15.5)
6.3 (13.4) 14.6 (17.1)
28.1 (31.5) 53.1 (20.2)

False concepts
Normal
Fast
20.0 (0.0) 20.0 (12.6)
8.3 (14.9)
4.2 (11.4)
10.9 (12.8)
9.4 (15.5)

Open Questionnaire

Mentioning Mentioning was counted for the same
clock parts as pointing. Some subjects occasionally
fluffed the names for the clock parts (e.g. pointing to
the pendulum and saying ‘this weight’). If the mentioned
word contradicted a concurrent pointing gesture, mentioning was corrected to the pointed clock part. This
mismatch appeared for 16 subjects 1 or 2 times and
for one subject 6 times. On average, 0.91 mismatches
occurred per subject. There was no significant difference between the normal and fast tempo conditions
(0.77 and 1.58 mismatches respectively). Overall kappa
for mentioning was κ = .93. Two-factorial ANOVA
with Tempo x Part showed no significant main effect,
but the interaction of Tempo x Part was significant,
F (4, 116) = 2.84, p < .05. Pairwise comparison of the
two tempo conditions using Sidak showed only in tendency that subjects in the fast condition mentioned the
weight more often and the minute or the hour hand more
seldom than in the normal condition, p = .09 respectively.
1309

Concepts in Written Descriptions Kappa values
for written descriptions ranged from κ = .78 to κ = 1.0.
The percentage of concepts occurring in the written descriptions was evaluated using a three-factorial ANOVA
Tempo x Correctness x Part. Prior knowledge had no
effect on the written descriptions. None of the main effects was significant. Two way interactions of Tempo
x Part and Tempo x Correctness were significant with
F (2, 58) = 3.95, p < .05 and F (1, 29) = 4.58, p < .05
respectively. Three way interaction was not significant.
For the Tempo x Correctness interaction pairwise comparison using Sidak revealed that subjects in the fast
tempo condition wrote significantly more correct concepts, and significantly less false concepts than the normal tempo condition subjects, p < .05 in both cases
(cf. Table 4). Also only subjects in the fast condition
produced significantly more correct than false concepts
in their written descriptions, p < .01. For the Tempo
x Part interaction pairwise comparison using Sidak re-

structional designers to raise the perceptual salience of
thematically relevant aspects of the display; the optimum speed for revealing key aspects may sometimes be
faster, sometimes slower, than realistic speed. The redistribution of attention could also be used on a subject
level, by presenting content successively at different presentation speeds. Follow-up studies are needed to explore the combination of various speeds and to obtain
more direct evidence of redistribution of attention.

Table 4: Percentage of concepts in written descriptions.
Normal tempo
Fast tempo

Correct concepts
8.9 (SD 13.2)
18.4 (SD 12.5)

False concepts
7.7 (SD 5.5)
4.0 (SD 5.8)

vealed that subjects in the fast tempo condition wrote
significantly more concepts (either correct or false) about
the weight than about any other part, p < .05. They
also wrote more about the weight than the subjects in
the normal tempo condition, p < .05.

References

Discussion

Ainsworth, S., & Van Labeke, N. (2004). Multiple forms
of dynamic representation. Learning and Instruction, 14 (3), 241-255.
Kline, K. A., Holcombe, A. O., & Eagleman, D. M.
(2004). Illusory motion reversal is caused by rivalry, not by perceptual snapshots of the visual
field. Vision Research, 44, 2653-2658.
Lowe, R. K. (1999). Extracting information from an
animation during complex visual learning. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14 (2),
225-244.
Lowe, R. K. (2003). Animation and learning: Selective processing of information in dynamic graphics.
Learning and Instruction, 13, 247-262.
Lowe, R. K. (2004). Interrogation of a dynamic visualization during learning. Learning and Instruction,
14 (3), 257-274.
Lowe, R. K. (2005). Multimedia learning of meteorology.
In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), The cambridge handbook of
multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lowe, R. K. (in press). Learning from animation: where
to look, when to look. In R. K. Lowe & W. Schnotz
(Eds.), Learning from animation: Research and
implications for design. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Newtson, D., & Rindner, R. J. (1979). Variation in
behavior perception and ability attribution. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37 (10),
18471858.
Purves, D., Paydarfar, J. A., & Andrews, T. J. (1996).
The wagon wheel illusion in movies and reality.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 93 (8), 3693-3697.
Schwan, S., & Garsoffky, B. (2004). The cognitive representation of filmic event summaries. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 18, 37-55.
Schwan, S., Garsoffky, B., & Hesse, F. W. (2000). Do
film cuts facilitate the perceptual and cognitive organization of activity sequences? Memory & Cognition, 28 (2), 214-223.
Schwan, S., & Riempp, R. (2004). The cognitive benefits
of interactive videos: learning to tie nautical knots.
Learning and Instruction, 14 (3), 293-305.
Visch, V. T., & Tan, E. S. H. (in press). Effect of film
velocity on genre recognition. Media Psychology.

The results support the hypothesis, that variation in presentation speed affects the distribution of attention. Interaction for mentioning of Tempo x Part shows that
subjects in the fast tempo condition had a different mentioning profile from those in the normal condition. They
tended to mention the weight, which is a central part of
the mechanism, more often and the minute or hour hand
less often. It is notable that in the normal condition the
minute or hour hand is mentioned more frequently, although it is almost static in this condition. This suggests that the attentional profile was not based solely on
visuospatial and temporal characteristics, but was also
influenced by top-down processes.
The hypothesis that a changed attentional profile has
implications for the understanding of the clock is also
supported. Subjects’ written descriptions of the function of the clock contained more correct concepts and
less false concepts for the fast version. In the verbal reports given during animation perception, the number of
correct concepts stated for the weight was greater for
the fast condition. This is consistent with the idea that
the more appropriate conceptualization of the clock in
the final descriptions has been achieved by the perceptual guiding of reasoning towards the weight as a key
component of the clock’s driving mechanism.
Whereas attention was influenced by changed presentation speed, interestingly Cognitive Load appears unaffected. Because the stimulus material contains various
temporal levels, this may indicate that speed alteration
leads subjects to focus on other parts or other features of
the dynamic visualization. Despite the higher density of
information in the fast condition, subject’s showed superior performance in the understanding task. It may be
that subjects regulated their processing load by ignoring
fast moving parts, or changed their processing granularity to extract features at a different level (e.g. perceived
relative rather than absolute dynamic properties, or segmented the time flow into coarser events).
In sum, the findings suggest that in order to design
more effective dynamic visualizations, it may be advantageous to deviate from normal speed presentation if the
thematically relevant aspects thereby become more perceptually salient. This first investigative finding opens
up a broad field of using temporal manipulations for instructional design. For complex subject matter, it seems
possible that speed could be used strategically by in1310

