UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Role Exchange between Task-doing and Observing Others on Insight ProblemSolving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/81r4j6b3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Izawa, Taro
Kiyokawa, Sachiko
Ueda, Kazuhiro

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Role Exchange between Task-doing and Observing Others
on Insight Problem-Solving
Sachiko Kiyokawa (kiyo@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Center for Research of Core Academic Competences, School of Education, The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Taro Izawa1 (taro-izawa@mercury.sannet.ne.jp)
Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies, The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Kazuhiro Ueda (ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Department of General System Studies, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan

during collaborative problem-solving and investigate
whether it can facilitate insight problem-solving.

Abstract
We experimentally examined the effects of role exchange
between task-doing and observing others on insight problemsolving. Sixty undergraduates were randomly assigned to one
of the following three conditions: (1) solo, (2) trial-and-otherobservation pair, (3) and trial-and-self-observation. In the
first condition (15 individuals), the participants were asked to
solve the T puzzle. In the second condition (15 pairs), each
member of a pair was required to perform the task by
alternating the roles of working with the pieces and of
watching the partner’s performance every 20 seconds. In the
third condition, the participants were instructed to work alone
and to alternate the same roles as those in the second
condition. The results showed that the role exchange between
task-doling and observing others had a facilitative effect on
insight problem-solving, while the role exchange within an
individual had a negative effect.

What Processes Contribute to the Facilitative
Effects of Collaboration on Problem-Solving?

Keywords: collaboration; insight problem-solving; dynamic
constraint relaxation theory; role exchange.

Previous studies have examined the manner in which the
facilitative effects of collaboration emerged in terms of
verbal interaction between collaborators.
Based on interviews with members of R&D teams in
leading Japanese companies, Ueda and Niwa (1997)
identified a collaborative style in which a member actively
engaged in problem-solving activities and his/her partner
supported him/her by making metacognitive suggestions.
According to Ueda and Niwa, metacognitive suggestions
involve identifying any logical contradiction or
inappropriateness of the partner’s idea, clarifying the
significance of the problem, and suggesting ways to
discover solutions. In other words, metacognitive
suggestions encourage the partner to reflect. They suggested
that the metacognitive suggestions contributed to the
invention of new products by the team.
Miyake (1986) pointed out that a collaborative group
member often serves as a monitor and checks his/her
partner’s activities. As a result of interactions in the cases
reported by her, each member of a pair deepened his/her
understanding of a complex mechanical device such as a
sewing machine. This type of interaction is similar to that
identified by Ueda and Niwa. Specifically, it can be said
that the person acting as a monitor plays the role of making
metacognitive suggestions to his/her partner.
Using the experimental method, Kiyokawa (2002)
attempted to determine whether collaboration, in which a
member of a pair was encouraged to engage in
metacognitive activities, could facilitate problem-solving.
Participants, either individually or collaboratively, were
asked to construct a map based on information presented as
text. In the collaboration condition, a member of a pair was

Introduction
Previous studies have shown that collaboration can facilitate
problem-solving (e.g., Miyake, 1986; Okada and Simon,
1997; Ueda & Niwa, 1997; Kiyokawa, 2002; Shirouzu,
Miyake, & Masukawa, 2002). Additionally, several studies
have discussed the manner in which the facilitative effects
emerged. Most studies focused on verbal interaction
between collaborative group members and suggested that
specific types of verbal interaction (e.g., explanatory
activities; Okada and Simon, 1997) contributed to the
facilitative effects. Although it appears to be one of the most
important factors, there exist possibilities of other factors
contributing to these effects. However, there exist fewer
literatures that investigated processes other than verbal
interaction during collaborative problem-solving.
Therefore, in this study, we focus on the role exchange
between task-doing and observing the other’s performance
1

Taro Izawa is currently employed at Bain & Company Japan, Incorporated.
1617

not allowed to text information independently or to express
his/her ideas. These constraints led the member to engage in
making metacognitive suggestions more actively than
his/her partner. This type of collaboration led to higher
performance on the task as compared with individuals.
In short, it can be said that all the previous studies
mentioned above focused on verbal interaction as the key to
the facilitative effects. Additionally, these studies indicated
that two roles—Task-doer and Monitor—were important to
facilitate problem-solving. This leads to the question of
whether the facilitative effects of collaboration can be
obtained without any verbal interaction.

present and desired states. A desired state and an evaluation
function are based on the representation of a goal. Hiraki
and Suzuki suggested that these constraints create an
impasse and the incremental relaxation of the constraints
driven by failures probabilistically causes qualitative
transitions.

Role Exchange between Task-Doing and Observing
Others

Method

Purpose of the Study

As mentioned above, less attention has been paid thus far to
nonverbal processes during collaborative problem-solving.
Most researches in the field of cognitive science appear to
implicitly hypothesize that verbal interaction is the key to
the facilitative effects on problem-solving. Although it is
one of the most important factors, there exist possibilities of
other factors contributing to facilitating problem-solving. If
we identify these factors, we can effectively collaborate
with others in the setting where verbal interaction is
restricted. Therefore, it appears helpful to address the
question.
There exists suggestive evidence to answer the question.
Shirouzu et al. (2002) found that two roles (i.e., Task-doer
and Monitor) differentiated naturally during collaborative
problem-solving—these roles were frequently exchanged
between members—and that role exchange contributed to
strategy shifts and a more elegant task solution. It can be
considered that the role exchange between Task-doer and
Monitor per se can facilitate problem-solving. Since
Shirouzu et al. did not control verbal interaction during
collaborative problem-solving, it is necessary to
experimentally examine whether the role exchange between
task-doing and observing the partner per se can contribute to
problem-solving.

In this study, we experimentally examine the effects of role
exchange between task-doing and observing others on
insight problem-solving and analyze the processes based on
the dynamic constraint relaxation theory.

Participants
Sixty undergraduates who were basically requested to bring
a friend of the same sex were randomly assigned to one of
the following three conditions: solo, trial-and-otherobservation pair, and trial-and-self-observation.

Task
We used a T puzzle that comprised four wooden pieces
(Figure 1). The goal was to arrange these pieces such that
they formed a “T.”

Procedures
In all the three conditions, before solving the problem, the
participants were presented with a sheet of paper that had a
2/3-sized image of “T.” They were then asked to silently
arrange the four wooden pieces into a “T.” Before beginning
the experiment, they were informed that (1) a signal would
be provided by the experimenter every 20 seconds, (2) the
time limit for the experiment would be 20 minutes, and (3)
the sheet of paper would be taken away before they began
working on the puzzle. The entire experiment was
videotaped for analysis. The procedures in each condition
were as follows.

Dynamic Constraint Relaxation Theory
To examine the effects of role exchange between task-doing
and observing the partner, a theoretical framework is needed
to analyze the processes when verbal interaction is
restricted. In this study, we rely on the dynamic constraint
relaxation theory on insight problem-solving (Hiraki and
Suzuki, 1998).
The theory hypothesizes three types of constraints: objectlevel, relational, and goal constraints. The object-level
constraint is our natural tendency to encode objects at a
basic level, although there are numerous other ways of
interpretations. The relational constraint is a tendency to
choose specific relations among innumerable alternatives.
The word “relation” is defined as the manner in which
objects relate to each other and each object has a specific
role. The goal constraint provides feedback to the other two
constraints mentioned above by evaluating a match between
1618

Figure 1: The T puzzle. As mentioned above, the goal
was to arrange the four pieces such that they formed a
“T.”

Display B

to participant B without disturbing the form he/she
constructed. Then, the latter began the task and the former
watched his/her trial on Display A, which was placed in
front of him/her. This procedure was repeated until they
reached the solution.

Display A

Working
board

Participant B

Trial-and-Self-Observation Pair Condition In this
condition, the participants were asked to work
independently in the setting shown in Figure 3. The
procedures in this condition were the same as those in the
second condition, with the exception of what the
participants observed. Since they worked independently,
they were provided with a 20-second delayed feedback
through a display placed before them and were asked to
observe their own performance.
By comparing the second condition with the third one, we
can clarify the effects of the target of observation.

Participant A
Camera A

Camera B

Results

Figure 2: Experimental setting in the trial-andother-observation pair condition.

Initially, we examined the effects of role exchange between
task-doing and observing the other on the performance of
insight problem-solving. Then, we examined its effects on
the process of insight problem-solving based on the
dynamic constraint relaxation theory.

Display

Performance Analysis

Working
board

Participant

Delayed
presentation
apparatus

Camera

Figure 3: Experimental setting in the trialand-self-observation pair condition.
Solo Condition In this condition, the participants were
required to perform the task independently.

To examine the effect of role exchange on performance, the
participants who could complete the task were classified
into three groups, according to the time taken to solve the
puzzle (Figure 4).
In the first condition, many participants were classified as
“unsolved”; therefore, the peak solution time in this
condition can be presumed to be more than 20 minutes.
Meanwhile, in the second condition, the peak solution time
was less than 400 seconds and the number of participants
who could solve the puzzle decreased as the solution time
increased. Conversely, in the third condition,2 most of the
participants were classified as “unsolved.”
This difference in the distribution of solution time in each
condition is verified by Fisher’s exact test (p < .001).
Residual analyses revealed that the rate of “unsolved” in the
second condition was lower (z = –3.20, p < .01) and that of
“solved (within 400 seconds)” was higher than the expected
values (z = 2.45, p < .05). Conversely, the results showed
that the rate of “unsolved” in the trial-and-self-observation
pair third condition was higher than the expected value (z =
2.59, p < .01).

Trial-and-Other-Observation Pair Condition In this
condition, the participants were asked to collaborate in the
setting shown in Figure 2, which was designed such that
they could not see their partners directly but on a display
screen. This was done to avoid making the participants view
their partners’ trials from different angles.
Initially, participant A began working on the puzzle
placed on a board in front of him/her. Participant B watched
him/her on Display B, which was placed in front of him/her.
The participants were asked to watch the display and think
of ways to solve the puzzle. After 20 seconds, a signal was
provided and participant A passed the board with the pieces

2

1619

The number of trials in the third condition was half of those in the
first and second conditions. To control the number of trials, the
performance in the hypothesized third condition was calculated as
follows: (1) 105 (15C2) pairs were made out of the total number of
participants in the third condition; (2) the shorter solution time
taken by a member of a pair was considered as the solution time
for that pair; and (3) to control the degree of freedom, the
frequencies were adjusted such that the sum of frequencies was 15.

100%

13.3
80%

60%

20.0

46.7

13.3
20.0

40%

20%

14.0
0.0
12.4

53.3

74.3

20.0

solved
（within 400
seconds ）
solved
（400–800
seconds ）
solved
(800–1200
seconds)
unsolved

13.3

0%
Solo
(N = 15)

Trial-and-otherobservation pair
(N = 15)

Hypothesized
trial-and-selfobservation pair
(N = 15)

Figure 4: Distribution of solution time in each condition.
Further, the number of times that the participants “placed
In short, the role exchange between task-doing and
the pentagon diagonally (including the placement at right
observing others has a facilitative effect, while that within
angle)” and simultaneously “joined the pentagon with
an individual has a negative effect on insight problemanother piece as the central part” was counted as the index
solving.
of the strong relaxation of the constraints since these factors
were related not only to object-level and relational
Process Analysis
constraints but also to a goal constraint.
According to the dynamic constraint relaxation theory, we
In this study, term was used as a unit of analysis and. A
examined the effects of role exchange on the processes of
term was operationally defined as every 20 seconds between
insight problem-solving.
signals. We calculated the rates of violation from each
As mentioned above, this theory hypothesizes object-level,
constraint, dividing the number of terms in which some
relational, and goal constraints and indicates that these
abovementioned violation occurred by term taken.
constraints result in an impasse. Further, the incremental
Figures 5–7 show the mean violation rates calculated
relaxation of these constraints, which is largely due to
from
each constraint in each condition in each half. The rate
failures, probabilistically causes qualitative transitions.
of
constraint
violation in each condition was submitted to an
Therefore, we can regard insight problem-solving as the
analysis
of
variance
(ANOVA) along with condition (solo,
process of constraint relaxation. More specifically, it can be
trial-and-other-observation pair, or the hypothesized trialsaid that the more frequently one deviates from these
and-self-observation pair: between participants) and time
constraints, the more likely is it that he/she will obtain the
(the first or second half: within participants) as the
solution.
independent variables.
Since Suzuki and Hiraki (1997) found that people have a
The results revealed that with respect to the object-level
strong tendency to place the pentagon either vertically or
constraint,
the main effect of condition and of time were
horizontally, with regard to the T puzzle, placing the
significant
(F
(2, 117) = 7.50, p < .01; F (1, 117) = 4.75, p
pentagon diagonally was regarded as a violation of the
<
.05,
respectively—see
Figure 5). In addition, the
object-level constraint.
interaction between condition and time was marginally
With regard to the relational constraint, people tend to
significant (F (1, 118) = 2.64, p = .08). Multiple
connect pieces in order to fill notches. Therefore, the index
comparisons showed that those in the first condition
of the relaxation of the relational constraint was defined as
deviated less than those in the other two conditions
connecting the pentagon with other puzzle pieces at the
(comparing with both the second condition—t (117) =
central part of “T.” The central part indicates that the
3.26—and the third condition—t (117) = 2.54, p < .05).
pentagon is placed at the intersection of two bars of “T.”

1620

With regard to the relational constraint, the interaction
between condition and time was significant (F (2, 117) =
3.57, p < .05).
The interaction indicates that there were no significant
differences in the violation rates among conditions in the
first half, whereas those in the second condition deviated
more frequently than those in the other two conditions in the
second half (comparing with the first condition—t (234) =
4.48—and the third condition—t (234) = 4.86, p < .05).
Additionally, with simultaneous violation from both the
constraints, the interaction between condition and time was
significant (F (2, 117) = 6.01, p < .01). The interaction
indicates that the participants in the second condition
deviated simultaneously from both the constraints more
often than those in the other two conditions in both the
halves; the differences increased with time (comparing with
the first condition—t (234) = 2.19—and with the third
condition—t (234) = 2.84—in the first half; and with the
first condition—t (234) = 5.49—and with the third
condition—t (234) = 6.49—in the second half; p < .05).
In short, it can be said that the role exchange between
task-doing and observing others can facilitate constraint
relaxation, particularly with respect to the relational
constraint.

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
The first half

The second half

Solo (N = 14)
Trial-and-other-observation pair (N = 15)
Hypothesized trial-and-self-observation pair
(N = 91)

Figure 5: Mean violation rates of the object-level
constraint in each condition in each half.
0.4
0.3
0.2

Discussion

0.1

The present study aimed to investigate the effect of the role
exchange between task-doing and observing others on
insight problem-solving. The results showed that the role
exchange between task-doing and observing others has a
facilitative effect, while that within an individual has a
negative effect on insight problem-solving. Moreover, the
participants in the trial-and-other-observation pair condition
placed the pieces in ways that deviated from the constraints
more frequently than those in the other conditions.
The difference between the trial-and-other-observation
pair condition and the solo one laid in whether or not the
role exchange existed. Thus, the facilitative effect found in
the former condition could be attributed to the effect of role
exchange. Moreover, it has to be noted that the facilitative
effect was obtained only in the trial-and-other-observation
pair condition but not in the hypothesized trial-and-selfobservation pair condition. The result implies that the
emergence of the effects of role exchange depends on what
one observes.

0

The first half

The second half

Solo (N = 14)
Trial-and-other-observation (N = 15)
Hypothesized trial-and-self-observation pair
(N = 91)

Figure 6: Mean violation rates of the relational
constraint in each condition in each half.

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Why Is Role Exchange between Task-doing and
Observing Others Effective?

0
The first half
Solo (N = 14)

The second half

Some interpretations are provided in an attempt to answer
the question “Why different effects are obtained between
the trial-and-other-observation pair and hypothesized trialand-self-observation conditions?”
One is the effect of diverse patterns during observation.
When observing others, the participants can view patterns
that are different from those that they employ during taskdoing. Conversely, when observing self-trials, the same
patterns viewed in the previous trial occur repeatedly. The
more various the patterns are, the more likely is it that a
deviation from the constraints would occur. Therefore the

Trial-and-other-observation (N = 15)
Hypothesized trial-and-self-observation pair
(N = 91)

Figure 7: Mean violation rates of both constraints
at the same time in each condition in each half.

1621

facilitative effect was obtained only in the trial-and-otherobservation pair condition.
The second interpretation is the effect of “perspective.”
Several studies have suggested that other-generated
hypotheses have facilitative effects on inductive reasoning,
e.g., Schunn and Klahr (1993). They showed that the othergenerated hypotheses led participants to investigate the
plausibility of those hypotheses more thoroughly and
yielded less false terminations with incorrect solutions.
Kiyokawa, Ueda, and Okada (2004) experimentally clarified
whether assessing other-generated hypotheses could
facilitate a revision of hypotheses using a rule-discovery
task. The results showed that the participants who assessed
the other-generated hypotheses before generating and
assessing their own hypotheses performed better than those
who generated their own hypotheses and assessed them
thoroughly. Although the task used in these studies is
different from that used in this study, it appears that the task
demand—changing initial representation to reach the
solution—is common among the tasks. Therefore, it is
possible that the effects seen in Schunn and Klahr and
Kiyokawa et al. also emerged in this study.
The third is the effect of cognitive resources. A similar
effect is known as the worked-example effect (e.g.,
Atkinson, Renkl, Derry, & Wortham, 2000). In other words,
worked examples are superior to learning than doing. It is
interpreted that this work-example effect may be caused by
observers’ more cognitive resources for reflecting on a task.

Future Directions
In the future, it is necessary to answer the question “What
happens when the roles are fixed?” In this study, the
participants in the trial-and-other-observation pair condition
were asked to alternate between two roles every 20 seconds.
Strictly speaking, to assert that role exchange is effective in
facilitating insight problem-solving, it is necessary to
compare this condition with the one in which the same roles
were set but not alternated. Additionally, it is necessary to
examine whether the timing of alternating the roles will
affect the facilitative effect of role exchanges obtained in
this experiment.
Second, it is necessary to examine whether the
facilitative effects of role exchange can be generalized. In
this study, the facilitative effects were obtained without any
verbal interaction. It is possible that the effects are restricted
to the T puzzle because verbal processes appear unnecessary
for solving the puzzle. It is important to determine the
extent to which role exchanges per se can be effective in
facilitating problem-solving.
Third, the effects of sociomotivational factor should be
examined. In the trial-and-self-observation pair condition in
particular, with regard to a frustrating task that one cannot
find a solution for, watching oneself fail at it might lead to
greater frustration and self-consciousness. However,
watching the other fail as well may have a positive effect on
the motivation to perform the task. In addition to the
abovementioned cognitive factors, these sociomotivational
factors should be examined.

Finally, it is necessary to determine the mechanism by
which role exchange facilitates constraint relaxation during
insight problem-solving.

Conclusion
In this study, by controlling verbal interaction, it was
revealed that the role exchange between task-doing and
observing others per se can facilitate insight problemsolving. Additionally, it was revealed that the positive effect
is not obtained when alternating the roles within an
individual. It can be said that this research suggests a new
positive effect of collaboration on insight problem-solving.

References
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of
Educational Research, 70, 181–214.
Hiraki, K., & Suzuki, H. (1997). Constraints and their
relaxation in the processes of insight. ETL Technical
Report, TR-97-13.
Hiraki, K., & Suzuki, H. (1998). Dynamic constraint
relaxation as a theory of insight. Cognitive Studies:
Bulletin of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society, 5, 69–
79. [in Japanese]
Kiyokawa, S. (2002). The interdependence structure
facilitating representational change: Collaborative
problem solving dividing activities into a task level and a
meta-task level. Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the
Japanese Cognitive Science Society, 9, 450–458. [in
Japanese]
Kiyokawa, S., Ueda, K., & Okada, T. (2004). The effects of
other-generated hypotheses on scientific reasoning.
Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese Cognitive
Science Society, 11, 228–238. [in Japanese]
Miyake, N. (1986). The constructive interaction and the
iterative process of understanding. Cognitive Science, 10,
151–177.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Collaborative discovery
in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 109–146.
Schunn, C. D., & Klahr, D. (1993). Self- vs. other-generated
hypothesis in scientific discovery. Proceedings of the 15th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
900–905). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H. (2002).
Cognitively active externalization for situated reflection.
Cognitive Science, 26, 469–501.
Ueda, K., & Niwa, K. (1997). Cognitive analysis of
collaborative knowledge creation in R&D teams.
Proceedings of Portland International Conference on
Management
of
Engineering
and
Technology
(PICMET'97) (pp. 524–527).

1622

