UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Working Memory Capacity on a Remote Associates Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0b67n03p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Ricks, Travis
Turley-Ames, Kandi Jo
Wiley, Jennifer

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Working Memory Capacity on a Remote Associates Task
Travis Ricks1 (tricks2@uic.edu)
Kandi Jo Turley-Ames2 (turlkand@isu.edu)
Jennifer Wiley1 (jwiley@uic.edu)
1

2

Department of Psychology
1007 W. Harrison St. M/C 285
University of Illinois, Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

Department of Psychology
Campus Box 8112
Idaho State University
Pocatello, ID 83209 USA

“horse”. Horse can be used to make the phrases “wild
horse” and “dark horse”, but it does not work with fork. For
this RAT item, individuals must be able to abandon the word
“horse” and continue a search of LTM to find other words
that might represent a good solution to the problem. To do
this successfully, individuals must be able to both generate a
broad range of attempts and perhaps most importantly,
inhibit failed attempts to solve the RAT items. Since
working memory capacity has been identified as an
important factor in an individual’s ability to retrieve items
from long term memory, as well as to resist interference
during processing (Rosen & Engle, 1998; Stoltzfus, Hasher
& Zacks, 1996), the current study investigates the role
working memory capacity (WMC) might play in the process
of solving RAT items.

Abstract
For creative problem solving, often the most obvious solutions
do not work and other paths or problem representations need
to be considered. In these cases prior attempts may interfere
with further solutions. The present study examines how
working memory capacity (WMC), which has been
conceptualized as the ability to retrieve and process
information in the face of interference, relates to the ability to
solve remote associate task (RAT) problems. A positive
relation between WMC and the ability to solve RAT problems
was found. Additional findings suggest a trend for higher
WMC to constrain solution when problem solvers are fixated
by misleading solution attempts.

Remote Associates and Creative Solutions
Creativity is required for many problems we face in our
everyday lives. As opposed to problems that may be wellstructured, with more or less obvious routes to solution,
many everyday problems are ill-structured, meaning there is
no one straightforward way to represent or solve such
problems. In these cases we may need to generate many
alternative solutions or representations until one fulfills our
needs. Critically, it is often important to move beyond the
most obvious or salient approaches to solving a problem,
and consider a broad range of more remote possibilities.
The present study is concerned with how individual
differences in working memory capacity may interact with
the generation of remote associates in a particular creative
problem solving context.

What is Working Memory Capacity?
Daneman and Carpenter (1980) developed a reading span
task that was one of the first measures of WMC with a
processing component, reading a sentence, and a memory
component, remembering the final word of the sentence.
More recent assessments of WMC use complex span tasks
where the processing and storage component are distinct
(Conway, Kane, Bunting, Hambrick, Wilhelm, & Engle,
2005). RSPAN asks participants to read sentences and
remember a list of letters. OSPAN, developed by Turner and
Engle (1989) involves solving elementary math problems as
a processing component, and remembering a list of unrelated
words as a memory component.

The remote association task (RAT) was created by Mednick
(1962) as a quantifiable creative problem solving
assessment. RAT items consist of three words that appear
unrelated to one another such as: wild, dark and fork.
Participants are then asked to generate a fourth word which
may form a meaningful compound or phrase with each of
the words. In this case, a good solution would be “pitch”
which would form the phrases wild pitch, pitch dark, and
pitchfork. The ability to solve Mednick’s RAT items
requires individuals to engage in a broad search of long term
memory (LTM) to find a word that forms a meaningful
phrase with all three unrelated words. It is easy to find many
words that can form meaningful phrases with one or even
two of the words. Thus finding a word that fits with all three
other words requires participants to test and reject many
different possible solutions. An example of a word that
forms a meaningful phrase with only two of the words is

Working memory (WM) has been conceptualized as a
mental workspace in which activated memory
representations are available in a temporary buffer for
manipulation by the individual during cognitive processing
(Stoltzfus, Hasher, & Zacks, 1996). Unlike other memory
components, sensory memory and LTM, WM is limited in
capacity. Differences in performance on complex span tasks
represent a measure of the capacity of WM. Performance on
complex span tasks have been explained in several ways:
the capacity reflects the amount of activation available to the
WM system (Engle, Cantor, & Carullo, 1992), or the
efficiency of encoding and retrieving information (Ericsson
& Delaney, 1999; Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995), or the ability
to process new information while inhibiting irrelevant
information (Rosen & Engle, 1998; Stoltzfus, Hasher &
Zacks, 1996).
2016

appears that high WMC participants’ ability to focus their
attention can also limit the breath of their awareness, and can
constrain the range of information that they might consider
or process. Although this ability has obvious advantages for
filtering out irrelevant information, in the case of creative
problem solving, where a broad search for solution is
required, some negative consequences might be expected. If
high WMC solvers focus too much on the misleading
solution attempts, they might actually do worse than low
WMC solvers, who may have broader activation of LTM,
which would translate into better problem solving.

Rspan and Ospan have shown reliable relationships with
performance on many higher-order cognitive tasks as well as
with measures of general fluid intelligence, which has been
defined as the ability to solve novel problems and adapt to
new situations (Cattell, 1943, Hambrick & Engle, 2002,
Kyllonen & Christal, 1990). Kyllonen (1996) conceptualized
WMC as the central component behind general fluid
intelligence.
We were interested in whether WMC would relate to
individuals’ ability to successfully search LTM and inhibit
attempted solutions as they solve RAT items. To further test
how WMC may be related to RAT problem solving, we
used two sets of RAT problems. One set of items was called
the Baseball-consistent version (Wiley, 1998) where the
solution is cued by a baseball-related phrase (such as the
example given at the start of this paper). A second set of the
problems was called the Baseball-Misleading RAT (Wiley,
1998). We were especially interested in performance on
these problems which we felt would make the probability of
producing a misleading solution to RAT problems even
more likely.
If WMC allows solvers to overcome
interference from prior solutions, then the relationship with
WMC should be stronger in this condition.

In sum, if WMC relates to the ability to retrieve information
from memory, it could be predicted the there will be a
positive effect of WMC across all types of RAT items
because of high spans’ superior ability to search and retrieve
relevant information from LTM.
An additional prediction is that an interaction will exist
between WMC and condition. This would be the result of
high spans outperforming low spans by a greater margin in
the baseball-misleading condition, because of high spans’
ability to inhibit no longer relevant information.
However, if WMC relates to the ability to focus one’s
attention, then high spans may not show the highest level of
performance, and they may be especially harmed on the
misleading problems. Further, high knowledge participants,
who will be more likely to experience fixation on the
baseball-misleading problems (Wiley, 1998), may be most
likely to show a negative effect of WMC.

For the Baseball-Misleading RAT, Wiley (1998) created ten
RAT items that contained a first word that was part of a
familiar baseball phrase (such as wild pitch). The second
word in the problem also formed a meaningful phrase with
this solution (such as pitch dark). However, a third word
was introduced so that it did not work with the baseballsolution word (in this case, sense). Sense pitch or pitch sense
are not meaningful phrases. At this point, the candidate
solution “pitch” must be abandoned, ignored or inhibited in
some way, and generation must continue until the solution
(horse) can be found. Thus, these items were termed
“baseball misleading.” Because the baseball-misleading
RAT items are specifically designed to activate a misleading
solution attempt that individuals would be required to inhibit
or abandon, it is of interest to see if WMC plays an increased
role in solving the baseball-misleading items. This result
would follow directly from the work of Stoltzfus, Hasher,
and Zacks (1996) who found that individual differences in
WMC are a result of participants’ ability to inhibit irrelevant
information. One might also expect solvers with high WMC
to perform better on all problems as WMC has been linked
to the efficient retrieval from LTM, which would also be
beneficial in solving RAT items (Rosen & Engle, 1997).

Method
Participants. Participants were volunteers from introductory
psychology classes at Idaho State University. Participants
received course credit for their participation. Data from 120
participants was collected. Four participants were removed
from analyses due to missing data, and one was removed as
an outlier for solving an exceptional number of problems
(over 3 SD above the mean).
Materials. An operation span test (Turley-Ames &
Whitfield, 2003) and Wiley’s (1998) adapted version of
Mednick’s (1962) RAT was used in the present research.
Three tests developed by Hambrick and Engle (2002) were
used to assess knowledge of baseball rules, regulations, and
terminology.
Procedure. First, participants were administered the OSPAN
task in which the math operations and words were presented
via a moving window (Turley-Ames & Whitfield, 2003).
Operation-word sequences were presented in increasing set
size. Set size increased from two operation-word sequences
to six operation-word sequences. At the end of each set,
participants were asked to recall the words that were
presented after each math problem. Participants completed
three trials at each set size and had seven seconds to
complete each operation-word sequence. In order to receive

An interesting alternative however, is that high WMC might
actually impair a solver’s ability to get out of a misleading
solution attempt. Another view of WMC is that it relates to
the ability to focus one’s attention (Conway, Cowan, &
Bunting, 2001). In their study on the cocktail party effect,
Conway, Cowan, and Bunting (2001) observed that high
WMC participants were actually less likely than low WMC
to hear their name in an unattended channel. Thus, it

2017

one point towards an individual’s WM span score, the math
problem needed to be performed correctly and the word
correctly recalled. The maximum WM span score was sixty
points.

interpretation of the regression results, graphs displaying the
relation of WMC to RAT performance, as a function of
condition and baseball knowledge are presented along with
the regression analyses for correct solutions.

Following OSPAN, participants were administered the
adapted RAT. The first word for each of the RAT items
appeared in the middle of the computer screen for five
seconds. The second word then appeared underneath the
first word for 7.5 seconds. Following the 7.5 seconds, the
third word appeared underneath the first and second words,
and participants had 30 seconds to enter a solution. If the 30
seconds elapsed without a solution being entered, the words
disappeared, and participants were instructed to enter a
solution. Participants had 20 seconds to respond before the
next RAT item was presented.

Correct Solutions
The relation of working memory capacity to RAT
performance as a function of condition and baseball
knowledge is presented in Figure 1. Table 1 reports the
outcome of the hierarchical regression for correct solutions.
Review of Table 1 reveals that that WMC, baseball
knowledge, and condition together accounted for 20% of the
total variance in RAT performance, F (3, 110) = 9.24, p <
.001, and that both WMC and RAT condition were
significant unique predictors of correct solutions. Higher
levels of WMC were associated with superior RAT
performance, and the baseball-misleading RAT condition
was more difficult then the baseball-consistent condition.
None of the two-way interactions were significant. The
three-way interaction accounted for an additional 2% of the
variance in RAT performance, F (1, 106) = 2.97, p < .08,
although this was only marginally significant.

Participants were randomly assigned to one of two RAT
conditions. The baseball-misleading condition consisted of
20 RAT items, 10 of which were baseball-misleading and 10
were neutral based on Mednick’s original items. The
baseball-congruent condition consisted of 20 RAT items, 10
of which could be solved with a baseball-related term, and
10 which were neutral.

Table 1
Hierarchical regression analysis for RAT performance

Response time was measured by computer from the
presentation of the third word until the participant typed a
solution and hit the enter key, or until 30 seconds had
elapsed. Participants then completed the baseball tests.

Variable Inc. R² F value B t value β
Step 1 .201 9.24**
WMC
.615 2.82** .271
BK
.200 0.91 .087
Condition
-.624 3.20** -.275
Step 2
.012 .55
WMC X BK
-.026 .118 -.011
WMC X Condition
.063 .284
.027
BK X Condition
-.272 1.24 -.119
Step 3
.021 2.97*
WMC X BK X Condition -.375 -1.72* -.174
Note. Inc. R² = increase in variance accounted for;
B = unstandardized regression coefficient; β = standardized
regression coefficient; WMC = working memory capacity;
BK = baseball knowledge; *p <.10, **p < .05.

Results
Hierarchical regression analyses were conducted to evaluate
the main and interactive effects of baseball knowledge,
WMC, and condition on RAT performance. For use as
predictor variables, working memory span test scores were
converted to Z-scores. Baseball knowledge scores were
created by averaging the Z-scores for the multiple choice
task and the fill-in-the-blank task, since these two tasks are
most closely related to the Spilich, Vesonder, Chiesi and
Voss inventory used in the Wiley (1998) study, and because
only these two baseball knowledge tasks had high reliability
in the Hambrick and Engle (2002) study. Working memory
span scores ranged from 19 to 57, with a mean of 37.3 (SD
8.4). Scores on the baseball multiple choice test ranged
from 3 to 19, with a mean of 9.91 (SD 4.05). Scores on the
baseball fill-in-the-blank test ranged from 0 to 20, with a
mean of 7.88 (SD 5.5). No outliers were found on these
variables.

The nature of the three way interaction is best seen in Figure
1. As shown in the upper panel of Figure 1, low knowledge
individuals showed a positive relation between WMC and
correct solutions in both the baseball-consistent (upper
regression line) and baseball-misleading condition (lower
regression line). If anything, the relation between WMC and
performance was greater in the misleading condition.

Hierarchical analysis was carried out in three steps. RAT
condition, baseball knowledge and WMC were entered in
the first step to evaluate the main effect of each predictor
variable on performance. Cross-product terms representing
the baseball knowledge x WMC, baseball knowledge x RAT
condition, and WMC x RAT condition two-way interactions
were entered in the next step. A cross product of baseball
knowledge x WMC x RAT condition representing the threeway interaction was entered in the third step. To ease

As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 1, high knowledge
individuals only showed a positive relation between WMC
and correct solutions in the baseball-consistent condition
(upper regression line). Separate curve fit analyses revealed
that a quadratic function provided the best fit for high
knowledge participants in the misleading condition. (lower
regression line: linear fit = .03, quadratic fit = .35) with the

2018

solvers, for baseball consistent (plusses) and baseball
inconsistent (circles) conditions.

high knowledge individuals with intermediate levels of
working memory capacity performing best on misleading
problems. (The quadratic did not significantly improve over
linear fit for any of the other 3 regression lines.)

Response Time for Items Solved Correctly
Table 2 reports the outcome of the hierarchical regression
for response times on correctly solved items. Review of
Table 2 reveals that that WMC, baseball knowledge, and
condition together accounted for 12% of the total variance in
RAT solution times, F (3, 110) = 5.16, p < .002. WMC and
RAT condition were both significant predictors of solution
time, while the effect of baseball knowledge was marginal (p
< .09). Higher levels of WMC were associated with faster
solution times for RAT items. Solution times were longer in
the baseball- misleading condition than in the baseballconsistent condition, while higher baseball knowledge
tended to lead to longer solution times. None of the two-way
interactions reached significance. The baseball knowledge x
condition interaction was closest to reaching significance at
p<.12. Baseball knowledge tended to lead even longer
solutions times in misleading versus consistent conditions.
The three way interaction did not reach significance for
correct solution times.

Baseball Knowledge: Low

Mean Number of Correct Solutions

10.00

8.00

6.00

4.00

2.00

Table 2
Hierarchical regression for correct times to solution.
0.00
-2.00000

-1.00000

0.00000

1.00000

Variable Inc. R² F value B t value β
Step 1 .123
5.16**
WMC
-1.32 2.82** -.284
BK
0.80 1.72* .173
Condition
1.03 2.46** .221
Step 2 .028
1.17
WMC X BK
-.403 0.87 -.083
WMC X Condition
-.625 1.34 -.134
BK X Condition
.714 1.53
.153
Step 3
.013
1.64
WMC X BK X Condition .596 1.28
.136
Note. Inc. R² = increase in variance accounted for; B =
unstandardized regression coefficient; β = standardized
regression coefficient; WMC = working memory capacity;
BK = baseball knowledge; *p <.10, **p < .05.

2.00000

Working Memory Capacity Z-score

Baseball Knowledge: High

Mean Number of Correct Solutions

12.50

10.00

Discussion

7.50

In summary, the current study did find a positive effect of
working memory capacity on RAT problem solving,
especially in the baseball-consistent condition. However, in
the baseball misleading condition, there was a trend in which
the relation of working memory capacity to RAT
performance tended to differ between high and low
knowledge solvers. For low knowledge participants, there
was again a positive relation between working memory
capacity and performance. However, for high knowledge
individuals, high working memory capacity did not lead to
the best level of performance on the misleading items.
The current results are consistent with previous work on
WMC in a number of ways. First, the overall advantage in
RAT problem solving due to WMC is consistent with Rosen

5.00

2.50

-2.00000

-1.00000

0.00000

1.00000

2.00000

Working Memory Capacity Z-score

Figure 1: Average number of correct solutions for low
knowledge (top panel) and high knowledge (bottom panel)

2019

and Engle (1997) who linked WMC to efficient retrieval
from LTM.

References
Ash, I. K., & Wiley, J. (2006). The nature of structuring in
insight: An individual-differences approach. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review. 13(1), 66-73.
Cattell, R. B. (1943). The measurement of adult intelligence.
Psychological Bulletin, 40, 153-193.
Conway, A. R. A., Cowan, N. C., & Bunting, M. F. (2001).
The cocktail party phenomenon revisited: The importance of
working memory capacity. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 8(2), 331-335.
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick, D.
Z., Wilhelm, O., and Engle, R. (2005). Working memory
span tasks: A methodological review and users guide.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 2(5), 769-786.
Conway, A. R. A., Tuholski, S. W., Shisler, R. J., & Engle, R.
W. (1999). The effect of memory load on negative priming:
An individual differences investigation. Memory &
Cognition, 27, 1042-1050.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of
Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 19, 450-466.
Engle, R. W., Cantor, J., & Carullo, J. J. (1992). Individual
differences in working memory comprehension: A test of
four hypotheses. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9, 972-992.
Ericsson, K. A., & Delaney, P. F., (1998). Working memory
and expert performance. In R. H. Logie., K. J. Gilhooly., &
E. Hove (Eds.), Working memory and thinking (pp. 93 –
114). United Kingdom: Psychology Press/Erlbaum.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Hambrick, D . Z., & Engle, R. W. (2002). Effects of domain
knowledge, working memory capacity, and age on cognitive
performance: An investigation of the knowledge is power
hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 44(4), 339-387.
Kyllonen, P. C. (1996). Is working memory capacity
Spearman’s G? In I. Dennis & P. Tapfield (Eds.), Human
abilities: Their nature and measurement (pp. 49-75).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kyllonen, P. C., & Christal, R. E. (1990). Reasoning ability (is
more than) working memory capacity?! Intelligence, 14, 389433.
Mednick, S. (1962). The associative basis of creative problem
solving process. Psychological Review, 69, 200-232.
Rosen, V. M., & Engle, R. W. (1997). The role of working
memory capacity in retrieval. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 126, 211-227
Stoltzfus, E. R., Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1996). Working
memory and aging: Current status of the inhibitiory view.
New York, New York, Oxford University Press.
Turley-Ames, K. J., & Whitfield, M. M. (2003). Strategy
training and working memory task performance. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49(4), 446-468.
Turner, M. L., & Engle, R. W. (1989). Is working memory
capacity task dependent? Journal of Memory and Language,
28, 127-154.
Wiley, J. (1998). Expertise as mental set: The effects of domain
knowledge in creative problem solving. Memory and
Cognition, 26 (4), 716-730.

On the other hand, there was a hint of support for the
alternative prediction that when participants’ are being
fixated by a solution attempt, that too much WMC may
actually harm creative problem solving by causing solvers to
focus too much on the misleading solution. When one
examines the relation between WMC and RAT problem
solving among high knowledge participants on misleading
items (Figure 1), high knowledge participants at
intermediate levels of WMC appear to be doing the best. It
does seem that high knowledge participants at higher levels
of WMC may do worse than those with intermediate levels
when it comes to escaping fixation. Thus, while WMC may
improve creative problem solving in general, it may actually
impair a solvers’ ability to get out of fixation imposed by a
misleading solution attempt. This would be consistent with
the findings of Conway, Cowan and Bunting who
demonstrated that WMC can sometimes cause too much
attentional focus (Conway, Cowan, & Bunting, 2001).
The findings from this study suggest that high knowledge
participants who have high WMC may be at a disadvantage
when they experience mental sets due to their prior
knowledge (Wiley, 1998). WMC may help low knowledge
participants to resolve interference arising from solution
attempts in the misleading condition, but it does not seem to
help the high knowledge participants resolve fixation created
by their domain knowledge. Further research will attempt to
directly address this issue with more powerful designs.
The present results do suggest that WMC may be an
important variable to consider in relation to creative problem
solving performance. It may relate to the number of solution
attempts that can be generated or retrieved from LTM, as
well as to whether a solver is able to move past initial
attempts to solve the problem. And, WMC may have
different effects on performance depending on whether
interference comes from the problem solving task itself or
from prior knowledge.
However, regression models
including WMC and domain knowledge left a considerable
amount of variance in performance on this creative problem
solving task unexplained. Discovering other possible
individual differences that may predict creative problem
solving is yet another interesting direction for future
research. (c.f. Ash & Wiley, 2006).
Acknowledgements
The research reported here served as part of the first author’s
thesis submitted to the Department of Psychology, Idaho
State University in partial fulfillment of requirements for the
M.S.

2020

