UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Coherence Marking on the Comprehension and Appraisal of Discourse

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wn702rx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Kamalski, Judith
Lentz, Leo
Sanders, Ted

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Coherence Marking on the Comprehension and Appraisal of Discourse
Judith Kamalski (Judith.Kamalski@let.uu.nl)
Utrecht Institute of Linguistics, Trans 10,
3512 JK Utrecht, The Netherlands

Leo Lentz (Leo.Lentz@let.uu.nl)
Utrecht Institute of Linguistics, Trans 10,
3512 JK Utrecht, The Netherlands

Ted Sanders (Ted.Sanders@let.uu.nl)
Utrecht Institute of Linguistics, Trans 10,
3512 JK Utrecht, The Netherlands

coherence have in genres other than the informative. The
third aspect of our approach concerns prior knowledge.
Recent insights in text processing (for instance McNamara
and Kintsch, 1996) have shown that reader characteristics
such as prior knowledge have to be taken into account. The
text-reader interaction is crucial to develop the knowledge we
may have on the basis of earlier research on marking of
coherence.

Abstract
In the research on the role of coherence marking in discourse,
several factors have been ignored so far. In this paper, we will
adopt a new approach, where we will not only investigate
effects on comprehension, but also on appraisal and feeling of
knowing. Moreover, the current theory will be extended by
testing whether we can generalize results over different groups
of subjects (with and without prior knowledge) and over genres
(informative and persuasive). The results from two experiments
show that it is indeed possible to generalize over genres and
over subjects. Coherence markers have a positive influence on
both comprehension and on appraisal.

Off-line effects of Coherence Marking

Keywords: coherence marking, text comprehension, discourse

In general, research into the role of coherence marking on the
mental representation after reading a text does not provide
clear-cut answers. In some cases, linguistic marking leads to a
better structure in a free reproduction task (Meyer, Brandt, &
Bluth, 1980), to a faster and better answer on text
comprehension questions immediately after having read the
text (Millis & Just, 1994) and to a faster answer on a
verification task (Sanders & Noordman, 2000). Still, markers
of coherence do not seem to influence the quantity of
remembered information (Britton et al., 1982; Sanders &
Noordman, 2000), except for signals of importance (Lorch &
Lorch, 1986), such as the situation can be summarized as
follows. On the one hand, there is research that shows that
markers of coherence cause better answers on text
comprehension questions (Degand, Lefevre, & Bestgen,
1999; Degand & Sanders, 2002). On the other, some
researchers do not find any effect of coherence marking on
text comprehension questions (Spyridakis & Standal, 1987).
Not all of these studies are equally reliable (see Degand &
Sanders, 2002). The studies vary among other things in
quality of the manipulations, naturalness and length of the
experimental texts and, last but not least, the characteristics of
the reader are mostly not included in the research.

Introduction
It has regularly been shown that marking of relational
coherence influences the mental representation that a reader
constructs from a text. In general, readers benefit from the
presence of connectives (because, therefore) and lexical cues
(the consequence is) that explicitly mark the coherence in a
text. The markers make relations explicit that would
otherwise have to be inferred by the reader himself. There is
empirical evidence for the facilitation that markers of
coherence cause during the reading-process (Gaddy, van den
Broek, & Sung, 2001). They shorten the processing time of
following segments (Britton, Glynn, Meyer, & Penland,
1982; Sanders & Noordman, 2000).
In this paper, a new approach to the effect of coherence
markers will be presented. The first new aspect of our
approach concerns different types of effects. Although
empirical research on coherence marking has provided us
with ample knowledge on the effects on text comprehension,
other effects have received less attention. In this paper, we
will not only discuss the comprehension effects that
coherence markers can have, but also the effects on appraisal
(what is the reader’s opinion on text quality?). A second new
aspect of our approach is that we use different text types or
genres. Most of the previous research on coherence marking
is based on informative texts. In this paper, we will also
investigate effects of coherence markers in persuasive texts,
since very little is known about the effect that markers of

Prior knowledge

1575

The influence of prior knowledge about the text topic on text
comprehension has often been described. In their research on
‘learning from text’, McNamara and Kintsch (1996) find an
interaction between prior knowledge and marking of
coherence: readers with prior knowledge benefit optimally
from a non-marked text, readers who lack this knowledge
perform better on text comprehension questions after a

marked version. As much as we believe in this interaction
effect of coherence marking with reader’s knowledge, there is
a difficulty with the McNamara and Kintsch experimental
texts. It is sometimes impossible to understand certain
passages of the non-marked version without the appropriate
prior knowledge1. In this paper, the same interaction-effect is
the focus of our experiment, but this time with text versions
that are also understandable without the prior knowledge. It
only takes more cognitive energy to integrate the segments in
the right way and construct a coherent representation, but it is
not impossible. Moreover, McNamara and Kintsch
manipulated many different aspects of coherence, some of
which differ quite a lot form pure linguistic marking. In the
explicit version they provided the reader with more examples,
they changed the order in which the information was
presented, etc. Therefore, it is important to investigate the
same interaction as McNamara and Kintsch did, but only with
purely linguistic markers of coherence.

understanding. This could very well be the case for coherence
markers as well.

Genre

Feeling of Knowing

In existing research on marking of coherence and prior
knowledge, mostly short informative texts are used. In this
paper, we will discuss experiments where longer texts were
used, from two different text genres: informative and
persuasive, in order to check whether the effects of coherence
marking differ between both genres.
How exactly do we distinguish between informative and
persuasive texts? The most commonly used definition bases
the distinction on the author’s intention (for instance O'Keefe,
1990). This definition may suffice in theory, but in the
empirical context of an experiment, a more detailed
operationalization is needed. Many persuasive texts try to
convince the reader by providing information, which makes
the difference between these genres smaller and smaller. In
persuasive texts, providing accurate information plays an
important role. Schellens and de Jong (2004) analyze twenty
brochures and conclude that argumentation is often presented
as information. One characteristic is always present:
pragmatic argumentation. Advantages to the desired behavior
or disadvantaged to the non-desired behavior are stressed. In
this experiment, the distinction between informative and
persuasive texts is based on the absence or presence of
pragmatic argumentation.

Up to this point, only one aspect of information processing
has been discussed: the mental representation. Another
aspect, usually not included in previous research, is the metacognitive judgment of a reader on his or her own
understanding of a text, also known as Feeling of Knowing
(FOK). Sometimes, the term Illusion of Knowing is used,
relating to the wrong sense of understanding readers may
have after reading a text. Glenberg, Wilkinson and Epstein
define this phenomenon as follows: “The belief that
comprehension has been attained when, in fact,
comprehension has failed” (1982: 597). Rawson and
Dunlosky (2002) investigated to what extent readers base
their estimated performance on the difficulty they experience
in text processing. In these experiments, subjects predicted a
better score on comprehension questions when they had read
a text with coherence markers. This indicates that the when a
text is easier to process, people think they understood it
better. Based on these studies, we expect that markers of
coherence do not only influence the mental representation,
but also the extent to which a reader thinks he or she has
understood the text.

Experiment 1
In the following paragraph, we will discuss a first experiment
to develop the current theory on coherence marking.

Hypotheses

Appraisal

Readers make representations of texts at three different levels
(Kintsch, 1998; Schmalhofer & Glavanov, 1986). The level
of the exact formulation, where grammar and vocabulary play
a part, is referred to as the surface code. The second level of
meaning is called text base: readers construct the semantic
meaning of sentences. The third level is the situation model,
where readers integrate textual information and prior
knowledge. In text comprehension research the latter two are
the most important levels.
In this experiment, we measured only the situation model
representation, where the interaction between prior
knowledge and marking of coherence occurs. We expected to
replicate the interaction effect of McNamara and Kintsch
(1996): Readers with prior knowledge will perform better
after an implicit version. Readers without prior knowledge
will perform better after an explicit version (hypothesis 1).
The expectation on Feeling of Knowing is that the
coherence markers will provide the (perhaps wrongful)
feeling of having understood the text. (Glenberg et al., 1982;
Rawson & Dunlosky, 2002). The explicit versions cause a
greater Feeling of Knowing than the implicit versions
(hypothesis 2).
The third hypothesis concerns appraisal: The implicit
version receives a less positive evaluation. A text that leaves
its coherence implicit demands more cognitive energy from a
reader and this annoys the readers.

A third aspect of coherence marking in discourse that has so
far been ignored is appraisal. How do people evaluate the use
of coherence marking in texts? Do they appreciate explicit
texts more than implicit ones?
Coherence markers are supposed to help the reader and
make it easier to construct a coherent representation. If
markers are absent, more cognitive effort is needed in order to
understand a text. This is supposed to have an effect on the
judgment of quality. Garbarino and Edell (1997) found that
the quality of advertisements was judged to be poorer when
subjects had to invest more energy in the process of
1

In the explicit version, abbreviations are being used which are
explained for in the marked versions (for instance ARVN for South
Vietnamese Army). In the unmarked version, much geographical
knowledge is assumed to be familiar to the reader (e.g., Hanoi is
North-Vietnam).
1576

Finally, we had no concrete hypotheses concerning the two
different genres. This part of the experiment is therefore
explorative.

Method
Materials Two text topics were selected in order to make
natural informative and persuasive texts: genetic
manipulation and organ donation. Persuasive texts on these
topics often try to persuade by incorporating information and
facts in the text. This enables us to actually investigate
comprehension and appraisal for both genres.
For every topic, we constructed an informative and a
persuasive version, based on existing materials. Pragmatic
argumentation was a central characteristic for the persuasive
versions. The persuasive versions underline the advantages to
the desired behavior, or the disadvantages to the un-desired
behavior (‘by giving up your organs after death, you are
helping other people’). The informative texts did not contain
pragmatic argumentation.
The four texts (informative and persuasive for both topics)
were subsequently manipulated to create an implicit and an
explicit version. Marking of coherence is taken in a very
broad sense in this study. This implies that the following
aspects have been manipulated in the texts: global coherence
(headings and organizers), relational local coherence
(connectives and lexical cue phrases), and referential local
coherence (repeating the antecedent). The following
paragraph is a text passage from the persuasive organ
donation text, the markers are underlined.
Tim is only 16, but his heart seems worn out. This is caused
by the fact that he had leukemia and the chemotherapy
seriously damaged his heart. Tim has been on the waiting list
since 1996. (….) These are only examples. At this moment,
there’s a long waiting list for donor organs. You can do
something about the long waiting list by giving permission for
your organs to be donated after death. If you find this a
difficult decision to make, the information in this brochure
can help you.
In the implicit version, there were some coherence markers
present to make the text natural enough. In the explicit
version, 25 more coherence markers were used than in the
implicit version.
Comprehension was measured by means of 4 open-ended
situation model questions, such as ‘Why is it no longer
necessary to carry a codicil with you?’ The correct answer
would be that the decision to be an organ donor is nationally
registered.
FOK was measured by asking subjects to rate their
understanding of the text on a 10-point Likert scale and on a
4-point scale.
Appraisal was measured with 15 items, all semantic
differentials like ‘very easy- very difficult’ on 7 point Likert
scales. The items could be categorized in 4 different
categories, see Table x, based on Ortony, Clore and Collins
(2001). All these items and questions were presented in a
booklet, following the text. The appraisal questions were
presented before the comprehension questions, to avoid an

influence of ‘not-knowing-the-answer’ on appraisal questions
about the comprehensibility of the text.
Table 1: Dimensions and items
Dimension
1. Appealingness
2. Acceptance
3. Accessibility
4. Structure

Example of operationalization
Clear
Vague
Credible
Not credible
Difficult
Easy
Coherent
Not coherent

Subjects Eighty students of Utrecht University participated in
this experiment: 26 History students, 54 Biology students. We
expected the Biology students to know significantly more
about genetic manipulation and organ donation. This
assumption was controlled for by asking 4 prior knowledge
control questions, prior to the experiment. A t-test showed
that both groups differ significantly on prior knowledge (t(79)
= -10.59, p < 0.001). Biologists score higher than History
students.
Design The experimental factor prior knowledge is a
between-subjects factor with values high and low. The
experimental factor text version is a within-subjects factor
with the values no marking and with marking. Furthermore,
there are two conditions: informative and persuasive, and two
text topics: genetic manipulation and organ donation. In total,
we used 8 different texts in this experiment: 2 topics * 2
versions * 2 genres. These factors were integrated in a Latin
Square Design: every subject read 2 texts, one of which
implicit and the other explicit, one of which persuasive and
the other informative, one of which on genetic manipulation
and the other on organ donation. The experiment took about
40 minutes. Subjects were instructed not to turn back the
pages they had already read.

Results
Every hypothesis is analyzed for the informative and
persuasive genre separately. All analyses were first conducted
per text, but hardly appeared to differ between the two topics.
Therefore, the two topics are integrated in the presentation of
the results. Two-way ANOVAs are calculated to test the
effects of marking of coherence and prior knowledge on the
dependent variables.
Effect on comprehension The answers to the open-ended
questions on the open-ended questions were scored as
follows: 1=incorrect, 2=doubtful, 3=correct. This did not
cause any problems, since most of the answers clearly fell in
category 1 or 3. The doubtful answers were scored with the
help of an expert in biology, and they were mostly assigned
category 2. Table 2 shows the effects of marking of coherence
and prior knowledge on comprehension questions for the
informative texts. Internal reliability between the questions
was measured with Cronbach’s alpha: for the genetic
manipulation text, α = 0.33, for organ donation, α = 0.45).
An interaction-effect of marking of coherence and prior
knowledge occurred in the informative genre, just as
predicted (see hypothesis 1, F(1,77) = 3.722, p < 0.05, η² =
0.05). Readers without prior knowledge perform better after
the explicitly marked text than after the implicit version (t(50)
= -2.576, p < 0.05). Readers with prior knowledge perform

1577

equally well on both versions (t(106) = 0.057, p > 0.9). There
is also a significant main effect of prior knowledge (F(1,77) =
15.493, p < 0.01, η² = 0.17): subjects with prior knowledge
perform better then subjects who lack this knowledge.
Table 2: Comprehension scores (means, standard deviations
and number of observations) for informative texts
Less prior
knowledge
More prior
knowledge

No marking
1.38 (0.77)
(n = 13)
2.44 (0.75)
(n = 27)

less vague, clearer, simpler, less demanding and more
coherent.
In the persuasive texts, these effects are less distinct. The
overall effect is not significant, but several items show an
significant effect of coherence marking on appraisal. The
persuasive explicit text is judged to be significantly clearer,
more coherent and more credible than the implicit text.

Conclusion and discussion from experiment 1

With marking
1.93 (0.76)
(n = 13)
2.29 (0.76)
(n = 27)

For comprehension, the results of McNamara and Kintsch
(1996) have been replicated with texts that were varied
systematically in the linguistic marking of coherence relations
and text structure. We found an interaction effect of prior
knowledge and marking of coherence in the informative texts.
In the persuasive texts, the explicit version was beneficiary
for both groups. The coherence markers do not give readers
the illusion of having understood the text: the effect of
marking on FOK reflects an accurate prediction of
comprehension.
The effects on appraisal for both the informative and
persuasive texts were as predicted: the implicit versions were
judged more negatively on the four dimensions involved than
the explicit version.
A very important point of concern is that the open ended
comprehension questions were not reliable. Therefore, we
decided to replicate the experiment with a different method:
the sorting task (McNamara and Kintsch, 1996).

For persuasive texts, the situation differs, as is represented
in Table 3. There is no interaction-effect of marking of
coherence and prior knowledge, but there is a main effect of
marking of coherence (F (1,75) = 2.7, p = 0.05, η² = 0.04) and
of prior knowledge (F (1,75) = 10.4, p < 0.01, η² = 0.12).
Readers with prior knowledge perform on average better than
readers without, just as for the informative genre. For both
groups, however, the benefits are greater after having read the
explicit version than after the implicit version.
Table 3: Comprehension scores (means, standard deviations
and number of observations) for persuasive texts
Less prior
knowledge
More prior
knowledge

No marking
1.46 (0.78)
(n = 13)
2.22 (0.75)
(n = 28)

With marking
1.92 (0.76)
(n = 13)
2.39 (0.85)
(n = 26)

Experiment 2

Effect on feeling of knowing We expected the explicit
versions to cause a higher FOK than the implicit ones. We
only found significant effects for the informative genre: a
main effect of marking of coherence (F (1,76) = 2.882, p <
0.05): the version with marking causes more FOK than the
version without marking, conforming hypothesis 2.
Apparently, the explicit version gives a reader the impression
of having understood.
It is also important to check whether this impression is
correct or not. We used a linear regression analysis to
calculate whether FOK could be a predictor for the actual
comprehension scores. FOK does appear to be an adequate
predictor of the actual comprehension scores for the
informative texts (r = 0.31, p < 0.02), and for the persuasive
texts (r =.26, p < 0.03). Coherence marking does not cause an
illusion of having understood the text when this is not
actually the case. Marking of coherence actually causes better
comprehension, and readers seem capable of assessing their
own comprehension. In the informative texts, coherence
markers lead to a higher FOK.
Effect on appraisal Reliability of all 15 appraisal items was
high (α = 0.85), and therefore we analyze all 15 items
together. The expectation was that the text with marking
would be more positively evaluated than the one without
marking. This expectation was confirmed for informative
texts over all items (F1,80) = 5.3, p < 0.05). More precisely,
the informative explicit text was judged to be significantly

The second experiment is a replication of experiment 1, with
a few adaptations. The method to assess comprehension has
been changed to a sorting task2. Also, only relational
coherence marking was manipulated, not referential
coherence marking. The same materials and the same design
were used, only the subjects differed.
Method
Sorting tasks Text comprehension at the situation model
level was tested by means of a sorting task. In a sorting task, a
subject has to categorize key concepts from a text according
to the text (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996), therefore tapping
the situation model representation. Example 1 is an example
of a sorting task for the genetic manipulation text.
(1) “Here’s a list of key words taken from the text. Make
groups of words that you think should go together on the
basis of the text. You can make as many groups as you
want, and they can be of any size. Draw a circle for each
group you want to make and put the right numbers in the
circle.”
1. solving the world hunger problem
2. crossing existing crops
3. moratoria
4. making new proteins, etc.

1578

2

We have validated several methods to assess comprehension and
the sorting task seems to be the most valid (Kamalski, Sanders,
Lentz, & Bergh, submitted). The sorting task scores better than
other methods of text comprehension on criteria such as reliability,
known group validity, divergent and convergent validity.

informative genre (r = 0.86, p = 0.03), and in the persuasive
genre (r = 0.49, p < 0.001).
Effect on appraisal Combining all observations, a two way
ANOVA with marking of coherence and prior knowledge
revealed a main effect of marking of coherence (F(1,247) =
7.850, p = 0.05, η2 = 0.03) and a main effect of prior
knowledge (F(1,247) = 4.756, p = 0.03, η2 = 0.02). The
implicit versions were, as expected, evaluated more
negatively as the explicit versions. The readers without prior
knowledge were more lenient in their judgments.
Although we did not differentiate between genres in our
hypotheses, we still checked whether this assumption was
correct. These same effects were tested for the different
genres. When we performed the same two- way ANOVA on
the informative texts, the effect was not significant, but the
data still showed a strong tendency. For the persuasive texts,
the effect pertained: F(1,127)= 19.026, P<0.001, η2=0.14).

In this example, key concept 1 would have to be categorized
with other arguments in favour of genetic manipulation, 2 and
4 with other originally intended goals in the past and 3 with
solutions. When scoring these sorting tasks, only wrong
categorizations lowered the score attributed to the subject
with one point. An example would be a subject putting one
argument against with all the other arguments in favour. This
is definitely wrong, and would lower the score. Incomplete
groups (for instance, instead of categorizing all arguments in
favour, a subject makes 2 groups of these arguments) only
lowered the score for this group with 0.5 points.
Subjects 67 medical students participated in the high
knowledge group, 64 law or history students participated in
the low knowledge group. We expected the medical students
to have more prior knowledge about organ donation and
genetic manipulation than law students. This expectation was
confirmed: t(129) = -20.3, p < 0.0001. Students without prior
knowledge received an average score of 0.29 on the
comprehension score, students with prior knowledge received
on average 3.55 (on a scale from 0 to 5).

Conclusion from experiment 2

Results

In experiment 2, we have seen that coherence marking leads
to better comprehension for both genres. In the persuasive
genre, marking leads to a more positive evaluation. In the
informative genre, there is a similar tendency, but the results
are not significant. The coherence markers do not give
readers the false illusion of having understood the text: the
markers actually improve comprehension, and readers seem
to be aware of this in both genres.
The results from experiment 2 show not much difference
between genres or knowledge groups, if any. The only
difference is that the effects on appraisal are not significant in
the informative genre.

Effect on comprehension Comprehension was measured
with a sorting task. The proportion of correctly categorized
items is calculated, and then multiplied by 10 to make the
sorting task score resemble normal test scores on
comprehension, usually on a scale from 1 to 10. Reliability
was acceptable (genetic manipulation task: α = 0.56, organ
donation α = 0.64). When we analyzed both genres
separately, we found no differences, so the analysis we report
here combines both genres in a repeated measure ANOVA.
There is a main effect of marking of coherence (F(1,126) =
3.80, p = 0.05), see Table 3. There is no interaction with prior
knowledge.

Comparison: conclusion and discussion

Table 3: Comprehension scores
(means and number of observations)
Text version Comprehension score

In summary, the effects of coherence marking seem stable
over genres and over knowledge groups. The overall
conclusion seems to be that marking of coherence causes
better comprehension, improves the impression of having
understood the text, and results in more positive evaluations.
However, there are a few results that are more problematic
to interpret. How about the interaction effect on
comprehension that we saw in experiment 1? In experiment 2,
only a main effect of coherence was found, and prior
knowledge did not play a role anymore. Two possible
explanations exist for this difference. The first one is a
methodological one. In the first experiment, we used
comprehension questions that revealed to be unreliable
(internal reliability, measured with Cronbach’s alpha was
very low). In the second experiment, sorting tasks were used
to assess comprehension. This method has proven to be more
reliable in an elaborate experiment on the validity of several
comprehension methods (see Kamalski et. al, submitted).
This means that there is a valid reason to consider the
interaction-effect in experiment 1 as less reliable then the
main effect in experiment 2. However, it is not unequivocally
sure that this difference in methodology causes the different
result. A second possible explanation lies in the exact nature
of the prior knowledge that the subjects had: in experiment 1,
the subjects were Biology students, in experiment 2 they were
Medicine students. It is possible that the nature of the prior
knowledge matters so much, that even within a group of

Without
marking
With
marking

informative
6.04* (64)

persuasive
6.03*(64)

6.49*(63)

6.70*(67)

* p < 0.05

Effect on feeling of knowing Subjects were asked to rate
their own level of comprehension by means of two questions:
one on a 4 point scale, and one on a 10-point scale. On both
scales, the effect is visible: we will report on both scales
combined (α = 0.67).
There is a main effect of coherence in the persuasive texts,
(F1,127) =3.30, p = 0.03, η2 = 0.03). In the informative texts,
the same effect is visible, but less strong: F(1,122) = 2.40, p =
0.06, η2 = 0.02). In all cases, the texts with marking cause a
higher feeling of knowing than the texts without marking.
We checked whether FOK is accurate: are the participants
able to correctly assess their understanding? A linear
regression analysis revealed a predictive relation in the

1579

experts (both Biology and Medicine) only one subgroup had
the exact knowledge structure to their disposition that they
needed in the experiment. A solution to this problem would
be to provide exactly the knowledge that readers need before
the actual experiment. This would give us control over the
specific knowledge participants have. This control was absent
in the two experiments in this paper.
Another result that is not completely stable is the effect of
markers on appraisal. The results all point in the same
direction, but at one occasion, they were not significant
(informative texts in experiment 2). We have shown that
marking of coherence has a positive effect on text appraisal
on the three other occasions, and this seems to indicate a
pretty stable effect.
The same reasoning applies to FOK: on three out of four
occasions, we found strong significant effects that show that
markers of coherence lead to a high feeling of knowing, but
in one case (persuasive texts, exp 1), this effect was not
significant.
Despite these differences, the overall conclusion seems to
be that we can generalize effects of coherence marking over
genres and groups of subjects. In general, differences between
the two genres are small. Also, the difference between high
and low prior knowledge is minor. We have shown in two
experiments that coherence markers can have a positive effect
on both comprehension and appraisal, and that they are
therefore useful in informative and persuasive texts. Only two
texts have been used in these experiments: the results need to
be replicated with more texts. However, another theoretically
important question remains: do these markers also influence
the persuasive power of a text? A persuasive text does not
only aim at conveying information, but also at convincing the
reader. This aspect of coherence markers should not be
neglected and merits more attention in future research.

References
Britton, B. K., Glynn, S. M., Meyer, B. J. F., & Penland, M. J.
(1982). Effects of text structure on use of cognitive capacity
during reading. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 5161.
Degand, L., Lefevre, N., & Bestgen, Y. (1999). The impact of
connectives and anaphoric expressions on expository
discourse comprehension. Document Design, 1, 39-51.
Degand, L., & Sanders, T. (2002). The impact of relational
markers on expository text comprehension in L1 and L2.
Reading and Writing, 15, 739-757.
Gaddy, M. L., van den Broek, P., & Sung, Y.-C. (2001). The
influence of text cues on the allocation of attention during
reading. In T. Sanders, J. Schilperoord & W. Spooren

1580

(Eds.), Text representation: Linguistic and Psycholinguistic
aspects. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins.
Garbarino, E. C., & Edell, J. A. (1997). Cognitive effort,
affect and choice. Journal of Consumer Research, 24, 147158.
Glenberg, A. M., Wilkinson, A. C., & Epstein, W. (1982).
The illusion of knowing: Failure in the self assesment of
comprehension. Memory and Cognition, 10, 597-602.
Kamalski, J., Sanders, T., Lentz, L., & Bergh, H. v. d.
(submitted). How to measure situation model
representations. On the validity of text comprehension tasks.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension. A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lorch, R. F., & Lorch, E. P. (1986). On-line Processing of
Summary and Importance Signals in Reading. Discourse
Processes, 9, 489-496.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from
texts: effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.
Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
Meyer, B. J. F., Brandt, D. M., & Bluth, G. J. (1980). Use of
top level structure in text: key for reading comprehension of
ninth grade students. Reading Research Quarterly, 16, 72103.
Millis, K. K., & Just, M. A. (1994). The influence of
connectives on sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory
and Language, 33, 128-147.
O'Keefe, D. J. (1990). Persuasion. Theory and Research.
(Vol. 2). Newbury Park, California: Sage Publications.
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (2001). The cognitive
structure of emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rawson, K. A., & Dunlosky, J. (2002). Are performance
predictions for text based on ease of processing? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 28, 69-80.
Sanders, T., & Noordman, L. (2000). The role of coherence
relations and their linguistic markers in text processing.
Discourse Processes, 29, 37-60.
Schellens, P. J., & de Jong, M. (2004). Argumentation
Schemes in Persuasive Brochures. Argumentation, 18, 295323.
Schmalhofer, F., & Glavanov, D. (1986). Three components
of Understanding a Programmer's Manual: Verbatim,
Propositional, and Situational Representations. Journal of
Memory and Language, 25, 279-294.
Spyridakis, J. H., & Standal, T. C. (1987). Signals in
expository prose: Effects on reading comprehension.
Reading Research Quarterly, 285- 298.

