UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Writing on Conceptual Coherence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1mb9519h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Galbraith, David
Hallam, Jenny
Torrance, Mark

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Writing on Conceptual Coherence
David Galbraith (d.galbraith@staffs.ac.uk)
Centre for Educational Psychology Research, Staffordshire University
College Road, Stoke-on-Trent, ST4 2DE, UK

Mark Torrance (m.torrance@staffs.ac.uk)
Centre for Educational Psychology Research, Staffordshire University
College Road, Stoke-on-Trent, ST4 2DE, UK

Jenny Hallam (j.l.hallam@staffs.ac.uk)
Centre for Educational Psychology Research, Staffordshire University
College Road, Stoke-on-Trent, ST4 2DE, UK

Abstract
Current cognitive models of writing attribute the discovery of
new ideas through writing to explicit problem-solving
processes, and treat text production as a passive process of
translating ideas into text. This paper describes an alternative,
dual-process model of writing, in which text production is
assumed to be an active knowledge-constituting process. A
key prediction of the model is that dispositionally guided text
production will lead to the development of more conceptually
coherent new ideas than writing directed towards extrinsic
goals. An experiment designed to test this prediction is then
described. The results confirm that dispositionally produced
new ideas are relatively more conceptually coherent than new
ideas produced to satisfy rhetorical goals.
Keywords: writing; coherence; dual process; text production.

Introduction
Writers commonly describe writing as an act of discovery,
stressing that writing involves finding out what to say in the
course of writing, rather than being simply a matter of
translating preconceived ideas into text. In cognitive models
of writing, this is typically characterized as involving active
problem solving to satisfy rhetorical goals. Bereiter and
Scardamalia (1987), for example, contrast the “knowledgetransforming” approach used by expert writers, which
involves developing an elaborate set of goals for their text,
and generating ideas in order to satisfy these goals, with the
“knowledge telling” approach used by novice writers, which
simply involves retrieving ideas prompted spontaneously by
the topic and translating them directly into text. As Flower
and Hayes (1980) put it: "At one end of the spectrum, writers
are merely trying to express a network of ideas already
formed and available in memory; at the other, writers are
consciously attempting to probe for analogues and
contradictions, to form new concepts, and perhaps even to
restructure their knowledge of the subject.".
Despite its central role in cognitive models of writing,
there have been relatively few attempts to examine the
conditions under which writing leads to the development of
thought, and in particular to test the claim that the extent to

which this occurs depends on the extent to which writing
incorporates deliberate rhetorical problem solving. Our own
research has attempted to do this by examining individual
differences in the conditions under which writers develop
new ideas through writing (Galbraith, 1992, 1999).
This research has used Snyder’s self-monitoring scale
(Snyder and Gangestad, 1986) to distinguish between
writers whose writing is presumed to be more or less
directed towards rhetorical or dispositional goals. This selfreport questionnaire distinguishes between high selfmonitors, who are assumed to monitor and control their
expressive behavior in order to achieve social goals, and low
self-monitors, who are assumed to express their thoughts
directly as a reflection of their current internal state.
Galbraith (1992) used this scale as a means of selecting
writers whose writing he assumed would be either directed
towards rhetorical goals (high self-monitors) or
dispositional goals (low self-monitors). These groups were
then asked either to make notes in preparation for an essay
(global planning) or to write the text itself (text production),
and the extent to which they developed new ideas as a
function of writing in these different conditions was
measured. According to problem-solving models of writing,
one would expect the high self-monitors to develop more
novel ideas (through “knowledge-transforming” adaptation
of thought to satisfy rhetorical goals) than the low selfmonitors (whose writing would be assumed to simply
involve “knowledge-telling”). This difference should be
most pronounced in the notes conditions where writers can
focus on planning without having to produce detailed text,
but should be in the same direction when writers have to
produce full text. In fact, although the high self-monitors
did indeed produce more new ideas after writing notes than
the low self-monitors did, just as a knowledge-transforming
model would predict, in the text condition, the difference
was completely reversed, with the low self-monitors
producing twice as many new ideas as the high selfmonitors, contrary both to the assumption that knowledge
transformation depends on adaptation of content to
rhetorical goals and to the assumption that low selfmonitors’ writing is a simple matter of “knowledge telling”.

1340

Furthermore, while the number of new ideas generated by
low self-monitor’s text production were positively
correlated with subjective ratings of increased knowledge,
as would be expected if they had a clarifying effect on
thought, the new ideas generated by high self-monitors’
planned notes were unrelated to subjective changes in
knowledge, suggesting that they did not necessarily develop
the writer’s understanding of the topic. More recent research
has replicated this advantage for low self-monitors’ text
production (Galbraith, 1999).
In the light of these results, Galbraith (1999) suggested
that problem solving models of writing only partially
capture the way in which writers develop new ideas during
writing, and proposed a dual-process model of writing.
In this model, the first – knowledge transforming –
process is assumed to be much as described by Bereiter and
Scardamalia, and involves the manipulation of ideas in
working memory in order to create a mental model of the
text which satisfies rhetorical goals. By itself, however, this
process does not create ideas. Instead, it either selects and
organizes existing ideas retrieved from episodic memory or,
when such content is not available in episodic memory,
activates input to the second process. This account of the
knowledge-transforming process explains the greater
number of new ideas generated by high self-monitors after
planned notes and the fact that these are not associated with
increases in subjective knowledge: the application of
rhetorical goals during planning leads to the selection of
different ideas from episodic memory compared to when
ideas are freely retrieved before planning. (See Galbraith,
Ford, Walker and Ford (2005) for evidence that new ideas
generated to satisfy rhetorical goals during outline planning
are associated with improved text quality, and that this is
reduced by secondary tasks loading on central executive and
spatial components of working memory).
The account of the second – knowledge-constituting –
process assumes that, over and above the explicit
representation of previously formulated ideas in episodic
memory, the writer’s knowledge is also represented by
implicit relationships within semantic memory. These
relationships correspond to the fixed connections between
sub-propositional units in a constraint satisfaction network,
and constitute the writer’s disposition towards the topic.
Two implications follow from this assumption. First, the
writer’s ideas are not retrieved directly from memory, but
are instead synthesized by constraint satisfaction within the
network in the course of text production. Second, the
writer’s disposition is represented by the set of utterances as
a whole rather than by any individual proposition. Thus, it is
assumed that each individual synthesis of content produces
only a partial, best fit to the writer’s disposition, and that
feedback from this output prompts further syntheses
designed to reduce mismatches between individual
syntheses and the writer’s disposition. In order, therefore, to
capture their implicit disposition towards the topic, the
writer has to formulate ideas dispositionally, free from
external constraints. The crucial claim for present purposes

is that, when novel content is formulated by this process, it
will, because it is generated as a dispositional response to
preceding ideas, be conceptually coherent with those ideas.
This account of the knowledge-constituting process explains
why low self-monitors generate more new ideas during text
production than high self-monitors (low self-monitors’ text
production is dispositionally guided, whereas high selfmonitors’ text production is constrained by rhetorical goals),
and why the new ideas they generate were associated with
increases in subjective knowledge.
These two processes are assumed to be complementary in
their effects, and both are required for effective writing.
Thus, the knowledge-constituting process is responsible for
synthesizing conceptually coherent ideas, but needs the
knowledge transforming process in order to ensure that
content is presented in a rhetorically appropriate form.
Similarly, while the knowledge-transforming process can
create a rhetorically appropriate global structure for the text,
it needs the knowledge-constituting process to ensure that
this is articulated in a conceptually coherent way. The
difficulty for writers is that the two processes operate best
under opposing conditions, and hence interfere with one
another: the unpredictable output of the knowledgeconstituting process disrupts explicit planning; the
constraints imposed by global planning prevent the
dispositional spelling out of thought.
According to this model of writing, the fundamental
difference between low and high self-monitors stems from
the relative priority they give to planning and text
production processes. Low self-monitors, whose
fundamental goal is to articulate their implicit disposition
towards the topic, prioritize spontaneous text production,
and accordingly employ a relatively bottom-up strategy for
writing. Thus, when trying to produce a single draft of wellformed text, although they may make explicit plans before
writing, these will impose relatively less control on text
production, and will be readily modified to accommodate
dispositionally generated new ideas. The global structure of
the final text will, therefore, reflect relatively more of the
writer’s implicit disposition towards the topic. By contrast,
high self-monitors, whose fundamental goal is to satisfy
external communicative constraints, prioritize explicit
planning, and accordingly employ a relatively top-down
strategy. Thus, when producing a single draft of wellformed text, they focus first on developing a global plan
designed to satisfy rhetorical goals, and then use this to
control subsequent text production. The global structure of
the final text will, therefore, reflect relatively less of the
writer’s implicit disposition towards the topic, and will be
structured relatively more in terms of their readers’
anticipated response.
This analysis predicts that: (i) When writing a rough draft
free from external constraints, the knowledge-constituting
process will predominate, and hence new ideas produced in
the course of writing will be conceptually coherent.
Furthermore, because low self-monitors prioritize this
process, they will generate more new ideas than high self

1341

monitors. (ii) When external constraints are imposed and
global planning is applied, fewer new ideas will be
produced by low self-monitors than when they write rough
drafts, but because ideas are generated from the bottom-up
these will still be conceptually coherent. By contrast,
because high self-monitors prioritize the knowledgetransforming process they will generate more new ideas
than when they write rough drafts, but because they
generate their ideas from the top-down, the knowledgeconstituting process will be reduced and these new ideas
will not be conceptually coherent. To test these predictions
we used a measure of conceptual coherence derived from
constraint satisfaction models (harmony), and investigated
the effect of low and high self-monitors writing either rough
drafts or outline planned texts.

Method
Participants

prior to writing, and asked to write down a single sentence
summing up their view of the topic. They were then given
half an hour to write the draft. This involved writing down
their thoughts as they occurred to them, in continuous
prose, but without worrying about how well organized or
well-expressed their text was. In the outline planned
condition, participants were given 5 minutes to make an
outline of their essay prior to writing. They were then
given half an hour to write a well-structured essay about
the topic. This involved trying to communicate their ideas
as clearly as possible to their readers, but without worrying
too much about mechanical features of the text. In the
control condition, participants were alternately asked to
write either a rough draft or an outline planned essay.
Initial analysis found no differences on any of the
dependent variables between these two groups within the
control group, so analyses comparing performance with
the experimental groups were conducted using the control
group as a whole.

96 undergraduate students at Staffordshire University, the
majority of whom (76%) were women, volunteered to
participate in the experiment in return for credits in the
Psychology department’s research participation scheme.
Their average age was 21.5 years (s.d. 6.04).
Participants were pre-selected using Snyder’s 18 item
self-monitoring scale (Snyder and Gangestad, 1986). They
were classified as low self-monitors (n = 48) if they scored
between 0 and 8 on the scale, and as high self-monitors (n
=48) if they scored between 10 and 18 on the scale.

Procedure
All participants carried out the task individually in a soundproofed laboratory cubicle, and wrote their essays using a
computer keyboard and simple text-editing software. The
procedure for measuring relationships between ideas before
and after writing and for identifying new ideas after writing
is summarized in table 2 below.

Design

Table 2. Summary of procedure.

Participants were randomly allocated to one of three groups
in the design summarized in table 1. In the two experimental
groups, they were asked to write an essay discussing
whether “the use of violence to achieve political aims can
ever be justified”. They were reminded to consider
arguments for and against the proposition, with a view to
arriving at a conclusion about the issue. In the control
group, they were asked to write about a different topic –
“describe a recent social event that you have attended” - but
instructions and procedure were otherwise identical, and all
the dependent variables were about the same topic as for the
experimental groups. This was designed to control for
effects of generic features of writing (cognitive effort, mode
of processing) on the dependent variables.
Table 1. Summary of experimental design.

Control

Writing condition
Rough draft
Planned essay

Low SM
High SM
The two experimental groups were asked to write about the
topic in two different ways. In the rough draft condition,
participants were given 5 minutes to think about the topic

1342

1

Generate list of ideas about the topic (list 1) (10
minutes).

2

These ideas were then randomly presented in pairs on
the computer monitor, and participants indicated by
mouse click the degree of relationship between each
pair of ideas on a 7 point scale. The rating scale
extended between -4 (for very incompatible or
opposed ideas), through 0 (for unrelated ideas), up to
+4 (for very compatible or closely related ideas). This
continued until all possible pairs had been presented.

3

Write texts according to instructions specified in the
different conditions (30 minutes).

4

Generate new list of ideas about topic (list 2) (10
minutes).

5

Rate relationships between ideas within list 2, using
the same procedure as before writing.

6

Compare lists 1 and 2, rating the extent to which
ideas in list 2 corresponded to ideas in list 1. The
rating scale extended between 1 = identical point and
6 = no corresponding idea in list 1.

Measures
For this paper, two measures will be analyzed.
New Ideas
Following the practice used in previous research (Galbraith
1992, 1999), ideas in the second list were classified as new
if participants either did not identify a corresponding idea in
the initial list or if a corresponding idea was identified but
was rated as only having low correspondence (4 or above on
the 6 point scale). In order to control for variations in the
number of ideas generated in list 1, new ideas were
expressed as a proportion of the ideas occurring in list 1.
Mean Harmony
To measure the mutual consistency of the relationships
between writers’ ideas, we used a measure of harmony used
in constraint satisfaction networks (Britton & Sorrells, 1998;
Thagard & Verbreugt, 1998). In these networks, the
harmony of a set of relationships is represented by
ΣiΣjwijai(t)aj(t), where w = strength of link between units i
and j, a = degree of activation of the units, and t = time step
of activation update. Harmony is maximized when two
highly activated units are linked by a high positive weight,
and when two conflicting units are linked by a negative
weight. It is calculated by updating an initially random set
of activations according to the weights linking them until a
stable state occurs. When the power algorithm is used to
update the network, the final state is equivalent to the first
principal component of a principal components analysis,
with the factor loadings corresponding to unit activations
and the eigenvalue corresponding to the harmony of the
network.
To calculate the harmony of the ideas produced before
and after writing, we therefore carried out a principal
components analysis on the participants’ ratings of the
relationship between ideas within lists, and used the
eigenvalue of the first principal component as a measure of
total harmony. In order to control for variations in network
size (number of ideas) we then converted these total
harmony scores to a measure of mean harmony by dividing
the first eigenvalue of the principal components analysis by
the number of relationships in the network.

(planned comparison, p = 0.03) and marginally more after
writing an outline planned essay than the control group
(planned comparison, p = 0.07). By contrast, the high selfmonitors produced marginally fewer new ideas after writing
a rough draft than they did in the control group (planned
comparison, p = 0.06) and no more new ideas after writing
the outline planned essay than in the control group (planned
comparison, p = 0.37).
Two other features of the data should be noted. First,
although the number of new ideas produced by the high
self-monitors in the control group was not significantly
greater than the number produced by the low self-monitors
(t(30) = 1.7, p < 0.1), it was relatively high compared to all
the other conditions. This suggests that high self-monitors
have a propensity to change the ideas they consider relevant
to a topic even when they have not written about the topic,
and raises a question about whether the high number of new
ideas produced by high self-monitors after writing a planned
essay are a consequence of writing about the topic or simply
of this general propensity. Second, the number of novel
ideas produced by the high self-monitors after writing a
rough draft was significantly lower than the number they
produced after writing the outline planned essay (t(27) =
2.81, p < 0.01) and than the number produced by the low
self-monitors writing a rough draft (t(29) = 2.07, p < 0.05).
Table 3. Mean number (and s.d.s) of new ideas (square root
as a proportion of the initial list of ideas) produced in each
condition by low and high self-monitors.

Low SM
High SM

Writing condition
Control
Rough draft Planned essay
0.47 (0.28)
0.64 (0.22)
0.62 (0.13)
0.62 (0.26)
0.44 (0.30)
0.71 (0.22)

Results

Overall, then, these data replicate Galbraith’s (1999)
finding that low self-monitors change their ideas more than
high self monitors when they write a rough draft, and
demonstrate further that this is greater than when they write
about an unrelated topic. Low self-monitors appear to
change their ideas to a similar extent after writing an outline
planned essay, suggesting that the number of new ideas is
relatively unaffected by the form of pre-planning (explicit
planning). High self-monitors, by contrast, appear to change
their ideas after planned writing, suggesting that idea
change for them depends on explicit planning processes.

New Ideas
Preliminary analysis of the data revealed that 4 participants
had made errors in the correspondence rating task. They
were removed from this analysis. A square root
transformation was then carried out on the remaining data to
normalize the positively skewed distribution of scores. Two
remaining outliers were then excluded from the data set.
A two-way (3 * 2) between subjects ANOVA revealed a
significant interaction between writing condition and selfmonitoring (F(2, 84) = 4.59, MSE = 0.06, p = 0.01). As can
be seen in table 3, the low self-monitors produced more new
ideas after writing a rough draft than in the control group

Mean Harmony of Ideas

1343

In total, 8 participants produced data that was unusable in
this analysis. Deleted participants were drawn equally from
all conditions. A log transformation was then carried out on
the remaining data to normalize the positively skewed
distribution of scores.
A three-way (3*2*2) repeated measures ANOVA
revealed a significant interaction between writing condition,
self-monitoring and mean harmony before and after writing
(F(2, 82) = 3.94, MSE = 0.102, p = 0.02). As can be seen in

figure 1, this interaction reflects the contrasting effects of
rough drafting and planned writing on harmony for the low
and high self-monitors. The harmony of the high selfmonitors’ ideas was significantly reduced after planned
writing (t(14) = 3.58, p = 0.003) but not after rough drafting,
where there was no significant change as a function of
writing (p = 0.48). There was also a marginally significant
reduction in harmony in the control condition for high selfmonitors (t(14) = 2.15, p = 0.06). By contrast, although the
changes were in the opposite direction for low selfmonitors, with harmony increasing slightly after planned
writing, and decreasing after rough drafting, none of these
changes, including within the control condition, were
statistically significant (p > 0.3 in all cases). The key finding
here is that although low and high self-monitors produced a
similarly high number of novel ideas after planned writing,
this was associated with a reduction in harmony for the high
self-monitors but not for the low self-monitors.

whether new ideas are produced by dispositional text
production or rhetorical planning, they have a negative
effect on the conceptual coherence of thought. A possible
explanation for this is that the production of novel ideas per
se makes it harder to form a coherent mental model of the
text in a limited capacity working memory.
Table 4. Correlations between increases in harmony and
number of new ideas

New Ideas and Changes in Harmony
If new ideas are directly generated in order to create a more
coherent mental model of the text, as some forms of
Bereiter and Scardamalia’s knowledge-transforming model
would imply, then one would expect new ideas to be
positively associated with increases in harmony.
Alternatively, if new ideas are produced by another process,
be it spontaneous text production or deliberate adaptation to
the anticipated needs of the reader, then new ideas could in
principle have any direction of relationship with increases in
harmony, depending on the effect of new ideas on
conceptual coherence. As can be seen in table 4, the
correlations were in fact negative or absent, implying that
new ideas were not directly generated in order to increase
the coherence of the writers’ mental model of the text.
The most important result here is that, in the conditions
where a relatively high number of new ideas were produced,
there were strong negative relationships between new ideas
and increased harmony. This implies that, regardless of
1344

Condition
Control
Rough draft
Planned

Self-monitoring (SM)
Low SM
High SM
0.1
- 0.49
- 0.82***
- 0.19
- 0.81**
- 0.64*

It is important to note here, however, that although the low
and high self-monitors produced a similarly high number of
new ideas after writing the planned essays, and show a
similarly strong negative relationship between new ideas
and changes in harmony, there was nevertheless a
pronounced difference in the extent to which harmony was
reduced in the two conditions. The fact that, overall, there
was a slight increase in harmony after the low self-monitors
wrote planned essays but a marked decrease in harmony
after the high self-monitors wrote planned essays implies
that the new ideas produced by the low self-monitors were
relatively more compatible with the global organization of
their ideas.
Finally, it is worth noting that in the high self-monitors’
control condition, although the relationship is nonsignificant, it is moderate in strength and in the same
negative direction as in the planned essay condition.

Conclusion
The general pattern of results supports the claims of the
dual process model. Thus, the number of new ideas

produced in the rough drafting condition was higher for the
low self-monitors than for the high self-monitors, implying
that dispositionally guided text production is not simply a
matter of knowledge telling, but is an active knowledgeconstituting process in its own right, which is inhibited by
the application of rhetorical goals. Furthermore, in the
planned essay conditions, where writers have to take
external rhetorical constraints into account, the high selfmonitors did produce a high number of new ideas, as would
be expected if high self-monitors generate new ideas
through rhetorical planning.
The one unexpected finding here was that low selfmonitors produced a similar number of new ideas in the
planned essay condition and that this was no lower than in
the low self-monitors’ rough draft condition. One possible
explanation for this is that it is a consequence of the
extended period of time the participants spent considering
content during the rating of relationships between ideas.
This general activation of content prior to writing may have
led to a more ‘planned’ mode of writing in all conditions,
which may have reduced the extent to which rough drafting
was dispositionally driven, while at the same time activating
more potential content to be manipulated by explicit
planning during the planned essay. Alternatively, it may be
that low self-monitors tend to ignore rhetorical constraints
even when they are present.
Whatever the explanation for this, the key issue for the
dual process model is not so much the relative number of
new ideas produced under different conditions (which it
would expect to vary depending on a range of factors,
including the balance of implicit and explicit knowledge
about specific topics) but rather the relative conceptual
coherence of these ideas. The fundamental prediction of the
model here was that low self-monitors’ new ideas - because
they are dispositionally produced - would be more
conceptually coherent than high self-monitors’ new ideas.
This was strongly confirmed by the fact that, although they
produced a similar number of new ideas, low self-monitors
maintained the harmony of their ideas after writing both
rough drafts and planned essays, whereas high self-monitors
showed a marked decrease when they produced new ideas
after planned writing.
At first sight, the presence of strong negative correlations
between the number of new ideas produced and increases in
harmony appears to contradict this conclusion. As we
suggested earlier, however, we think this reflects the fact
that two different factors are at work here: (i) the conceptual
coherence of the ideas in themselves and (ii), the ability of
the writer to identify this coherence when a high number of
new ideas are present in working memory. The present
results imply that, although novel content generally reduces
the writer’s ability to create a coherent mental model of the
text in working memory, dispositionally produced new ideas
are relatively more coherent than those produced by
rhetorical planning.
Furthermore, this may, in part, also be a consequence of
the fact that writing in this experiment was restricted to a

single draft, where the writer has to create a global
organization for their ideas at the same time as formulating
them in text. Writers may find it difficult, immediately after
an intense period of text production, to step back and form a
clear picture of the overall structure of their text. If this is
correct, then it implies the problem may be alleviated when
the writer is allowed to write more than a single draft. We
would predict that low self-monitors would show greater
increases in conceptual coherence if they were to employ
revision strategies involving the identification and
organization of ideas in their previously written text (see
Galbraith and Torrance, 2004, for fuller details of these
strategies).
Finally, we should point out that the pattern of results for
high self-monitors’ planned essays were similar to the
control condition where they wrote about an unrelated topic.
This casts further doubt on the claim that the new ideas
produced in these conditions reflect genuine discovery, and
provides support for the idea that their new ideas are a
consequence of directly manipulating a mental model of the
text, rather than a consequence of text production. In the
control condition, the requirement to write an essay, even
about an unrelated topic, may be sufficient to activate
general rhetorical goals which cause high self-monitors to
modify their ideas after writing.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of
written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Britton, B.K. & Sorrells, R.C. (1998). Thinking about
knowledge learned from experience and instruction: Two
tests of a connectionist model. Discourse Processes, 25,
131-179.
Flower, L. S. and Hayes, J. R. (1980). The cognition of
discovery: defining a rhetorical problem. College
Composition and Communication, 31, 21-32.
Galbraith, D. (1992). Conditions for discovery through
writing. Instructional Science, 21, 45-72.
Galbraith, D. (1999). Writing as a knowledge-constituting
process. In M. Torrance & D. Galbraith (Eds.), Knowing
what to write. Dordrecht, NL: Amsterdam University
Press.
Galbraith, D., Ford, S., Walker, G., & Ford, J. (2005). The
contribution of different components of working memory
to knowledge transformation during writing. L1:
Educational Studies in Language and Literature, 15, 113145.
Galbraith, D. & Torrance, M. (2004). Revision in the
context of different drafting strategies. In L. Allal, L.
Chanquoy, & P. Largy (Eds.), Revision: Cognitive and
instructional processes. Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Snyder, M., & Gangestad, S. W. (1986). On the nature of
self-monitoring. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 125-139.
Thagard, P., & Verbeurgt, K. (1998). Coherence as
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 22, 1–24.

1345

