UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effortful Pragmatics: The Demanding Nature of Implicatures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8225m6jw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
De Neys, Wim
Shaeken, Walter

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effortful Pragmatics: The Demanding Nature of Implicatures
Wim De Neys (Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

compatible with (c) and not with (b). In statement (b),
Some is interpreted pragmatically. Based on expectations
about how a conversational exchange occurs the hearer
goes beyond the literal, logical meaning of the uttered
terms (Grice, 1989). Such pragmatic inferences or
implicatures have been extensively studied in the
philosophical and linguistic work on verbal
communication. The inference in the example has been
dubbed scalar implicature since the constituting terms
can be ordered on a scale of informativeness. The
implicature arises when a less informative term (e.g.,
Some) is taken to imply the denial of the more
informative term (e.g., All). The scalar implicature is
considered as the paradigmatic case for the study of
implicatures.
In the literature there is an interesting discordance
between pragmatic theorist who try to describe how scalar
inferences actually work (i.e., how a scalar inference
manifests itself in real time). The dispute centers around
the automaticity of the scalar implicature (see Bott &
Noveck, 2004; Noveck, 2001; Noveck & Posada, 2003;
Papafragou & Musolino, 2003). One school of thought,
referred to as the “neo-Gricean” account (e.g., Levinson,
2000) claims that the pragmatic interpretation is actually
the default interpretation in a concrete, communicative
setting. It is assumed that every time Some is encountered
the hearer will automatically make the scalar implicature.
Levinson, for example, has argued that scalar implicatures
result from a Q-heuristic dictating that “What isn’t said
isn’t”. Therefore, whenever a listener hears a weak scalar
term like Some, the listener will automatically assume that
the speaker intended that a stronger term (i.e., All) is not
warranted. The Q-heuristic dictates that if it is not said
that All is the case, it is not. If the speaker intended Some
to imply the stronger term All, she should have said it
explicitly. Hence, the hearer will always start by making
the scalar implicature. An eventual logical interpretation
of Some can only arise in a later stage where the
implicature is undone by the context.
A second approach, Relevance Theory (Carston, 1999;
Sperber & Wilson, 1996), assumes implicatures are not
made by default. Relevance theory states that how far a
hearer goes in processing an utterance’s meaning is
governed by principles concerning effect and effort.
Listeners try to gain as many effects as possible for the
least effort. According to Relevance Theory the logical

Abstract
In the present study we introduce dual task methodology to test
opposing psychological processing predictions concerning the
nature of implicatures in pragmatic theories. Implicatures
routinely arise in human communication when hearers interpret
utterances pragmatically and go beyond the logical meaning of
the terms. The neo-Gricean view (e.g., Levinson, 2000) assumes
that implicatures are generated automatically whereas Relevance
Theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1996) assumes that implicatures are
effortful and not automatic. Participants were presented a
sentence verification task with underinformative sentences that
have the potential to produce scalar implicatures like Some oaks
are trees. Depending on the nature of the interpretation of Some
(logical or pragmatic) the sentence is judged true or false. In two
experiments, cognitive working memory resources were
experimentally burdened by the concurrent memorization of
complex dot patterns during the interpretation process. Results
showed that participants made more logical and fewer pragmatic
interpretations under load. Findings provide direct support for
the Relevance Theory view.

Introduction
The complexity of human communication has been
characterized as one of the hallmarks of our species. A
striking demonstration of the sophisticated nature of our
communication system is our ability to draw pragmatic
inferences or implicatures. Often speakers intend to
convey far more than the logical meaning of the words
they utter and hearers readily retrieve the intended
interpretation. Imagine, for example, that U.S. Secretary
of Defense Donald Rumsfeld states in an interview:
(a) Some of our soldiers are misbehaving.
You would readily assume that Mr. Rumsfeld intends to
say:
(b) Not all of our soldiers are misbehaving.
Rather then:
(c) All of our soldiers are misbehaving.
However, according to standard semantic accounts, Some
means Some and possibly All. From a strictly logical point
of view, Secretary Rumsfeld’s utterance is therefore

178

logical interpretation process. Hence, people should be
more likely to stick to the default pragmatic interpretation
under load. From a neo-Gricean view one therefore
predicts that the cognitive load will boost the rate of
pragmatic interpretations.
Notice that pragmatic theorists and previous
experimental studies have not characterized the exact
nature of the alleged effortful processing. The present
study focuses on the role of executive working memory
resources since these are widely recognized as the
quintessential component of human cognitive capacity
(e.g., Engle, Tuholski, Laughlin, & Conway, 1999).

interpretation of Some (i.e., some and possibly all) could
very well lead to a satisfying interpretation in an
utterance. It is possible that the hearer will derive the
scalar implicature and move to a pragmatic interpretation
(i.e., some but not all) to make the utterance more
informative but this enrichment is not automatic and will
come at the cost of additional processing effort.
Thus, from the perspective of Relevance Theory scalar
implicatures are considered as effortful, non-necessary
inferences, whereas according to a neo-Gricean view it is
precisely the occasional undoing of an automatic, default
implicature that takes extra effort (Noveck & Posada,
2003).
Intuitively, the neo-Gricean account seems to be the
most plausible. If one looks at Mr. Rumsfeld’s utterance
(a), for example, it certainly feels like we infer (b) directly
while the logical interpretation (c) seems to require far
more active thinking. However, contrary to the intuitive
appeal, recent experimental findings seem to provide
some support for the Relevance Theory view. Noveck
(2001), for example, showed that children made the
logical interpretation of Some more than adults (see also
Papafragou & Musolino, 2003). Thus, the availability of a
larger cognitive resource pool with increasing age seemed
to be linked with a stronger dominance of the pragmatic
interpretation. In a series of latency studies, Bott and
Noveck (2004, see also Noveck & Posada, 2003)
observed that people needed more time for the pragmatic
interpretation than for the logical one. They also found
that limiting the time available for responding boosted the
rate of logical interpretations. These findings suggest that
making scalar implicatures is associated with correlates of
effortful processing.
The present study introduces a dual task approach to
settle the debate with a more direct test of the
automaticity claim. In two experiments available
cognitive resources were experimentally burdened by
imposing a resource demanding secondary task during
sentence interpretation. Participants were presented socalled underinformative sentences like some tuna are fish
and were asked to judge whether the sentence was true or
false (e.g., Bott & Noveck, 2004). Since, by definition, all
tuna are fish, the sentence will be judged false if one
draws the scalar implicature and interprets the sentence
pragmatically (e.g., some but not all tuna are fish). If one
interprets Some logically (e.g., some and possible all tuna
are fish) the sentence will be judged true.
If the scalar implicature is not automatic but requires
effortful processing, making the implicature should be
harder when cognitive resources are burdened. Therefore,
from the perspective of Relevance Theory one predicts
that the rate of pragmatic inferences will decrease under
cognitive load. On the other hand, if one believes that the
implicature is made automatically and it is the logical
interpretation that requires additional processing,
burdening the cognitive resources should hamper the

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 participants verified sentences while
they concurrently tried to remember a briefly presented
visual dot pattern (e.g., Miyake, Friedman, Rettinger,
Shah, & Hegarty, 2001). The complexity of the dot
pattern was manipulated so that storage of the pattern in a
control group would be less demanding.

Method
Participants
A total of 184 students of the University of Leuven,
Department of Social Sciences, participated voluntarily or
in return for psychology course credit.
Material
Sentence verification task. Participants provided
True/False judgments for 10 underinformative sentences
presented on a computer screen in front of them. Content
of the sentences referred to categories and exemplars
(e.g., Some <exemplar> are <category>). The only
instructions participants were given was to respond ‘True’
if they thought the sentence on the screen was true, or
‘False’ if they believed the sentence to be false.
Participants typed down their response using the numpad
(‘1’- True or ‘2’- False).
Participants also judged 10 filler trials where patently
true (e.g., Some birds are eagles) and patently false (e.g.,
Some tigers are fish) sentences were presented (see
Appendix for the complete set). The sentences were
presented in random order.
Dot memory task. The dot memory task is a classic spatial
storage task (e.g., Bethell-Fox & Shepard, 1988; Miyake
et al., 2001). For the present study a 3x3 matrix filled with
three to four dots was briefly presented for 850 ms.
Participants memorized the pattern and were asked to
reproduce it afterwards.
In the load group the matrix was filled with a complex
four-dot pattern (i.e., a “two- or three-piece” pattern based
on the work of Bethell-Fox & Shepard, 1988, and
Verschueren, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2004, see Figure

179

Sentence verification task. Underinformative sentences.
Remember that when underinformative sentences are
interpreted pragmatically they will be judged “false” in
the sentence verification task. Overall, participants gave a
mean number of 7.76 “false” responses to the
underinformative sentences. Thus, the vast majority
(about 78%) of participants’ interpretations were
pragmatic in nature. The crucial finding is that the rate of
pragmatic interpretations tended to be lower in the
complex load (M = 7.33, SD = 3.64) group than in the
control group (M = 8.18, SD = 3.25), t(182) = 1.65, p <
.1, d = .24. Although the effect reached only marginal
significance the trend is consistent with the prediction
from a Relevance Theory perspective. Concurrent
memorization of the complex dot pattern decreases rather
than boosts the tendency to make pragmatic
interpretations.
Filler sentences. To check whether the load did not
interfere with basic sentence comprehension we
calculated the mean number of correct responses to the
filler sentences. Performance was uniformly high, both in
the control (Mean = 9.32, SD = .73) and load group
(Mean = 9.18, SD = .86), t(182) = 1.25, p = .25. The high
overall rate of correct filler responses (less than 7%
errors) establishes that participants were not simply
guessing or superficially accepting under secondary task
load. In principle, one could suggest that the secondary
task load triggers a general tendency to select “true”
responses. Hence, the load effects on the
underinformative sentences would not point to a difficulty
to derive the implicature per se. Note, however, that four
out of ten filler sentences were patently true. Hence, if
participants would simply accept or guess under load they
should err on 50% to 60% of the filler trials. The high rate
of correct responses on the filler items establishes that the
cognitive burden specifically interfered with drawing
scalar implicatures.

1). Miyake et al. (2001) established that storage of similar
complex dot patterns tapped executive resources.

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
a.

b.

Figure 1. Examples of the dot patterns in the load (a) and
control group (b).
In the control group the pattern consisted of three dots
on a horizontal line (i.e., a “one-piece” pattern in BethellFox & Shepard’s terms). This simple and systematic
pattern should only minimally burden the executive
resources (e.g., De Neys, in press; Miyake et al., 2001).
Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of 19 to 42 and were
randomly assigned to the control or complex load group.
The experiment started with a demonstration of the
storage task. On two practice storage items (one with a
simple and one with a complex pattern) an empty
response matrix was presented 1 s after the pattern had
been presented. Participants used the keypad to indicate
the location of the dots. Instructions stressed that it was
crucial that the dot patterns were reproduced correctly in
the upcoming task.
A verification task trial started with a brief presentation
of the dot pattern for 850 ms. Next, the sentence was
presented and remained on the screen until the participant
made a response. Afterwards, an empty matrix was
presented and participants had to reproduce the dot
pattern. Participants received feedback on whether the
pattern had been reproduced correctly and were reminded
that they had to remember the complete pattern correctly.
The procedure was clarified with two practice sentences.

Experiment 2
The marginal load trend observed in Experiment 1
presented some initial support for the Relevance Theory
view of implicatures. Experiment 2 presents a more
stringent within-subjects test to validate the findings.
Participants verified two sets of sentences, one while
memorizing the easy control patterns and one while
memorizing the complex load patterns.

Results and discussion
Dot memory task. Results for the dot memory task
indicated that the task was properly performed. The mean
number of correctly localized dots for the complex fourdot pattern in the load group was 3.74 (SD = .27) and 2.88
(SD = .18) for the simple three-dot pattern in the control
group. Thus, overall, about 94% of a complex and 96% of
a simple pattern was reproduced correctly. This
establishes that participants were indeed memorizing the
patterns.

Method
Participants
A total of 56 first-year psychology students of the
University of Leuven participated in return for
psychology course credit. None of the students had
participated in Experiment 1.

180

interpretation that required additional effortful processing,
one would have expected to see more pragmatic and
fewer logical interpretations under complex load. The
decreased pragmatic interpretations directly establish that
making scalar implicatures is not automatic but requires
effortful, cognitive processing.
One might note that the impact of our cognitive load
manipulation was not spectacular. Indeed, the complex
dot memorization only decreased the rate of pragmatic
interpretations with about 10% and participants still made
over 70% pragmatic interpretations under load. However,
it should be clear that the size of the load effect is not the
crucial issue here. First, one could always try to obtain
stronger effects by imposing more demanding secondary
tasks (e.g., increasing the number of dots). Second, and
more important, it is obvious that no one in the Relevance
Theory camp would claim that drawing an implicature
puts a massive burden on our cognitive resources. Given
the prevalence of pragmatic inferences in daily life, it
would indeed be hard to see how people would manage to
communicate if every implicature would involve a major
cognitive cost. Thus, it is rather likely that implicatures
require a relatively small cognitive involvement. The
important point is that they are not completely automatic.
The basic finding that a cognitive burden results in more
logical and fewer pragmatic interpretations directly
contradicts the prediction from a neo-Gricean account of
scalar implicature.
We stated that pragmatic theorists have not yet
characterized the exact nature of the alleged effortful,
cognitive processing. The memorization of complex dotpatterns has been shown to specifically burden the
executive component of the human working memory
system (Miyake et al., 2001). The present findings thus
indicate that the effortful processing that is required in
deriving scalar implicatures specifically draws on these
executive working memory resources. This stipulation
should stimulate pragmatic theorists to link their work
more closely with the rich psychological research
tradition on the role of executive resources in higher-order
cognition (e.g., Kane & Engle, 2002). We believe that
such an approach will be especially fruitful to arrive at
more fine-grained future characterizations of the cognitive
operations underlying pragmatic inferences.
We finally note an interesting implication of the present
findings for the field of deductive reasoning. It is wellestablished that fallacious deductive inferences can be
often attributed to pragmatic interpretations of the
premises (e.g., Begg & Harris, 1982; Brain & O’Brien,
1998; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002). Influential dual
process theories of reasoning (e.g., Evans, 2003;
Stanovich & West, 2000) have attributed this pragmatic
modulation to the operation of a heuristic system that
biases the operation of a second, analytic system
mediating normative correct reasoning. The basic
assumption is that the heuristic system operates

Material
Sentence verification task. Participants verified two sets
of 20 sentences (with 10 underinformative and 10 filler
sentences in each set, see Appendix).
Dot memory task. See Experiment 1.
Procedure
Participants were tested in small groups. For each
participant it was randomly determined with which
sentence set and which load type they started. Item
presentation followed the same procedure as in
Experiment 1.

Results and discussion
Dot memory task. As in Experiment 1, participants
properly memorized the dot patterns. The mean number
of correctly localized dots for the complex four-dot
pattern was 3.75 (SD = .25) and 2.90 (SD = .17) for the
simple three-dot pattern. Thus, overall, about 94% of a
complex and 97% of a simple pattern was reproduced
correctly.
Sentence verification task. Underinformative sentences.
Overall, the vast majority (about 76%) of participants’
interpretations were pragmatic in nature. However, as in
Experiment 1, participants made significantly fewer
pragmatic interpretations when they had to memorize the
demanding complex patterns (M = 7.32, SD = 3.98) than
when memorizing the easy control patterns (M = 7.89, SD
= 3.68), t(55) = 2.18, p < .04, d = .41.
Filler sentences. Participants responded correctly to the
filler sentences both when memorizing the control (Mean
= 9.36, SD = .77) and complex patterns (Mean = 9.3, SD
= .1.01), t(55) = .37, p = .72. Hence, all results completely
replicated the findings of Experiment 1.

General Discussion
The present study introduced dual task methodology to
test opposing processing assumptions in pragmatic
theories concerning the nature of scalar implicature. The
intuitively appealing neo-Gricean account considers
implicatures as automatic, default inferences that will
need to be effortfully overridden to arrive at a logical
interpretation. From the perspective of Relevance Theory
the logical interpretation is more basic and implicatures
are considered additional, non-automatic, cognitive
demanding inferences. The present findings clearly
supported the Relevance Theory view of scalar
implicature. Both in Experiment 1 and 2, burdening the
cognitive resources with the memorization of the complex
dot patterns decreased the rate of pragmatic inferences.
Hence, contrary to intuition, people became more
“logical” under cognitive load. If it would be the logical

181

Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of
prefrontal cortex in working-memory capacity,
executive attention, and general fluid intelligence: An
individual differences perspective. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9, 637-671.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory
of generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Rettinger, D. A., Shah, P.,
Hegarty, M. (2001). How are visuospatial working
memory, executive functioning, and spatial abilities
related? A latent-variable analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 621-640.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical
than adults: Experimental investigations of scalar
implicature. Cognition, 78, 165-188.
Noveck, I. A., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterizing the
time course of an implicature: An evoked potentials
study. Brain and Language, 85, 203-210.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar
implicatures : Experiments at the semantics-pragmatics
interface. Cognition, 86, 253-282.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1996). Relevance:
Communication and cognition. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2004).
Everyday conditional reasoning with working memory
preload. Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah:
Erlbaum.

automatically whereas the second system would be
cognitively demanding and draw on executive working
memory resources. The present study indicates that
contrary to the popular conceptualization, pragmatic
modulation is not a pure automatic process. People
already need executive resources to derive the potentially
biasing scalar implicatures. Consistent with recent
findings in the reasoning field (e.g., De Neys, Schaeken,
& d’Ydewalle, 2005) this implies that the basic
characterization of an automatically operating heuristicpragmatic reasoning system should be questioned. Our
findings clearly established that the paradigmatic case for
the study of pragmatics, the scalar implicature, is not
made automatically but involves effortful, executive
processing.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by a post
doctoral fellowship grant from the Fund for Scientific
Research-Flanders (FWO).

References
Begg, I., & Harris, G. (1982). On the interpretation of
syllogisms. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 21, 595-620.
Bethell-Fox, C. E., & Shepard, R. N. (1988). Mental
rotation: Effects of stimulus complexity and familiarity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 14, 12-23.
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are
underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar
inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 437457.
Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. P. (Eds.). (1998). Mental
logic. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Carston, R. (1999). Informativeness, relevance, and scalar
implicature. In R. Carston, & S. Uchida (Eds.),
Relevance theory: Applications and implications.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
De Neys, W. (in press). Dual processing in reasoning:
Two systems but one reasoner. Psychological Science.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2005).
Working memory and everyday conditional reasoning:
Retrieval and inhibition of stored counterexamples.
Thinking & Reasoning, 11, 349-381.
Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., &
Conway, A. R. A. (1999). Working memory, short-term
memory, and general fluid intelligence: A latentvariable approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 128, 309-331.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003). In two minds: Dual process
accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7,
454-459.

Appendix
Sentences Used in the Verification Tasks
Set 1 (Experiment 1 and 2)
Underinformative
Some eels are fish.
Some carp are fish.
Some oaks are trees.
Some beeches are trees.
Some sparrows are birds.
Some robins are birds.
Some flies are insects.
Some mosquitoes are insects.
Some roses are flowers.
Some tulips are flowers.

182

Filler
Some birds are magpies. (true)
Some insects are wasps. (true)
Some pigeons are insects. (false)
Some beetles are flowers. (false)
All Chrysanthemum are flowers. (true)
All hazels are trees. (true)
All trees are elms. (false)
All fish are herrings. (false)
All daffodils are trees. (false)
All sycamores are fish. (false)

Some lilies are flowers.
Some firs are trees.
Some birches are trees.
Some trout are fish.
Some sharks are fish.
Filler
Some flowers are carnations. (true)
Some trees are willows. (true)
Some crocuses are trees. (false)
Some poplars are fish. (false)
All cod are fish. (true)
All parrots are birds. (true)
All birds are crows. (false)
All insects are worms. (false)
All pike are birds. (false)
All swallows are insects. (false)

Set 2 (Experiment 2)
Underinformative
Some ants are insects.
Some bees are insects.
Some canaries are birds.
Some blackbirds are birds.
Some daisies are flowers.

183

