UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Embodied Synchrony of Nonverbal Behaviour in Counseling: a Case Study of Role Playing
School Counseling

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01g447zr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Komori, Masashi
Nagaoka, Chika
Yoshikawa, Sakiko

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Embodied Synchrony of Nonverbal Behaviour in Counselling: a Case Study of Role
Playing School Counselling
Chika Nagaoka (nagaoka@educ.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Sakiko Yoshikawa (say@educ.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University
Yoshida Honmachi, Sakyo, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan.

Masashi Komori (komori@isc.osakac.ac.jp)
Faculty of Information Science and Technology, Osaka Electro-Communication University
18-1 Hastu-cho, Neyagawa-shi, Osaka, 572-8530, Japan

Abstract
Experienced counsellors have mentioned that the clientcounsellor relationship, which is of high importance in
counselling, may be related to embodied synchrony of
nonverbal behaviour, but there is little quantitative research
on the topic. The present study captured the embodied
synchrony of nonverbal behaviour in counselling from a
multiple communication channel perspective, in order to
examine the relationship between these channels. At the same
time, the relation between embodied synchrony and the
mental processes of the client or counsellor, such as the sense
of trust between counsellor and client, was investigated. 9-24
participants rated visual and vocal embodied synchrony and
sense of trust in role-playing school counselling scenes. The
results indicated that embodied synchrony, such as body
movement coordination, similarity of voice strength and
coordination and smoothness of response timing, have a cooccurrence relation. Moreover, significant correlations with
evaluated sense of trust suggested that embodied synchrony
can act as an indicator reflecting the mental process of a client
or counsellor.

Counselling is a dialogue between a client and a counsellor
who is a skilled listener, and is performed with the purpose
of overcoming the client’s mental difficulties or obstacles.
The
counsellor's
verbal/nonverbal
responses
are
experientially known to encourage the client's speech, and
have the assistance function of guiding the client's thinking
from a "confused state" to a "regulated state".
Conventionally, in the case of investigating and evaluating
counselling, the counsellor’s verbal responses are examined
as the key element, and only rarely attention is directed
towards nonverbal responses. However, we may assume that
nonverbal responses are also playing an important role in
counselling. It is expected that analyzing the counsellor's
nonverbal behaviour would give an important cue also about
the characteristics of the response style of listeners in daily
conversations.
In this study, embodied synchrony is focused upon as a cue
to investigating nonverbal behaviour in counselling.
Embodied synchrony is a phenomenon in which the
interactants’ nonverbal behaviour synchronizes and

becomes similar; the listener's movements of the head or
arms may synchronize with the flow of the speaker's speech,
or the way of speaking, postures, mannerisms, and facial
expressions may become similar (e.g. Cappella, 1981;
Hess, Philippot, & Blairy, 1999; Feldstein & Welkowitz,
1978; Cheng & Chartrand, 2003). Up to the present,
embodied synchrony has been described qualitatively by the
subjective impressions of skilled counsellors with abundant
experience in counselling, and has been considered to
indicate the client-counsellor relationship, which is thought
to be of primary importance in counselling. There is also
some research which indicates quantitatively the congruence
of posture in counselling dialogues (e.g. Charny, 1966), as
well as other studies that indicate the relation between
embodied synchrony, such as congruence of posture,
duration of pauses or response latencies (i.e., latency before
responding to the partner's last utterance), synchrony of
body movements, and empathy (Maurer & Tindall, 1983;
Staples & Sloane, 1976; Hall, Harrigan, & Rosenthal, 1995;
Bernieri, Davis, Rosenthal, & Knee, 1994).
For measuring the degree of embodied synchrony of
nonverbal behaviour, a method suggested by Bernieri &
Rosenthal (1991) has been used. This method consists in
judges evaluating directly the degree of the overall
embodied synchrony in order to quantify it. As opposed to
the conventional single-channel approach in which attention
is directed towards a particular channel which is examined
in detail, this method attempts at capturing nonverbal
behaviour on a multi-channel level. However, this method
cannot take paralanguage into consideration. To our
knowledge, there has been no such method that allowed
quantifying vocal synchrony overall.
Therefore, in this study, an attempt to quantify vocal
embodied synchrony overall, adapting Bernieri et al. 's
method to measure vocal embodied synchrony, in addition
to quantifying embodied synchrony of body movement
using this method, is carried out. In other words, it is one of
this work’s purposes to capture embodied synchrony from a
multi-channel perspective. The necessity for investigating
embodied synchrony on a multi-channel level was implied
by Hall et al. (1995). In the present study, it is also
examined whether embodied synchrony occurs as a

1862

complementary or a co-occurrence relation between
channels.
The second purpose of this research is to examine
empirically the relation between embodied synchrony and
mental processes of the client and counsellor, which change
during the process of counselling. As mentioned above, the
relation between embodied synchrony and the clientcounsellor mental relationship has been known
experientially, and there are also suggestions from some
empirical research. For example, when two speakers having
different opinions dialogue in order to reach a compromise
through discussion and consideration of their partner's
opinion, the response latencies of the two speakers' become
similar, whereas when discussing to impose their opinion on
the conversation partner, response latencies are not similar
(Nagaoka, Komori, Nakamura, & Draguna, 2005).
Therefore, embodied synchrony in counselling scenes can
be anticipated to have high correlation with some mental
processes, such as trust between the client and counsellor. In
this study, as an indicator of mental process, firstly, the
client's sense of trust towards the counsellor, evaluated by
judges who listened to the vocal stimuli, was used. (Note:
these evaluations were used because the comments of the
parties involved in the counselling scenes on the results of
the counselling session are unavailable). In addition, the
contents of the speech and the nonverbal behaviour within
the counselling scenes will be also considered.

atmosphere." From hereon, the students will be referred to
as “clients” and the school counsellor and teacher as
“counsellors”.
Four scenes were used for each case (Figure 1): Opening
(after sitting down), Pre-empathetic phase, Empathy display,
and Closing (the last 1 minute was excluded). The border
between Pre-empathetic phase and Empathy display was
marked by the first utterance expressing the counsellor’s
empathy towards the student: “that is rather hard…”, in
reference to the client being ignored by some of her friends
in Case 1, and “that is indeed quite tough…”, in reference to
the client’s parents never talking seriously about his path in
life in Case 2. In Empathy display scene, the counsellor in
Case 1 expresses her empathy verbally, and then continues
with questions, inquiring about details regarding the client's
situation. On the other hand, the counsellor in Case 2 keeps
listening to the student's speech and then asks him questions.
Each scene lasted about 30 seconds, which included both
the client’s and counsellor’s utterances. The video and audio
materials representing the stimuli were created using a film
editing application (VideoWave Movie Creator; Roxio) and
an audio-wave editing application (DigiOnSound; DigOn).

Ratings of Embodied Synchrony

Method

Body Movements Evaluation
Judges Independent judgments on the synchrony of body
movements were collected from 12 female and 12 male
participants, age between 19 and 30 years. All the judges
used Japanese as their mother tongue, had no visual or
auditory impairment, and had not watched the recordings
prior to the experiment.
Procedure The judges evaluated the recordings individually,
in a laboratory where the background noise had a low level.
The stimuli were presented on a 19-inch monitor (VGPD19SM2, Sony), using a presentation software (PowerPoint,
Microsoft, VGC-RA70PL9) on a computer, without sound.
Participants rated the embodied synchrony on papers, after
having watched each stimulus twice. There were three rating
items: simultaneous movement, tempo similarity and
coordination and smoothness, terms borrowed from Bernieri
et al. (1988), and translated into Japanese. For example, for
coordination and smoothness, the instructions given to the
judges were as follows: "assume you are viewing a
choreographed dance rather than a social interaction. How

This experiment consists of two sections in which the
embodied synchrony and the client’s sense of trust towards
the counsellor were evaluated. Furthermore, the evaluation
of embodied synchrony consists of the evaluation of body
movements coordination as a visual cue, and the evaluation
of voice strength similarity, speech tempo similarity, and the
coordination and smoothness of response timing, these
representing audio cues. Participants in the experiment were
asked to judge the visual cues, audio cues, and the sense of
trust for each scene respectively. Correlations between
ratings were also examined.

Stimuli
Two films from an educational material for teachers entitled
"School education and counselling" (Miyamoto, T. and
Yamada, T. ed.) were used, with the editors’ permission:
Case 1 - a dialogue between a junior high school female
student and a female teacher, and Case 2 - a dialogue
between a junior high school male student and a female
school counsellor. Both cases represented role-playing, and
according to an expert's comments (recorded on the DVD),
in Case 1 (a 15-minute recording), "the enthusiasm of the
counsellor had been conveyed to the student", however, "the
student could not fully express her inner feelings", and Case
2 (27-minute) was considered to be "an example of good
counselling", and "to some extent, there was already a
rapport (good client-counsellor relationship) between the
student and the school counsellor", with "a generally warm

(a) Case1
Opening Empathy display
Closing
↓
↓
15-minute
↑
Pre-empathetic phase

1863

(b) Case2
Opening
↓

Empathy display
↓
↑
Pre-empathetic phase

Closing
27-minute

Figure 1: Stimuli’s time serial position in counselling

smoothly does the interactants’ flow of behaviour
intertwine?" The judges gave ratings on 10-point scales,
from 1 - very low level, to 10 - very high level, for each
item. The stimuli were presented in random order, and four
practice trials were inserted first.
Audio Evaluation
Judges Six female and three male participants between the
ages of 22 and 30 years evaluated the stimuli. All the judges
used Japanese as their mother tongue, did not have any
visual or auditory impairment, and had not listened to the
material prior to the experiment.
Procedure The ratings were conducted in a quiet laboratory,
one to three judges at a time. The stimuli were presented
from an active speaker (time domain light;
TIMEDOMAIN) installed in front of the judges, using a
presentation software (PowerPoint, Microsoft) on a
computer, with no image. The stimuli were presented at a
level of about 70dB(A) at the judges' position. The judges
rated the embodied synchrony on paper, after having
listened to each stimulus twice. The rating items were: voice
strength similarity, speech tempo similarity, and
coordination and smoothness of response timing. For
example, in the case of coordination and smoothness of
response timing, instructions given to the judges were as
follows: “assume you are listening to a musical ensemble
rather than a dialogue. How smoothly do the interactants'
voices harmonize, without disturbing the atmosphere of the
partner's speech?” The judges rated each item on 10-point
scales. Stimuli were presented in random order, and four
practice trials were inserted at the beginning. The judges
were instructed to focus their attention only on prosodic
cues, and not get influenced by the semantic content. These
ratings were performed after rating the sense of trust, which
will be mentioned below. This was because when listening
for the first time to audio stimuli, it is supposed to be easier
to pay attention to their semantic content rather than to only
their prosodic characteristics.

correlations between the three were very high. The mean for
Case 2 (M =6.8) was significantly higher than the mean for
Case 1 (M = 4.5) for body movement synchrony (F(1, 51) =
43.0, p<.001, the two-way repeated-measures analysis of
variance: ANOVA). On the other hand, since the evaluated
targets for the three items for audio embodied synchrony are
considered to be independent respectively, resulting in low
correlations of the rating values for each item, they will be
considered separately. The results for Case 2 (similarity of
voice strength, M = 6.1; coordination and smoothness of
response timing, M = 8.0) was significantly higher than
those for Case 1 (voice strength similarity, M = 4.1;
coordination of response timing, M = 4.9; voice strength
similarity, F(1, 24) = 12.5, p<.001; coordination of response
timing, F(1, 24) = 23.8, p<.01), though no significant
difference was observed for speech tempo similarity (Case1,
M = 5.3; Case2, M = 6.0; F(1, 24) = 0.6, n. s.).

Relation between communication channels
Significant high correlations were observed between body
movement synchrony, voice strength similarity and
coordination and smoothness of response timing,
respectively (Table 1). This indicates that these synchronies
are in a co-occurrence relation. However, speech tempo
similarity correlated with neither channel significantly.

Time Serial Changes of Embodied Synchrony

Ratings of the Sense of Trust

Figure 2 indicates time serial changes of body movement
synchrony, similarity of voice strength, speech tempo
similarity, and coordination of response timing, respectively,
as a function of time lapse of the counselling session.
For rating values of body movement synchrony, we
conducted a two-way repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) for cases (case1, 2) and scenes
(Opening, Pre-empathetic phase, Empathy display and
Closing). There were significant main effects of the case
(F(1, 51) = 43.0, p<.001) and scene (F(3, 51) = 10.1,
p<.001), and a significant interaction effect between case
and scene (F(3, 51) = 6.8, p<.001). For the rating values of
voice strength similarity, there were significant main effects
of the case (F(1, 24) = 12.5, p<.001) and scene (F(3, 24)
=5.1, p<.001), and a significant interaction effect between
the case and the scene (F(3, 24) = 5.2, p<.001). For the
rating values of speech tempo similarity, there were
significant main effects of scene (F(3, 24) = 3.0, p<.05), and
a significant interaction effect between case and scene (F(3,
24) = 8.3, p<.001), although the main effect of case was not

Judges The participants were the same as those who rated
the above-mentioned audio embodied synchrony.
Procedure Apparatus was the same as for the audio
embodied synchrony ratings. Participants rated the client's
sense of trust towards the counsellor on paper, after
listening to each stimulus once. Since a speaker may trust
their partner even if the conversation seems not to be
successful, the judges were required to rate the stimuli only
after very careful consideration. Each item was rated on a
10-points scale, from 1 - no trust to 10 - trust very much.
The stimuli were presented in random order, and two
practice trials were inserted at the beginning.

Results and Discussion
Similar to Bernieri et al. (1988), the mean rating values for
the three items (simultaneous movement, tempo similarity
and coordination and smoothness of response timing) for
body movement synchrony were calculated, since the
1864

Table 1: Correlations between the synchrony of
communication channels
Communication channel
1. Body movement
2. Voice strength
3. Speech tempo
4. Response timing
*: p<.05, **: p<.01

1

.78*
.33
.95**

2
.69
.88**

3

4

.53

-

(a) Body movement

Mean Rating

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Case1
Case2

Opening
i nt

Empathy
bfPrer
af t
分割群 display
empathetic
scene

Closing
end

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Case1
Case2

Closing
Cl osi ng

di spl ay

PreEmpathy
empathetic display
scene
c phase

Opening
Openi ng

Mean Rating

(b) Voice strength

PreEmpathy
empathetic display
scene

Closing

Case1
Case2

Closing
ng

ay

PreEmpathy
empathetic display
scene
ase

Opening
ng

Mean Rating

(d) Coordination and smoothness of response timing
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Correlation between Embodied Synchrony and
Sense of Trust

si ng

Opening

pl ay

Case1
Case2
hase

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

ni ng

Mean Rating

(c) Speech tempo

significant (F(1, 24) = 0.6, n. s.). For the rating values of
coordination and smoothness of response timing, we
obtained significant main effects of the case (F(1, 24) = 23.8,
p<.01) and scene (F(3, 24) = 7.5, p<.01), and a significant
interaction effect of case and scene (F(3, 24) = 2.5, p = .08).
Concerning body movement, voice strength and
coordination and smoothness of response timing, in Case 2,
described as an example of good counselling in which the
rapport between the student and the counsellor had been
established to some extent, a relatively high embodied
synchrony was observed consistently throughout the session,
from the Opening to the Closing scenes. On the other hand,
in Case 1 in which the student could not express fully his
feelings, embodied synchrony was relatively low and
decreased remarkably in the Closing scene.
According to Figure 2, the variation pattern for speech
tempo similarity in Case 2 significantly differed from that
for the other parameters. In particular, the low synchrony
level within Pre-empathetic scene in Case 2 is specific. In
this scene, the client speaks at a fast tempo, imitating the
tone of his parents who use to interrupt his talk. As
compared to this, the counsellor responds in a calm tone, as
she does in any other scene. The counsellor’s moderate
speech tempo throughout the session may mean that the
counsellor’s attitude is consistent, not related to or affected
by any feelings expressed by the client. Also, using
consistently moderate speech tempo may be interpreted as a
strategy to express the counsellor’s consistent attitude
towards the client. Moreover, in this scene, nonverbal
behaviour other than speech tempo indicated very high level
of embodied synchrony. This cannot be disregarded, since
this may imply the possibility that these channels have the
function to compensate for the low level of speech tempo
similarity.

Figure 2: Time serial changes of embodied synchrony.
Error bars represent ±1 standard errors.

The client's sense of trust towards the counsellor was rated
to be higher in Case 2 (M = 7.9，SD = 1.6) than in Case 1
(M = 5.3，SD = 1.9; F(1, 24) = 30.4, p<.001). Since it is
assumed that a client would trust more a counsellor in good
counselling, this result is not inconsistent with the expert's
comments mentioned above. Figure 3 indicates time serial
changes of the sense of trust. The sense of trust in Case 2
tends to improve gradually. In contrast, in Case 1 it
decreases monotonously. The result of Case 2 may be
interpreted as evidence indicating that the confidential
relation between a counsellor and a client is established over
time. The pattern of Case 2 implies that the sense of trust
enhances in an early stage in good counselling, and the
empathy displayed after the early enhancement in the sense
of trust works effectively.
The mean rating values of embodied synchrony and sense
of trust for each scene and item were calculated. The results
of correlation analyses using these means indicated that

1865

PreEmpathy
empathetic display
scene
spl ay

Opening

osi ng

Case1
Case2
phase

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

eni ng

Mean Rating

there is a significant high correlation between body
movement synchrony, voice strength similarity, coordination

Closing

Figure 3: Time serial changes of the sense of trust. Error
bars represent ±1 standard errors.
Table 2: Correlations between embodied synchrony and
sense of trust.
Communication channels
1. Body movements
2. Voice strength
3. Speech tempo
4. Response timing
*: p<.05, **: p<.01

The sense of
trust
.89**
.75*
.30
.87**

of response timing and sense of trust (Table 2).
These results imply that we evaluate a partner indicating
synchrony with our own nonverbal behaviour to be
trustworthy, and that we respond nonverbally, behaving in
synchrony with a trustworthy partner. Moreover, this
implies that when evaluating counselling, embodied
synchrony of nonverbal behaviour between two persons,
exception making the speech tempo, can act as an indicator
of quality of the counselling and the client-counsellor
relationship.
Charny (1966) indicated that postures of a client and
counsellor become more congruent with the time course of
the counselling session. However, the present results
indicated that embodied synchrony did not increase
constantly with the time course, but changed depending on
the scene. Considering these two results, it is suggested that
embodied synchrony of nonverbal behaviour reflects
sensitively the speakers’ mental processes, such as the
client-counsellor trust relationship, which change with the
time course of the interaction.

client may be inferred based upon the semantic contents and
nonverbal behaviour displayed in the scene. Thereby, the
relation between the speakers' mental process and their
nonverbal behaviour will be examined.
Although the client spoke only a little bit at a time in the
Opening scene, during the Pre-empathetic scene he spoke
about his situation actively, with many gestures. At this time,
the counsellor responded using gestures similar to the
client's, this causing an increase in embodied synchrony.
During Empathy display, after the counsellor’s speech
indicated empathy, the client revealed his feelings about his
parents. Considering this, we may assume that in this scene,
the client thought introspectively and faced his true feelings.
The client's body movement and speech duration during the
scene are smaller and shorter respectively than during the
Pre-empathetic scene (based on the results of sound and
image analyses). On the other hand, the counsellor nodded
frequently during the speech of the client, with the probable
intent of encouraging the client to speak. Thus, the
differences in mental processes of the two are thought to
find their expression in differences in their nonverbal
behaviour, this explaining the low level of body movement
synchrony and coordination and smoothness of response
timing.
It is essential in counselling for the client to think
introspectively. When doing so, it is possible that body
movements are suppressed. This is confirmed by other cases
that the authors have recently examined, in which body
movements of the introspectively thinking clients are rather
small, this possibly being the cause for low synchrony of
nonverbal behaviour. Therefore, relatively low embodied
synchrony does not necessarily reflect a bad situation in
counselling. Indeed, the difference between evaluated sense
of trust in the Empathy display scene and in the Preempathetic scene was not significant (Figure 3).
Furthermore, as compared with the counsellor in Case 1,
the one in Case 2 was seated in a moderately relaxed posture,
which may promote that the counsellor indicates higher
embodied synchrony to the client's nonverbal behaviour,
and spoke at slow speech tempo consistently. This
counsellor did not always have verbal fluency, use fewer
pauses, and shorter response latencies, which are assumed to
be related to high conversation management (the degree to
which speakers engage in smooth conversation) in ordinary
interactions (Coker & Burgoon, 1987). All these imply that
behaviour required in counselling situations is not always
the same as behaviour required in ordinary conversations.

General Discussion
The present results indicated that embodied synchrony of
nonverbal behaviour might occur simultaneously over
multiple communication channels. The significance of this
is that it may represent evidence that speech and body
movement are integrated. However, it is necessary in the
future to verify whether this is true in other interactions as
well.

Semantic Contents of Speech and Nonverbal
Behaviour in Counselling Scenes
It is suggestive that the rating values of body movement
synchrony and coordination and smoothness of the response
timing decrease in the Empathy display scene of Case 2
(Figure2). Concerning this, herein the mental process of the

1866

Further, the present results suggested that embodied
synchrony (body movement coordination, similarity of
voice strength and coordination and smoothness of response
timing) can also act as an indicator of a client’s or
counsellor’s mental process, such as sense of trust, which is
strongly related to the quality of counselling. Of course, it is
role-playing that the present study dealt with, rather than
actual counselling. Since role-playing counselling is
generally used as a method for the counsellor’s skill
acquisition, it is considered that the phenomena that occur in
actual counselling occur also in role-playing counselling.
Therefore, using role-playing counselling as an object for
study is presumed to be significant.
Previously, such synchrony has been described
qualitatively by the subjective impressions of experienced
counsellors with abundant experience in counselling. Also,
in counselling training, embodied synchrony has been
scarcely explained. Therefore, we consider that the present
study presents interest not only for filling in the gaps in the
qualitative descriptions provided by expert counsellors, but
it can also contribute to counselling training.
Concerning this study, some problems remain to be
examined. Firstly, although the sense of trust rated by the
student who played the client role should be taken into
consideration, ratings of outside observers were used instead.
Therefore, at present, we are collecting and examining data
which contains clear comments of the persons involved in
the counselling scenes. Secondly, only two cases were
examined in this study. In addition, it may also be
problematic that the same participant rated both the audio
embodied synchrony and the sense of trust, and that the
length of stimuli differed between cases. Therefore, in the
future it is necessary to investigate whether the same results
are obtained also for other cases. Although the present study
used the method of evaluating embodied synchrony,
specifying the physical factors involved in the perception of
embodied synchrony is also required. Analyses of vocal
sound in the counselling scenes indicated that the degree of
embodied synchrony can be anticipated from the frequency
of simultaneous speech that contains back-channels (i.e. the
part of speech in which two speakers' vocalizations overlap).
In addition, the mechanism through which two speakers'
nonverbal behaviour displays embodied synchrony it is
rather unclear at present. If we assume that speakers'
thinking strategies and their attitude towards counselling or
their conversational partner are reflected in their nonverbal
behaviour, it is possible that when talking with a counsellor,
the client would be enabled to organize their thinking and
the thinking strategies would become similar, hence their
nonverbal behaviour would change and finally display
synchrony with that of the counsellor. However, body
movements’ coordination originating in the ecological
foundation of humans, upon which the dynamic systems
approach (e.g. Schmidt & Turvey, 1994) have focused
cannot be disregarded either, even within counselling scenes
which may be viewed as advanced intellectual activity. In
the future, it is necessary to investigate further the

mechanism through which the synchrony of nonverbal
behaviour is achieved.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Grant-in-Aid for
Creative Scientific Research, 13GS0003, 2004, and a
postdoctoral fellowship grant from Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.

References
Bernieri, F., Davis, J., Rosenthal, R., & Knee, C. R. (1994).
Interactional synchrony and rapport: Measuring
synchrony in displays devoid of sound and facial affect.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 303-311.
Bernieri, F., & Rosenthal, R
(1991). Coordinated
movement in human interaction. In R. S. Feldman ＆ B
Rime(Eds.), Fundamentals of nonverbal behavior
(pp.401-432). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cappella, J. N. (1981). Mutual influence in expressive
behavior: Adult-adult and infant-adult dyadic interaction.
Psychological Bulletin, 89(1), 101-132.
Charny, M. D. (1966). Psychosomatic manifestations of
rapport in psychotherapy. Psychosomatic Medicine, 28(4),
305-315.
Cheng, C. M., & Chartrand, T. L. (2003). Self-monitoring
without awareness: Using mimicry as a nonconscious
affiliation strategy. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 1170-1179.
Coker, D., & Burgoon, J. (1987). The nature of
conversational involvement and nonverbal encoding
patterns. Human Communication Research, 13, 463-494.
Feldstein, S., & Welkowitz, J. (1978). Conversational
congruence: Correlates and concerns. In A. Siegman, & S.
Feldstein (Eds.), Nonverbal Behavior and Communication
(pp.358-378). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Hall, J. A., Harrigan, J. A., & Rosenthal, R. (1995).
Nonverbal behavior in clinician-patient interaction.
Applied & Preventive Psychology, 4, 21-37.
Hess, U., Philippot, P., & Blairy, S. (1999). Mimicry: Fact
and fiction. In P. Philippot, R. S. Feldman, & E. J. Coats
(Eds.), The Social Context of Nonverbal Behavior (pp.
213-241). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Maurer, R. E., & Tindall, J. F. (1983). Effect of postural
congruence on client's perception of counselor empathy.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 30 (2), 158-163.
Nagaoka, C., Komori, M., Nakamura, T, & Draguna, M. R.
(2005). Effects of receptive listening on the congruence of
speakers' response latencies in dialogues. Psychological
Reports, 97, 265-274.
Schmidt, R. C., & Turvey, M. T. (1994). Phase-entrainment
dynamics of visually coupled rhythmic movements.
Biological Cybernetics, 70, 369-376.
Staples, F. R., & Sloane, R. B. (1976). Truax factors, speech
characteristics, and therapeutic outcome. The Journal of
Nervous and Disease, 163(2), 135-140.

1867

