UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Emotion, Memory, and Religious Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8k02t4jq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Alfaro, Peter F.
Livingston, Kenneth R.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Emotion, Memory, and Religious Concepts
Peter F. Alfaro (palfaro01@qub.ac.uk)
Institute of Cognition and Culture, Queens University Belfast, 2-4 Fitzwilliam Street
Belfast, Northern Ireland BT7 1NN UK

Kenneth R. Livingston (livingst@vassar.edu)
Department of Psychology, Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue
Poughkeepsie, NY 12604 USA

by importing expectations from another category. For
example, “a dog that walks through walls,” captures all of
the normal expectations for dogs except the expectation
that, as a physical objects, dogs and walls are both
permanent and cannot occupy the same space at the same
time. “A plant that sings,” engages the plant category but
imports the capacity to sing from the human category
domain. In both cases, what results is what Boyer and
Ramble (2001) call a Minimally Counterintuitive (MCI)
concept.
MCI concepts have a supernatural quality in virtue of
their violation of natural domain expectations and thus seem
a likely candidate for helping to explain certain key ideas at
the heart of religious systems of belief. Particularly
interesting is the claim that the distinctive structure of these
ideas makes them anomalous enough to capture increased
attention from those exposed to them. They are considered
minimally counterintuitive because more than one, or at
most two, violations of domain expectations seems to
produce an idea that strikes people as simply bizarre or
incoherent and thus not worth further attention. The greater
attention devoted to MCI concepts increases the likelihood
that they will be remembered, while their counterintuitive
nature leads to processing at a deeper level in an effort to
resolve the expectation violation. Boyer argues that this
novel way of engaging perfectly ordinary cognitive systems
lies at the heart of any system that we consider religious
(Boyer, 2002).
The MCI hypothesis has received considerable
experimental support. Boyer and Ramble (2001) found that
MCI concepts, presented as part of a simple narrative, had a
higher rate of recall than both normal and bizarre concepts
for samples based in France, Gabon, and Nepal. Likewise,
Barrett and Nyhof (2001) found memory and transmission
advantages for MCI concepts over mundane and bizarre
concepts.
There is also some evidence that even
theologically complex concepts, such as the Abrahamic
God, may utilize an underlying MCI-like structure when
subjected to real-time processing demands (Barret & Keil,
1996). Even though God is often explicitly thought of as
being omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent, believers
appear to subconsciously apply constraints on His abilities.
Implicit measures of story comprehension confirm this
effect for both God and various Hindu deities (Barrett,
1998).

Abstract
Recent work has shown that ‘minimally counterintuitive’
(MCI) concepts are more memorable than both normal and
bizarre concepts in ways that may explain why supernatural
ideas lie at the heart of religious systems. However, such
investigations have ignored other factors, including especially
emotional loadings, that may also be relevant. The present
study replicated previous findings of an MCI effect on
memorability, adding new information about delayed effects.
We also found interesting interactions between MCI structure
and emotional loading that suggest a more complex account
of what makes supernatural or religious concepts special.
Keywords: Memory, emotion, religion, concepts, MCI

Introduction
A longstanding theoretical problem for researchers studying
the nature of religious concepts is to explain how the same
cognitive machinery that tracks ordinary, mundane events
and objects might also be responsible for the extraordinary,
supernatural concepts that lie at the heart of religious
systems. Although it has been argued by some that there are
dedicated modules for handling at least some religious
concepts (Bering, in press) and by others that religious ideas
reflect the operation of genes that increase access to selftranscending religious experiences and ideas (Hamer, 2004),
most students of the cognitive science of religion are
committed to the search for ways to explain religious
cognition using well-established research and theory about
the operation of basic, and general, cognitive processes
(Barrett, 2000; Lawson & McCauley, 1990; Whitehouse,
2004). One of the must interesting ideas about how to do
this is grounded in theories about how the organization of
our domain categories interacts with memory systems to
enhance the likelihood that some concepts or ideas will be
especially likely to capture attention and cognitive resources
long enough to be encoded and vividly remembered (Boyer
& Ramble, 2001). Boyer and Ramble argue that religious
concepts always point to a natural domain that is
represented richly enough to allow extrapolation beyond the
information given for any new exemplar. By doing so,
these concepts gain access to familiar, default expectations
for members of the category. However, counter-intuitively,
some ideas violate the normal domain expectations either by
negating some expectation for natural category members, or
967

Memory is also significantly affected by the emotional
valence (whether it is seen as inherently positive or
negative) attached to encoded information. Kensinger and
Corkin (2003) found enhanced recall for emotional material
at the level of individual words. While taboo words (i.e.
‘curses’, ethnic slurs), which are assumed to be both
arousing and highly negatively valenced, were remembered
with the greatest accuracy and contextual detail
(presentation color), even words that were only mildly
valenced (e.g., “sad”) were remembered significantly better
than non-emotional words. Similar effects appear to hold
for young children, who show increased recall for emotional
events in a story as compared with non-emotional events
(Davidson, Luo, &Burden, 2001).
These findings suggest a likely role for emotional context
and content in the memorability of the kind of material used
to study the effects of MCI concepts on recall. In the
absence of previous work on the relationship between these
two factors, it is hypothesized that one or both of these
emotional factors will produce additive effects in
conjunction with MCI concepts. Although it is possible that
there are discrete processing effects for specific emotions,
the present study only examined negative affect, which is
associated with focused processing strategies and has been
most consistently shown to enhance memory (Levine &
Pizarro, 2004). In addition, the study design provides an
opportunity to weigh in on the basic dispute about the size
of the MCI effect itself using a procedure that assessed both
immediate and delayed recall. To that end we created
narrative-like stories that manipulate MCI structure,
affective context, and affective loading of specific stimuli
and assessed recall for this material both shortly after it is
encountered and one week later.

Recently, however, Atran (2002) has challenged the MCI
account. In a list-recall task, Atran found better initial recall
for normal concepts than MCI ones, contradicting a central
prediction of the theory. Atran did find that recall for MCI
concepts degraded less than that for normal concepts when
participants were asked to recall them again one week later,
which is at least consistent with the claimed memory
enhancing effects of such ideas. On balance, it seems that
there is a genuine memory enhancement effect of MCI
concepts, although the time course of that effect remains
unclear.
While the MCI hypothesis has produced a growing body
of interesting research and new ideas about the special
memorability of concepts that fit a supernatural template, it
has typically been explored without regard for other factors
known to affect how well material is recalled. One set of
psychological processes that would seem an obvious source
of effects is found in the emotional domain. Even a cursory
reading of the most widely known and oft repeated narrative
stories in the major religious traditions reveals a strong
emotional component. The talking serpent of the biblical
creation story tempts Eve, leading to mankind’s downfall
and evoking strong negative emotions associated with
snakes, temptation, and loss.
Similarly, Muhammad
survives a horrendous evisceration while being purified by
the angel Gabriel in a well-known Islamic story. It seems a
reasonable hypothesis that emotional factors affect the
memorability of religious concepts quite independently of
the effects of MCI structure and may well interact with the
MCI nature of those concepts in important ways. The goal
of the research described here is to explore the contribution
of emotion to the memorability of MCI concepts.
The link between cognition and emotion in general has
been the focus of investigation for many decades and there
is now considerable evidence that emotional arousal serves
to focus attention on those stimulus features responsible for
the arousal (Easterbrook, 1959) and that arousal also
enhances consolidation of long-term memory in both
animals (McGaugh, 2004) and humans (Heuer & Reisberg,
1992). Research has shown that emotion, and particularly
negative emotion, appears to enhance the quality and
accuracy of memory in at least two ways. The first
concerns the emotional context in which memory is
presented. The most extreme example of this can be found
in the work on ‘flashbulb’ memories. Under conditions of
extremely high emotional arousal, surprisingly detailed
information about where one is and what one is doing are
preserved in an especially vivid form (Christianson, 1992).
However, less extreme emotional situations have also been
shown to enhance memorability. Cahill and McGaugh
(1995), for example, found that participants who saw a
series of pictures accompanied by a highly emotional story
recalled details of those pictures with greater accuracy and
detail than participants who saw the same pictures
accompanied by a relatively non-emotional story. The effect
was particularly prominent for pictures that were made
highly emotional in one story, but not the other.

Method
Participants
Participants were 35 Vassar College undergraduates
recruited from introductory psychology classes and the
general college population. Participants included 4 men and
31 women. One female subject was excluded due to an
inordinate amount of missing data.

Materials
Narratives Narratives consisted of two basic story
templates presented using Superlab experimental software
running on an iMac computer under OS 9.2. In addition to
an introduction and conclusion, each story contained 24
three-sentence descriptions of the protagonist encountering
various objects (See Table 1). The length of each threesentence event was restricted to 30 ± 3 words. The objects
for each story varied by structure (MCI versus non-MCI)
and emotional valence (negative emotional vs. neutral) such
that six were non-MCI and neutral, six were non-MCI and
emotional, six were MCI and neutral, and six were MCI and
emotional. The events were presented individually in

968

randomized order for each participant to control for possible
order effects.
Each story was presented with one of two possible
introductions. In the emotional context condition, a family
member of the protagonist suffers a life-threatening injury
and the protagonist goes on a journey to get help. In the
neutral context, the protagonist’s activities are to help his or
her family (one of the stories is about a character named
John, the other about a character named Sarah) with a less
important task. Order of introductions was counterbalanced
by type. The two introductions were of nearly equal length
(196 and 197 words).

Participants were asked to return one week later. They
then performed an additional recall task where they were
asked to write down as many events from both stories in as
much detail as possible. Participants then gave a second set
of emotional valence and familiarity ratings for each
concept. Participants were then thanked and debriefed.

Data Reduction
Items were counted as recalled if they were remembered
accurately or had only slight distortion (i.e. a man was
remembered as a woman; a statue that told lies was
remembered as rock instead). Generally, this was not an
issue and distortions were very slight. Given this study’s
emphasis, distortion patterns in the data, as described by
Atran (2002), were not examined.
Unfortunately, one ‘neutral normal’ concept (a lake) was
repeated in both stories. For the second recall session, the
concept was scored normally for both stories if it was
recalled twice. For cases where it was only recalled once, a
proportion score was calculated from the first round for how
often it was recalled for the first and second story. These
proportions (.45 and .55 respectively) were then used for
scoring the second week’s recall task accordingly.
The data were prepared for two separate analyses. For the
first analysis, which was designed to look at the pattern of
an individual’s responses, the number of each type of
concept remembered during each session was computed.
Individual response pattern was of interest due to potential
confounds with the emotional context manipulation (see
below). In addition, because events were not randomly
assigned to the two different stories (always appearing in
the same set of 24), it was possible that some differences
could be due to one set or the other tending to have more
memorable items in general. The second analysis attempted
to circumvent some of these potential issues by examining
individual concept memorability across participants. For
this latter analysis, the number of people who remembered a
given concept was looked at for each session.

Table 1: Sample Story Events
Concept Type
Neutral Non-MCI
Emotional Non-MCI
Neutral MCI
Emotional MCI

A woman sleeping under a tree
A poisonous snake
A plant that moves around
A rock that eats people

Context Ratings To check for the effectiveness of the
emotional context manipulation, participants were asked to
rate the emotional impact of each introduction immediately
after reading it. Ratings were made using a 7-point scale,
with higher ratings indicating greater emotional impact.
Concept Ratings To test the effectiveness of the
emotional valence manipulation, participants were asked to
rate how dangerous, disturbing, or emotional they thought
each event was. To control for possible effects due to
previous familiarity with similar concepts, participants were
asked to rate how familiar each concept was from real life
and entertainment. Ratings for both questions were made
on a 5-point scale with larger values indicating greater
familiarity and emotional impact.
PANAS Prior to reading the stories participants were
asked to complete a short version of the Positive and
Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) to provide a measure of
mood at the time of the experiment (Watson, Clark, &
Tellegen, 1988).

Results

Procedure

PANAS

After obtaining informed consent and data archival
permission, participants were asked to complete the
PANAS. Participants were then presented with the first
narrative introduction and asked to rate it for emotional
impact. Participants then read the story events, which were
presented one at a time on screen, in random order. The
duration for presentation of each event was under
participant control.
Upon completion of the story,
participants completed a 5-minute distraction task (mental
arithmetic based on counting letters and syllables in long
words). Participants were then given a sheet of paper and
asked to write down as many of the story events as they
could remember in as much detail as possible. This
procedure was repeated for the second narrative. Upon
completion of the second recall task, participants were asked
to rate each concept for emotional valence and familiarity.

The mean positive affect score on the PANAS was 26.35
(STD=6.4). The mean score for negative affect was 14.6
(STD=4.25). Both positive and negative affect were used to
perform a variety of ANCOVAs, but no systematic
relationships with the study’s main dependent measures
were found.

Manipulation Checks
Context Manipulation Results are summarized in Figure 1.
The effectiveness of the context manipulation was tested by
examining the difference in emotion ratings for the story
introductions in a 2 (context-order) x 2(story order)
ANOVA. There were main effects of both context order,
F(1,30)=8.00, p<.01 and story presentation (John story

969

Table 3: Average Familiarity Ratings
Higher numbers indicate less familiarity

followed by Sarah story (order A), or vice versa (order B),
F(1,30)=15.00, p<.001. There was also a significant
interaction between context presentation order and story
presentation order, F(1,30)=10.09, p<.01.
Emotional Valence Emotional valence scores are
summarized in Table 2. The average of the ratings scores
from the two sessions was used for analysis. A 2(story) x
2(neutral vs. emotional) x 2(normal vs. MCI) between
subjects ANOVA was used to examine the data. Main
effects of both emotional valence, F(1,40)=324.14,
p<..0001, and structure, F(1,40)=52.12, p<.0001, were
found, such that MCI concepts were more disturbing than
normal ones. A highly significant interaction effect was

Valence
Neutral
Emotional

Conceptual Structure
Normal (Mean ± SD) MCI Mean ± SD)
1.34 (0.17)
3.87 (0.54)
2.15 (0.53)
4.10 (0.31)

Participant Recall
A series of mixed-model ANOVAs examining the types of
concepts recalled by individual participants were performed
with story order and context order as 2 x 2 between subjects
factors and a 2 (week 1 vs. week 2) x 2 (neutral vs.
emotional context) x 2 (normal vs. MCI) x 2 (emotional vs.
neutral valence) within-subjects design. The average recall
pattern across all groups is presented in Figure 2. Only
significant results are reported below.
Time As expected, there was a highly significant effect of
testing session (week 1 vs. week 2), F(1,30)=40.70,
p<.0001, with better recall at week 1.
Structure A main effect of structure, F(1,30)=50.03,
p<.0001, is the result of enhanced MCI recall as compared
with non-MCI concepts. There was also a significant
interaction effect between testing session (week 1 vs.
week2) and structure for recall, F(1,30)=5.15, p<.03, though
this was confounded by significant interactions with
contextual presentation order, F(1,30)=4.00, p<.05 and a
three-way interaction with both story and contextual
presentation orders, F(1,30)=4.78, p<.04. There was also a
significant interaction between conceptual structure and
emotional valence, F(1,30)=5.96, p<.02.
Emotionally
loaded MCI concepts are better recalled than neutral MCI;
the pattern reverses for non-MCI concepts (see Figure 2).

Figure 1. Average absolute difference in emotion ratings for
introductions with standard error bars.
also found, F(1,40)=11.56, p<.001, such that emotional MCI
concepts were rated as being the most disturbing. There
was also a significant interaction between story and
structure, F(1,40)=6.22, p < .02.
Table 2: Average Emotional Valence Ratings
Higher numbers indicate greater emotional valence
Valence
Neutral
Emotional

Conceptual Structure
Normal (Mean ± SD)
MCI (Mean ± SD)
1.09 ± 0.08
2.17 ± 0.52
3.26 ± 0.42
3.65 ± 0.35

Familiarity The familiarity scores from the two different
rating sessions were averaged for this analysis. Results are
summarized in Table 3. A 2(story) x 2(emotional vs.
neutral) x 2(normal vs. MCI) ANOVA indicated main
effects of valence, F(1,40)=17.98, and structure,
F(1,40)=328.91, p<.01. Participants rated negatively
valenced and MCI concepts as being less familiar. There
was also an interaction between valence and structure,
F(1,40)=5.57, p<.02, such that valence made normal
concepts more unfamiliar than MCI ones. A regression
found that familiarity and emotional valence were
significant predictors of one another, r(47)=0.51, p<.001.

Figure 2. Average participant recall pattern
with standard error bars.
Context There was no main effect of presentation context
on recall, but the interaction with concept valence
approached
significance,
F(1,30)=3.71,
p=.06.
Unfortunately, this was confounded by a highly significant

970

employed by researchers who do find the effect (Barret &
Nyhof, 2001; Boyer & Ramble, 2001).
Embedding
concepts in narrative stories may require different kinds
and/or greater depth of processing than presenting them in a
straightforward list.
The fact that so much of the
information in doctrinal religious traditions (cf. Whitehouse,
2004) is transmitted in stories may reflect the implicit
appreciation by those who would spread the religion that
there is something special about how concepts are processed
when in narrative form. On the other hand, there was some
evidence from the present research that confirms Atrans’
(2002) finding that conceptual structure does affect
degradation of memory over time, suggesting that this
pattern may be independent of mode of concept
presentation.
Results of the manipulation of emotional valence were
also particularly interesting. The failure to find a main
effect of emotional valence on item recall is somewhat
surprising given that such effects are commonly described
in the literature (see Kensiger & Corkin, 2003), but the
effect is not always found (e.g., Ochsner, 2000) and We did
find an important interaction between emotional valence
and conceptual structure in which emotionally laden MCI
concepts were particularly memorable. This is again
consistent with the informal observation that so many of the
most oft repeated, canonical stories in many religious
traditions have a strong emotional component. Had there
been a main effect of emotional valence one might have
referred to an additive effect of MCI structure and affect.
As it is, further research will be needed to refine our
understanding of how these two facets of a concept are
related during encoding and processing. Recent fMRI work
has begun to indicate complex regulating effects of frontallobe-mediated cognitive processes on emotion (Ochsner,
Bunge, Gross & Gabrielli, 2002). What has become the
standard story about the effects of emotion on cognitive
processing may be too simple to capture the dynamic
interaction between cognitive and emotional systems and
MCI-emotion interactions may be especially fertile ground
for such research.
Analyses of the emotional valence and familiarity ratings,
obtained to check manipulation effectiveness and control for
cultural familiarity, provided interesting results in their own
right. For example, the main effect of conceptual structure
on emotional valence scores was not predicted, although in
hindsight it seems a perfectly reasonable hypothesis that a
violation of such basic ontological expectations about the
world would trigger some type of affective response. In a
similar vein, the fact that familiarity with a concept is
associated with lowered emotional valence makes perfectly
good sense. It is an interesting question for further research
whether even emotionally arousing MCI concepts become
less so as they become familiar, a result that would be
consistent with the theory that doctrinal religions require
frequent ritual repetition of core concepts precisely because
their familiarity makes them less memorable (Whitehouse,
2004).

interaction with context presentation order, F(1,30)=10.90,
p<.001. Presentation context had confounding interactions
with both story and emotion presentation orders,
F(1,30)=6.39, p<.07 and with structure, valence, and both
emotion and story presentation orders, F(1,30)=19.14,
p<.01.

Concept Memorability
Average Memorability Individual concept memorability
across participants was examined in a 2 (story) x 2 (neutral
vs. emotional) x 2 (normal vs. MCI) ANOVA using an
average of the recall from both sessions. Here, the MCImemorability main effect was replicated, F(1,40)=14.28,
p<.001. Neither a main effect of negative emotional
valence nor an interaction of valence with structure was
found. Results are summarized in Figure 3.
Degradation In similar analysis with repeated measures on
testing session (week 1 vs. week 2), the expected decrease
in recall across sessions was found, F(1,40)=130.02,
p<.0001. However, the lack of any significant interactions
in this second analysis suggests that recall for both types
degraded similarly across sessions, contrary to results
reported by Atran (2002).
Emotional Context In a third analysis, examining
differences in memorability for concepts presented in
emotional and neutral contexts, there was a significant
interaction of context and valence, F(1,40)=4.23, p<.05,
such that nonemotional concepts were remembered better in
emotional contexts. No main effects of emotional valence
were found nor were any interactions between valence and
structure for any of these analyses.

Figure 3. Average concept recall
with standard error bars.

Discussion
Among the most compelling results of this study is the clear
replication of the MCI memory enhancement effect
demonstrated by Boyer and Ramble (2001). Further work
will be needed, however, to properly explain why this effect
is not observed in other research (Atran, 2002). It may be
relevant that Atran used a list-recall paradigm whereas the
present study used the same kind of narrative structure
971

Boyer, P. & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts: cross-cultural evidence for recall of
counter-intuitive representations. Cognitive Science, 25,
535-564.
Cahill, L. & McGaugh, J.L. (1995). A novel demonstration
of enhanced memory associated with emotional arousal.
Consciousness and Cognition 4, 410-421.
Christianson, S. (1992). Emotional stress and eyewitness
memory: a critical review. Psychological Bulletin 112,
284-309.
Davidson, D., Luo, Z., & Burden, M.J. (2001). Children’s
recall of emotional behaviours, emotional labels, and
nonemotional behaviours: does emotion enhance
memory? Cognition and Emotion 15, 1-26.
Easterbrook, J. A. (1959). The effect of emotion on cue
utilization and the organization of behavior.
Psychological Review, 66, 183-201.
Hamer, D. (2005). The god gene: How faith is hardwired
into our genes. New York: Anchor Books.
Heuer, F. & Reisberg, D. (1992). Emotion, arousal, and
memory for detail. In S. Cristianson (Ed.) The handbook
of emotion and memory, pp. 151-164. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kensinger, E.A., & Corkin, S. (2003). Memory
enhancement for emotional words: are emotional words
more vividly remembered than neutral words? Memory
and Cognition, 31, 1169-1180.
Levine, L.J., & Pizarro, D.A. (2004). Emotion and memory
research: a grumpy overview. Social Cognition 22, 530554.
McGaugh, J. L. (2004). The amygdala modulates the
consolidation of memories of emotionally arousing
experiences. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 1-28.
Ochsner, Kevin N. (2000). Are affective events richly
recollected or simply familiar? The experience and
process of recognizing feelings past.
Journal of
Experimental Psychology, General, 129, 242-261.
Ochsner, K. N., Bunge, S. A., Gross, J. J. & Gabrieli, J. D.
(2002). Rethinking feelings: an fMRI study of the
cognitive regulation of emotion. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14, 1215-1229.
Watson, D., Clark, L.A., & Tellegen, A. (1988).
Development and validation of brief measures of positive
and negative affect: the PANAS scales. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 54, 1063-1070.
Whitehouse, H. (2004). Modes of religiosity: a cognitive
theory of religious transmission. Walnut Creek, CA:
Altamira Press.

Unwittingly, the design of the present study also raises
some deeper questions about the nature of the role played by
context in the processing of the kinds of concepts explored
here. For example, contrary to all expectations, which of
the two stories was presented first interacted with the
emotional context to affect emotion rating of the stories.
Further research will be needed to understand the nature of
these effects, but whatever their source, it is interesting to
note that the same story may have a very different effect
when read “cold,” as it were, without previous narration,
than when read after another story has already been
processed. The narrative structure of religious instruction in
real world settings, whether in sermons or the simple
reading or retelling of stories from the tradition, may well
be able to take advantage of such effects. Indeed, even the
historical redacting of religious texts may be shaped in part
by discoveries of more and less effective sequencing of
religious narratives. In the present study, these effects
operate as confounds that raise more questions than they
answer, but they do point the way to important ideas for
further investigation.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Randolph Cornelius for his advice
during the design of this study and for his careful review of
an earlier version of this manuscript. Our thanks also go out
to three anonymous reviewers for their comments and
suggestions.

References
Atran, S. (2002). In gods we trust: the evolutionary
landscape of religion. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Barrett, J.L. (1998). Cognitive constraints on Hindu
concepts of the divine. Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion 37, 608-619.
Barrett, J.L. & Keil, F.C. (1996). Conceptualizing a nonnatural entity: anthropomorphism in god concepts.
Cognitive Psychology 31, 219-247.
Barrett, J.L. & Nyhof, M.A. (2001). Spreading non-natural
concepts: the role of intuitive conceptual structures in
memory and transmission of cultural materials. Journal
of Cognition and Culture 1, 69-100.
Bering, J. (in press). On the folk psychology of souls.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion explained: the evolutionary
origins of religious thought. New York: Basic Books.

972

