UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence for Massive Redeployment of Brain Areas in Cognitive Functions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jd7993r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Anderson, Michael L.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidence for Massive Redeployment of Brain Areas in Cognitive Functions
Michael L. Anderson (anderson@cs.umd.edu)
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies and Program in Neuroscience and Cognitive Science
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA

norm when it comes to the functional topography of the
brain (a more moderate hypothesis might predict
occasional instances of redeployment). Second, MRH
predicts significant redeployment both within and
between traditional cognitive domains (e.g. perception,
motor control, language, memory, etc.), that is, it suggests
that most brain areas are not domain specific.

Abstract
This essay introduces the massive redeployment hypothesis
(MRH), an account of the functional organization of the
brain that centrally features the fact that brain areas are
typically employed to support numerous cognitive
functions. MRH offers a middle course between strict
localization on the one hand, and holism on the other, in
such a way as to account for the supporting data on both
sides of the argument. MRH is supported by some case
studies of redeployment, and an empirical review of 135
imaging experiments.

Case Studies for Massive Redeployment
In this section, I will discuss three different instances
involving the apparent redeployment of brain areas to
support multiple functions. The case studies both provide
some evidentiary support for MRH and, perhaps more
importantly, illustrate how such redeployment works, and
why it might have evolved.

Introduction and Background
The localization-holism debate has generally been
presented in terms of a choice between whether cognitive
functions are typically instantiated by a few and closely
grouped neural participants, or by many and widely
distributed ones. Yet this is pretty clearly not the right
distinguishing factor between localization and holism, for
as Mundale (2002) persuasively argues, the belief that
cognitive functions typically have many and widely
distributed participants is perfectly compatible with
localization. Instead, I would like to suggest that the
following two questions offer a better contrast: (1) are
brain areas that support a given function largely dedicated
to—that is, are they not just necessary participants in, but
also exclusive participants in—the cognitive function(s) in
question?; and (2), when a brain area participates in more
than one cognitive function, is it doing the same thing in
each case? The believer in localization answers “yes” to
both questions (although question 2 does not really arise),
whereas the holist answers “no”.
In contrast to both localization and holism, a
redeployment hypothesis splits the difference, answering
“no” to question 1, and “yes” to question 2. That is, a
redeployment hypothesis claims that parts of the brain are
specialized, in that they do the same thing each time they
are activated. However, the thing that they do—the
function they compute or transformation they effect—
does not line up with any specific cognitive function.
Rather, brain areas must work in concert with other areas
to do anything interesting, and are generally deployed in
many different functional complexes, which do many
different (interesting) things.
The remainder of this essay will introduce and defend a
particular redeployment hypothesis, MRH. I call it a
massive RH (as opposed, perhaps to mild, moderate,
meek, or modest) for two reasons. First, MRH predicts
that non-exclusive participation will turn out to be the

The Organization of M1
The somatotopic organization of M1 has long been part of
the standard account of the functional topography of that
region. In its classic form, Penfield’s homunculus
specified distinct, non-overlapping regions for motor
control down to the level of individual fingers and joints.
It is a clear product of the localization assumption.
However, over the past few decades, evidence has been
mounting that the areas of M1 controlling the various
body parts are in fact distributed and overlapping.
Recently, Marc Schieber (2001) has reviewed this
evidence, and found six factors constraining the
somatotopic organization in M1:
1) Convergent output from a large M1 territory
controls any particular body part, joint, or muscle. 2)
Divergent output of many single M1 neurons reaches
multiple spinal motoneuron pools. 3) Horizontal
connections interlink the cortex throughout a major
body part region. 4) Widely distributed activity
appears in a major body part region whenever any
smaller body part is moved. 5) Partial inactivation of
a major region affects multiple smaller body parts
simultaneously. 6) Plasticity limits the degree to
which control of a specific body part can be assigned
to a particular piece of cortex. (p. 2125, emphasis in
original)
For the purposes of this essay, I will be focusing on
findings 1, 2 and 4. Findings 3, 5 and 6, while compatible
with MRH and interesting in their own right, nevertheless
have implications somewhat orthogonal to the main
elements of MRH I am trying to support.
The clear implication of convergence is that there are
multiple, not necessarily spatially contiguous areas that
24

related to multiple different finger and/or wrist
movements.
Imaging studies in humans confirm
extensive overlap in the areas of activation in M1
corresponding not just to finger movements (Sanes et al.,
1995), but also to thumb, index finger, wrist, elbow and
shoulder movements (Kleinschmidt, Nitschke & Frahm,
1997).
What is attractive about the evidence from M1 is that it
is such an extensively studied area. Insofar as the
emerging picture of its functional organization indicates
reliance on multiple, distributed and non-exclusive
participants in motor control functions, then given the
extent of the evidence, the hypothesis needs to be taken
quite seriously. On the other side of the coin, given that
the evidence is restricted to M1 and motor control,
extensive redeployment might not seem all that
surprising. The support for MRH coming from the study
of M1, while strong, is also somewhat narrow. Thus, the
next two case studies showcase some rather more radical
and surprising instances of apparent redeployment. The
evidence for these examples is somewhat less strong, but
the implications are far broader.

share in the motor control of a given muscle or body part.
Using intracortical microstimulation (ICMS), a technique
that limits the possibility that the stimulus will
accidentally spread to larger areas of cortex, Asanuma
and Rosen (1972) found multiple small areas controlling
the same movement of, or contracting the same muscle in,
a monkey’s forelimb. Moreover, they found that these
areas were intermixed with areas controlling other
movements or muscles such that, although a gross
somatotopic organizational trend could be observed (arm
movements controlled by this general area, leg
movements in that, face movements over here),
boundaries between large areas were not necessarily clear,
and the somatotopic organization did not extend to the
fine-grained structure of the cortex. More recent studies
have confirmed this finding, and shown further that, as
the stimulation of small cortical areas is increased in
intensity or duration, responses are evoked in increasing
numbers of muscles or joints (an effect that cannot be
adequately explained in terms of stimulation spreading or
leaking to neighboring cortical areas). This brings us to
the issue of divergence.
Anatomic evidence indicates that a single neuron from
M1 can terminate in different spinal segments, connecting
to different motoneuron pools (Shinoda, Yokota &
Futami, 1981), and functional studies demonstrate that
these connections can affect muscle groups across
different body parts, as widely separated as finger and
shoulder (McKiernan et al., 1998). In an especially
striking demonstration of the possible utility of such
connections Graziano et al. (2002) showed that the
stimulation of individual cortical areas could evoke
complex coordinated movements of a monkey’s forelimb,
such as reaching, grasping, or adopting a defensive
posture. They found further that these areas were not
somatotopically organized, but rather showed a spatial
and postural organization, roughly corresponding to the
locations at which the movements were directed (the
endpoint of the motion in ego-centric space), and the limb
posture resulting from the action.
Such evidence for convergence and divergence alone
does not necessarily suggest MRH. Convergence, it
might be argued, merely shows redundancy of function,
while the evidence for divergence is compatible with the
strict localization claim that cortical areas are functionally
specialized and dedicated, so long as the functions in
question are characterized in a complex way: reaching to
a given spot, rather than contracting a single muscle.
However, the defining claim of MRH is that the same
cortical area can play a role in supporting multiple
functions, however complex their characterizations.
Perhaps the clearest evidence for both distribution and
redeployment comes from single neuron recordings of
monkeys performing individuated finger and wrist
movements (Schieber & Hibbard, 1993). Schieber and
Hibbard found that the general territories of M1 involved
in finger control were virtually coextensive. Moreover,
while each neuron was consistently related to at least one
movement, there were multiple, spatially distributed
neurons involved in each movement, most of which were

Sensorimotor Coding in Working Memory
One instance of redeployment on which there has been a
fair amount of work is in the apparent use of sensorimotor
resources to support working memory. As the evidence
has been reviewed in detail by Margaret Wilson (2001),
I’ll only provide a brief summary. The experiments in
question typically involve the presentation of multiple
items (words or letters) either visually or auditorily, with
the task being to remember these items, in order. The
question of interest is what kind of processing supports
this ability, and there is a great deal of evidence
supporting some version of the Baddeley and Hitch model
of working memory, which posits that working memory
has both verbal and visuospatial components, among
others (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; 1994, Baddeley, 1986;
1995). Basically, the Baddeley and Hitch model says that
one strategy for remembering such lists involves (silently)
saying them to one’s self (producing a “phonological
loop”), which engages brain areas typically used both in
speech production and in audition. Another strategy for
remembering words is the visual representation of their
form or meaning (especially for abstract nouns). Wilson
notes that this latter strategy is not particularly effective
for maintaining an ordered list, and that therefore a
strategy involving some version of the phonological loop
is more typically employed.
A pattern of findings supports the existence of a
phonological loop, a strategy that engages both inner
“speaking” and inner “hearing” to support working
memory. First, there is poor recall of similar sounding
terms; second, there is poor recall of longer words; third,
there is poor recall if the subject is made to speak during
the maintenance period; and fourth, there is poor recall
when the subject is exposed to irrelevant speech during
the maintenance period. Moreover, imaging studies have
found that such memory tasks cause activation in areas
typically involved in speech production (Broca’s area, left
25

coordination of action, it is not surprising that there is
an observable remnant of that history. The results
also raise the intriguing possibility that much, if not
all, language comprehension is similarly grounded.
Although substantial work needs to be done to secure
that possibility, that work may well be rewarded by
an account of language and meaning firmly anchored
in human experience. (p. 564)
One kind of evidence that is currently missing for this
effect is neural imaging data. To help address this lacuna,
I hope in the near future to run an MEG experiment
featuring the Glenberg-Kaschak task. MEG evidence,
especially given its temporal resolution, might help rule
out the most obvious alternate explanation of the data,
that it is a post-understanding simulation of the action that
is interfering with the response, rather than a simulation
implicated in the understanding itself. Although it is true
that it is difficult to use this alternative to explain the
effect in the case of abstract transfers (for there is little
reason to believe that a post-understanding simulation of
abstract transfers would implicate movements toward or
away from the subject, even if it involved simulating the
actions used in the transfer, such as speaking), MEG data
might help settle the matter.
There are nevertheless other kinds of evidence available
that appear to support the general finding that motor
control and language understanding are intertwined with
one another. For instance, patient KJ-1360, who has a
lesion in left premotor cortex, shows an impairment in
verb retrieval, but has otherwise normal linguistic abilities
(Damasio & Tranel, 1993). Martin et al. (1995, 1996)
confirm this basic finding that areas associated with motor
control are involved in verb retrieval, and also show that
naming colors and animals involved visual processing
areas, suggesting that language use and comprehension
involves the re-use of many other areas of the brain
besides motor areas, and, moreover, that this
redeployment is content specific, with verbs reusing
motor control areas, and certain nouns like animal and
color names reusing visual processing resources. That
there is a large amount of redeployment of sensory
processing areas in linguistic and conceptual tasks is
another striking case of redeployment worth pursuing in
its own right (Barsalou, 1999), but we will focus here on
the relation between language use and motor areas.
One particularly interesting part of the brain in this
regard is Broca’s area (left Brodmann areas 44 and 45).
Broca’s area has long been associated with language
processing, but what has recently begun to emerge is its
functional complexity (Hagoort, 2005). For instance, it
has been shown that Broca’s area is involved in many
different action-related tasks, including movement
preparation (Thoenissen, Zilles, & Toni, 2002), action
sequencing (Nishitani, et al., 2005), action recognition
(Decety et al., 1997; Hamzei et al., 2003, Nishitani, et al.,
2005), imagery of human motion (Binkofski, et al., 2000),
and action imitation (Nishitani, et al., 2005). In other
words, language processing involves (much) more than
one region of the brain, and the regions of the brain
associated with language processing are involved in many

premotor cortex, left supplementary motor cortex, and
right cerebellum) and in phonological storage (left
posterior parietal cortex) (Awh et al., 1996). Imaging
data also tends to support the use of sensorimotor
strategies in visuospatial working memory, showing
activation of right hemisphere, including areas of visual
and prefrontal cortex (Smith, 2000).
Although these findings will not be at all surprising to
anyone who has ever tried to remember multiple things,
only to be foiled by having to say, or listen to, something
unrelated, the broad implications are nevertheless
significant. As Wilson writes, in this case it appears that
…sensorimotor processes are run covertly to assist
with the representation and manipulation of
information, in the temporary absence of taskrelevant input or output. Such an arrangement would
make sense, given our evolutionary heritage from
creatures whose neural resources were devoted
largely to perceptual and motor processes. Indeed,
given that we have such resources, it would be odd if
we did not exploit them whenever possible to assist
in off-line cognitive processing. (pp. 44-5)

Motor Simulations in Language Understanding
Finally, the last case I would like to consider is an even
more striking example of the redeployment of resources
in apparently disparate functions: the action-sentence
compatibility effect (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002), which
suggests the involvement of the motor system in language
understanding. To demonstrate this interesting interaction
between comprehension and motor control, Glenberg and
Kaschak asked subjects to indicate whether a given
sentence made sense or not by making a response that
required a movement either toward or away from their
bodies (e.g. reaching for a button). They found that
response times were longer in cases where the required
movement ran counter to a movement suggested by the
sentence itself (e.g. where the response required a
movement toward the body, and the sentence, e.g., “Close
the drawer” indicated a movement away from the body, or
vice-versa), and that this was true even when the
“movement” indicated by the sentence was abstract, as in
the transfer of information from one party to another (e.g.
“You told Ann about the party.”). A general explanation
of this effect would be that the comprehension of the
sentences involved a motor simulation of the action they
describe, thus “priming” the system to move in one way,
rather than another. More particularly, Glenberg and
Kaschak posit that understanding language involves
combining the affordances of the sentence elements, and
judging the “doability” of the action corresponding to the
meshed set of affordances. A doable action indicates a
comprehensible sentence.
These results are intriguing and highly suggestive, yet,
as Glenberg and Kaschak readily admit, there is much
more work to be done.
In summary, our results demonstrate that the
understanding of imperative, double-object and
dative constructions is grounded in action. Given
that language almost certainly arose to facilitate
26

As mentioned already above, Cabeza and Nyberg
divided each brain area into 4 parts; however, their coding
scheme forces a decision between lateral and medial
activation, such that it is not possible to show a left
medial and a left lateral activation in a given area for a
given task. Instead, the possible activations for each brain
area are left lateral (LL), right lateral (RL), bilateral
lateral (BL); left medial (LM), right medial (RM),
bilateral medial (BM). Thus, for instance, they list the
following activations for a task involving hearing words
vs. a resting condition (Muller et al., 1997): an LL
activation in Brodmann area 47, and BL activations in
areas 21 and 22.
For the purposes of counting participants in a task, I
treated bilateral activations of an area as two participants,
one left and one right (medial or lateral). Thus, the
language task above would have five participants, three
LL participants (areas 47, 21 and 22) and two RL
participants (areas 21 and 22). For the purposes of
counting redeployments (areas activated by more than one
task), I matched LL activations in an area to other LL
activations of that area, as well as to BL activations, and I
matched RL activations in an area to other RL activations
of that area, as well as to BL activations. I followed the
same procedure for medial activations. I did not match
bilateral activations to each other.
The data show that, on average, each of the 135 tasks
has 5.97 participants (SD 4.80), with somewhat more than
that for the language tasks and slightly less for attention
and perception. More importantly, they show that each
area was typically a participant in more than one task,
although interestingly, there is a significant difference
between medial and lateral activations in this regard.
Thus, each LM area that was a participant in at least one
task was, on average, a participant in 3.87 different tasks
(SD 3.34); likewise, each RM area that was a participant
in at least one task was, on average, a participant in 3.29
tasks (SD 1.77). In contrast (and providing incredibly
striking evidence against strict localization), each LL area
that was a participant in at least one task was a participant
in an average of 14.29 different tasks (SD 9.20), and each
RL area was a participant in 10.41 (SD 7.96). Put
differently, an average LL area participated in nearly one
in nine (10.6%) of the tasks studied, and the average RL
area participated in one in thirteen (7.7%).
The participation of areas in multiple tasks was not
restricted to only closely related tasks. In fact, of the 28
LL areas that participated in at least one task in one of the
four task categories, 26 (93%) were also participants in at
least one other task in a different task category. Moreover,
23 of those areas (82%) participated in tasks in at least
three categories, and 15 (54%) participated in tasks in all
four categories. The numbers are similar for RL
activations, and while the numbers for medial activations
were somewhat lower, the data overall undermine strict
localization,
and
strongly
suggest
widespread
redeployment throughout the cortex (see Table 1).
There were nine tasks of the 135 examined that
activated a total of ten areas not activated by any other
task. Since other tasks not examined might also activate

other tasks, of which we have listed just a few. Note,
however, that it does not appear to be the case that brain
areas are redeployed haphazardly; rather, the
contributions they make are useful in more than one
situation. In the case of Broca’s area, for instance, it is
not surprising that an area of the brain that plays a role in
action sequencing would be useful in language processing
and production, since this, too, requires action
sequencing. Likewise, that verb retrieval/comprehension
would involve motor simulation is unsurprising, so long
as we suppose that our ability to understand verbs is
closely connected to our experience of acting in the
world.
Returning, then, to our central theme, a main
distinguishing feature of MRH is the claim that the
functional complexes of the brain make heavy use of
nonexclusive participants, not just within, but across
classically specified domains. The three case studies
above offer some evidence for this claim—and, just as
importantly, help to illustrate what redeployment does for
the brain, and why it makes sense as an organizational
principle. But it must of course be admitted that this
evidence in no way proves MRH, and certainly does not
establish redeployment as the norm. Thus, in the next
section we turn to a different kind of evidence that can
help do just that.

Empirical Review of Imaging Experiments
The evidence for MRH is in no way restricted to the few
brain areas or cognitive functions listed above. In fact, a
recent review by Cabeza and Nyberg (2000) strongly
suggests that rather rampant redeployment to be the norm.
Cabeza and Nyberg survey 275 fMRI and PET
experiments, arranging them by task category (attention,
perception, imagery, language, working memory, episodic
memory encoding, episodic memory retrieval, etc.). For
each task, they catalog the participants in that task, from a
list of 31 different brain areas (28 Brodmann, and three
subcortical areas), each divided into four different parts:
left lateral, right lateral, left medial and right medial.
Although Cabeza and Nyberg do not do any statistical
analysis of this data (their primary interest is in
examining/establishing the consistency of findings across
different experiments on similar tasks), the results of even
a simple analysis are striking.
For simplicity and brevity, I focus here on only four of
the ten categories of tasks surveyed: attention, perception,
imagery, and language. The data on the other task
categories is consistent with what I report here. Cabeza
and Nyberg looked at 39 attention-related tasks, 42
perception-related tasks, 18 imagery-related tasks, and 36
language-related tasks, for a total of 135 tasks in these
four categories. The attention tasks included things like
tone detection and Stroop tasks (naming colored words);
perception tasks included such things as object
identification and facial recognition; the various imagery
tasks include mental rotation and landmark visualization;
and the language tasks included reading out loud and
silently, lexical decision tasks (discriminating words from
non-words), and the like.
27

Focusing just on some work that is very close in spirit to
MRH, I note that my arguments for MRH are largely
compatible with those in (Mundale, 2002) for a limited
form of localization. However, while allowing for the
possibility of multiple necessary participants in a given
brain function, Mundale does not address the difference
between necessary and exclusive participation, and thus
she does not discuss the possibility of a form of
localization in which the (localized) participants in one
function also participate in other functions. Mesulam
(1990, 1998) suggests a position much more similar to
MRH: “many cortical nodes are likely to participate in the
function of more than one network. Conceivably, topdown connections from transmodal areas could
differentially recruit such a cortical node into the service
of one network or another.” (1998, p.1040). However,
Mesulam’s development and defense of this common
basic idea is significantly different from that offered here
(in particular, the empirical review provides more broadbased evidence for the thesis). Dan Lloyd (2000) also
rejects localization, in part because of an empirical review
he performed somewhat like the one I report here.
However, Lloyd’s review is much smaller, and does not
appear to control for laterality, making its conclusions
suspect. Moreover, Lloyd appears to endorse holism as
the correct alternative to localization, a move I do not
support. Cabeza and Nyberg, whose work was the basis of
my empirical review, do notice that there is apparently a
great deal of redeployment in the brain, but they decline
to offer any hypotheses about the significance of this
finding. Interestingly, they observe that researchers tend
to interpret activations in terms of the domain within
which they are working: “Area 7 activations, for instance,
were usually attributed to attentional processes in
attention studies, to perceptual processes in perception
studies, to working memory processes in working
memory studies, and so on.” (Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000:
31) This tendency would serve to mask the prevalence of
redeployment from those disinclined to look for it.

these areas, we cannot conclude on this basis alone that
these nine tasks have exclusive participants—and, in fact,
eight of these ten areas are known to be involved in tasks
in categories not surveyed here. Even if the remaining
two areas turn out to be exclusive to their two tasks, this
still would mean that less than 1.5% of the tasks
examined had exclusive participants. Only one of these
two tasks had a single participant, not activated by any
other task; the other had 8 other participants, none of
which were exclusive.
Table 1: Number of brain regions (out of 31) with
activations in exactly the number of task categories listed,
out of the four categories surveyed.
Activation
Type
Right
Lateral
Left
Lateral
Right
Medial
Left
Medial

Number of areas with activations in:
1 task
2 task
3 task
4 task
category categories categories categories
3
4
11
11
2

3

8

15

4

4

6

0

6

3

4

2

Overall, the picture could hardly be clearer: nearly
every brain area participates in multiple cognitive
functions, and each cognitive function utilizes many
participants, very few of which are exclusive. The data on
brain function is decidedly not consistent with a strict
localization assumption.
Note, however, that while the data appear to rule out
localization, they do not argue against holism. My main
motivation for rejecting holism is that it seems that one
can offer an evolutionary reason for redeployment as an
architectural feature of the brain only if brain areas do
roughly the same thing for each of the functional
complexes in which they participate. As new brain
functions develop, one might well expect opportunistic
reuse of existing functional components, but it seems that
this would only be effective insofar as the existing
components already did something that could easily
become a useful part of a functional complex supporting
the new function. Too little initial compatibility would
make the incorporation of existing components into a new
functional complex quite puzzling, and too much
alteration in the functional structure of the existing
component could cause problems with the other functions
it supports. Still, until we have much better awareness of
what individual brain areas contribute to cognitive
functions (something that imaging data alone will not
provide), it will be difficult to definitively rule out holism.

Conclusion
This essay introduced the massive redeployment
hypothesis, an account of the functional organization of
the brain that gives pride of place to the fact that brain
areas are typically employed to support numerous
functions, with little respect for traditional domain
boundaries. Although I think that the three case studies in
which there appears to be redeployment of brain areas to
support very different functions, together with the
empirical review that suggests such redeployment is the
norm, strongly support MRH, this is not likely to be, nor
is it intended as, the last word on brain organization. Still,
an hypothesis can be prove useful even (or perhaps
especially) in the course of being disproved and
discarded, insofar as it offers a way to help (re-)organize
old data and interpret new information, and may suggest
novel experimental inquiries. I hope for no more than this
from MRH. A much more thorough discussion of MRH,
including a proposal for a specific functional architecture,
is given in (Anderson, forthcoming).

Comparison to Related Work
There has been too much work on localization to even
begin to survey it in a paper of this length; more extensive
discussion can be found in (Anderson, forthcoming).
28

high-resolution functional MRI study. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 9: 2178-86.
Lloyd, D. (2000). Terra cognita: From functional
neuroimaging to the map of the mind. Brain and Mind,
1: 93-116.
Martin, A., J. V. Haxby, F. M. Lalonde, C. L. Wiggs & L.
G. Ungerleider (1995) Discrete cortical regions
associated with knowledge of color and knowledge of
action. Science 270, 102-105.
Martin, A., C. L. Wiggs, L. G. Ungerleider & J. V. Haxby
(1996) Neural
correlates
of
category-specific
knowledge. Nature, 379: 649-652.
McKiernan, B.J., Marcario, J.K., Karrier, J.H., &
Chenery, P.D. (1998). Corticomotoneuronal postspike
effects in shoulder, elbow, wrist, digit, and intrinsic
hand muscles during a reach and prehension task.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 21: 1132-39.
Mesulam, M.-M. (1990). Large-scale neurocognitive
networks and distributed processing for attention,
language, and memory. Annals of Neurology, 28, 597613.
Mesulam, M.-M. (1998). From sensation to cognition.
Brain, 121, 1013-1052.
Muller, R.A., Rothermel, R.D., Behen, M.E., Muzik, O.,
Mangner, T.J., & Chugani, H.T. (1997). Receptive and
expressive language activations for sentences: a PET
study. Neuroreport, 8(17):3767-70.
Mundale, J. (2002), Concepts of localization:
Balkanization in the brain, Brain and Mind, Vol. 3, No.
3, pp. 313-330.
Nishitani, N., Schürmann, M., Amunts K., & Hari, R.
(2005). Broca’s Region: From Action to Language.
Physiology, 20: 60-69.
Sanes, J.N., Donoghue, J.P., Thangaraj, V., Edelman,
R.R. & Warach, S. (1995). Shared neural substrates
controlling hand movements in human motor cortex.
Science, 268: 1775-77.
Schieber, M.H. (2001). Constraints on somatotopic
organization in the primary motor cortex. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 86: 2125-43.
Schieber, M.H. & Hibbard, L.S. (1993). How somatotopic
is the motor cortex hand area? Science, 261: 489-92.
Shinoda, Y., Yokota, J., & Futami, T. (1981). Divergent
projection of individual corticospinal axons to
motoneurons of multiple muscles in the monkey.
Neuroscience Letters, 96: 7-12.
Smith, E.E. (2000). Neural bases of working memory.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9: 45-9.
Thoenissen, D., Zilles, K., & Toni, I. (2002). Differential
involvement of parietal and precentral regions in
movement preparation and motor intention. Journal of
Neuroscience, 22, 9024-9034.
Wilson, M. (2001). The case for sensorimotor coding in
working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 8:
44-57.

References
Anderson, M. L. (forthcoming). The massive
redeployment hypothesis and the functional topography
of the brain. Philosophical Psychology.
Asanuma, H. & Rosen, I. (1972). Topographical
organization of cortical efferent zones projecting to
distal forelimb muscles in the monkey. Experimental
Brain Research, 14: 143-56.
Awh, E., Jonides, J., Smith, E.E., Schumacher, E.H.,
Koeppe, R.A., & Katz, S. (1996). Dissociation of
storage and rehearsal in verbal working memory:
Evidence from positron emission tomography.
Psychological Science, 7: 25-31.
Baddeley, A.D. (1986). Working Memory. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A.D. (1995). Working memory. In: M.S.
Gazzaniga, ed. The cognitive neurosciences.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 755-64.
Baddeley, A.D. & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In;
G.H. Bower, ed. The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation. Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum. 647-67.
Baddeley, A.D. & Hitch, G. (1994). Developments in the
concept of working memory. Neuropsychology, 8: 48593.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22: 577-660.
Binkofski, F., Amunts, K., Stephan, K. M., Posse, S.,
Schormann, T., Freund, H.-J., Zilles, K., and Seitz, R.J.
(2000). Broca's region subserves imagery of motion: A
combined cytoarchitectonic and fMRI study. Human
Brain Mapping 11:273–285.
Cabeza, R. & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging Cognition II:
An empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12: 1-47.
Damasio, A. R. & D. Tranel (1993) Nouns and verbs are
retrieved with differently distributed neural systems.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA, 90: 4957-4960.
Decety, J., Grézes, J., Costes, N., Perani, D., Jeannerod,
M., Procyk, E., Grassi, F., & Fazio, F. (1997). Brain
activity during observation of actions. Influence of
action content and subject’s strategy. Brain, 120, 17631777.
Glenberg, A. & Kaschak, M. (2002). Grounding language
in action. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 9: 558565.
Graziano, M.S.A., Taylor, C.S.R., Moore, T., & Cooke,
D.F. (2002). The cortical control of movement
revisited. Neuron, 36: 1-20.
Hagoort, P. (2005). On Broca, brain and binding. In: Y.
Grodinsky and K. Amuts (eds.) Broca’s Region.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hamzei, F., Rijntjes, M., Dettmers, C., Glauche, V.,
Weiller, C., & Büchel (2003). The human action
recognition system and its relationship to Broca’s area:
an fMRI study. Neuroimage, 19, 637-644.
Kleinschmidt, A., Nitschke, M.F., & Frahm, J. (1997).
Somatotopy in the human motor cortex hand area: A

29

