UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Expertise Development in Clinical Psychology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3mp169g0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Hauser, Sabine
Meier, Anne
Spada, Hans
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Expertise Development in Clinical Psychology
Sabine Hauser (sabine.hauser@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Hans Spada (hans.spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Nikol Rummel (nikol.rummel@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Anne Meier (anne.meier@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg,
Department of Psychology, Cognition-Emotion-Communication,
Engelbergerstr. 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract

Research on the Nature of Expertise

This study intends to shed light on expertise development in
clinical psychology during university studies and beyond. So
far, 70 participants at different stages of training have taken
part in the study, ranging from psychology undergraduates to
expert therapists. All participants completed a computerbased questionnaire consisting of 3 parts: a knowledge test,
open-format questions, and case studies. At the expert level,
data collection has not yet been finished, but preliminary
results can be reported. Participants from different stages of
training levels did not differ regarding knowledge about basic
principles. However, with increasing training, participants
knew significantly more about the application of basic
principles to clinical psychology and about clinical
psychology itself. In answering the open-format questions,
participants differed significantly regarding their use of
technical terms. The case studies revealed differences in terms
of the quality of recalled items, the correctness of the
diagnosis, and the quality of the explanations given for the
patients’ problems. Preliminary results from the sample of
expert therapists indicated a decrease in some of these
variables.
Keywords: Expertise development; Clinical Psychology;
Knowledge test

Research on the nature of expertise has attracted a great deal
of attention from the 1960s up until the present day. In a
well-known study, de Groot (1965) presented a chess board
to experts and novices. After a presentation time of just five
seconds, experts remembered more correct figures than
novices thanks to their ability to identify meaningful
patterns on the chessboard. Since this pioneering work and,
later, the work of Chase and Simon (1973), researchers have
come to agree that experts of a particular domain are, in
general, not more intelligent or talented than non-experts,
but they have acquired a vast and well-connected
knowledge base, which facilitates retrieval.
Most pioneering work about expertise dealt with wellstructured domains like chess (e.g. Chase & Simon, 1973,
de Groot, 1965) or physics (e.g. Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser,
1981; Chi, Glaser, & Rees, 1982; Ploetzner & Spada, 1993).
There are some common features that experts of all these
domains share if compared to novices (VanLehn, 1989): (1)
Experts have worked hard to become experts and were
engaged in several years of deliberate practice (Ericsson,
Krampe, & Tesch-Roemer, 1993). (2) Experts are able to
perform faster than novices, (3) solve domain-specific
problems better than novices, and (4) are able to recall more
relevant items when presented with a relevant situation (de
Groot, 1965).

Introduction
Teaching and training novices to become experts able to
solve complex problems can be seen as a pedagogical
challenge in any domain. One starting point for developing
instructional measures is to analyze what constitutes
expertise in a domain and how this expertise develops. This
question is also the main focus of our study, which is
embedded in a larger project examining the effects of
growing expertise on net-based, interdisciplinary
cooperation. In our project, a physician and a clinical
psychologist cooperate on a complex patient case making
use of a videoconferencing system (cf. Rummel & Spada,
2005). To analyze the effects of our participants’ expertise
on cooperation, we first need to understand what constitutes
expertise in the domain of medicine and clinical
psychology, respectively. While in medicine, research on
expertise development already exists, in clinical
psychology, such research is lacking. The study presented in
this paper aims to shed light on this question.

Expertise Development in Medicine

1458

Research on expertise development in the more complex
domain of medicine is of particular interest for our
purposes. While there are particular differences between
what constitutes expertise in clinical psychology and in
medicine (see below), the two domains also share
commonalities: practitioners from both fields are concerned
with diagnosing and treating patients, rely on scientific
results about normal and abnormal functioning in order to
derive therapy techniques, and need to cooperate with
experts (colleagues) and laypersons (patients). Medical
expertise has attracted many research activities since the
1970s, resulting in a large research base (e.g. Boshuizen,
Bromme, & Gruber, 2004; Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992;
Custers, Boshuizen, & Schmidt, 1996; Elstein, Shulman, &
Sprafka, 1978; Rikers, Schmidt, & Moulaert, 2005; Schmidt
& Boshuizen, 1993).

In order to examine expertise development in the domain
of medicine, researchers usually construct a text-based case
study and ask medical doctors and novices to think aloud
while working on it (Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992). After
diagnosing the case, participants are asked to elaborate on
their assessment of the signs and symptoms.
Boshuizen and her colleagues (Boshuizen, 2003;
Boshuizen et al., 2004) postulated three steps in the
development of a medical expert: First, medical students
acquire large amounts of declarative knowledge about
biomedical processes. The representation of this knowledge
can be understood as a loosely connected semantic network.
With some clinical experience, declarative knowledge is
then proceduralized in a process of “knowledge
encapsulation”. Knowledge encapsulations are higher-order
concepts under which lower-order concepts are subsumed.
In routine work, experts verbalize only higher-order
concepts. However, if asked to do so, or when problems
arise, experts are supposed to be able to verbalize lowerorder concepts (Boshuizen et al., 2004). Researchers can
detect encapsulated knowledge by comparing the experts’
post-hoc explanations with think-aloud protocols. If
explanations consist of lower-order concepts that are
subsumed under the higher-order concepts stated in the
think-aloud
protocols,
this
indicates
knowledge
encapsulation. In a final step, the clinical experience helps
the expert to develop illness scripts for each disease. An
illness script consists of enabling conditions (conditions and
constraints of a disease), the fault (major malfunctions in
bodily processes), and consequences (signs and symptoms).

Expertise Development in Psychology
In the domain of clinical psychology, there has been no
comparable research on the development of expertise.
Studies examining the effects of psychotherapy, for
example, control for individual characteristics of the
psychotherapists that could obscure the effects of the tested
therapy models and treatment procedures (Beutler, 1997). In
contrast, we specifically focus on the development of
psychological knowledge in the course of formal
psychological education and therapist training.
Because medicine and clinical psychology share some
commonalities (see above), findings about expertise
development in medicine can serve as a starting point for
analyzing the development of expertise in clinical
psychology. However, three main differences between
clinical psychologists and physicians have been described
and attributed to differences in their training (Kingsbury,
1987): (1) Medical students learn to view science as a body
of facts. Students of psychology, in contrast, learn to view
science as a body of scientific methods that help to
experimentally test theories. Therefore, psychologists tend
to challenge information more than physicians. (2) For
physicians, there is a stronger association between particular
diagnoses and specialized treatments than for
psychotherapists. (3) Medical students usually start their
studies with the goal of becoming a physician, and after two
preclinical years, students begin with their clinical training.
In contrast, the first years of the psychology curriculum in
German universities focus on a scientific education in the

more general field of psychology. Not until their third or
fourth year can students decide to specialize in clinical
psychology, and only after finishing their university
education can they engage in clinical training. Against the
background of the commonalities and differences described,
we investigate whether expertise in clinical psychology
develops in a similar manner compared to expertise in
medicine.
In order to derive hypotheses, it is worth taking a closer
look at how the formal training proceeds in this domain.
Although the basic structure of the psychology curriculum
at university level is prescribed for all German universities,
the local curricula differ substantially in their main focus
and the sequence of courses. Therefore, we limit our
description to the University of Freiburg, where we
recruited our sample. In the first two years of their studies,
students learn about basic principles of human psychology.
They cover topics such as: learning, cognition, emotion,
communication, development, and physiology. During their
third year, students then learn about the application of these
basics. For example, they learn about clinical disease
patterns and psychotherapeutic techniques. In the final two
years, students can choose a particular area of psychology
on which to focus, for example clinical psychology. In this
part of their studies, they then begin to solve realistic and
complex cases and learn to interact with patients. They are
also required to complete internships at psychiatric hospitals
or comparable institutions. After graduation, psychologists
intending to work as psychotherapists must engage in an
extra three to five years of therapeutic on-the-job training.
In certified training schools, the psychologists are
supervised as they work with patients. Furthermore, they are
requested to attend additional theory sessions on specific
psychotherapy-related topics. Psychologists who have
finished this additional training are then finally allowed to
call themselves psychological psychotherapists.
We selected our sample to represent different stages in
this education, and designed our materials to reveal
knowledge differences between the different training levels.

Goals of the Study

1459

This study was motivated by three main goals. (1) As there
is only little research on expertise development in clinical
psychology, we aimed to discover which competencies
result at different stages of training. A long-term goal will
be to help to strengthen competencies and to reduce
weaknesses in formal education. (2) We wanted to
investigate whether expertise in medicine and clinical
psychology develops in a similar manner. One main finding
in medicine is that experts encapsulate their knowledge, and
are able to recall lower-order concepts if necessary. In the
past, such knowledge encapsulations have been measured
by comparing post-hoc explanations with recall data or
think-aloud protocols of case studies. We employed three
methods to measure encapsulations. First, we developed a
knowledge test to directly examine whether basic concepts
really do remain available for experts who learned these
concepts years ago. Second, we measured the use of higher
order concepts in the participants’ recall of case studies.

And third, as a method to unpack encapsulated knowledge,
participants were asked to explain the case studies after
diagnosing. (3) As this research is embedded in a project on
net-based interdisciplinary cooperation, we aimed at using
the results from expertise development in both domains to
deduce hypotheses about the quality of such a cooperation.

Method
Participants
Psychologists at different stages of their training
participated in our study. Up to now, 55 students (20 novice
students, 20 intermediate students, 15 advanced students),
10 trainee therapists, and five expert therapists have taken
part. At the moment, we are finishing up the data collection
of the expert therapists. For this highest level of expertise,
we will examine 10 behavior therapists, who have worked
in their profession for at least 10 years. All participants
received financial compensation for their participation.
Students and trainee psychotherapists were recruited
during lectures. To contact the psychotherapists, we
distributed flyers in practices in Freiburg, Germany.

Material
Participants completed an instrument assessing the quality
and quantity of their knowledge in the area of clinical
psychology. The instrument consisted of three parts: A
multiple-choice test measured the availability of knowledge
(declarative knowledge test). Open-format questions
required participants to freely list what they knew about
selected concepts. Finally, participants were given written
descriptions of two patients’ problems (case studies) and
were asked to read, recall, diagnose, and explain the cases.
In the following, the parts of the instrument will be
described in more detail:
The declarative knowledge test consisted of three
subscales. All questions had to be answered by marking one
of five answers.
(a)
Five questions measured knowledge about basic
principles of psychology such as learning theory and
cognitive principles, for example: “What is the result
of classical conditioning?”
(b)
Three questions measured the application of basic
principles to clinical psychology. For example, we
asked what kind of learning processes are part of
Mowrer’s two-factor theory of avoidance learning.
(c)
Four questions measured knowledge in the area of
clinical psychology, for example: “What does Beck
call the negatively biased thoughts in depression?”
The second part of our instrument consisted of two openformat questions. Participants were asked to write down
everything they deemed important about the two concepts.
We chose schedules of reinforcement, an important concept
for therapeutic work learned early on in university studies,
and schizophrenia, a well-known mental disease pattern
taught later. To analyze the frequency of correct statements,
we developed model solutions for each question based on
the literature that students and trainees in psychotherapy
have to read for exams. We then counted the number of

correct statements in participants’ answers. Scores were
added up for each of the two questions. In addition, we
counted the technical terms stated in the answers.
The third and main part of our instrument were case
studies. We developed two text-based cases, a more
common case (a social phobia) and a more uncommon case
(an obsessive-compulsive disorder revolving around
obsessive thoughts about suicide). To develop authentic
cases, we consulted discussion forums on the Internet and
an expert psychotherapist. An example case study is
presented in Figure 1.
Participants were asked to first scan the case, and then to
recall important information in writing. With this recall
phase, we intended to simulate the results on chess expertise
(de Groot, 1965): with increasing expertise, psychologists
should perceive a whole case as a pattern and thus
remember more details. At the same time, we wanted to
examine whether increasing experience leads to different
structuring of content, i.e. whether more experience leads to
an increased use of higher-order concepts. Next, participants
diagnosed the patient described in the case study, and
finally, they explained signs and symptoms of the disorder
they had diagnosed. The explanations were supposed to
serve as a method to trigger the “unpacking” of basic
knowledge that had been encapsulated. This procedure
resembles the procedure used to examine expertise
development in the domain of medicine.

1460

Up to now, I have been able to avoid awkward situations
(in my private life, too) by simply leaving the situation if I
could not endure it anymore. I rarely attended lectures and
courses. Nevertheless, I completed my degrees not too
badly. Of course, everybody feels nervous before
presentations, but my nervousness is so extreme that I feel
ill physiologically. But that is not the main problem. It is my
sweating that worries me the most. I do not sweat in
comfortable situations, e.g. alone at home or together with
my best friends. But if only one person I don’t know is
present, it begins: My hands get blue and wet; my shirt is
drenched with cold, clammy, smelly sweat. I already
consulted a physician: there are no medical causes. I ought
to do something about this as my job involves a lot of public
speaking. Others consider me to be a self-confident person,
a fact that I cannot understand, because I feel really tense. In
addition to the sweating, my muscles tremble from my legs
to my face. When other people are present, I immediately
turn pale, and after a while my hair becomes greasy and I
feel scruffy although I am actually not. At the moment, I am
trying to be assertive and to approach people straightaway
instead of waiting till I have to. But afterwards I am really
exhausted.
Figure 1: Example Case Study
As dependent variables for the cases, we assessed the
number of correctly recalled statements (concepts
mentioned in the case study) and the number of higher-order
concepts (e.g. physiological symptoms can stand for
sweating, turning pale, blushing…). For the diagnoses, a
score from 0 (false) to 1.25 (correct and additionally

elaborated diagnosis) was assigned. To analyze the
explanations of signs and symptoms, we constructed model
solutions and analyzed the explanations regarding the
frequency of correct statements.

Procedure
Participants completed the first subscale of the knowledge
test (basic principles of psychology), then answered the first
open-format question (schedule of reinforcement), and
afterwards worked on the first case study (social phobia).
Next, they completed the second subscale of the knowledge
test (application of basic principle to clinical psychology),
answered the second open-format question (schizophrenia),
and solved case study two (obsessive-compulsive disorder).
Finally, they filled out the third subscale of the knowledge
test (clinical psychology).

Statistical Analysis
To compare the four training levels, one-way ANOVAs
were performed (α = .05). Since the data collection for the
expert therapist sample has not yet been completed, data of
this group was not included in the analysis.

Results

but at the intermediate level, knowledge about the
application of basics increased sharply.
In the subscale clinical psychology, the knowledge
increased continuously up to the advanced students’ level.
Then, at the trainee level, it increased sharply (F(3, 61) =
7.10, p < .001, η² = .26).

Open-Format Questions
See Table 2 for the means and standard deviations for the
open-format questions.
In the first question (schedules of reinforcement), the most
technical terms were used by the novice students (F(3, 61) =
3.08, p = .03, η² = .13). Differences in the frequency of
correct statements did not reach significance (F(3, 61) =
1.81, p = .16, η² = .08), although the novice students also
wrote down the most correct statements. Interestingly,
higher frequencies of correct statements were strongly
associated with an increased use of technical terms (r = .80)
In the second open-format question about schizophrenia,
both the frequency of correct statements (F(3, 61) = 12.13, p
<.001, η² = .37) and the frequency of technical terms (F(3,
61) = 10.12, p < .001, η² = .33) increased with higher
training level, again with a sharp increase at the trainees’
level. The frequency of correct statements and technical
terms again correlated significantly (r =.82).

Psychologists from the different training stages did not
differ with regard to the overall time needed to complete the
computer-based questionnaire or with regard to the number
of words in both the open-format questions and the case
studies. Thus, we assumed that the groups were equally
motivated to complete the instrument.

Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations (in Parentheses)
for the Open-Format Questions
OpenNovices Interformat
mequestions
diates
Schedule of reinforcement
Correct
3.75
2.05
statements
(3.92)
(1.38)
Technical
2.70
1.20
terms
(3.20)
(1.20)
Schizophrenia
Correct
1.10
2.93
statements
(1.32)
(2.57)
Technical
0.10
1.45
terms
(0.45)
(2.42)

Knowledge Test
The knowledge test consisted of 12 multiple-choice
questions measuring knowledge about basic principles (5
questions), about the application of basics to clinical
psychology (3 questions), and about clinical psychology (4
questions). For means and standard deviations, please
consult Table 1.
Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations (in Parentheses)
for the Knowledge Test
Knowledge test
Basics
Application
Clinical P.

Novices
3.85
(1.39)
1.70
(0,92)
1.65
(1.04)

Intermediates
3.65
(1.14)
2.55
(0.76)
2.05
(1.00)

Advanced
3.47
(1.19)
2.53
(0.52)
2.40
(1.06)

Advanced

Trainees

2.13
(1.20)
0.60
(0.74)

2.60
(2.35)
1.60
(2.37)

3.63
(2.24)
2.27
(2.22)

6.35
(3.17)
4.70
(3.53)

Case Studies

Trainees
3.40
(0.97)
2.60
(0.70)
3.40
(0.84)

The training levels did not differ with regard to
knowledge about basic principles (F < 1). However, in the
subscale application of basics to clinical psychology,
significant differences were found (F(3, 61) = 5.86, p =
.001, η² = .22). The novice students scored relatively low,

See Table 3 for the results on case one (patient with social
phobia).
While the groups recalled about the same number of
statements from the case (F<1), they differed with regard to
the frequency of higher-order concepts (F(3, 61) = 4.78, p =
.01, η² = .19). The trainee therapists stated a greater number
of higher-order concepts than the students. This result points
towards knowledge encapsulation.
The quality of the diagnosis improved sharply at the
intermediate level and then levelled off (F(3, 61) = 8.20, p <
.001, η² = .29). A similar picture emerged for the quality of
the explanations, again with a rather sharp increase at the
trainees´ level (F(3, 61) = 4.23, p = .009, η² = .17).

1461

The results for case study two (patient suffering from
obsessive-compulsive disorder) are shown in Table 4.
The groups did not differ with regard to recalled
statements (F(3, 61) = 1.77, p = .16, η² = .08), although
descriptively, the trainee therapists recalled more correct
statements than the students. The quality of recalled
information differed, with a rather sharp rise in the use of
higher-order concepts at the advanced students’ level (F(3,
61) = 3.17, p = .03, η² = .14).
Table 3: Means and Standard Deviations (in Parentheses)
for Case Study 1

This result contradicts the findings in medical expertise
development that even after several years of practical
experience, basic knowledge can be recalled if required. In
the two open-format questions, also, the expert therapists
wrote down fewer correct statements and fewer technical
terms than the trainees. The same picture was found in both
case studies regarding the use of higher-order concepts
during recall and the number of correct statements in the
explanations given. In contrast, the expert therapists
diagnosed slightly better than or as correctly as the trainees.

Case 1
Social
Phobia
Recall
Correct
statements
Higher-order
concepts
Diagnosis
Correctness
Explanation
Correct
statements

Novices

Intermediates

Advanced

Discussion
The goal of the study was to shed light on the expertise
development in clinical psychology during university
studies and beyond. Novice, intermediate and advanced
students, trainee therapists and expert behaviour therapists
completed a knowledge test measuring declarative
knowledge, open-format questions measuring quality and
quantity of free recall, and two case studies. As data
collection on the expert therapists has not yet been
concluded, the statistical analyses presented in this paper
referred to the remaining levels. For the expert therapist
level, we presented preliminary results.
In the knowledge test measuring basic psychological
principles, no significant differences between the levels
were found. However, with increasing experience,
knowledge about the application of basic principles to
clinical psychology and knowledge about clinical
psychology increased. Preliminary results of the expert
therapist sample indicated a strong decrease in knowledge
about basic principles and slight decreases in knowledge
about the application of basics and in clinical psychology. In
both open-format questions, participants differed in their use
of technical terms. Interestingly, higher frequencies of
correct statements were associated with a greater use of
technical terms. In both questions, the expert therapists
wrote down fewer correct statements and fewer technical
terms. Results in the open-format questions resemble the
results in the corresponding subscales of the knowledge test.
In the more basic concept the novice students scored best,
and then knowledge decreased and finally increased at the
trainees’ level. In contrast, knowledge about the clinical
concept increased with each expertise level. In the case
studies, students and trainee therapists recalled about the
same frequency of statements from the case. However,
participants on the different levels differed in the quality of
their recall, particularly in the frequency of higher-order
concepts. This is an indication for knowledge encapsulation.
With increasing training level, more correct diagnoses were
derived. The explanations increased from novice students to
trainee therapists, but decreased at the expert therapists´
level.
With regard to the first goal – the investigation of
expertise development in clinical psychology - we can
summarize that basic psychological and clinical knowledge
as well as the ability to infer correct clinical diagnoses begin
to develop in the second and third year of studies.

Trainees

10.10
(2.94)
1.30
(1.22)

11.90
(5.03)
1.60
(1.19)

11.27
(5.01)
2.27
(1.87)

10.80
(4.49)
3.60
(2.68)

0.64
(0.36)

0.94
(0.14)

0.95
(0.14)

0.98
(0.18)

0.73
(0.45)

1.20
(0.90)

1.20
(0.64)

1.75
(1.07)

Table 4: Means and Standard Deviations (in Parentheses)
for Case Study 2
Case 2
Obsessive
disorder
Recall
Correct
statements
Higher-order
concepts
Diagnosis
Correctness
Explanation
Correct
statements

Novices

Intermediates

Advanced

Trainees

6.85
(2.89)
1.50
(1.28)

8.45
(3.28)
1.25
(1.16)

8.53
(4.49)
2.27
(1.62)

9.70
(2.67)
2.60
(1.43)

0.45
(0.45)

0.74
(0.45)

0.77
(0.41)

0.78
(0.38)

0.13
(0.21)

0.79
(0.83)

0.77
(0.66)

1.03
(0.99)

Correctness of the diagnosis rose sharply at the
intermediate level and then levelled off (F(3, 61) = 2.36, p =
.08, η² = .10). The rise at the intermediate level was also
found regarding the explanations (F(3, 61) = 5.21, p < .003,
η² = .20). There was an additional increase at the trainees´
level.

Expert Therapists
So far, data of five expert therapists have been gathered and
analysed. Results point to a strong decrease compared with
the trainees in basic knowledge and a slight decrease in
application of basic knowledge and clinical psychology.
1462

Knowledge and competencies increase strongly at the level
of the trainee therapists. Therefore, we can conclude that
therapist training is successful. Regarding the expert
therapist sample, preliminary results indicate decreases in
the availability of knowledge and in recall and explanations
of the case studies. However, it should be noted that these
experts did not engage in certified training after university
studies because in Germany, this was not obligatory until
1998. Training for practitioners would probably help to
keep their knowledge up to date and counteract the trend we
found. In the diagnoses, the experts achieved similar results
to the trainees’ group. This may be due to the fact that
diagnosing is an activity that is very familiar for expert
therapists. In comparing our results with findings from the
domain of medicine (Goal 2), we can summarize that
knowledge stays available up to the trainees’ level, and
decreases afterwards. The increased recall of higher-order
concepts with increasing training level points to knowledge
encapsulations similar to expertise development in
medicine. However, on the level of expert therapists, only
some indications of knowledge encapsulation were found.
The results concerning expertise development in clinical
psychology together with the findings in the medical
domain have important implications regarding our goal of
examining the effects of growing expertise on net-based,
interdisciplinary cooperation (Goal 3). Knowledge
encapsulation and increased use of technical terms may
complicate communication. This issue will be taken up in a
further study.

Conclusion
To summarize, our results show that basic and clinical
knowledge and the ability to diagnose correctly start
developing early on during university studies and increase
up to the level of trainee therapists. However, data from five
expert therapists indicate that knowledge acquired during
studies does not outlast ten years of therapeutic practice.

Acknowledgments
The present research was supported by the German
Research Foundation [DFG] with a grant awarded to the
second author and Prof Franz Caspar (contract Sp 251/16-3)
and by the Virtual Graduate Program of the DFG
“Knowledge acquisition and knowledge exchange with new
media” with a scholarship awarded to the first author. We
would like to thank our student research assistants Elsa
Haase, Christine Kalweit, Ann-Kristin Reinhold, and Britta
Stumpf.

References
Beutler, L. E. (1997). The psychotherapist as a neglected
variable in psychotherapy: An illustration by reference to
the role of therapist experience & training. Clinical
Psychology: Science & Practice, 4, 44-52.
Boshuizen, H. (2003). Expertise development: how to
bridge the gap between school and work. Den Haag: Cipgegevens Koninklijke Bibliotheek.

Boshuizen, H., Bromme, R., & Gruber, H. (2004).
Professional Learning: Gaps and Transitions on the Way
from Novice to Expert. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Boshuizen, H., & Schmidt, H. (1992). On the role of
biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning by experts,
intermediates and novices. Cognitive Science, 16, 153184.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind's eye in
chess. In W. G. Chase (Ed.), Visual information
processing.: Academic.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Chi, M. T. H., Glaser, R., & Rees, E. (1982). Expertise in
problem solving. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Custers, E. J. F. M., Boshuizen, H. P. A., & Schmidt, H. G.
(1996). The influence of medical expertise, case
typicality, and illness script component on case
processing and disease probability estimates. Memory &
Cognition, 24, 384-399.
DeGroot, A.D. (1965). Thought and choice in chess. The
Hague: Mouton.
Elstein, A. S., Shulman, L. S., & Sprafka, S. A. (1978).
Medical Problem Solving - An Analysis of Clinical
Reasoning. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Roemer, C.
(1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition
of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363406.
Kingsbury, S. J. (1987). Cognitive differences between
clinical psychologists and psychiatrists. American
Psychologist, 42, 152-156.
Ploetzner, R., & Spada, H. (1993). Multiple mental
representations of information in physics problem
solving. In G. Strube & K. F. Wender (Eds.), The
cognitive psychology of knowledge. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science Publishers.
Rikers, R. M. J. P., Schmidt, H. G., & Moulaert, V. r.
(2005). Biomedical Knowledge: Encapsulated or Two
Worlds Apart? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, 223231.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to Collaborate:
An Instructional Approach to Promoting Collaborative
Problem Solving in Computer-Mediated Settings. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 14, 201-241
Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. (1993). On acquiring
expertise in medicine. Educational Psychology Review, 5,
205-221.
VanLehn, K. (1989). Problem Solving and Cognitive Skill
Acquisition. In M. Posner (Ed.), Foundations of Cognitive
Science (pp. 527-579). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1463

