UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Extending Spatial Frames of Reference to Temporal Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7c57g5w1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Kranjec, Alexander

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Extending Spatial Frames of Reference to Temporal Concepts
Alexander Kranjec (akranjec@brooklyn.cuny.edu)
Department of Psychology, Brooklyn College, CUNY, 2900 Bedford Ave.
Brooklyn, NY 11210 USA

Abstract

structure) of the source domain, in a way consistent with the
inherent structure of the target domain” (Lakoff 1993, p.
215). In the case of time, the source domain consists of
cognitive representations of basic spatial relations that
emerge through the subject’s experience navigating through,
observing motion in, and orienting oneself within, space.
Thus the extension of spatial frame of reference models to
temporal concepts might illuminate similarities in the
structure of spatial and temporal cognition.

Tripartite systems are currently common to several theories
concerned with distinguishing different spatial frames of
reference (Levinson, 1996, 2003; Levelt, 1996; Tversky,
1996). The notion that such a 3-part spatial model (e.g.
intrinsic, deictic, extrinsic) can be extended to temporal
models is at least theoretically plausible (Levinson, 2003).
The current study reviews three basic spatial frame of
reference types. Then, the results of recent empirical work
investigating temporal metaphor is reviewed and applied to a
theoretical temporal frame of reference model. Lastly, the
concept of an extrinsic temporal frame of reference is
introduced and supported by several experiments.

Spatial Frames of Reference1
Intrinsic

Introduction

The intrinsic frame of reference is an “object-centered”
coordinate system where directional valences are based on
the inherent formal properties or features of the object that
is being used to ground a scene. In English, “sidedness” is
often a saliency issue generally determined by an object’s
function and the manner in which one acts upon it. So, the
front of a chair is the side aligned with our own front when
in use (Fig. 1a). The front of a television is the side we
watch. And the front of a car is the end facing the direction
of its motion trajectory. If an object has no inherent front or
back that can be determined by physical features, motion
alone can provide a front and back. In the case of a cube
sliding down a hill for example, the front of the cube is
regularly assumed to be the side facing downhill.

Space is often divided into three frames of reference (see
Levinson, 1996, 2003; Levelt, 1996; Tversky, 1996). The
notion of frame of reference in the context of spatial
cognition refers to the “distinctions between underlying
coordinate systems” (Levinson, 2003 p. 24) people use
when thinking and talking about space. In general, frame of
reference models can be understood as attempts to
disambiguate and refine issues raised by the many
disciplines in cognitive science where perspective and
figure/ground relations are important. Generally, these
models divide frame types by the main reference point used
to establish unambiguous relations: (a) of inherent object
features or intrinsic relations; (b) according to viewer or
ego-centered d e i c t i c frames; or (c) in respect to
environmental or extrinsic reference axes.
Time is often understood in terms of space. Lakoff and
Johnson (1999) have suggested that our entire system of
conceptualization is built upon a limited number of source
domains that emerge directly from experience. They argue
that abstract domains of thought, whether one examines
modes diverse as moral reasoning or temporal cognition, are
generally understood and elaborated upon in terms of a
more concrete source domain, like physical well-being or
spatial cognition, respectively. Recent work in conceptual
metaphor theory has begun to investigate the structure of
mappings between concrete experiential domains, like
space, and abstract concepts, like time.
According to conceptual metaphor theory, more abstract
domains that lack direct perceptual support, like time, are
target domains and understood metaphorically in terms of
experientially concrete source domains, like space (see also
Gentner, 1983; 2001). Metaphorical mappings are assumed
to “preserve the cognitive topology (the image-schema

Deictic
For the purposes of the present discussion the deictic frame
of reference can be understood as ego-centered or grounded
in a particular “viewpoint.” Deictic coordinate systems tend
to be based on the reference planes derived from bodily
1

Although terminology is a topic of some dispute in this area of
research, for the present paper I have to chosen to evade excessive
hand wringing on the matter. For example, “deictic” is being used
although I could have chosen the term “egocentric” to define the
sort of “viewer-centered” perspective described in this paper. Yet
Levinson’s (2003) term “relative” would have been inappropriate
because his relative frame represents in some sense an attempt to
reconcile ambiguities arising in 3-D space that are probably
irrelevant in 1-D time. I have decided to use the term “extrinsic”
because I interpret it to be a sufficiently general abstraction of the
similarly conceived “allocentric” or “environment” centered
frames that focus on the “ground” to establish reference. Another
term that could have been used, “absolute,” I thought carried too
much philosophical baggage in the context of time.

447

axes. The human body can be divided along three major
planes. These divisions provide the anchor for left/right,
top/bottom and front/back coordinates. As compared to the
axis that gives left/right coordinates, front/back and
top/bottom axes are asymmetrical (and hence will be more
amenable to extension to temporal concepts).
Deictic
frames of reference determine an object’s location relative
to these axes and frequently an individual’s direction of
gaze (in canonical examples) (Fig. 1b).

past on February 18, 2022. In contrast, it is understood that
the storming of the Bastille (1789) occurred earlier than the
Tsar’s abdication (1917) and that the temporal relation
between these events is fixed. This fundamental bipartite
division of the time concept would seem the basic starting
point for any model hoping to extend spatial perspective to
time. Indeed, recent work in cognitive linguistics and
conceptual metaphor theory suggests that the distinction
between lexical concepts like past/future and early/later is
more than “language deep” and grounded in more basic
cognitive processes that derive structure from simple
schemas which reflect this perspective-based division.
In the following sections I will review how this two-part
division emerges from current research on temporal
metaphor. I’ll demonstrate how deictic and intrinsic frames
can be mapped onto several preexisting temporal models
emerging from this research. Then, in order to argue for the
possibility of extending a tripartite spatial frame of
reference model to time, I will introduce the idea of an
extrinsic temporal concept and discuss new empirical
evidence suggesting the “psychological reality” of an
extrinsic temporal frame of reference.

Extrinsic
Extrinsic frames of reference anchor coordinates to fixed
bearings like cardinal directions (e.g. north/south/east/west)
and environmental gradients (e.g. uphill/downhill, wind
direction, gravity). Extrinsic frames are fixed, and therefore
independent in respect to the intrinsic properties of objects
or the perspective of the viewer or ego. Thus, in Figure 1c
the ball is south of the chair regardless of the position of the
observer or the inherent orientation of the chair. Extrinsic
coordinates are not necessarily environmentally based.
They can be culturally determined (e.g. reading direction).
(a)

(b)

Temporal Framework Models

(c)

Deictic
Researchers investigating temporal metaphors in English
have traditionally focused on two distinct ego-centered
metaphors, both of which can without difficulty be
classified as deictic in terms of frame of reference (Clark,
1973; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Gentner, 2001). These two
distinct schemas, the Moving-Time (MT) and Moving-Ego
(ME) metaphors, both map future events in front of the
observer, the present moment (or “now”) as co-locational
with the observer, and past events behind the observer.

Figure 1. Spatial Frames of Reference. (a) Intrinsic: “The
ball is in front of the chair.” (b) Deictic: “The ball is to the
right of the chair.” (c) Extrinsic: “The ball is south of the
chair”

Integrating Spatial and Temporal Models
Although never fully integrated into a coherent model,
notions relevant to distinct intrinsic, deictic and extrinsic
frames of reference have been discussed to some extent in
research investigating the structure of temporal concepts.
Thus far, no systematic attempt to extend a tripartite spatial
frame of reference model to time has adequately described
the common features of spatial frameworks and temporal
concepts. Although Bender, Bernardo & Beller (2005) set
out to extend a tripartite spatial frame of reference to
temporal concepts, the authors failed to make the critical
distinction between past/future and earlier/later relations. In
the parlance of philosophy, this is the basic distinction
between “A properties” of time which are in constant flux
relative to our experience of change and “B properties”
which represent static sequences. For example, my 50th
birthday may currently reside in the future relative to my
place in the present, but that status will eventually change as
I grow older, until this particular day comes to occupy my

Figure 4. Deictic Temporal Framework: The Moving-Time
model. Note that although the ego is used to define
past/future relations, forward motion is in the direction of
earlier times. Times are represented as objects in space.
In regard to spatial structure, MT and ME metaphors are
figure-ground reversals of one another. With MT
metaphors, the ego is stationary as future events approach
from in front; in ME metaphors the ego moves forward in
the direction of stationary events “located” in the future. As

448

the ego and event come to occupy the same space, the event
is conceptualized as present. When the event occupies the
space behind the ego, it is in the past (Figs. 4 and 5). The
difference between these mappings is apparent in sentences
using spatial language for time like, “The deadline is almost
here” (MT) and “We are approaching our first wedding
anniversary” (ME).

standing stationary vs. riding in an office chair along a
straight path) then answers to the ambiguous question tend
to match the primed perspective. What this suggests is that
our experience of space actually influences the way we
think about time. Boroditsky’s studies suggest that a deictic
coordinate system, based on the reference planes derived
from bodily axes, can serve to structure temporal concepts.

Intrinsic
However, are the Moving-Time and Moving-Ego metaphors
necessary for conceptualizing temporal relations in spatial
terms? If one considers sentences like, “Wednesday follows
Tuesday and Monday precedes Tuesday” it would seem not.
Such expressions do not require a deictic center to establish
a point of reference but rather derive sequential relations
from intrinsic features. The asymmetrical, unidirectional
nature of causal relations makes representing discrete events
in terms of a beginning (a front) and an end (a back) quite
ordinary. In spatial metaphors that structure time in terms of
objects moving through space, the intrinsic fronts of events
(objects in space) are defined relative to their direction of
motion. Events in front of other events are earlier times and
events in back of other events are later times (Fig. 6). Note
that an intrinsic temporal model only maps earlier/later
relations and is distinct from deictic models that can specify
past, present and future temporal relations with respect to an
ego.

Figure 5. Deictic Temporal Framework: The Moving-Ego
model. Note that although the ego is used to define
past/future relations, forward motion is in the direction of
later times. Times are represented as locations in space.
As part of a broad program of research, Boroditsky and
her colleagues (Boroditsky, 2000; Gentner, Imai &
Boroditsky 2002; Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002) have set
out to demonstrate the psychological reality of such
structural metaphors. The basic finding of these studies—
that actual or imagined motion through space can influence
the way people think about events in time—reveals
interesting relations between spatial and temporal concepts.
Consider the question, “Next Wednesday’s meeting has
been moved forward 2 days. What day is the meeting now
that it has been rescheduled?” The question is ambiguous
because it can be answered either Monday or Friday
depending on the temporal metaphor one uses. If a person
adopts a MT metaphor, where the ego is stationary as events
in the future move towards the observer, forward motion
moves the meeting to an earlier time along the motion
trajectory of sequenced events, in a direction towards the
position of the stationary observer (leading to a Monday
response). On the other hand, if one takes the perspective of
a ME metaphor, forward motion is directed away from the
ego, moving the meeting to a later time (leading to a Friday
response). When asked the ambiguous question with no
experimental manipulation Boroditsky (2000) reports that
people will answer Monday or Friday with approximately
equal proportions.2 However, if participants are primed to
imagine or experience motion through space in a manner
concordant with the spatial structure of either the MT or ME
metaphors (e.g. pulling a chair towards oneself while

Figure 6. Intrinsic Temporal Framework. Note that forward
motion is in the direction of earlier times.
In two recent papers, Núñez and his colleagues (Núñez &
Sweetser, 2006; Núñez, Motz & Teuscher, in press) lucidly
make a similar distinction between intrinsic and deictic
temporal models, choosing to label them, Time-ReferencePoint metaphors (Time-RP) and Ego-Reference-Point
metaphors (Ego-RP) respectively. The major difference
between the two metaphors they describe is that in Time-RP
metaphors “there is no compulsory specification of ‘Now’ ”
(Núñez et al., in press).
In priming studies using an animated sequence of cubes
moving across a screen horizontally (counterbalanced for
direction) the authors find that spatial priming, without any
reference to the ego, influenced participant’s answers to the
ambiguous temporal question about Wednesday’s meeting.
That is, after priming with moving sequences of cubes
designed to highlight the intrinsic structure of non-ego
referenced sequential temporal relations, participants more
often moved Wednesday’s meeting to Monday, an earlier
time. The result is consistent with the structure of the
intrinsic temporal model (see Fig. 6) where forward motion
is in the direction of earlier times. The authors conclude:

2

When asked the ambiguous question without priming, using the
materials for the current study’s Experiments 1-3, 46.2% of
participants answered Monday and 53.8% Friday (N = 26).

449

The results of our experiments suggest that when
people give a “Monday” answer to the “Next
Wednesday’s meeting …” question, they are not
drawing the essential inferential organization
from “an entity moving toward me,” as it is
usually suggested, but from the intrinsic
front/back relationship of the spatial sequence
itself (i.e., anteriority/posteriority). The Time-RP
metaphor, in which “moving forward” is
“moving earlier,” thus provides a more precise
and parsimonious account of “Monday” answers
than the one found in the literature (Núñez et al.,
in press).

Figure 7. Extrinsic Temporal Framework. Note that forward
motion is in the direction of later times.
Importantly, there is evidence that temporal ‘cardinal
directions’ like reading direction can serve to provide
extrinsic temporal structure to a spatial array (Tversky,
Kugelmass & Winter, 1991; Dehaene, Bossimi & Giraux,
1993; Chan & Bergen, 2005).

Extrinsic
Newton, in the Principia Mathematica, writes “Time, of
itself, and from it’s own nature, flows equably without
relation to anything external” (from Evans, 2003 p.142).
Perhaps, in the context of modern physics, this
conceptualization of time seems rather old-fashioned.
However, the notion that time itself is a backdrop, or
something understood to move forward, independent of
particular events embedded within it, is a very common
one.3 The extrinsic frame of reference is invoked with
expressions like “across time, the effect of variable X is
minimal” or “time flows on forever” where both examples
involve motion yet neither requires a deictic reference point.
An extrinsic temporal frame of reference can be
distinguished from intrinsic temporal frames as well.
Consider a single car moving from one end (A) of a oneway street to the other end (B). When the car is at location
(A) it is at an earlier time relative to its time at location (B).
Location (B) can be said to be in front of location (A)
relative to the path of motion taken by the car. The car
brings attention to its abstracted trajectory, but the path
itself, or the ground—which in an extrinsic temporal frame
serves to establish relations between earlier and later
events—is the reference object. According to this schema,
time really is motion, where forward motion is in the
direction of later times (Fig. 7). Note that this relation
between forward motion and locations later in time is
opposite to that in intrinsic temporal frames where forward
motion is correlated with earlier times.
Like the Moving-Ego metaphor, times represented in an
extrinsic frame are represented as locations in space.
However, the presence of a reference object that can take
the position of discrete locations along a path is not a
necessary feature of an extrinsic temporal framework. As
long as a path of motion is defined relative to some stable
ground, extrinsic temporal models can have meaningful
structure (Fig. 8).

Figure 8. Extrinsic Temporal Framework. Note that forward
motion is in the direction of later times.

Priming Studies
In order to examine the extent to which extrinsically framed
models influence temporal thought, 3 priming experiments
were conducted.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants viewed a color animation that
showed a blue square moving horizontally (in either
direction) over a rectangular bar spanning the display
screen. The rectangular bar depicted the gray scale (Fig. 9).
The animation was looped and participants were permitted
to watch until they got bored. Afterwards, they were asked
several questions including (1) “What color was the
square?” and (2) “Which side of the floor did the square get
to first: the dark side or the light side?” This was followed
by the target question, “Next Wednesday’s meeting has
been moved forward two days. What day is the meeting
now that it has been rescheduled?”
There was no reference to an ego in Experiment 1. If
participants are using an extrinsic frame to answer the
question about Wednesday’s meeting, then the meeting
should be moved to Friday, a later time. This was indeed
the result. 75% of participants answered Friday (later) and

3

Evans (2003) calls this aspect of the time concept the “matrix
sense.”

450

only 25% answered Monday (earlier), χ2(1, N=16) = 4.00, p
= 0.046. There was no effect for direction.

intrinsic temporal frame in responses to the ambiguous
question (i.e. more “Monday” responses). It is very similar
in design to studies discussed above (Núñez et al., in press).
As in Experiment 1 of the current study, participants were
permitted to watch a looped color animation depicting a
simple motion scene until they became bored. In
Experiment 3, five differently colored squares moved across
a computer screen in either direction. The green square in
the middle had a black “X” (Fig. 11).

Figure 9. One box extrinsic prime. (The arrow was not
present during the experiment.)

Experiment 2
For Experiment 2 a paper and pencil test was used.
Participants received a 2-page survey. On the first page was
a scene depicting a mountain range and river. Adopting the
general method of Boroditsky & Ramscar (2002)
participants were directed to follow the instructions written
on the first page and then complete the question on the
second page (Fig. 10). The second page contained the
ambiguous question about Wednesday’s meeting.

Figure 11. Five box intrinsic prime. (The arrows were not
present during the experiment.)
After priming, participants answered several simple
questions including, (1) “What color square was the X in?”
and (2) “What color square was in the front? What color
square was in the back?” These questions were followed by
the target question about Wednesday’s meeting.
As predicted, more participants adopted an intrinsic
temporal frame after intrinsic spatial priming. 61% of
participants answered Monday and 39% answered Friday
χ2(1, N=36) = 1.778, p = 0.182. Although the results in
Experiment 3 are not statistically significant, the direction of
responding is consistent with the theoretical framework
presented in this study (Fig. 12).

In what direction would the water flow in the picture?________
Imagine how the water would flow.
Draw a straight arrow indicating the general path of motion.

Monday (Earlier)

Figure 10. Mountain extrinsic prime.

Friday (Later)

80
70

As with the previous experiment, there is no reference to
the ego in Experiment 2. However, this study has the
added benefit of controlling for deictic explanations. Since
almost all participants imagined the water moving “down”
(96.4%) towards the bottom of the paper, if participants
were adopting a deictic frame in order to answer the target
question, the Moving-Time metaphor would be the most
coherent model to adopt. Thus we could predict alternative
results for deictic and extrinsic frames. If participants are
using a deictic frame to answer the ambiguous question
about Wednesday’s meeting, they should provide more
answers of Monday. If adopting an extrinsic frame, Friday
answers should be more abundant.
Again the results were as predicted. Participants used an
extrinsic frame of reference. 71% of participants answered
Friday (later) and 29% answered Monday (earlier), χ 2(1,
N=28) = 5.14, p = 0.02.

60

%

50
40
30
20
10
0
1 box (extrinsic)

mountain

5 box (intrinsic)

(extrinsic)
Response

to

Target

Question

by

Prime

Type

Figure 12. Responses to ambiguous target question in
Experiments 1-3.

Conclusions
Whenever possible, it is best to avoid monocausal
explanations. Much as the experiments reported in Núñez et
al. (in press) demonstrate that “Monday” answers to the
ambiguous question about Wednesday’s meeting can arise
from at least 2 distinct mental representations, the current

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 uses a spatial prime intended to elicit an

451

Boroditsky, L. & Ramscar, M. (2002). The Roles of Body
and Mind in Abstract Thought. Psychological Science,
13(2), 185-188.
Chan, T. & Bergen, B. (2005) Writing Direction Influences
Spatial Cognition. In Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore, Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language, New York: Academic Press.
Dehaene, S., Bossimi, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Evans, V. (2003) The structure of time. Amsterdam and
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
(Reprinted in A. Collins & E. E. Smith (Eds.), Readings
in cognitive science: A perspective from psychology and
artificial intelligence. Palo Alto, CA: Kaufmann)
Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial metaphors in temporal
reasoning. In M. Gattis (Ed.), Spatial schemas in abstract
thought (pp. 203-222). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space >
time metaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17,
537-565.
Lakoff G. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor.
In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought (2nd ed., pp.
202-251). Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
New York, NY: basic Books.
Levelt, W. H. (1996). Perspective Taking and Ellipsis in
Spatial Descriptions. In P. Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L.
Nadel and M. F. Garrett (Eds.), Language and Space. 77108. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Frames of reference and
Molyneux’s question: cross-linguistic evidence. In P.
Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel and M. F. Garrett (Eds.)
Language and Space. 109-171. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and culture:
Explorations in cognitive diversity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Núñez, R. & Sweetser, E. (2006). Looking ahead to the past:
Convergent evidence from Aymara language and gesture
in the cross linguistic comparison of spatial construals of
time. Cognitive Science, 30(3), 1-49.
Núñez, R., Motz, B. & Teuscher, U. (in press). Time after
Time: The psychological reality of the Ego-and TimeReference-Point distinction in metaphorical construals of
time. Metaphor and Symbol.
Tversky, B. (1996). Spatial perspective in descriptions. In
P. Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel and M. F. Garrett
(Eds.) Language and Space. 463--491. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. and Winter, A. (1991) Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.

study provides evidence that “Friday” answers can also be
derived from a non-egocentric temporal model. And
because an extrinsic temporal model makes predictions
opposite to those for an intrinsic model (regarding forward
motion in space and before/after relations in time) the
evidence from the experiments reported here suggest a
temporal model distinct from what Núñez calls “TimeReference-Point” metaphors.
The current study also orients the results of several
empirical studies within the broader context of the spatial
frame of reference literature. If a coherent relation exists
between spatial and temporal frames of reference, then
empirically testable predictions can be made about the
degree to which shared reference frames interact.
For example, if spatial and temporal frames are
structurally related, would priming a more general spatial
frame of reference engage a corresponding temporal frame
of reference? (Would looking in a mirror prime a deictic
temporal frame; reading a compass, an extrinsic temporal
frame?) It may also be possible to predict the particular
sense a temporal concept will take, across languages, by
examining the orientation of the spatial axis used to provide
structure. That is, one would expect past/future relations,
where ego-reference is an experiential and conceptual
requirement for grounding, to be more often structured
along the asymmetric, deictic front/back axis, where egomotion along a horizontal plane is canonical. However,
across languages, the past/future concept is less likely to be
mapped along an extrinsic vertical axis, where earlier/later
relations could more regularly find grounding in a natural
environmental slope gradient, like that provided by gravity.
Although past research in this area has clearly
demonstrated that structural relations between spatial and
temporal conceptualization exist, most of this work has
described space—time relations in terms of asymmetrical
metaphorical mappings from a concrete source domain
(space) to an abstract target domain (time). If spatial and
temporal frames of reference are tightly connected, the
notion that a strict asymmetry exists between source and
target domains, a principle of sorts in conceptual metaphor
theory, is in need of further examination. The framework
presented here suggests that, in the case of space and time,
both domains share something more fundamental in
common; namely the constraints imposed by a more
dynamically represented spatiotemporal coordinate system.

References
Bender, B., Bernardo, B. & Beller, B. (2005). Spatial
Frames of Reference for Temporal Relations: A
Conceptual Analysis in English, German, and Tongan. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric Structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1-28.

452

