UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Extended Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46x938rj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Liu, Hsi-wen Daniel

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Extended Perception
Hsi-wen Daniel Liu (hwliu@pu.edu.tw)
Division of Humanities, Providence University
Shalu, Taichung County 433, TAIWAN

Abstract
The extended mind thesis (in brief, EMT) does not reserve a
position for inner representations, which certainly play a
substantive role in the making of human mind, however. It is,
as a consequence, hard to conceive of perception as extended.
The present paper, as a complement to EMT, argues that
perceptual processes are extended, and so is perceptual content.
The argument proceeds with three reasons. Firstly, perceptual
content is action-oriented, supporting perceptual-motor
coordination. Secondly, the spatial structure of perceptual
content is set externally. Finally, active perception manifests
the interactive and selective nature of perception. This
complementary work provides a ground for rebutting two
recent criticisms and a claimed corollary of EMT.

Introduction
The extended mind thesis, also known as active externalism,
maintains that the relation of external resources to an agent is
active because the two sides of that relation become a sort of
tight coupling (Clark 1997ab, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005; Clark
and Chalmers 1998; Dennett 1996, 1998, 2000). Those
external resources are considered as playing a crucial role in
“driving the cognitive process in the here-and-now” (Clark
and Chalmers 1998: 11). The active processes of managing
those external resources, if turning up in the head, would
equally be regarded as genuinely cognitive. A question
would naturally arise: if the mind is extended like the way it
is considered in the extended mind thesis, what is the role that
perceptual experiences play? They seem to be purely internal,
and hence this can be taken as a challenge to the extended
mind thesis. The theme of perceptual experiences, perhaps,
can be deemed as a “holy territory” of internalism—
1
especially, the representational theory of the mind—and by
contrast seems to be a land very hard to conquer for the
extended mind thesis.
The processes of perceptual
experiences, as generally conceived in the causal theory of
content, proceed with the inward direction in general, without
the need of coalition with tools or environmental conditions.
In addition, perception aims to provide contents and this is the
end of perception per se, as it seems. Although perceptual
contents can be further used for guiding action, the perception
qua perception seems not to be a device for that, or for
exploiting external tools or environmental conditions.
Furthermore, the main function of perception seems to
1

More typically, certain cognitive capacities are taken by
internalists as internally privileged, such as self-knowledge,
proprioception, introspection, thoughts and second-order beliefs.
Such capacities arise internally and are maintained without being
determined by external factors.

provide contents that report external conditions, without
engaging in problem-solving, hence without involvement in
external use. Thus, compared to perception, we seem to find
that the themes of language and reasoning are relatively easier
to explain for EMT. Language, according to Dennett’s
(2000) notion of florid representing, is a mind-tool. While
reasoning may be understood as internalized technologies
such as arithmetic algorithms deployed on a notepad, it seems
much harder to put perceptual experiences in the context of
extended mind. As a consequence, the theme of perceptual
experiences may be taken as a weak point of EMT.
Perception seems to be completely internal.
The above weak point is not incorrigible for EMT. The
present paper aim to defend EMT at this point, as a
complement to EMT, for three reasons: that perceptual
content serves to support perceptual-motor coordination, that
the spatial structure of perceptual content is set externally,
and that active perception manifests the interactive and
selective nature of perception.

Extended Perceptual Content
Perceptual-Motor Coordination
As the first of the three reasons, perceptual content serves to
support perceptual-motor coordination. The visual content
that a cup is on the table, for example, is not exclusively
limited to the faculty of sensation. The visual content is
action-oriented as it can be seen as a panel on which various
motor routines reside, which manifest the ways in which
motor activities can unfold on the top of a visual panel.2 The
handle is a position for cup-user to hold, and the cup-surface
requires a different way of holding. Another example, a
baseball batter must pay full attention of where and how the
pitcher’s ball is arriving. After his repetitive practice, the
activity of perceiving-ball-and-hitting-it becomes, as required
(after learning), highly integrated. It is a visual-motor activity
with subtle varieties, all with smooth integrity, hence in a
certain sense becomes a visual-motor merger.
The
interactions between visual processes and motor processes
constitute a two-way channel.
Motor processes feed
backward, in certain ways, to visual processes (Hurley 1998),
which makes vision motor-oriented. This helps the batcontrol to respond to the unexpected trajectory of the
pitcher’s ball with sufficient flexibility. The motor activities
are maintained in a way that they flexibly respond to
changeable environmental factors (e.g. unexpected ball2

For discussion of similar examples, see Clark’s (1997a)
discussion of “affordances”. For example, to humans a chair
affords sitting.

1693

trajectory, or even strong wind) that are detected in visual
content. Thus, visual content provides various facilities that
help a controlling agent to maintain visual-motor coordination
and co-operation. Perceptual content, hence, does not end up
as perceptual report or private entertainment but provides
abundant facilities that indicate various subtle visual-motor
combinations. Perceptual content is not independent; rather,
it keeps being exploited in support of motor action, through
learning in the batter’s repetitive practice and learning from
his experiences of competition.
The above, in general,
manifests a picture of perception-for-use, a picture in which
perception is a non-independent component of the perceptionmotor merger.

perceptual space, as those skeptics maintain, what is restructured is motor space (“the filled staff”), not the
perceptual space (“the empty container”).
Such skeptical consideration sounds reasonable.
However, it is mistaken because of overlooking the
ecological aspect of perceptual representations. The space
underlying human perceptual experiences is not simply
represented as an empty-container but is full of perceptualmotor combinations4 that manifest the ways in which motor
activities with certain trajectories may arise in certain
locations. Such a space is by no means empty before motor
activities unfold, but instead full of perceptual guidance of
motor activities. While motor activities unfold in space, the
motor processes of those unfolding activities are made
possible under the guidance of perceptual properties. The
agent of motor activities must support/guide her motor
activities with perceptual properties, if those motor activities
are neither reflexive nor blind. Moreover, the unfolding
motor activities also stand as objects of further perception,
forming perceptual representations that can be stored in
memory for guiding subsequent motor activities. The agent,
when holding a stick, can see how motor activities unfold,
and feel the changing conditions at the hand location and at
the stick location. In other words, the involving motor
activities are indeed guided by perceptual representations, as
opposed to simply motor ones. The exploitation of space by
hand-and-tool has a perceptual aspect. What is re-structured
in the expanded near space involves both motor and
perceptual representations. Thus, we entrench the notion of
re-structuring the expanded near space with perceptual-motor
combinations.

Structure of Space
The second reason is that space is an essential element of
perceptual experiences,3 yet it is indeed structured in relation
to bodily actions—specifically, our motor ability of reaching
with the hands. It is studied in neuroscience that in primates
and humans space is represented with the distinction between
“far (extrapersonal) space” and “near (peripersonal) space”,
the former is the area outside the reach of the hands while the
latter being the area that can be reached and grasped by the
hands without locomotion (Rizzolatti, Riggio & Sheliga,
1994). The representations of space are structured in
accordance with the reach of the hands. Note that hands are
bodily parts that are deemed as tools by Dennett (2000).
Because of space, hence, perceptual contents are
distinguished between those which can be integrated with
hand activities and those which cannot. As we can infer from
the above discussion, the near space can be abundantly
exploited by various combinations between subtle
representations of the near space and complex hand activities.
Representations of far space, by contrast, cannot have such
extended combinations.
Moreover, certain parts of the far space can be restructured by being incorporated into near space, resulting
from the expansion of hand control by holding tools like
sticks or rakes (Berti and Frassinetti, 2000).
The
representations of space, in other words, can be re-organized
in the way that the area with perceptual-motor combinations
expands. The spatial expansion is made through the hand
control of holding tools, which brings about abundant
complex perceptual-motor combinations. Thus, the spatial
structure is re-organized depending on the perceptual-motor
combinations that are established outward.
Some skeptics may question whether, in the above
consideration of expansion, what is re-structured is not
perceptual representations but completely motor ones. The
use of tools establishes certain motor skills that control areas
beyond the finger tips, and thus expands the reach of motor
skills. They can even grant that the coverage of perceptualmotor combinations indeed expands, but insist that the
perceptual representations of the space per se remain left
unchanged.
Because motor skills are “filled into” a
3

Here, space is not taken as something in the internal, but instead
an essential form of experience.

Active Perception
The above consideration is limited to lower-level perceptual
processes, one may argue, and higher-level perceptual
processes remain completely internal. Consider the fact that
visual experiences have higher and lower levels, according to
Milner and Goodale (1995). One may accordingly contend
that vision may be granted as extended but what is extended
is limited to lower-level processes. Higher-level vision is
different; its processes are completely internal. Against this
point, however, the present paper maintains that the higherlevel vision remains environment-oriented to a certain degree,
although it looks as if it is a device of completely inner
manifestation. This point of extended mind is evident in the
recognition of active perception, which renders the third
reason.
The point of active perception is as follows: perception
does not end with re-construction of the external world—
providing all details of the world—but instead provides
partial information, depending on what the perceptual agent
concerns. The notion that vision, in particular, gives rise to a
panorama of all details is but an illusion (Nöe 2002). Instead,
fine-grained visual content is constructed under the
4
Such visual-motor combinations may be achieved by learning,
and hence are not necessarily Gibsonian affordances.

1694

might they be, computationalist or connectionist, or even
Gibsonian—also take place internally once they have reached
perceptual receptors. It is rarely considered, as yet, that
perceptual processes, in its way of determining perceptual
content, need to frequently go across the skin-and-skull
boundary in order to take account of factors across that
boundary. It is at this point that the present account of
extended perception insists.
The externalism of content in philosophy of mind—as
initiated in Putnam’s discussion of Twin Earth arguing for the
notion of wide content with the slogan “meaning just ain't in
the head”—generally discussed meanings of words (e.g.,
“water”) and contents of thoughts or propositional attitudes.
By contrast, the issue of whether perceptual content is
externalist is generally disregarded.
The three main theories of perceptual content—sensedatum theory, intentional theory, and naïve realism (Martin
1994)—discuss how the content of perceptual experience
consists of, and leave off the processes that bring about
perceptual content. The question is whether those processes
would have a bearing on the nature of perceptual content per
se. To put it more sharply, if the processes that bring about
perceptual content are indeed extended, what is the sense in
which perceptual content can also be considered as extended?
Given the justification of extended processes in the second
section, the question is now focused on whether we can have
substantive senses in which perceptual content is intrinsically
extended. This is the issue of this section.
The present account of extended perception, though it
can be regarded as a complement of the general EMT, is not a
straightforward implication of it. The EMT generally
involves the use of tools, but the existence of perceptual
content seems to be independent of the use of any tool. In
addition, it is for the need of problem-solving that the mind is
deemed as extended, but the perceptual content itself does not
seem to be involved in problem-solving. Furthermore, the
extended mind thesis does not reserve a position for mental
content. In the previous section, all these three points have
been specifically put in the context of perceptual content and
been demonstrated successfully, and consequently the notion
of extended perceptual content is justified. Yet, the way in
which perceptual content can be considered as intrinsically
extended remains not a straightforward derivation from the
already established notion of extended mind. It needs
discussion.

(selective!) guidance of saccadic attention. Only the limited
information needed for the concern, for example guided by a
question, will be pursued (Churchland et. al 1994). Visual
processes, to consider from an evolutionary point of view,
must respond in real-time in order to respond to an
encountered environmental challenge, for example for a rat to
question whether the moving shadow showing a prey or a
predator. Hence, visual processes, in the construction of finegrained visual experience, provide only the information
needed for the agent to respond to her current concern. As a
consequence, the visual processes render only a partial view
in the visual experience. Visual content provides something
(not everything!) external and skips something else.
To consider the thesis of active vision more specifically,
the determination of fine-grained visual content depends on
the recurrent interactions between saccadic attention (in
which goals are implicit) and environmental conditions.
Though given the encountered environmental conditions, the
visual content would not end up with a fixed destination, as it
remains dependent on the agent’s concern and how attentive
control of saccades responds to those environmental
conditions. Because of the above attention-environment
interactions, the fine-grained visual content is not completely
dependent on the encountered environmental conditions
(counter to the causal theory of content). The generation of
fine-grained visual content, though in a very short time, is a
result of three interacting components: agent’s goal, attention,
and environmental conditions. The above discussions, to
summarize, show that the mind in the making of perceptual
experiences is indeed extended.

Active Externalism of Perceptual Content
A Novel Account
Perception, as is generally conceived of in philosophy of
mind, is purely an internal matter, and consequently the
notion of extended perceptual content maintained above
would sound abrupt and bizarre. Perception is firmly
considered as internal, although it is true that perception has
external links: perception requires environmental stimuli in
the first place, and its information can be used to guide
actions. It is generally insisted, in philosophy of mind, that
perceptual content per se, as opposed to those above links, is
individuated purely internally. Perceptual experience arises
internally and perceptual content is purely an internal matter.
Furthermore, even the way in which perception contributes to
action is also determined entirely inside the skin-boundary.
Accordingly, it seems to be quite an abrupt idea to see
perceptual content as intrinsically extended.
The point of the extended perception thesis discussed
above, however, is that the determination of perceptual
content must take account of interactions between internal
processes and external ones. There is no dispute as to
whether perceptual experiences per se—consisting of
phenomenal characters and perceptual content—reside
internally or not. It seems to have been assumed in
philosophy of mind that perceptual processes—whatever

Active Content

1695

Perceptual content is extended because it is active, which is in
at least five senses, as manifested in the second section.
Firstly, it is active as it is action-oriented. Such content
provides various facilities for a controlling agent to maintain
visual-motor coordination. In addition, perceptual content is
active in the sense that it is expandable content. Perceptual
content can be exploited by the fed-backward motor
processes. Even the near space itself is expandable.
Furthermore, visual content is active because the saccadic
control compiles a series of fine-grained tiny-areas for the

visual content in a real-time scale, as manifested in active
perception. Finally, perceptual content is active because of its
immanent purpose. The compiling of fine-grained perceptual
content is to support agents’ need/concern. Hence, the
perceptual content is not simply a matter of description. It
has the immanent purpose of supporting adaptation. Given
all the above reasons, perceptual content can be seen as
immanently active. Yet, this does not automatically explain
that perceptual content is intrinsically extended.
Surely, the processes that give rise to perceptual content
are extended across skin-and-skull boundary, as discussed in
the previous sub-section. In this sense is it sufficient to claim
that perceptual content is extended. However, this only
shows, strictly speaking, that what is extended are those
processes, not yet the content per se. Nevertheless, this
extended nature of perceptual content can be affirmed
because of such content’s pertinent ways of external
connection. This property of being extended is part and
parcel to, though not straightforward proof of, its property of
being active. The fine-grained parts of perceptual content can
be compiled (guided by the attentive control of saccades),
consequently can be altered, according to the involving
agent’s run-time need/concern. The near space is expandable,
and the involvement of perceptual-motor combinations can be
exploited, in a way that they constitute the infrastructure of
the bare perceptual content. In addition, it’s being purposeladen makes perceptual content go beyond the epistemic
category into a somewhat teleological one. Thus, this paper
presents a fundamental view with regard to the nature of
perception, and also a fundamental perspective regarding the
nature of extended content. Besides, perceptual content, in
contrast to its processes, can be put in the category of
externalism, 5 because the perceptual content as above
considered is partly determined by external(/non-perceptual)
factors.
In Clark’s (2003) extended mind thesis what makes the
mind extended, strictly speaking, is not the cognitive
processes that go beyond the skin-and-skull boundary but
primarily the agent-and-external-resources merger. The
smooth and close interactions between agent and externalresources result in that merger, which is an emerging unity
(though heterogeneously including both perceptual content
and external factors) dedicated to a certain problem-solving
activity. The perceptual content plays an important role in the
making of such an across-skin-and-skull merger/unity. To
wit, it warrants both the aforementioned property of being
active and that of being extended, including the support in
favor of an agent’s need in her environment. Without the
perceptual content such a warrant would be pointless to arise.
The perceptual content, with all its infrastructures such as the
visual-motor combinations previously discussed, warrants a
unity with the above-mentioned property of being active and
extended. The warrant of that unity makes perceptual content
extended in a genuine sense. Not only the processes that
make perceptual content are extended (in the sense of across5

skin-and-skull processes) but also the perceptual content per
se is extended (in the sense construed above).
The perceptual content as an across-skin-and-skull
merger, as above considered, makes available a transparent
perceptual space that bear realities. Realities seem to be
presented in space without the mediation of sense-data or a
perceptual space. Everything presented in the perceptual
content is seen as a real thing as it can touch our bodies and
can be captured by hands. This is made possible by that
across-skin-and-skull merger, as the perceptual space has the
agent’s body as its origin of coordinate and also serves to
guide motor activities. A perceptual space, in theory, can be
non-transparent like this, however. The space that we
perceive in a movie or a TV program is not as transparent as
the “real” space we perceive. This can be explained in our
account in terms of lacking the aforementioned merger. This
is because the movie does not employ the audience as the
origin of its perceptual space, and, above all, the audience
cannot touch or catch anything in the movie.

Criticisms
Inner Representations

For details, see the “Introduction” in Schantz (2004).

Sterelny (2004) criticizes EMT by proposing that the use of
epistemic tools disproves EMT’s active account of tool use.
In EMT, as Sterelny (2004) understands, the relation of
external resources to an agent is active, because the two sides
of that relation become a sort of coupling. Those external
resources are considered as playing a crucial role in “driving
the cognitive process in the here-and-now” (Clark and
Chalmers 1998: 11). The active role of external factors marks
the EMT as active externalism, as opposed to content
externalism in philosophy of mind. The content in the
content externalism need not be active. When a believer and
her duplicate twin have beliefs about water, what makes their
beliefs different are the relevant external features that
passively locate at the distal end of the causal chain. With the
above understanding, Sterelny criticizes Clark’s active
externalism. That role (and consequently the agent-tool
coupling) would make the tool use limited to a specific end in
specific circumstance, but this is not evident in the way
humans employ epistemic tools, as Sterelny contends.
Sterelny’s general line of argument is focused on two
themes concerning epistemic artefacts, such as recipes,
handbooks and field guides. The first theme is that the
information involving in the use of external resources is
portable, that is, not tightly coupled to a specific task, but can
be used as multi-purpose representation. The second theme is
that the use of epistemic tools, Sterelny contends, must
involve rich resources of inner representations that accurately
track world features and accordingly make possible the openended use of those tools, for various projects in even
unpredictable circumstances.
The examples employed in Sterelny’s argument are
appropriately constructed, and the exposition of those two
themes is tenable. Despite these, the argument does not
consequently amount to a denial of Clark’s EMT. The EMT

1696

remains standing in a potentially good position to explain
everything considered in the above two themes concerning
epistemic artefacts. Although Clark rarely discussed the
coupling of epistemic tools in his construction of EMT,6 this
does not preempt the EMT from application to such artifacts.
Because they are epistemic artifacts, handbooks and field
guides stand at a higher level of cognitive use. The here-andnow circumstances of their use involve various epistemic
factors, including the identification of objects and the tracking
of features relevant to an agent’s concern, also including
ecological information, the agent’ interpretation and the
relevant knowledge of those tracked features. Despite its
involvement of higher level cognition, an epistemic artefact
may well constitute a tight couple with their users, once they
have coped with its use in a manner that the youth uses cell
phone and its accompanying facilities. Computer can be
regarded as an epistemic artifact as it can run lots of highly
epistemic programs. Only for those who can smoothly
manage such programs that an agent-and-computer coupling
can be constituted. The involvement of various relevant
knowledge and open-ended use does not preempt the agent
and the computer from constituting a tight couple, and
consequently the agent can have an active use of her
computer. The computer belongs to her not in the sense of
ownership, but in the sense of that coupling. That tools can
be used flexibly for different users in various circumstances
does not mean that there cannot be tight (user-and-tool)
coupling and active use (of such tools).
Despite the above-mentioned flaws, Sterelny’s (2004)
argument is certainly smartly designed, as it presents
abundant ways of tool use for problem-solving that requires
inner representations. The role of inner representations is
worth attention, as they indeed take part in problem-solving
and hold an externalist role in their interactions with the
environmental conditions. It is, however, a role that EMT
rarely touches. Sterelny’s (2004) denial of the active
externalism (EMT) is unsuccessful, as above-mentioned; this
seems to manifest a hint that inner representations can play a
role in active externalism, but this needs justification.
The present paper can serve as an argument in support of
that envisaged justification. As discussed in the second
section, the combinations between visual content and motor
routines are inner representations that serve to control agents’
motor activities. The role of those inner representations in the
control is to promote agents’ motor flexibilities in response to
even unpredictable environmental challenges. Note that the
perceptual-motor coordination clearly manifests a coupling
unity of perceptual and motor systems. As limbs can be seen
as external resources, according to Dennett (2000), here we
find evidence in support of active externalism. In addition,
the attentive control of saccades has immanent inner
representations, consisting of saccadic movement responding
6

Telnet is certainly an epistemic artifact, but Clark (2003: chapter
6, Global swarming) does not discuss it in the issue of tight
coupling and smooth use in here-and-now, unlikely the discussion
of cell phone. Rather, the issue surrounds the issue of decenteralized cognition.

to certain specific visual features that are especially
concerned by an agent under a certain query or interest. The
visual-motor combinations in the near space are also inner
representations that play a role in the unfolding of the
extended mind, as discussed in the second section. Thus, the
present paper fills a gap between inner representations and
active externalism, and consequently can serve to justify that
inner representations can play a role in active externalism.

Non-Derived Content
Adams & Aizawa (2001) claim that external processes cannot
provide non-derived mental representations: “[i]ntracranial
cognitive
processes
involve
non-derived
mental
representations, whereas extracranial processes such as
rotating blocks on a computer screen, making marks on
paper, tying strings around fingers, do not” (Adams &
Aizawa 2001: 57). The present paper, in the second section,
shows that perceptual content indeed arises from extended
processes. No interpretation, as we should note, is involved
in the course of content generation. The inner representations
involving in the perceptual content, as a consequence, are
non-derived. Hence, the extended perceptual content remains
completely non-derived.

The World Leaking into the Mind?
Dartnall (2005) raises a version of internalism claiming that
the world leaks into the mind. The main reason is, as Dartnall
puts it, that “we sometimes perform actions in our heads that
we usually perform in the world” (p. 142). This internalism
has an epistemological implication: “if a process gives us an
empirical discovery when it is performed in the world, it will
also give us an empirical discovery when it is performed in
the head” (Abstract, italics added). Dartnall’s evidence is
mental operations such as mental rotation applied to mental
imagery. We can manually work a jigsaw puzzle and find
certain geometric relations between shapes; correspondingly,
we can find similar results by performing similar operations
mentally on the basis of mental imagery.
Such an internalist account does not seem to be tenable,
however. It is hard to say that the world leaks into the mind,
and this would not be a corollary of the active externalism.
Dartnall (2005: 139) argues that the use of external objects as
memory stores (as our cognitive model, in a Brooksian view)
has the deficiency of non-portability, and that having inner
analogs of it “would overcome this problem and free
cognition from the here and now, the context and the
moment”. That argument, on the one hand, underestimates
the cognitive role of the world model, in particular the active
role of external resources playing in human-tool coupling.
The information of external objects’ activities, in addition,
can still be maintained whenever it is needed and
consequently this information is largely no less portable than
the information provided by rotation on visual imagery.
On the other hand, Dartnall’s (2005) claim exaggerates
the effectiveness and efficiency of operations on visual
imagery. The operations on the inner analogs of objects and
states of affairs, as is generally admitted, would be less
effective and efficient than those working on external objects.

1697

This is because the limited storage and the nebulousness of
mental imagery compared to perception. Despite their being
seemingly closer (to the agent’s management of problemsolving) than the external ones, those inner ones are indeed
harder to manage. The concrete facilities and the betweenparts relational sharpness provided by the active human-tool
coupling would be likely to lose its vividness and clarity in
mental imagery. Managing arithmetic operations on large
numbers would be much harder then that practiced on paper.
When we attempt to mentally operate a complex jigsaw, we
are liable to un-attentively make mistakes or even completely
get lost. Such deficiencies, however, can be significantly
reduced in manual operations on real physical objects.
Dartnall happily applauds that employing inner analogs of
external operations will “free cognition from the here and
now, the context and the moment” (italics added). Yet, this
indeed is to erode the abundant subtle information provided in
the here-and-now operations and their complex interactions.
The mind can leak into the world, but the reverse is hardly
promising.
This subsection raises a caveat. The active coupling
between agents and tools needs to be managed with our
body/limbs/hands in the environment; the substituting
operations on visual imagery would not be equally active.
Although vision is extended as argued above, mental
operations on visual imagery has gone off the ground of
human-tool coupling, a ground on which the extended mind
must rely.

Concluding Remarks
This paper, as a complement to EMT, argues that perceptual
content is extended, extended not in the trivial sense that
perceptual content links externally to sensory input and
behavioral control. Rather, it is extended in a substantive
sense: perceptual processes are extended, and so is perceptual
content per se. The visual content is itself extended for
several reasons. It is action-oriented, as it can be seen as a
panel on which various motor routines are tightly bound. The
visual space is not an empty container, but has the immanent
infrastructure of abundant visual-motor combinations.
Furthermore, the visual space can be re-organized after using
tools that seem to extend hands.
Still further, the
determination of visual content depends across skin and skull
on the recurrent interactions between attentive control of
saccades, agents’ goals, and the environmental conditions.
For such reasons, the present paper shows that perceptual
content is intrinsically extended and that certain inner
representations (which are bearers of perceptual content) can
play a role in the extended mind.
In addition, the above reasons can serve as a
counterargument against two criticisms against the EMT.
Adams & Aizawa (2001) claims that external processes
cannot give rise to non-derived content. The present paper
shows that perceptual processes indeed give rise to nonderived content although they are external. Sterelny (2004)
criticizes that the human-tool coupling would jeopardize the
open-ended use of inner representations. The present paper

disagrees, showing that the employment of inner
representations in the making of visual content indeed serves
to enhance its flexibility. Besides, Dartnall (2005) maintains
that world leaks into mind. The present paper criticizes it, as
visual experience transformed into imagery would lose its
active thrust.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by National Science Council,
Taiwan, under grant NSC 94-2411-H-126-003.

References
Adams, F., and Aizawa, K. (2001). The bounds of cognition.
Philosophical Psychology, 14(1): 43-64.
Berti, A. and Frassinetti, F. (2000). When far becomes near:
Remapping of space by tool use, Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12: 415-412.
Churchland, P. S., Ramachandran, V. S., and Sejnowski, T.
(1994). A Critique of Pure Vision. In Koch and Davis
(1994), (eds.), Large-Scale Neuronal Theories of the Brain.
MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1997a). Being There. MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1997b) The dynamical challenge. Cognitive
Science, 21: 461-81.
Clark. A. (2002). Minds, brains, and tools, in Clapin (2002).
(ed.). Philosophy of Mental Representation. Oxford
University Press.
Clark. A. (2003). Natural-Born Cyborgs. Oxford U. Press.
Clark. A. (2004). Is language special? Some remarks on
control, coding, and co-ordination, Language Sciences, 26:
717-726.
Clark. A. (2005). Intrinsic content, active memory and the
extended mind, Analysis, 65(1):1-11.
Clark, A., and Chalmers, D. (1998). Analysis, 58:10-23.
Dartnall, T., (2005). Does the world leak into the mind?
Active externalism, “internalism” and epistemology.
Cognitive Science, 29: 135-143.
Dennett, D. C. (2000). Making tools for thinking, in D.
Sperber (ed.), Metarepresentations. Oxford Univ. Press.
Hurley, S.L. (1998). Consciousness in action, MIT Press.
Milner, A. D., & Goodale, M. A., (1995). The visual brain in
action, Oxford University Press.
Martin, M., (1994). Perceptual content, in A Companion to
the Philosophy of Mind, ed. by S. Guttenplan, Blackwell.
Nöe, A. (2002). (ed.), Is the Visual World a Grand Illusion?,
Imprint Academic.
Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L., and Sheliga, B. M.(1994). Space
and selective attention. In C. Umilta, & M. Moscovitch,
(eds.), Attention and Performance, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Schantz, R. (2004). (ed.), The Externalist Challenge, Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter.
Sterelny, K. (2004). Externalism, epistemic artefacts and
extended mind. In Schantz (2004).

1698

