UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eyebrow Raising, Discourse Structure, and Utterance Function in Face-to-face Dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1wd4726g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Flecha-Garcia, Maria L.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eyebrow Raising, Discourse Structure, and Utterance Function in Face-to-face
Dialogue
Marı́a L Flecha-Garcı́a (marisa@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Linguistics and English Language, University of Edinburgh
14 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9NL, UK
found that, indeed, recurring gesture features revealed a discourse organisation that correlated 100% with the hierarchical structure of their segmentation. McClave (2000) looked
at head movements in dialogue and, among other functions,
she associated changes in head position with a switch in discourse from indirect to direct speech and also with listing or
presenting alternatives. In a study by Cassell, Nakano, Bickmore, Sidner, and Rich (2001), body posture shifts were more
frequent when starting a new discourse segment which was
often at the boundary between turns. From this, Cassell et al.
(2001) concluded that posture shifts can signal boundaries
of units. As for brow raises, Chovil (1991) observed, with
an inductive approach, that in her recorded dialogues these
sometimes seemed to mark the organizational structure of a
dialogue, by marking the beginning, end, or continuation of
a topic. The findings above are for English. Cavé, Guaitella,
and Santi (2002) found that rapid eyebrow raises could have
a role in turn-taking by marking the start of a new speaking
turn in French.
In relation to utterance function, eyebrow raising has
been traditionally associated with questioning. This function was mentioned by Ekman (1979) in a publication that
has been very influential in later research even though it was
presented as a preliminary observation without empirical evidence. Chovil (1991) also observed this questioning function in her recorded dialogues. More recently, Srinivasan and
Massaro (2003) found that both eyebrow raising and head tilting could be used, together with auditory cues, to distinguish
echoic questions from statements in perception studies with
synthetic stimuli. They reported, however, that participants
relied most strongly on the auditory cues, even when the visual cues were enhanced.
In summary, observations in previous research suggest that
body movement, including eyebrow raising, could be related
to the organization of a discourse into segments. Also, eyebrow raises have been associated with the function of utterances, particularly with questioning. Thus eyebrow raises
would appear to have conversational functions, but there is
not strong empirical evidence. Research into when eyebrow
raises occur in dialogue could have important implications
for models of speech production and could provide crucial
information for the design of embodied animated agents in
multimodal dialogue systems.
The current study investigated eyebrow raising as it occurred spontaneously in task-oriented dialogues in English.
Considering the question of when we raise our eyebrows
when we are engaged in conversation, brow raises were predicted to occur more frequently at the start of new segments in
the conversation. In particular, and using the structure coding
scheme by Carletta et al. (1997), this hypothesis was stated
as:

Abstract
Some studies have suggested a relationship between eyebrow
raising and different aspects of the verbal message, but our
knowledge about this link is still very limited. If we could establish and characterise a relation between eyebrow raises and
the linguistic signal we could better understand human multimodal communication behaviour. This study investigated eyebrow raising in a corpus of task-oriented English dialogues in
relation to discourse structure and utterance function. Based
on previous observations of body movement, eyebrow raises
were predicted to occur more frequently in utterances starting
a new segment in the structure of the dialogue. It was also predicted that they would be more frequent in instructions and in
queries than in other types of utterance. Analyses using generalised linear models showed that eyebrow raises occurred more
frequently in the initial utterance of high-level discourse segments than in other parts of the dialogue, and more frequently
also in instructions than in other types of utterance. The start
of a lower level in the discourse structure was not associated
with eyebrow raising, nor were utterances with a questioning
function. These findings provide tentative evidence of a relation between eyebrow raising and aspects of the linguistic
message which is important not only from a psycholinguistic
point of view but also for practical applications in the design
of multimodal dialogue systems.
Keywords: Psycholinguistics; Multimodal communication.

Introduction
Like many of the subtleties of human communication, the use
of the face is something we believe we understand but cannot
yet describe. Human facial movements have attracted a great
deal of research, but the information we have about the use
of the face in multimodal communication is still very limited.
Research on facial movements has been largely dominated by
the study of the expression of emotion. By contrast, and leaving aside movements that are necessary for the articulation
of speech, studies on facial movements in connection with
spoken language have been scarce. Observations have, however, been made which suggest possible conversational functions of eyebrow raises in particular, and in recent years a few
studies have taken an empirical approach to this issue. The
sketchy nature of the evidence for coordination is particularly
surprising because other body movements have been shown
to have a non-random relation with the speech they accompany. The study reported here investigated possible linguistic
functions of eyebrow raising associated with discourse structure and utterance function in face-to-face dialogue.
There have been several studies suggesting a relationship
between body movements and discourse structure. Kendon
(1972, 1980) suggested that common discourse themes will
produce gestures with recurring features. Based on this, McNeill et al. (2001) studied possible cues for discourse structure from manual gestures in videotaped conversations. Segmenting the conversations in terms of discourse goals, they
1311

H1: Eyebrow raises will be more frequent in utterances starting conversational games and transactions than in other utterances in the dialogue.
As for utterance function, the hypothesis was that eyebrow raising is associated with some linguistic communicative functions and it will be unequally distributed across utterances depending on the purpose of such utterances in the dialogue. In the kind of dialogue investigated here instructions
were the most important type of utterance for participants to
advance the dialogue and complete their task. Additionally,
the literature mentioned above suggests that we raise our eyebrows when we ask a question. Thus, queries in the dialogues
under investigation were also predicted to have more frequent
eyebrow raising:

Figure 1: Sample frame from a video-recorded dialogue, with
the IG on the left and the IF on the right.

H2: Eyebrow raises will be more frequent in utterances giving instructions than in other types of utterance

Discourse structure The structure of each dialogue was
annotated according to the Conversational Games Analysis
coding scheme (Carletta et al., 1997), which divides a dialogue according to the speaker’s purpose in producing the utterances. There are three conversational levels in this scheme:
moves, games, and transactions. These are defined below.

H3: Eyebrow raises will be more frequent in utterances requesting information than in other type of utterance
If, however, eyebrow raises simply occurred at random,
then we would expect only effects of the opportunities for
brow raises, which would vary as a function of the duration
of the sampled unit. Thus, the null hypothesis can be stated
as:

Conversational move: An utterance that communicates an
intention and can be classified according to its purpose in
the communicative task and according to its form. This is
the lowest level of the discourse structure. There are twelve
types of move in this coding scheme, which in the current
study were reduced to a set of five broader move types: Instruct, Query, Explain, Reply, and Acknowledge. This classification preserved the basic distinctions between moves’
purposes: to make the listener follow an instruction, to acquire some information, to provide some information, and
to acknowledge receipt of information.

H0: Eyebrow raises are a random phenomenon determined
only by utterance length. Long utterances will have more
brow raises than short ones but uptake of opportunities will
not depend on type of utterance or position in discourse.

Method
Corpus collection: The Map Task
A corpus of task-oriented dialogues was recorded using the
experimental design of the Map Task (Anderson et al., 1991).
In the Map Task, two participants, the Instruction Giver (IG)
and the Instruction Follower (IF), sit opposite each other with
slightly different versions of a simple map. The IG’s map
has a route navigating a set of labeled landmarks, whereas
the IF’s has only landmarks. Their task is to draw the IG’s
route on the IF’s map. But their sets of landmarks are not
quite identical and they cannot see each other’s maps, so both
participants must collaborate to perform the task. Thus, they
engage in conversation so that the IG can describe the route
to the IF, who in turn can ask any questions or clarifications
needed in order to draw that route. In the current corpus four
female native speakers of British English participated twice
as IG to two different IFs, yielding a total of eight dialogues.
Figure 1 shows a sample frame from one of the recordings,
edited for analysis so that it shows a single front view of both
speakers.

Materials
The materials for this study came from six of the recorded
dialogues with an average duration of 369sec. Utterances and
brow raises produced by three of the participants (A1, A2, B2)
in the role of IG were analysed.

Conversational game: This is a set of moves starting with
an initiation move (Instruct, Query, or Explain) plus any
subsequent moves that are produced until the purpose of
that first move is fulfilled or abandoned. All moves must be
included in at least one game and games can be embedded.
Transaction: This represents the highest level of the dialogue structure. Transactions consist of a set of games that
negotiate a section of the map route and so correspond to
one step of the task which the dialogue furthers. These sections map onto a speaker’s own division of the route into
segments that are dealt with in sequence.
Dialogue structure was annotated by the author using the
xlabel software on Entropic/Xwaves which segments the digitised speech signal into labeled units. The annotation was
done without acces to the video recordings to avoid a possible bias from facial movements.
Eyebrow raises An eyebrow raise was defined as: any upward movement, from a baseline neutral position, of at least
one eyebrow and observable by the annotator on the digital
video recordings. This definition, then, included movements
of any intensity and also asymmetrical movements in which
only one eyebrow was lifted.

1312

The start and end of eyebrow raises produced by the IG
participants in the dialogues were annotated by the author using the software SignStream (version 2.0, Boston University,
USA), that allows the frame-stamped segmentation and labeling of digital video data. The annotation was done without
sound, to avoid bias from the speech, and also hiding the bottom part of the participant’s face, to avoid distraction and bias
from articulatory movements from the mouth area.
In order to associate brow raises with a particular conversational move in the dialogue the start of the raising movement
was considered. This choice was made because when annotating brow raises their start was generally more marked and
perceptually clearer than their end. Thus, a brow raise was
associated with the move in which it started. When it did not
start within a move, i.e. it started in an inter-move interval,
then if it finished after the start of the following move it was
associated with that move; if it finished within the inter-move
interval, i.e. before the next move’s start, then it was excluded
from the analysis. The latter occurred in four cases out of 274
brow raises, which left 270 brow raises for the analysis.

Table 1: Mean and SD for move length and number of brow
raises (BRs) by move type
Move type
Instruct
Explain
Query
Reply
Acknowl.
Overall

(N)
(284)
(59)
(94)
(135)
(110)
(682)

N of words
Mean SD
10.58 5.54
9.10 4.69
6.40 3.47
3.11 3.57
1.25 .747
6.90 5.74

N of BRs
Mean SD
.65
.821
.44
.702
.29
.500
.21
.447
.02
.134
.39
.675

Table 2: Mean and SD for move length and number of brow
raises (BRs) by discourse position

Statistical analysis

Disc. Pos.
Trans-init.
Game-init.
Non-init.
Overall

The unit of analysis in this study was the conversational
move. Multiple linear regression (MLR) analyses were carried out in order to examine a possible relationship between
brow raises and both dialogue structure and utterance function, according to the above hypotheses. The dependent variable was the number of eyebrow raises per move. The predictor variables were move type, discourse position, speaker,
and move length (in number of words). Move type and discourse position were the variables of interest as possible predictors of brow raising. The other variables were included
to account for possible effects of individual differences between participants and of the length of utterances. The categorical variables were coded as sets of dummy variables, one
for each group within the variable.1 Then, following standard procedures, all groups minus one, within each variable,
were entered into the regression analysis. The group left out
in each categorical variable was the reference to which the
other groups within that variable were compared. For move
type, the reference group was Instruct and Query, one at a
time as described below, to which the other move types were
compared. For discourse position the reference group was
non-initial. For speaker, A1 was selected as the reference because preliminary observations suggested that she raised her
eyebrows more frequently than the other two participants.
Additionally, to confirm results from the MLR analyses,
logistic regression analyses were also performed. To do this,
number of brow raises was reduced to a binary variable indicating whether the conversational move did or did not have
a minimum of one brow raise. Since only 6% of the moves
had more than one brow raise, the loss of precision was not
critical.

(N)
(104)
(185)
(393)
(682)

N of words
Mean SD
10.79 5.48
9.43 5.63
4.67 4.75
6.90 5.75

N of BRs
Mean SD
.75
.76
.49
.716
.25
.586
.39
.675

Results

first MLR analysis are reported below and in Table 3, which
shows the independent contributions of the significant predictor variables. In this table, for each predictor variable, β indicates how much the number of brow raises will change with
a change of one standardised unit in that predictor variable.
Since they are expressed in standardised units, β values can
be directly compared across predictors. The values for the individual move types and speakers are in comparison to their
reference groups: Instruct type and speaker A1, respectively.
Negative β values for those categorical variables indicate that
the predictor in question has significantly fewer brow raises
than the reference group.
Overall, the resulting model accounts for 25% of the variance in the number of brow raises per move (R2 = .254;
F(8,673) = 28.655, p < .001). The strongest predictor is the
length of the move: the longer the move, the more brow
raises it had. The next predictor is the speaker identity, with
A1 raising her eyebrows more frequently than the other two
participants. Then with smaller but significant contribution,
the next predictor is the type of move, with Acknowledge and
Query types having less brow raises than Instructs. Finally,
Transacion-initial moves had more brow raises than moves in
non-initial position.
In the second MLR analysis move types were compared to
Query, everything else was kept the same. The results are
very similar to the previous ones above (R2 = .253; F(7,674) =
32.639, p < .001). In Table 4 we see the same relation to
Instruct type, this time expressed in reverse: Instruct moves
had significantly more brow raises than Query moves. What
is new is that Query moves did not appear to have more frequent eyebrow raising than any other move type. That is,
it was Instructs, all else being equal, which attracted brow
raises, not Queries.
In both analyses move length is by far the best predictor

There was a total of 682 moves and 270 brow raises. Some
descriptives are presented in Tables 1 and 2. Results from the
1 Move type was coded as Instruct, Explain, Query, Reply, and
Acknowledge. Discourse position was coded as Transaction initial,
Game initial, Non-initial. And speaker was coded as A1, A2, B2

1313

Table 3: Independent contribution of the significant predictors of Number of brow raises (move types compared to Instruct)
Predictor
Acknowledge
Query
Trans. initial
Speaker A2
Speaker B2
Move length

β
−.105
−.095
.101
−.178
−.204
.379

Sig.
.020
.012
.006
< .001
< .001
< .001

Table 4: Independent contribution of the significant predictors of Number of brow raises (move types compared to
Query)
Predictor
Instruct
Trans. initial
Speaker A2
Speaker B2
Move length

β
.108
.092
−.184
−.208
.372

Sig.
.015
.009
< .001
< .001
< .001

of the number of brow raises, whereas move type and discourse position contribute much less to explaining the variance in that dependent variable. Nevertheless, their contribution is significant. This was confirmed by the general linear test statistic2 . This test confirmed the significance of
the increase in R2 when adding the variable move type to
a reduced model without it (F(3,673) = 2.920, p < .05), and
when adding discourse position to a reduced model without
it (F(1,673) = 7.612, p < .001). Some diagnostics were also
used to detect whether there was multicollinearity between
the predictors: measures of association, the variance inflation
factor (VIF), and tolerance values. These showed that the
predictors were not too highly associated between them, and
also that the VIF and tolerance values in the regression analyses presented above were acceptable, even considering the
conservative cutoff values suggested by some researchers (all
VIF values were < 4, and tolerance values were > .2).
The dependent variable above was skewed. This was not
a problem for the MLR analyses because the data size was
considerably large. Nevertheless, as mentioned earlier, logistic regression analyses were also performed which confirmed
the results. The same significant predictors appeared and in
the same pattern. For example, the odds of a brow raise occurring in an Instruct move were 2.5 times greater than the
odds of it occurring in a Query move (95% C.I. from 1.2 to
3.9).

Discussion and conclusion
In this study Conversational Games Analysis (Carletta et al.,
1997) was applied to six Map Task dialogues in order to investigate whether eyebrow raises produced by speakers were
2 See

related to the structure of the dialogue and to utterance function. One of the predictions was that brow raises would occur
more frequently in moves starting conversational transactions
and conversational games than in other positions in the structure of the dialogue (H1). Also, brow raises were predicted
to occur more frequently in Instruct (H2) and Query moves
(H3) than in other types of move. H1 and H2 were partially
supported by the results of analyses using generalised linear
models. Brow raises were found to relate most strongly to
the length of the utterance. As the number of words in a
move increased, so did the number of brow raises. If this
had been the only relationship found, eyebrow raising would
have seemed a random phenomenon with simply more opportunities to occur in long utterances. However, other relations appeared that were independent of move length. Supporting H1 partly, speakers raised their eyebrows more frequently in transaction-initial moves than in non-initial moves.
This seemed to indicate that they used eyebrow raising when
starting a new task-related section of the discourse. This tendency was not present at a lower discourse level: game-initial
moves that were not transaction-initial did not have more eyebrow raises than non-initial moves. As for utterance function, brow raises were also found to occur more frequently
in Instruct moves than in Query and Acknowledge moves,3
lending some support to H2 above. However, contrary to the
prediction in H3, Query moves did not have more frequent
eyebrow raising than any other type of move. In fact, interestingly, the only relation between Query and other move
types was, as we just saw, that speakers raised their eyebrows
less frequently when asking questions than when giving an
instruction. Apart from these results, speakers differed significantly in terms of number of eyebrow raises per conversational move. One speaker produced more eyebrow raises per
move than the other two speakers did. Large variability between participants is very often found in this type of research
and can be a problem for the interpretation of findings. In this
study, the influence of one speaker on the frequency of brow
raising was stronger than the influence of the variables of interest, namely move type and discourse position. However,
the reported statistical significance for the latter is still valid,
because the contribution of each variable was assessed independently of the contribution made by the others. So, those
variables did influence the frequency of brow raising, even if
the influence of the speaker identity was larger. Similarly, although move length was the strongest predictor, its influence
was controlled when evaluating the other potential predictors.
It is important to point out though, that the predictive power
of the whole model was not very strong. Putting together
the influence of the significant predictors, only 25% of the
variance in brow raising was accounted for. Therefore, if the
majority of this accounted variance is explained by the duration of the utterance and by the identity of the speaker, then
the influence of the type of utterance and its position across
the discourse is significant but relatively small. Being aware
of this limitation, we could interpret the results as described
below.
Speakers in the dialogues under investigation raised their
eyebrows more frequently in the first utterance of a transac3 Instructs also had more brow raises than Explain and Reply
moves, but this tendency did not reach significance

e.g. Neter, Wasserman, and Kutner (1996)

1314

tion than elsewhere in the dialogue. In Map Task dialogues
transactions represent the highest level of the discourse structure, and they reveal the speakers’ mental organisation of the
description of the route into segments. Eyebrow raises at the
start of these segments could mark the introduction of a new
coherent section of the description. Looking at the research
literature this has some similarities with the findings reported
by Chovil (1991). In both cases the speaker is introducing a
new segment with a new “theme”. The current finding could
also be compared to that by Cassell et al. (2001) who found
that participants made a body posture shift when starting the
discussion of a new assigned topic, again marking the start
of a high-level discourse segment. Cavé et al. (2002) reported that in French brow raises seemed to mark the start
of turns. This would suggest that body movement marked
boundaries not only at high-levels in the structure of a conversation. However, in the current dialogues eyebrow raising did
not mark the start of segments at a lower level than transactions, namely conversational games. This is probably because
the change from one game to the next is not as marked as a
change from one transaction to another. The start of a game
marks the initiation of a new purpose in the conversation, for
example, to provide some instruction or some information, or
to acquire some information from the other participant. While
this implies a change in the conversation, those games are still
linked by a coherent “topic” within the same transaction, that
is, they have in common the fact that they discuss or negotiate
the same part of the route. Considering previous findings in
the literature and those here, a general conclusion could be
made that a change in body movement can signal a change
from one segment of the discourse to another. More in particular, we could conclude that in the task-oriented dialogues
under investigation speakers’ eyebrow raises seemed to have
a discourse function by marking the start of high-level discourse units in the conversation.
In relation to utterance function, the fact that queries did
not have more eyebrow raises than any other type of utterance disagrees with previous observations that associated
brow raising with questioning (Ekman, 1979; Chovil, 1991;
Srinivasan & Massaro, 2003). It would seem, then, that eyebrow raises do not mark questions as had been claimed. Alternatively it could be that in the type of dialogues investigated here, eyebrow raises provided a questioning meaning
to utterances that would not be perceived as questions when
only listening to the speech without watching the speakers.
However, considering the report by Srinivasan and Massaro
(2003) that visual cues had a much weaker effect than auditory cues in their perception experiments, it seems unlikely
that the finding in the current study would be due to wrong
assignment of some questions to a category other than Query.
It could be possible, however, that brow raises added a questioning meaning to utterances with a different main purpose,
such as an instruction. This will be discussed further below.

play a role here by reinforcing the content of these utterances
and setting them apart. In a different kind of dialogue, another type of utterance could carry the key information that
would be marked by eyebrow raising. Another interpretation,
in connection with the discussion in the previous paragraph,
is that eyebrow raising was associated to Instructs in order to
add a questioning meaning to the instructions, as if simultaneously asking ’ok?’, ’are you with me?’. It is possible that
this function, of checking that the interlocutor is following the
conversation, can be achieved sometimes by an explicit utterance and other times by means of eyebrow raising accompanying the instructions. It would be interesting, in future research, to study the interlocutor’s (IF) behaviour, to see how
many times they produce an Acknowledge or Reply, immediately following a brow raise by the IG speaker in a non-query
move, as if the IF had felt prompted to provide a reply or a
sign that a message had been successfully conveyed.
To summarise, this study provides tentative evidence of a
relation between eyebrow raising and the linguistic message,
which can be interpreted as an indication that eyebrow raises
may have conversational functions. These functions would be
to signal the beginning of high-level discourse segments and
to emphasise information in the utterances with the most important role in the dialogue. A question arises as to whether
these are intended signals that can add meaning to the linguistic message or whether brow raises are not intended and
are just a by-product of the speech production process. There
has been a long debate about this issue in the field of gesture
study and it is still ongoing. In any case, if eyebrow raises
are correlated with certain aspects of the linguistic signal, an
interlocutor would be able to attribute meaning to them and
interpret them as a signal even if originally not intended as
such.
A relation between brow raises and prosodic phenomena
has also been reported (e.g. Krahmer & Swerts, 2004; FlechaGarcia, 2006), supporting the hypothesis that eyebrow raising
is not a random behaviour and may be linked to the linguistic
signal. Although the findings in the current study are preliminary, they make an important contribution by encouraging
further research in this area. A larger-scale study, including
more participants and different types of dialogue, may confirm the conversational functions of eyebrow raising in English. Perhaps certain eyebrow raises and other movements,
such as head movements, would be found to derive from the
same speech production system as other linguistic phenomena. Apart from its relevance for psycholinguistic theories
of speech production, this type of research has applications
in the area of multimodal dialogue systems. If we can determine when these movements occur in natural interactions,
we could provide important guidelines for the design of embodied conversational agents that are hampered by poor coordination between the speech and the movements of the animated agent.

As for instruct moves, the fact that they had more brow
raises than other types of utterances could be due to their
importance in the dialogues under investigation, since it is
mainly these instructions that allow the interlocutor to draw
the route on her map. Therefore, instructions must be conveyed clearly and efficiently by the speaker in order to succeed in the completion of their task. Eyebrow raises may

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my Ph.D. supervisors, Dr. Ellen G.
Bard and Prof. D. Robert Ladd, for their advice and support. Thanks also to EPSRC for providing funding for this
research.
1315

References
Anderson, A. H., Bader, M., Bard, E. G., Boyle, E., Doherty,
G., Garrod, S., et al. (1991). The HCRC map task corpus.
Language and Speech, 34, 351–366.
Carletta, J., Isard, A., Isard, S., Kowtko, J., Doherty-Sneddon,
G., & Anderson, A. (1997). The reliability of a dialogue
structure coding scheme. Computational Linguistics, 23,
13–31.
Cassell, J., Nakano, Y. I., Bickmore, T. W., Sidner, C. L., &
Rich, C. (2001). Non-verbal cues for discourse structure.
In Proceedings of the 41st annual meeting of the association of computational linguistics (pp. 106–115). Toulouse,
France.
Cavé, C., Guaitella, I., & Santi, S. (2002). Eyebrow movements and voice variations in dialogue situations: an experimental investigation. In Proceedings of ICSLP (pp. 2353–
2356). Denver.
Chovil, N. (1991). Discourse-oriented facial displays in conversation. Research on Language and Social Interaction,
25, 163–194. (Published as 1991/92)
Ekman, P. (1979). About brows: emotional and conversational signals. In M. von Cranach, K. Foppa, W. Lepenies,
& D. Ploog (Eds.), Human ethology. Cambridge University
Press.
Flecha-Garcia, M. L. (2006). Eyebrow raising in dialogue:
discourse structure, utterance function, and pitch accents.
Doctoral dissertation, Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh.

Kendon, A. (1972). Some relationships between body motion and speech: An analysis of an example. In A. Siegman
& B. Pope (Eds.), Studies in dyadic communication. Elmsford, New York: Pergamon.
Kendon, A. (1980). Gesticulation and speech: two aspects of
the process of utterance. In M. R. Key (Ed.), The relationship of verbal and nonverbal communication. Mouton.
Krahmer, E., & Swerts, M. (2004). More about brows: A
cross-linguistic study via analysis-by-synthesis. In Z. Ruttkay & C. Pelachaud (Eds.), From brows to trust: Evaluating embodied conversational agents. Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
McClave, E. (2000). Linguistic functions of head movements
in the context of speech. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 855–
878.
McNeill, D., Quek, F., McCullough, K., Duncan, S., Furuyama, N., & Bryll, R. (2001). Catchments, prosody and
discourse. Gesture, 1, 9–33.
Neter, J., Wasserman, W., & Kutner, M. (1996). Applied
linear statistical models (4th ed.). Chicago, London: Irwin.
Srinivasan, R. J., & Massaro, D. W. (2003). Perceiving
prosody from the face and voice: distinguishing statements
from echoic questions in English. Language and Speech,
46(1), 1–22.

1316

