UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Factors that Influence Children's Acquisition of Adjective-Noun Order

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wg838qq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Nicoladis, Elena
Rhemtulla, Mijke

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Factors that Influence Children’s Acquisition of Adjective-Noun Order
Elena Nicoladis (elena@ualberta.ca)
Department of Psychology, P-217 Biological Sciences Building, University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2E9 CANADA

Mijke Rhemtulla (mijke@psych.ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, 2136 West Mall, University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z4 CANADA

Abstract
Usage-Based theoreticians have argued that children make the
biggest strides in learning to use many adult-like grammatical
rules in the preschool years. This argument is based on how
children use novel verbs in verb clauses: many Englishspeaking 2-year olds are willing to use novel verbs in
ungrammatical order; by 4, few children are willing to use
novel verbs in a non-SVO order. In verb clauses, the word
order determines the semantic/syntactic role (e.g., subject).
By focusing on verbs, researchers have failed to take into
account that children might also be learning how meaning and
semantic/syntactic function are related. To test this
interpretation, we taught novel adjectives to 35 monolingual
English-speaking children between 2 and 4 years old, either in
a prenominal or postnominal position. Results showed that,
while children were more likely to reverse the order of novel
postnominal adjectives, even 4-year olds used the new
adjectives in the order they were modeled more than half the
time. These results suggest that during the preschool years,
children are learning to map word order onto
semantic/syntactic function.

Keywords
Language acquisition, Usage-based Theory, word order

Background
From the time children first start to put two words together
in spontaneous speech, they almost always order the words
according to grammatical rules of their input language (e.g.,
Brown, 1973). For example, English-speaking children
often start to talk about possession with constructions like
“Mommy sock” that correspond to the typical English word
order (Bloom, 1970). What kind of knowledge do children
have that allows them to order their words according to
grammatical rules of the input language? Until recently, the
most frequent answer has been that children must have
access to some kind of abstract lexical categories before
they start to produce word combinations. These abstract
lexical categories could be grammatical, such as noun and
verb (Pinker, 1984; Wexler & Culicover, 1980), or
semantic, such as object and action (e.g., Dromi), or the
semantic role, such as possessor and possessed (e.g., Bloom,
1970).
More recently, researchers working in the framework of a
Usage-Based theory of grammar (e.g., Tomasello, 2000a)
have argued that children may have little underlying abstract

knowledge about grammar. Instead, children start by using
words in set utterances, such as “Here you go” and
“Where’s Daddy,” eventually learning to make minor
changes to those utterances by substituting single words in
set phrases such as “Where’s X” (Tomasello, 2000a). Under
this framework, previous evidence showing that children are
usually correct in ordering their words would be due to the
fact that so many studies have studied children’s
spontaneous speech (e.g., Brown, 1973), rather than how
children use novel words in combination.
There is some compelling evidence to support a UsageBased Theory. For example, Tomasello (1992) showed that
his English-speaking daughter’s earliest uses of verbs were
frequently very similar to previous uses she had made of the
same verb. Other researchers have taught children verbs
both in an order that corresponds to their input language and
in an order that differs from the canonical order. Akhtar
(1999) taught novel verbs in one of three word orders to
English-speaking children aged two to four years. She
showed that the two-year olds were willing to use novel
verbs in a non-SVO order (i.e., SOV and VSO), three-year
olds used a majority of SVO order and four-year olds almost
never used an ungrammatical order. However, even the twoyear olds rarely used a familiar verb in a non-SVO order.
Part of the reason for the two-year olds’ willingness to use
the weird word order may have been because they were
taught three-word word combinations. When Abbot-Smith,
Lieven and Tomasello (2001) taught English-speaking twoyear old novel verbs in two-word combinations, they were
less willing to use a weird word order than in Akhtar’s
(1999) study. Nevertheless, the two-year olds were more
likely to produce novel verbs in SV order than in VS order.
Similar results were obtained from a study in which
researchers chose existing verbs that varied in frequency.
Matthews, Lieven, Theakston, and Tomasello (2005) tested
preschool children on some high frequency verbs and some
low frequency verbs, using some in a non-SVO order and
some in the canonical order. The children were more willing
to use the low frequency verbs in a non-SVO order than the
high frequency verbs. These results suggest that children’s
willingness to use the canonical verb-clause order is highly
related to their familiarity with particular verbs (as
estimated by frequency), particularly around two years of
age. Between two and four years of age, children make
gradual changes to using almost exclusively the canonical

1875

word order. By four years of age, children may start to
abstract grammatical knowledge about word order and
generalize to novel examples (Tomasello, 2000a). Note that
the claim here is not that children have no access to abstract
grammatical knowledge before four years of age, but rather
that the acquisition of grammatical knowledge becomes
increasingly abstract over the preschool years.
Most of the research that has been done in a Usage-Based
theoretical framework has focused on verb clauses. In verb
clauses (in English, at least, the language most of the
research has focused on), the word order corresponds to the
semantic/syntactic role. So, a noun preceding a verb in
English is almost always the subject of the verb or the agent
of the action. In fact, English constructions in which this
basic order is not followed are often notoriously difficult for
children, such as Object-Verb-er compounds (Clark, Hecht,
& Mulford, 1986) and passive sentences (e.g., Koff, Kramer,
& Fowles, 1980; Lempert, 1978). Thus, by focusing on verb
clauses, it is not clear that the observed changes in
children’s usage between two and four years is due
increasing sensitivity to word order (Tomasello, 2000a) or
increasing sensitivity to semantic/syntactic roles (e.g.,
Braine & Brooks, 1995) or both.
The purpose of the present study was to try to elucidate
the nature of children’s underlying grammatical knowledge,
particularly between the ages of two and four years. We did
this by using a weird word order paradigm (following
Akhtar, 1999) with adjective-noun constructions. Unlike in
verb clauses, the order of an adjective relative to a noun
does not change the semantic/syntactic significance of the
words. For example, if someone said “I saw a dog big
yesterday”, a native English speaker would undoubtedly
identify the sentence as ungrammatical but would be able to
recover the meaning. In a verb clause, the placement of a
noun signifies its syntactic role (e.g., whether it is the
subject or object of the verb) and therefore also affects the
meaning of the sentence. If someone said “The dog chased
the cat” when he or she meant “The cat chased the dog”,
there would be no way for a listener to recover the intended
meaning on the basis of the sentence alone. There is no such
distinction with adjectives: in English, there are no
subtleties by which adjective placement affects the syntax or
semantics of a sentence. If, between the ages of two and
four, children’s production becomes increasingly sensitive
to the underlying abstract basis for canonical word ordering
in their language (Tomasello, 2000a), then we would expect
them to correct weird adjective order as often as they correct
weird verb order (e.g., Akhtar, 1999). If the changes seen
between two and four years of age are also due to children’s
increasing sensitivity to how word order affects
semantic/syntactic roles, then children in this age range may
still be willing to use adjective-noun combinations in a noncanonical order.

can occur post-nominally (as in hair whiter than snow).
Also, some adjectives are used post-nominally, usually
adjectives borrowed from French (as in the dinner
extraordinaire) or with some quantifiers (as in something
blue). Note that, like many other researchers, we assume
that any change in order will have an effect on meaning.
The key component of adjective-noun ordering for our study
is that the use of an adjective before or after a noun changes
neither the semantic nor syntactic function of either word.
So if someone mentioned a car big, native speakers would
find it odd, but would probably understand the meaning. In
contrast, much previous research has focused on verb
constructions, where a change in the order changes its
semantic or syntactic function.
There is little research on children’s acquisition of the
order of adjective-noun constructions. Most acquisitional
work has been on children’s understanding of the semantics
of adjectives and/or how the syntactic frame determines
children’s understanding of the semantic category of an
adjective (e.g., Akhtar, 2002). However, the extant evidence
on children’s spontaneous speech has shown that children
are usually accurate in their ordering of adjectives and
nouns. For example, Brown (1973) observed that Englishspeaking children used adjectives and nouns in the correct
order, except when the copula was thought to be missing in
a sentence. One elicitation study with children between
three and five years of age showed that monolingual
English-speaking children made less than 5% errors in
adjective-noun order (Nicoladis, 2006). Even FrenchEnglish bilingual children, who have to learn two different
rules for adjective placement, order adjectives over 90%
correctly in spontaneous speech in English and over 90% in
an elicitation task in English from at least the age of two and
a half (Nicoladis, 2006; 2002).
On the basis of these studies, it would seem that the
acquisition of either one or two adjective-noun orders is a
trivial problem for children. However, it should be noted
that all of these studies concerned adjectives that children
already knew.

Weird Word Order Paradigm

English Adjective Placement and Acquisition

The purpose of this experiment was to test English-speaking
children’s knowledge of adjective-noun order. We used
Akhtar’s (1999) weird word order methodology where
children are taught novel words in both the correct (or
default) order of their language and in at least one
alternative order. With adjectives and nouns, there is only
one other possible order (i.e., in English postnominal). We
presented children with play scenarios in which an
experimenter taught them novel adjectives, some of which
were in the canonical (prenominal) position and some of
which were in the non-canonical (postnominal) position.
Children’s spontaneous use of the new words was recorded.
Because the context of this Experiment was a game,
children might have been willing to go along with noncanonical word order for the purposes of the game. In other
words, this paradigm probably underestimated children’s

In English, the canonical order for simple adjectives is prenominal (as in big car). In some cases, modified adjectives

1876

ability to produce the correct word order. For this reason,
we taught children novel adjectives in both the canonical
and novel orders, and compared their usage of both orders
within the play scenario. Also, we discuss how our results
compare with those of Akhtar (1999), who used a similar
methodology to research children’s use of novel verbs.

contrasting objects because adjectives are often used, and
easiest to learn, in contrasting situations (Waxman &
Klibanoff, 2000).

This Study

Table 1: Novel adjectives, their meaning, and objects
described with those adjectives.

This experiment was designed to explore three effects on
children’s use of word order: 1) familiarity, 2) canonical
order independent of semantic/syntactic role and 3) the
semantic/syntactic role.
As noted in the above literature review, there is evidence
that the greater children’s experience with specific words,
the less likely they are to mis-order those words. To verify
that this is also the case with adjective-noun constructions,
the children were also taught a control adjective (“green”) in
a novel position, that is, postnominally. We expected to
replicate previous findings, showing that children’s
willingness to use the unconventional word order with a
known word would decrease with age (e.g., Akhtar, 1999).
To test for an effect of children’s use of canonical order
independent of semantic/syntactic function, we compared
their use of novel postnominal adjectives and prenominal
adjectives. If children become increasingly more sensitive to
canonical order as they get older (Tomasello, 2000a), then
we should see a decrease in age with using postnominal
order, particularly between two and four years of age. By
four, children should almost never use the non-canonical
order (cf. Akhtar, 1999). Alternatively, if three- to four-year
old children’s avoidance of non-SVO order (e.g., Akhtar,
1999) is due additionally to increasing sensitivity to the
interaction between word order and syntactic/semantic role,
there should be little effect of age. In this case, even the
four-year olds might be willing to use the weird word order.

Adjective
Blickish
Drackish
Groffish

Meaning
Two-colored
Winged
Legless

Strivvish

With skis
instead of
wheels
Green

Green
(control)

Objects
Ball, star, duck, pencil
Turtle, frog, dolphin
Cow,
horse,
pig,
chicken
Truck, car, motorcycle
Ball, dinosaur, pencil

Procedure

Methods

Each child was videotaped during the task, either by a silent,
second experimenter, or by a camera simply sitting on a
tripod. When the experimenter started to present a new
adjective, he/she first brought out objects that did not
correspond to the novel adjective (e.g., “Here’s a fat fish.
Here’s a little skinny fish.”). Then the experimenter
presented the novel adjective paired with the object name
and defined the adjective (e.g., “Here’s a fish drackish. It’s
drackish because it has wings.”). Experimenters were
instructed to use the adjective in several contexts so that
children would understand that we meant the new words as
adjectives (e.g. “This fish isn’t drackish.” [about another
fish]). To ensure that the children understood what was
meant by each novel adjective, the experimenters posed a
number of questions, such as “Is this a fish drackish?” and
“Which one of these is drackish?”. Children were
encouraged to produce adjectives in as natural a way as
possible (e.g., in response to the question “Which one do
you want to play with now?”). The questions used to elicit
adjective-noun constructions were different from the
elicitations used in Akhtar (1999). This change was
necessary because adjectives are often used to contrast one
object from another (see Waxman & Klibanoff, 2000). Note
that experimenters and children were not limited to
producing adjectives paired with the names of objects in
Table 1. They could also refer to a superordinate category
(e.g., animals drackish or toys drackish), replace the noun
with one (e.g., ones drackish) or talk about non-present
things.
Each child was presented with four novel adjectives, the
order of which was counterbalanced across children. Each
child learned two adjectives in the post-nominal position,
and two adjectives in the pre-nominal position. Four
different experimenters performed the task (with different
children), each of whom learned only one set of adjective
orders, so as not to mix up adjective ordering during the
experiment. This was important, so each experimenter
sounded equally confident in each adjective condition. The

Thirty-five English-speaking children between two and four
years of age (mean age was 3;7 [years; months])
participated in this study. There were approximately equal
numbers of girls and boys in each age group.

Materials
Children were presented with a farm set including a barn,
pond, and some trees and chickens. For each of four novel
adjectives and the control adjective green, a different set of
toys was used. Each of the novel adjectives had a clear
meaning which is described in Table 1. We chose to create
novel adjectives with the ending –ish because of evidence
that English-speaking children can understand this suffix as
an adjectival marker before they are two years old (e.g.,
Waxman & Klibanoff, 2000). For every object described by
the novel adjective, there was at least one and usually two
other objects to contrast. For example, for the adjective
drackish, children were shown one fish that had had the
property (i.e., it had wings), as well as two other fish that
lacked the property (i.e., had no wings). We included

1877

Condition, F (2, 38) = 88.22, p < .001, but no main effect
for Age Group, F (2, 19) = 1.30, ns. There was no
significant interaction between Condition and Age Group, F
(4, 38) = 1.45, ns.
Within-subjects repeated contrasts confirmed that the
children’s rate of matching utterances with novel
prenominal adjectives was significantly higher than with
novel postnominal adjectives [F (1, 22) = 24.22, p < .001],
and their proportion of matching utterances with novel
postnominal adjectives was higher than with a familiar
adjective in the postnominal position (i.e., “green”) [F (1,
22) = 63.05, p < .001].

control adjective green was always presented last, and
always in the post-nominal position (e.g., “a dinosaur
green”). On average, the experimenters produced 30.5 (SD
= 12.6) constructions in the prenominal order and 30.8 (SD
= 10.2) in the postnominal order.

Coding

% matching to model

To analyze our results, three mutually exclusive codes
were used to categorize children’s responses (following
Akhtar, 1999): imitation, extension and reversal. Imitation
was the repetition of the novel adjective with the same noun
in the same order as a researcher had used at least once,
even if it was several minutes later. Extension referred to an
extension of the same order used by the researcher to
another noun. For example, if a researcher said a groffish
cow, the child was counted as extending if he/she said a
groffish horse. Reversal referred to a change of order from
the one used by the researcher, for example, if a researcher
said a groffish cow and a child said either a cow groffish or
a horse groffish, this was considered a reversal.
For some analyses, we present the data in terms of
matches and mismatches to the modeled order. The matches
are both imitations and extensions under our coding scheme
and mismatches are reversals. Unlike Akhtar (1999), we
included imitations in our analyses because many
acquisition theories consider imitations as an important sign
of learning (e.g., Tomasello, 2000b). In the discussion, we
will return to whether the inclusion of imitations could have
significantly changed the results.
Some children did not produce any novel adjectives with
nouns in a given condition. Those children were excluded
from the analyses, as appropriate according to the relevant
statistic.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Prenominal
Postnominal
Control

2

3

4

Age Group (years)

Error bars represent standard errors
Figure 1: Average Percent Matches by Age Group.

Results

Correlations with age. Another way to analyze
developmental trends is by correlating age in months and
proportion of matching responses in each condition. The
older the children were, the lower their proportion of
matching utterances to the familiar post-nominal (control)
constructions, r (33) = -.41, p < .05. There was no
correlation between age and the rate of matching novel
prenominal adjectives, r (33) = -.18, p > .05, or novel
postnominal adjectives, r (30) = .23, p > .05.

Overall, children of all ages were quite willing to use
novel adjectives in the way that they were modeled. While
older children tended to reverse postnominal adjectives
more than younger children, this tendency was still quite
weak.
Overall tendency to match order. The average percentage
of matches in the pre-nominal condition for all the children
was 99.1% (SD = 2.9%) while the average percentage of
matches in the post-nominal condition was 71.5% (SD =
32.1%). The average percentage of matches for the control
adjective was 16.8% (SD = 32.6%).
To test for developmental change, the children were
divided into three age groups. The two-year old group refers
to the 12 children who were between 2;2 and 3;2, (M = 2;7).
The three-year old group refers to the 12 children who were
between 3;4 and 4;1 (M = 3;8). The four-year old group
refers to the 11 children who were between 4;2 and 4;9 (M =
4;5). Figure 1 summarizes the average rate of matches by
the children in the three age groups for each condition.
A 3 x 3 [Condition x Age Group] ANOVA with
Condition as a repeated measure compared the children’s
percent of matches. This analysis showed a main effect for

Discussion

1878

Between two and four years of age, these children were
more likely to use the order of novel adjectives used in the
canonical, prenominal position than those in the noncanonical postnominal position. This result replicates
findings with novel verbs showing that children as young as
two years of age prefer the canonical order of their language
(Abbot-Smith et al., 2001; Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996).
This result suggests that children’s knowledge about the
canonical order of adjective-noun constructions is starting to
emerge in the preschool years.
This study also showed that even two-year old children
avoided using a familiar adjective (“green”) in a noncanonical order. Further, children’s willingness to use this
known adjective in a non-canonical order decreased with
age. These results also replicate previous results with verb
clauses, in which children are less likely to allow non-

canonical order for a known verb than a novel verb (Akhtar,
1999; Matthews et al., 2005). These results lend further
support to the argument that children’s familiarity with a
word is an important determinant in their usage (Tomasello,
2000a).
Where the results of this study depart from previous
results with verb clauses is in the three and four year olds’
degree of willingness to use the non-canonical order. For
verb clauses, the majority of three- and four-year olds did
not use the non-canonical word order (Akhtar, 1999). In the
current study, however, the majority of even four-year olds’
productions of the novel adjectives presented in noncanonical order matched the order in which they were
presented. While this result is augmented by our inclusion
of imitations in our analysis (where Akhtar, 1999, did not),
that inclusion does not account for the scale of the
difference. When imitations are removed from our analysis,
the four-year olds in this study still averaged 41% matching
order with the postnominal adjectives (cf. approximately 5%
for the four-year olds in Akhtar, 1999). This result suggests
then that preschool children may simply be less interested in
ordering novel adjective phrases correctly than in ordering
novel verb clauses correctly. We suggest that the reason for
the difference is that the word order in verb clauses
determines the semantic/syntactic role of the nouns. In
contrast, the semantic/syntactic role of an adjective is not as
dependent on its position relateive to the noun. We will
consider three alternative possibilities for this difference.
First, it is possible that children treat adjective-noun
constructions differently from verb clauses because they are
only exposed to a single adjective order, whereas they are
exposed to verbs in many sentence positions (e.g., passive
sentences and Object-Verb-er compounds). Some
researchers have argued that the existence of contrasting
types of constructions can lead to productivity (e.g., Bybee,
1995). It is possible that because children occasionally have
to interpret Object-Verb-er compounds and passive
sentences, the exposure to many different orders forces them
to pay attention to the word order of verb clauses. If this
were true, then we would expect that children learning a
language where more than one adjective order is available
would learn the rule earlier in development. We have run a
similar study with French-speaking children (Nicoladis &
Rhemtulla, in preparation), the results of which suggest that
this is not, in fact, the case. French allows both prenominal
and postnominal adjectives, with the postnominal adjective
being the default. The French-speaking children in that
study performed almost exactly like the English-speaking
children in this study. For that reason, we think it unlikely
that it is the availability of options in word order that
encourages three- and four-year old children to revert to
canonical word order for verb clauses but not for adjectivenoun constructions.
A second possible interpretation that we consider unlikely
is that these results are due to methodological differences
between our study and Akhtar’s (1999). For example, in this
study, we used different elicitation questions than Akhtar

(1999) did, in order to elicit adjective-noun constructions in
the most naturalistic way possible. Also, in this study we
used novel adjectives but did not use novel nouns.
Children’s sensitivity to non-canonical word order should
be tested with a variety of novel words. It will be important
for future research to investigate which methodological
parameters (e.g., the elicitation questions, the number of
items, the number of exemplars in the learning phase, the
lexical category of the novel words, the number of novel
words, etc.) make a difference in children’s performance.
A thirdpossible interpretation of the present results is that
children attend more to verb clauses because verbs are
required to make a grammatical sentence while adjectives
are optional. We have collected data from three- and fouryear olds’ use of non-canonical ordering of another optional
phrase-type in English, that is, novel noun-noun compounds
(Moroschan & Nicoladis, forthcoming). As in adjective
phrases, in English noun-noun compounds the first word
modifies the second. We found that children were
significantly less likely to use the non-canonical word order
for novel nouns as modifiers than for novel adjectives as
modifiers. In combination with the current data, these
results support our conclusion that what is really at play is
the effect of phrasal ordering on meaning. In noun-noun
compounds, unlike adjective phrases, the order of the words
makes a substantial difference to the meaning of the phrase
(e.g., compare door factory to factory door). Unlike nounnoun compounds, and unlike verb phrases, adjective order
does not determine the syntactic/semantic role of adjectives.
These results support our hypothesis that three- and fouryear olds revert to the canonical order when the word order
determines the syntactic/semantic role.
In sum, we have replicated previous studies’ results
showing that from the age of two years on, children are
sensitive to the canonical order in their language (e.g.,
Abbot-Smith et al. 2001). We have also replicated
children’s insistence on using familiar words in the
canonical order from the age of two years on (e.g., Akhtar,
1999). We have argued here that between three and four
years of age, children become more sensitive to the
semantic/syntactic roles of words relative to word order. For
this reason, they correct non-canonical verb clauses (e.g.,
Akhtar, 1999) but are far less likely to correct non-canonical
adjective phrases. Future research could focus on direct tests
of this interpretation.

Acknowledgments

1879

This research was carried out thanks to funding to the first
author from the National Science and Engineering Research
Council of Canada. The directors of daycares, parents and
children were all very helpful in encouraging participation.
Elaine Greidanus, Devin Bruce and Monique Bunyan
helped with the testing. Thanks to Johanne Paradis and
Paula Marentette for their feedback on an earlier version of
this paper.

References
Abbot-Smith, Lieven, & Tomasello, M. (2001). What
preschool children do and do not do with ungrammatical
word orders. Cognitive Development, 16, 679-692.
Akhtar, N. (2002). Relevance and early word learning.
Journal of Child Language, 29, 677-686.
Akhtar, N. (1999). Acquiring basic word order: Evidence
for data-driving learning of syntactic structure. Journal of
Child Language, 26, 339-356.
Bloom, L. (1970). Language development: Form and
function in emerging grammars. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Braine, M. D. & Brooks, P. J. (1995). Verb argument
structure and the problem of avoiding and overgeneral
grammar. In M. Tomasello & W. E. Merriman (eds.)
Beyond names for things: Young children’s acquisition of
verbs (pp. 353-376). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bybee, J. (1995). Regular morphology and the lexicon.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 10, 425-455.
Clark, E. V., Hecht, B. F. & Mulford, R. C. (1986). Coining
complex compounds in English: Affixes and word order
in acquisition. Linguistics, 24, 7-29.
Gupta, P. & Dell, G. S. (1999). The emergence of language
from serial order and procedural memory. The emergence
of language (pp. 447-481). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

Hirsh-Pasek, K. & Golinkoff, R. M. (1996). The origins of
grammar: Evidence from early language comprehension.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Koff, E., Kramer, P. E., & Fowles, B. (1980). Effects of event
probability and animateness on children’s comprehension of
active and passive sentences. The Journal of Psychology, 104,
157-163.
Lempert, H. (1978). Extrasyntactic factors affecting passive
sentence comprehension by young children. Child Development,
49, 694-699.

Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A. & Tomasello, M.
(2005). The role of frequency in the acquisition of English
word order. Cognitive Development, 20, 121-136.
Nicoladis, E. (2006). Cross-linguistic transfer in adjectivenoun strings by preschool bilingual children.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 9, 15-32.
Nicoladis, E. (2002). The cues that children use in acquiring
adjectival phrases and compound nouns: Evidence from
bilingual children. Brain and Language, 81, 635-648.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2000a). First steps toward a usage-based
theory of language acquisition. Cognitive Linguistics, 11,
61-82.
Tomasello, M. (2000b). Do young children have adult
syntactic competence? Cognition, 74, 209-253.
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs: A case study of early
grammatical development. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Wexler, K. & Culicover, P. W. (1980). Formal principles of
language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1880

