UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Finding Evidence of Deductive and Abductive Reasoning Abilities: An Experiment with
Lateral-Brain-Damage Patients

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/95z3109v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Nicolov, Nicolas
Salvetti, Franco

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Finding Evidence of Deductive and Abductive Reasoning Abilities:
An Experiment with Lateral-Brain-Damage Patients
Franco Salvetti (franco.salvetti@colorado.edu)
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Colorado at Boulder
430 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309–0430, U.S.A.

Nicolas Nicolov (nicolas@umbrialistens.com)
Umbria Inc.
1655 Walnut Str.
Boulder, CO 80302, U.S.A.
Abstract

as associated with the right hemisphere (Code, 1987). By
binding the concept of logical deduction in reasoning with
prediction of the future, it appears that patients with left hemisphere damage, on the other hand, linguistically attend more
to prediction than explanation, even though linguistic evidence of both types of reasoning is less than among members
of the control group.
The implications of this evidence and possible linguistic
and cognitive explanations for this evidence are discussed.

In narrative discourse, explanation can be considered abductive reasoning, described as a creative type of reasoning which
generates new ideas, and prediction can be considered logical
deductive reasoning. Given the well-known associations with
hemisphere processing and reasoning associations, it would
be expected that patients with left hemisphere brain damage
would exhibit more evidence of explanation versus prediction
in reasoning and patients with right hemisphere brain damage
would exhibit more evidence of prediction versus explanation
in reasoning. By observing actual linguistic evidence of reasoning in left and right hemisphere brain damaged patients in
comparison to that of a control group, we were able to discover important differences between these groups. Contrary to
assumed wisdom, patients with left hemisphere damage produced more utterances of prediction than of explanation and
patients with right hemisphere damage produced more utterances of explanation than prediction on a narrative discourse
task. Linguistic processing and cognitive processing are discussed as explanations for these results.

Related Research
Several previous studies, e.g., (Geminiani & Bucciarelli,
1998), have addressed the effect of lateral brain damage
on explanation and prediction reasoning processes. By and
large, the left hemisphere has been more commonly associated with language processing and the right hemisphere
with visuospatial processing and abstract reasoning. Related studies, e.g., (Sacco, Bucciarelli, & Adenzato, 2001),
have focused on causal reasoning, theory of mind processing,
metaphor interpretation, and discourse abilities.
Mind processing and simple causal reasoning were shown
to be intact in a severe agrammatic aphasic patient with a
large lesion in the left hemisphere who could not formulate propositions in speech or writing, make judgments as to
whether a sentence is grammatical, match sentences to pictures, or identify the meaning of verbs. This patient tested in
the 91st percentile on the Wisconsin card sorting test and was
able to rely on the visuospatial representation and memory of
the location and attributes of objects in order to communicate
his responses. Grammar may therefore play a vital role in the
development of cognitive processes, but once these processes
are established, cognition can operate without grammar (Siegal, Varley, & Want, 2001).
The assumption that reasoning based on world knowledge
is intact in severe aphasia may be questioned (Joanette &
Brownell, 1990). Huber discusses conflicting evidence that
Global and Wernicke’s aphasic patients had as much difficulties ordering picture stories as did right hemisphere patients.
Not only may visuospatial reasoning be damaged, but general
impairment of reasoning or sequencing may be attributed to
these common deficits. Huber (Joanette & Brownell, 1990)
found that choosing a figurative meaning of an idiom is more
demanding than choosing the literal meaning for normals, patients with right hemisphere damage, and aphasic patients.
Idioms with close relationships between the literal and figura-

Introduction
Human beings are able to generate long chains of reasoning
which produce inferences (Birnbaum, 1986). A way to categorize different kinds of reasoning is to focus on reasoning
which produces prediction versus reasoning which explains
observations. These two tasks are here considered cognitively
different. The first is considered more closely related to classical logical deduction (Feferman, 1999), while the second to
abductive reasoning (Magnani, 2005) and creative thinking.
Analyzing transcripts from an experiment, administered at
Boston VA Hospital and fully described here, that involved
patients with lateral brain damage, we have found preliminary evidence that patients affected by aphasia exhibit verbal evidence of reasoning which, compared with a control
group, suggests that while capable of performing reasoning,
they have less problems in producing sentences with evidence
of prediction than sentences with evidence of explanation.
Patients with right–hemisphere brain damage exhibit verbal
evidence of reasoning which, when compared with a control
group, suggests that even though abstract reasoning and the
ability to make inferences may be impaired, they have fewer
problems producing sentences with evidence of explanation
than sentences with evidence of prediction.
By binding the concept of creativity in reasoning with explanation in the past, it appears that patients with right hemisphere brain damage attend even more to this type of reasoning than normals, even though creativity could be thought of
2105

ent. The first is closely related to classical logical deduction,
and the second is closely related to abductive reasoning and
creative thinking. Being interested in exploring possible differences between brain damaged populations in terms of creative thinking, we decided to differentiate types of reasoning
by focusing on verbal evidence of reasoning in terms of prediction and explanation.
We noticed that many cases of inferences, which can be
considered explanations of some observations, can be better labeled as categorization. For instance, when a patient
claims, “There is a butcher”, we are observing the results of
categorization, because the butcher, which actually is a category, is chosen as the best label which can explain the observations. Although some may argue that the process of choosing “butcher” as a label is deduction and not explanation, we
are here accepting the idea of abductive reasoning (Magnani,
2005):

tive meanings led to a higher probability of the literal meaning being chosen. Global and Wernicke’s aphasic patients
were found to have the most difficulty identifying both literal
and figurative meanings of idioms when there was a remote
relationship between the two. When the two meanings were
close, the literal meaning was more easily accessed. Brownell
and Stringfellow (Brownell & Stringfellow, 1999) worked
with patients with right hemisphere damage, exploring their
performance in making requests in various situations. Findings were that some patients produced less explanatory material, and others produced normal amounts but did not vary
the amounts in ways that could be tied to the discourse setting. The conclusion was that the most common limiting factor for patients with right hemisphere damage when making
requests was not the initial assessment of the situation, but
rather using the understanding as a guide to designing appropriate utterances.
In other studies with patients with right hemisphere damage, their ability to distinguish between lies and jokes was described as fragile and unreliable (Winner, Brownell, Happe,
Blum, & Pincus, 1998). Left hemisphere and right hemisphere responses in picture description tasks differ among patients who acquired left hemisphere brain damage early. The
right hemisphere was shown to be able to develop an apparent speech production capability comparable to that normally
associated only with the left hemisphere. Patients’ responses
in picture description tasks still showed differences—the responses of patients with left hemisphere damage are quite descriptive with a focus on explanatory reasoning, while the responses of patients with right hemisphere damage were quite
visuospatially oriented and included both explanatory and
predictive reasoning (Code, 1987).

“Abduction is the process of forming an explanatory hypothesis. It is the only logical operation which introduces any new
idea.” – Pierce

Reasoning
If thinking can be seen as a psychological function that involves the creation and organization of information in the
mind, reasoning is a set of cognitive processes by which an
individual may infer a conclusion from an assortment of evidence or from statements of principles (Sternberg, 1999).
Classification of the different kinds of reasoning has produced a large number of definitions, which frequently contrast each other. The following is a list of possible kinds
of reasoning which can be encountered in scientific publications: abductive, affective, algebraic, analogical, anthropic,
approximate, automated, bounded, case–based, causal, circular, clinical, commonsense, consequentialist, critical, deductive, default, defeasible, demonstrative, deontic, diagnostic, equational, formal, forward, fuzzy, gifted, hierarchical,
inductive, legal, logical, mathematical, metaphorical, monotonic, moral, non–monotonic, plausible, pragmatic, probabilistic, proportional, prudential, qualitative, quantitative,
spatial, stereotypical, systematic, taxonomical, temporal, terminological, terrain, textual, and verbal. Our aim here in not
to refine or redefine a paradigm of the possible different forms
of reasoning; on the contrary, our aim is to use the broadest
possible classification capable of distinguishing among the
intuitively different, even if sometimes similar, reasoning activities we will encounter in our research.
Reasoning which produces prediction and reasoning which
explains observations are here considered cognitively differ-

The primary difference between deduction and abduction is
that deduction usually tends to predict results, such as in “All
men are mortal, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal.” Abduction tends to find, among the possible causes of
an observation, the one which is more likely, with respect to
our knowledge so far, such as in “John has lung cancer, John
smokes, therefore smoking is the cause of his cancer”. The
Socrates example cannot be contested; it is a logical deduction, but the second example is just one of many possible explanations of our observation. It could be that John has cancer due to some rare genetic disease. Moreover, inferences
produced through abduction are defeasible because new and
more accurate observations can lead to completely different
and even opposite inferences. If Pierce uses abduction and
deduction (Magnani, 2005), Polya analogously introduces the
idea of plausible reasoning in contrast to demonstrative reasoning (Polya, 1968):
“Plausible reasoning is the only means by which we can acquire new knowledge. We secure our knowledge by demonstrative reasoning, but we support our conjectures by plausible
reasoning. A mathematical proof is demonstrative reasoning,
but the inductive evidence of the physicist, the circumstantial
evidence of the lawyer, the documentary evidence of the historian, and the statistical evidence of the economist belong to
plausible reasoning.”

Considering that categorization is an instance of abductive
or plausible reasoning that is so abundant in languages, as is
evident, for instance, in the data that will be presented we
decided to create a separate category for it in order to have
more insight into the differentiation between explanation and
prediction.
We are not interested in inductive reasoning (i.e., the creation of a general rule from evidence) because observing inductive reasoning during the description of a picture is not
likely, whereas verbal instances of prediction, explanation
and categorization are present in sufficient amounts to justify
a comparison.

2106

Language and Reasoning
Considering that it is impossible to directly access internal
reasoning processes and see exactly how and where they happen, external observation of expression and confirmation of
understanding can be used to validate the existence of reasoning processes. A focus on understanding reasoning is directed toward patients being able to recognize logical or justified reasoning. By focusing on spontaneous evidence of reasoning in language, more attention can be paid to how much
patients choose to express reasoning about presented stimuli.
Patients may choose to attend or not attend to reasoning about
certain stimuli based on what given structures are available
linguistically. It is equally plausible that attempts may still be
made to communicate reasoning even without sound linguistic structure. The question of patient motivation and desire to
communicate conceptual and linguistic structure that may be
difficult varies between people in general, but may also be associated with cognitive processing variance between people.
For example, aphasic patients have been shown to have difficulty with sequential processing (Joanette & Brownell, 1990).
The possible connection between sequential processing and
the ability to reason about explanations which precede a situation and predictions which follow can then be presented.
If linguistic structures are ill-formed, this may simply be evidence of the communicative structure being damaged or it
may be that underlying processes associated with reasoning
and grammar have been damaged.

The patients in this experiment were given Figure 1. It
provided different scenes of stimuli conducive to explanation
and prediction. As seen in Figure 2, the four main scenes
in the picture are: the Eskimo and igloo, the woman and the
cans, the butcher and cleaver and the boy and the eggs (frame
lines and letters were not shown to patients). Each individual
scene had visuospatial triggers of items which may be connected to the main participants via a reasoning process. Indeed, according to (Kay, 1983), ideal readers of a text try to
cohere lexical triggers together, combining participants and
scenarios into one environment, connecting actions and roles.
When presented with visuospatial stimuli, it is probable that
normal observers do the same in order to give a coherent narrative description. Given the expectations that readers will

Figure 2: Four main scenes are evident in the picture:
(a) the igloo; (b) the lady; (c) the butcher; and (d) the child.
use these visual triggers to facilitate making connections, we
felt this picture provided strong cues to associate with the reasoning processes in which we were interested. In Figure 3, it
is possible to see the different main visual triggers that could
be connected in a narrative description. Examples of patient

Figure 1: Original picture shown to patients for data collection. Patients were asked to describe what is going on. –
c 1992 by R.P. Co. All rights reserved.

Methods
Differences in cognitive processing may exist between creative reasoning and logical deductive reasoning. Considering
differences in linguistic production and evidence of cognition
in studies of right and left hemisphere brain damage, comparing attention to and attempts at expressing these different
reasoning types may give insight into a representational difference between creative reasoning processes and logical deduction processes. In order to see evidence of these two types
of reasoning processes, an appropriate stimulus was needed.
The most logical place to look was in regular picture stimuli as given to patients for evaluation measures. These pictures commonly exhibit situations which may be conducive
to making inferences, labeling figures, and expressing coherence between possibly unrelated scenes in order to evaluate
patients’ language and inferential processing abilities.

Figure 3: Details in the picture which patients sometimes
connected by reasoning.
utterances: Control group patient: “the butcher looks like
he would like the lady and baby to go home”; patient with
right hemisphere damage: “there’s a woman getting some
cans pushing a monkey in a grocery cart”, patient with left
hemisphere damage: “the butcher he’s ice cold”.
2107

Type
Explanation
Categorization
Prediction

The proximity and semantic relatedness of the butcher and
the cleaver is likely to prompt explanatory reasoning that the
butcher may have cut his finger with the cleaver. The child’s
facial expression along with movement lines from his hand
to the eggs are likely to prompt the explanation that the child
threw the eggs. Examples of patient utterances for the child
scene include: Control group patient: “the strange looking
kid dumped the eggs”, patient with right hemisphere damage: “he’s going to get his bottom spanked”, patient with left
hemisphere damage: “playing and eggs and dropped them on
the floor”.
There are many triggers in this scene, of which the ones
illustrated above are examples. These triggers are conducive
to observers expressing reasoning of situations prior to this
picture, which is explanation, and what may happen as a result of this picture, which is prediction. To avoid confusing
creative explanations and the more logical deductive predictions with other evidence of reasoning, we also separated out
categorization. Categorization was the default label of evidence of reasoning regarding naming, description of states
and current events, and descriptions of emotional states or
theory of mind. This provides a category specific to evidence
of reasoning not directly associated with making explanations
or predictions from the picture stimuli, and also lets us keep
track of other linguistic evidence of reasoning as a whole.

µ
10.01
83.29
6.70

σ
4.93
5.06
0.90

This great difference remains despite the fact that many
instances of categorization were deliberately ignored (see
above). In counting instances of explanation, patients with
left hemisphere damage had a mean of 0.77, control group
members 1.79, and patients with right hemisphere damage
2.40 per patient. Patients with left hemisphere damage, thus,
produced 57% fewer instances of explanation than control
members and right hemisphere ones produced 25% more instances of explanation than control members. The fact that
right hemisphere patients overall produced 25% more instances of explanation than controls and yet they also produced the lowest average of words per patient, 63.60, especially highlights the difference between right hemisphere
patients, left hemisphere patients, and controls in producing
utterances of explanation. In counting categorization, left
hemisphere patients had a mean of 11.92, right hmisphere
12.20, and control ones 16.67 per patient. Left hemisphere
patients therefore produced 28% fewer instances of categorization than controls and right hemisphere patients produced
27% fewer instances of categorization than controls (see Table 3). Considering instances of prediction per patient, mem-

Analysis and Results
The collected data was labeled by group (i.e., right hemisphere, left hemisphere, and controls) and individually per
patient. Table 1 summarizes the average number of words in
the picture description per patient in each group, and the total
number of instances of the different kinds of reasoning per
group.
R-H
15
63.60
36.00
183.00
15.00
15.60

L-H
5.70
88.32
5.98

Figure 4: Percentage distribution of explanation, categorization and prediction in the control group, patients with right
and left hemisphere damage.

Data Collection and Quantitative Analysis

Ctrl
24
74.71
43.00
400.00
37.00
20.00

R-H
15.38
78.21
6.41

Table 2: Percentage of types of reasoning per patient group.
µ = mean evidence of type of reasoning across patient groups.
σ = standard deviation from mean of evidence of type of reasoning across patient groups.

Data was collected from 65 patients in the Boston VA Hospital as part of a routine evaluation. 24 patients were not identified as having brain damage, 24 (15) were identified as having
left (right) hemisphere brain damage. Patients were given a
picture as in Figure 1 and asked to describe it.
We labeled instances of linguistic evidence of reasoning in
the data as categorization, explanation, or prediction.

Num. of patients
Mean word count
Explanation
Categorization
Prediction
Mean per patient

Ctrl
8.96
83.33
7.71

L-H
26
75.38
20.00
310.00
21.00
13.50

Table 1: Average number of words in descriptions, and number of instances of explanation, categorization, and prediction
reasoning in control (Ctrl.), right hemisphere (R-H), and left
hemisphere (L-H) patients. Mean total evidence of reasoning
per patient group are shown.

Exp./Pat.
Cat./Pat.
Pre./Pat.

Ctrl
1.79
16.67
1.54

R-H
2.40
12.20
1.00

L-H
0.77
11.92
0.81

µ
1.65
13.60
1.12

σ
0.82
2.66
0.38

Table 3: Average number of instances of explanation (Exp.),
categorization (Cat.), and prediction (Pre.) per patient description produced in each patient group. µ = mean of types
of reasoning across groups. σ = standard deviation from mean
across groups.

Categorization is by far the most common type of reasoning, ranging from 78% (right hemisphere) to 88% (left hemisphere) of all instances of reasoning – see Figure 4 and Table 2.
2108

Discussion

bers of the control group had a mean of 1.54 examples per
patient, patients with right (left) hemisphere damage – 1.00
(0.81). Patients with right (left) hemisphere damage produced
36% (48%) fewer instances of prediction than control group
members. To verify the validity of the differences in amounts
between the types of reasoning, we designed a new measure
called “density of reasoning”, which represents the average
number of words between instances of reasoning to be used
in connection with and in comparison to measurements of instances per patient. The differences in reasoning instances per
patient are very similar to the differences in respective densities of reasoning. This becomes even more apparent when
looking at the densities (compare Figures 5 and 6).

The standard deviation for word count per patient in patients
with left hemisphere damage (67.43) is twice that of either of
the other groups (25.47 for right; 29.62 for control). This
large variance in number of words per patient may be attributed to the fact that patients in the left hemisphere group
were not distinguished by degree or type of aphasia. The general label of ‘left hemisphere’ describes the specific hemisphere of brain damage, but does not differentiate between
fluent and non–fluent aphasia, mild, moderate, and severe
aphasia or Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasia. The diagnosis
‘aphasia’ therefore has quite broad ways of being described,
differing in reference to both linguistic expression and comprehension with each of these more specific labels.
Generally, the measures of instances of reasoning indicate
that the control patients produce the most evidence of reasoning, followed by right hemisphere patients, with left hemisphere patients producing the least evidence of reasoning.
The only exception to this generalization is the fact that the
right hemisphere patients produced more explanation than did
the control patients. There are a few hypotheses that could
account for this observation. Right hemisphere patients, with
their possible tendencies to inject personal details or tangents
in narrative descriptions (Code, 1987), may have done so
without our noticing that the explanation was not directly
related to the picture, although we tried to exclude any reasoning that could not be directly connected with the picture.
Alternatively, right hemisphere patients could be making abnormally high amounts of explanation, regardless of whether
or not the reasoning is logical and justified (we did not exclude instances that may be considered less than sound judgment), as compared with controls. Given that explanation is
here considered creative reasoning, it is interesting to note
that patients with right hemisphere brain damage actually
produced more evidence of creative reasoning than controls,
whereas the right hemisphere is normally associated with creative processing, such as in interpreting metaphor. Left hemisphere patients, with possible damage to their expression of
language, may possibly have less access than controls to the
grammatical structures associated with explanation in speech.
Alternatively, what may appear on the surface as mere lack of
grammatical structure may instead be evidence of damage to
the abductive or plausible reasoning process of introducing
new ideas or thoughts, here considered a creative process.
While in this paper a distinction has been made between
explanation, prediction, and categorization, it is possible that
these processes in the brain are the same. While the tendency
for both controls and right hemisphere patients was to have
most reasoning focused on categorization, less focus on explanation, and the least focus on prediction, left hemisphere
patients broke this pattern with slightly more focus on prediction and less focus on explanation. This distinction possibly
can be accounted for by lack of the grammatical structures required to specifically produce explanation in left hemisphere
patients. While this is the usual conclusion drawn in reference
to cognitive processes with left hemisphere patients, other hypotheses may be considered.
Our annotation of the transcripts suggests that these differences may also be evidence of damage to reasoning processes, particularly distinctions between abductive and deductive reasoning processes.

Figure 5: Average instances of explanation and prediction per
patient in control group, and patients with right (left) hemisphere damage.

Figure 6: Average density (words per instance) of explanation
and prediction in control group, and patients with right (left)
hemisphere damage.
In examining these figures, note that for density, low numbers
indicate higher density, so if the differences are the same, the
graphs should look like mirror images of each other. For explanation, members of the control group had a mean density
of 41.7 and patients with right (left) hemisphere damage –
26.5 (98.0). For categorization, mean density was 4.48 for
control, 5.21 for right and 6.32 for left hemisphere, For prediction, mean densities were 48.46, 63.60 and 93.33 respectively.
2109

analysis, if confirmed, suggests that prominent notions about
the association of the right hemisphere of the brain with creativity might need to be re-examined or qualified to clarify
inconsistencies between philosophical and psychological notions of creativity. The results also show that aphasic patients
consistently perform fewer linguistic instances of reasoning
than controls and right hemisphere patients others.
Future research needs to be done exploring the possibility
of separate reasoning processes and what their relation may
be to specific brain-damaged populations. Also, in the followup of this work we intended to relate our findings to the literature on neuroimaging of reasoning activity, and to experiments on brain-damaged patients that involved skills such as
memory (Geminiani & Bucciarelli, 1998) and metaphor.

A study that allows patients to use other strategies of communication, like gesture and drawing, would possibly be able
to distinguish between any change in different reasoning patterns of left hemisphere patients as compared with controls
and lead to a stronger indication, or lack of indication, of cognitive reasoning associations with the left hemisphere.
The distinction also has been seen here that left hemisphere patients, in general, have fewer utterances of explanation, prediction, and categorization overall than controls
and right hemisphere patients. Although right hemisphere patients did follow the pattern of left hemisphere patients and
had fewer utterances of prediction and categorization than
controls, right hemisphere patients broke this pattern with
more utterances of explanation than controls. Since explanation has been associated with abductive reasoning, here supported as a creative type of reasoning, original expectations
that this reasoning would have fewer representations is not
supported. The idea that creative processes are considered to
be damaged in right hemisphere patients, evidenced by lack
of ability to interpret metaphor and make inferences between
input stimuli, does not support the connection of abduction
to the supposed creative processes of metaphor interpretation and making inferences. It does still suggest that there
may be a distinction between types of reasoning, possibly being associated with different processing areas of the brain.
A study with more specific information as to the location of
right hemisphere lesions in patients could shed light on possible correlations between different types of reasoning and the
right hemisphere.

Acknowledgments. We are deeply indebted to Anna Clark and
Stephen Lewis. Thanks to Monica Bucciarelli, Jim Martin, Gail
Ramsberger, Lise Men, Clayton Lewis, and Carolyn Rickard.

References

Conclusions
By observing actual linguistic evidence of reasoning in left
and right hemisphere brain damaged patients in comparison
to that of a control group, we were able to discover important
differences between these groups. We believe that the discovered differences are relevant and can stand scrutiny, since:
1. the size of the sample was relatively large, and suitable for
further statistical analysis of the data, e.g., bootstrapping
of the results for each class of patient.
2. the patients group was carefully assembled so as to minimize variations due to external factors. The participants
had been selected by the staff of Boston VA Hospital to
create a sample as homogeneous as possible both from the
point of view of the particular type of brain damage, which
was certified and unilateral, and of other relevant parameters such as age, gender and years in school. In particular,
control patients were selected among fellow in-patients.
Finally, professional staff administered the tests.
3. the test did not require vis-a-vis similar experiments, e.g.,
(Geminiani & Bucciarelli, 1998), particular memory skill
to be answered, and only limited verbal skills.
4. the annotators were given precise guidelines on how to
evaluate utterances w.r.t. the criteria discussed above.
Let us now reconsider that reasoning associated with creating new ideas and new knowledge, as described by Polya and
Pierce, is the kind of reasoning that patients with left hemisphere struggle with the most and with which right hemisphere patients seem to have little problem. The results of
2110

Birnbaum, L. (1986). Integrated processing in planning and
understanding. Research Report 489, New Haven: Computer Science Dept., Yale Univeristy.
Brownell, H., & Stringfellow, A. (1999). Making requests:
Illustrations of how right-hemisphere brain damage can affect discourse production. Brain and Language, 68, 442–
465.
Code, C. (1987). Language Aphasia and the Right Hemisphere. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Feferman, S. (1999). Logic, logics and logicism. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 40, 31-54.
Geminiani, G. C., & Bucciarelli, M. (1998). Deductive Reasoning in Right-Brain Damaged. In Proc. of the XXth Conf.
of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 386-391).
Joanette, Y., & Brownell, H. H. (1990). Discourse Ability and
Brain Damage: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Kay, P. (1983). Three Properties of the Ideal Reader. In
R. Freedle & R. Duran (Eds.), Cognitive and Linguistic
Analyses of Test Performance (pp. 208–224). Norwood,
NJ: Ablex.
Magnani, L. (2005). An Abductive Theory of Scientific Reasoning. Semiotica, 153(1/4), 261-286.
Polya, G. (1968). Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning,
Volume II: Patterns of plausible inference and analogy.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Sacco, K., Bucciarelli, M., & Adenzato, M. (2001). Mental
models and the meaning of connectives: A study on children,adolescents and adults. In Proc. of the XXIIIth Conf.
of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 875-880).
Siegal, M., Varley, R., & Want, S. C. (2001). Mind over
Grammar: Reasoning in aphasia and development. Trends
in Cognitive Science, 5(7), 296-301.
Sternberg, R. J. (1999). Pathways to psychology (2nd ed.).
Wadsworth Publishing, CA.
Winner, E., Brownell, H., Happe, F., Blum, A., & Pincus, D.
(1998). Distinguishing Lies from Jokes: Theory of Mind
Deficits and Discourse Interpretation in Right Hemisphere
Brain-Damaged Patients. Brain and Language, 62, 89–106.

