UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Flexible Attention to Labels and Appearances in Early Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70n6722q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Fisher, Anna V.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Flexible Attention to Labels and Appearances in Early Induction
Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, 15213 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH, 43210
1999; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004), with induction being a
function of the overall similarity of presented entities.
In short, whereas both positions predict the importance of
labels, they posit vastly different mechanisms. According to
the former, the importance of labels stems from top-down
conceptual influences, whereas according to the latter it
stems from a low-level attentional mechanism.
One way of distinguishing between the two positions is to
examine the flexibility of reliance on different sources of
information. If labels are more theoretically central than
appearances, then it should be difficult if not impossible to
change the reliance on labels in the course of associative
learning. Conversely, if reliance on labels and appearances
stems from attention being automatically allocated to these
predictors, then changing attentional weights of labels or
appearances should affect the reliance on these predictors in
a subsequent induction task.
Preliminary evidence that early in development
attentional weights of various attributes are flexible comes
from the research by Smith, Jones, and Landau (1996). In
this study 2- and 3- year-old children were presented with a
task in which they had to generalize a novel label to other
objects. Children generalized labels based on shape and
texture attributes if presented objects had eyes (presence of
eyes is highly correlated with animacy), whereas
participants relied solely on shape if the same objects were
presented without eyes. Similarly, young children generalize
names of solid substances along the lines of shape
similarity, whereas names for non-solid substances were
generalized along the lines of texture similarity (Samuelson
& Smith, 1999). Furthermore, there is evidence that these
attentional biases are shaped by experience, since they affect
learning only after children have acquired many names for
solid and non-solid substances (Samuelson & Smith, 1999).
One way of changing an attentional weight of a
predictor is by manipulating its predictive value. There is
ample body of evidence in the animal learning literature
indicating that if a cue is non-predictive in an associative
learning task, reliance on this cue attenuates in a subsequent
task (see Hall, 1991, for a review). Sloutsky & Spino
(2004) demonstrated that the same is the case with 5-yearolds, with effects of associative learning sustaining for over
two months.
In sum, when performing induction, young children rely
on both, appearance and label information. Some have
argued that reliance on labels stems from top-down

Abstract
Young children have been demonstrated to rely on both
labeling and appearance information when performing
induction. According to some accounts, labels are more
conceptually important than appearances. According to
others, reliance on labels and appearances stems from a lowlevel attentional mechanism. The latter, but not the former,
predicts flexible attentional shifts in reliance on labels or
appearances. Results of the two reported experiments indicate
that attention to labels and appearances can be flexibly
modified through associative training, thus supporting the
latter, but not the former account.

Introduction
The ability to perform inductive generalizations is crucial
for acquiring new knowledge. For instance, upon learning
that a particular poodle uses enzymes to digest food, one
could generalize this knowledge to other poodles, other
canines, and possibly other mammals. It is well-documented
that the ability to perform simple generalizations develops
early in life (Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004a, 2004b; Welder & Graham, 2001), however specific
mechanisms underlying early induction remain unclear.
It has been demonstrated that when performing induction,
young children rely on various sources of information, such
as perceptual similarity and linguistic labels (Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001). Some have
argued that even young children assume that these sources
form a conceptual hierarchy, with some object properties
being more important, or central, than others for
determining category membership and generalizing
properties of natural kind objects (Keil, et al, 1998; Gelman
& Coley, 1991). For example, category labels are said to be
proxies of category essences (e.g., Gelman & Coley, 1991),
and as such their contribution to induction should be greater
than that of peripheral properties, such as appearances.
Others have argued that reliance on labels during
induction may stem from a low-level attentional
mechanism. In particular, under many conditions auditory
input (including labels) overshadows (or attenuates
processing of) corresponding visual input (Sloutsky &
Napolitano, 2003; Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004; Robinson
& Sloutsky, 2004). As a result of overshadowing, entities
that share the same label are perceived as more similar than
the same entities presented without a label (Sloutsky & Lo,

220

conceptual knowledge, whereas others argued that it stems
from low-level attentional mechanisms. One way of
distinguishing between these positions is by systematically
manipulating attentional weights of labels and appearances
in the course of associative learning. While the former
position predicts that values of appearance and labeling
predictors should be relatively fixed, the latter position
predicts a high degree of flexibility of all perceptual
predictors.

was very different. For details of the calibration procedures
see Sloutsky and Fisher (2004). Similar to the training
triads, appearance information was pitted against labeling
information, such that Test 2, which looked either equally or
less similar to the Target than Test 1, always shared a label
with the Target. Position of the Test items on the screen
was randomized for each participant. Examples of testing
triads are presented in Figure 2.
Procedure Participants were tested individually in the child
care
centers
by
hypothesis-blind
experimenters.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the three
between-subject training conditions: Label Training,
Appearance Training, or Baseline Training conditions.

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to increase attentional
weights of either labels or appearances in the course of
associative training. Young children were first presented
with a training task, such that in one condition only labels
(but not appearances), whereas in the other condition only
appearances (but not labels) were predictive. After training
participants were presented with an induction task using a
novel set of stimuli, and the effectiveness of associative
training was assessed against a Baseline training that did not
manipulate attentional weights of either labels or
appearances.

Label Training. In the Label Training condition participants
were informed of a particular pseudo-biological property of
the Target (e.g., This is a zizi. This zizi has thick blood
inside its body) and were asked which of the Test items was
likely to share this property with the Target (e.g., Do you
think that this bala or this zizi also has thick blood inside?).
Participants were provided with positive feedback if they
generalized the property to the Test item that shared the
label with the Target, and with negative feedback if they
generalized the property to the Test item that looked more
similar to the Target. Positive feedback consisted of
engaging short movies, and negative feedback was given in
a form of a still picture. No explanations were provided as
part of feedback. Four participants failed to reach the
learning criterion (75% of correct responses, or 12 correct
responses on 16 trials) and were excluded from the sample.

Method
Participants Participants were 53 4- to 5-year-olds (25 girls
and 28 boys; M = 5.24 years, SD = .35 years). Nine more
children were tested and omitted from the sample because
they did not meet the learning criterion (see Procedure).
Materials Materials consisted of 16 training and 12 testing
triads of pictures, with each triad including a Target and two
Test stimuli. Materials also included a set of 28 artificial
label triads, with labels presented as count nouns (e.g., a
Gula, a Zizi, etc.).
Training Triads. Training triads consisted of pictures of
hedgehogs and guinea pigs. A calibration experiment with a
separate group of 25 five- year-olds established that children
were unfamiliar with and could not correctly label these
animals, but could reliably group them based on
appearances. Only pictures that were reliably grouped with
at least 85% accuracy by all participants were used in
Experiment 1. In all 16 training triads appearance
information was pitted against labeling information, such
that the Target looked similar to Test 1, but shared the same
label with Test 2. The screen position of each Test item (to
the left or to the right of the Target) was randomized for
each participant. Example of a training triad is presented in
Figure 1.

Figure 1: Example of a training triad.

Testing Triads. Testing triads consisted of pictures of
animal faces used in previous research (Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004). The testing triads were calibrated to represent three
levels of appearance similarity: at Level 1, both test items
looked equally similar to the Target; at Level 2, Test 1
looked somewhat more like the Target than Test 2; at Level
3, Test 1 looked almost identical to the Target, while Test 2

Appearance Training. Procedure in the Appearance
Training condition was similar to that in the Label Training
condition with one important difference: unlike the Label
Training condition, participants were provided with positive
feedback if they generalized the property to the Test item
that looked similar to the Target, and with negative
feedback if they generalized the property to the Test item
221

that shared the label with the Target. Feedback was
provided in a manner identical to that in the Label Training
condition. Five participants who failed to reach the learning
criterion (75% of correct responses) were excluded from the
sample.

Baseline Training. This condition was intended to provide
participants with experience with training triads and
feedback movies similar to that of participants in the Label
and Appearance training conditions, without affecting
attentional weights of labeling and appearance attributes. In
the Baseline Training condition participants were asked to
decide whether the Target liked to play more with Test 1 or
Test 2, and provided with positive feedback on the 75% of
the trials, regardless of their responses. Feedback was
provided in a manner identical to that in the Label and
Appearance Training conditions.

Similarity Level 1

Testing. Following training participants in all training
conditions were presented with testing trials. Participants’
task was to generalize a novel pseudo-biological property
from the Target to one of the Test items. No feedback was
given during testing and no children were omitted from the
sample based on their performance during testing.

Results
Training Accuracy. In the training phase of the experiment
participants demonstrated equivalent accuracy in the Label
and Appearance training conditions, averaging 92% of
correct responses, above chance, both one-sample ts >
20.69, ps < .0001.

Similarity Level 2

Testing. Proportions of label-based generalizations in the
Baseline, Appearance, and Label Training conditions are
presented in Figure 3. As shown in the figure, increasing
attentional weights of either labels or appearances through
associative training dramatically changed the pattern of
responses compared to the Baseline. In particular, in the
Label Training condition participants relied solely on
matching labels to perform induction (89%, 94%, and 88%
of label-based responses, at the Similarity Levels 1, 2, and 3
respectively); in the Appearance Training condition children
relied solely on appearances to perform induction: when
appearances were non-predictive participants did not rely on
matching labels, but rather exhibited a chance-level
performance (57% of label-based responses at the Similarity
Levels 1 and 2), and as predictiveness of appearances
increased, proportion of label-based responses dropped
below chance (32% of label-based responses at the
Similarity Level 3). A mixed ANOVA with the trained
predictor (Labels vs. Appearance) as a between-subject
factor and similarity level as a within-subject factor
confirmed a main effect of both, training condition and
similarity, Fs > 6.15, ps < .005, with the interaction of these
two factors being non-significant, p > .2.
Results of Experiment 1 clearly demonstrate that
attentional weights of appearance and label predictors can
be flexibly adjusted through associative learning. However,
it could be argued that effects observed in Experiment 1 are
purely task-specific since the same task was used during
training and testing. We addressed this possibility in
Experiment 2, in which training and testing phases used

Similarity Level 3

Figure 2: Examples of testing triads.

222

different tasks: children were trained using a similarity
judgment task and tested using an induction task.
Observing similar effects of training under these conditions
would indicate that reliance on appearance and labeling
information during induction can be flexibly adjusted by
changing perceived similarity of presented entities.

Materials and Procedure Materials and procedure were
similar to those of Experiment 1, with one important
difference: a similarity judgment task was used instead of an
induction task during training. Participants were presented
with the same training triads used in Experiment 1, and
asked whether the Target looked more like Test 1 or Test 2.
In the Appearance Training condition participants were told
that it was important to pay attention to how animals look,
and were provided with positive feedback for making
appearance-based choices. In the Label Training condition
participants were told that it was important to pay attention
to animals’ names, and were provided with positive
feedback for making label-based choices. Three participants
failed to reach the learning criterion (75% of correct
responses) and were excluded from the sample. Following
training participants were presented with the same testing
trials used in Experiment 1. No feedback was given during
testing and no children were omitted from the sample based
on their performance during testing.

Baseline
Label Training
Appearance Training

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Results
Training Accuracy. In the training phase of the experiment
participants demonstrated equivalent accuracy in the Label
and Appearance training conditions, averaging 95% and
94% of correct responses respectively, above chance, both
one-sample ts > 26.24, ps < .0001.

Similarity Level 1 Similarity Level 2 Similarity Level 3

Figure 3: Proportion of label-based responses by
similarity level and training condition in Experiment 1.

Testing. Proportions of label-based generalizations in
Experiment 2 are presented in Figure 4. As can be seen in
the Figure, similarity judgment training in Experiment 2
produced a pattern of results very close to that of induction
training in Experiment 1: in both Label training and
Appearance training conditions patterns of induction
changed compared to the Baseline. This change appears
pronounced at the Similarity Level 3 for both training
conditions, however at the Similarity Levels 1 and 2 training
effects seem to be limited to the label Training condition
alone. Potential causes of this asymmetry are addressed in
the General Discussion.
Proportions of labels-based responses in the Label and
Appearance Training conditions in Experiment 2 and
Baseline Training condition in Experiment 1 were submitted
to a mixed ANOVA, with the similarity level used a withinsubject factor, and trained predictor as a between-subject
factors. The analysis indicated significant main effects of
both similarity level and training condition (both Fs > 9.37,
ps < .0001), qualified by the training condition by similarity
level interaction, F (4, 104) = 3.00, p < .022. To compare
this pattern of results with the one observed in Experiment
1, proportions of label-based responses in the Label and
Appearance training conditions were submitted to a mixed
ANOVA, with the similarity level used a within-subject
factor, and trained predictor (Label vs. Appearance) and
training task (Induction vs. Similarity Judgment) used as
between-subject factors. The analysis confirmed that
induction and similarity judgment training tasks produced

Experiment 2
It has been argued that for young children (1) labels are
attributes of objects, contributing to perceived similarity of
presented entities, and (2) generalization is a function of
perceptual similarity computed over appearance and
labeling attributes (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004). Experiment 2
is based on this argument: if inductive generalization is a
function of similarity (with both labels and appearances
contributing to similarity), then, changing perceived
similarity of presented entities should affect induction
performance. To test this hypothesis we increased
attentional weights of appearances or labels in a similarity
judgment task, and then tested children using an induction
task. It was expected that effects of training should be
similar to those observed in Experiment 1, such that reliance
of labels should increase in the Label Training condition,
and reliance on appearances should increase in the
Appearance Training condition.

Method
Participants Participants were 36 4- to 5-year-olds (12 girls
and 24 boys; M = 5.06 years, SD = .24 years). Three more
children were tested and omitted from the sample because
they did not meet the learning criterion (see Experiment 1).

223

experiment, in which the “rule” does not need to be
discovered, but rather is provided by experimenters.
However, if attention to perceptual attributes is deployed
automatically, then young children might experience
difficulty in following instructions to focus on one attribute
while ignoring the other. The results of this control
experiment indicated that the proportion of the label-based
responses in the Ignore Labels condition did not decrease
compared to a no-instruction Baseline, p > .3. These results
render it unlikely that results of Experiments 1 and 2
stemmed from participants discovering “the rule of the
game” rather than from associative training: even when told
the “rule” on every trial, participants had difficulty
following the rule.

similar effects on induction performance: the effect of task
was not significant, F < 1.
Results of Experiment 2 indicate that effects of
associative training observed in Experiment 1 are not purely
task-specific: adjusting attentional weights of labels and
appearances in the course of a similarity judgment task
affected participants’ willingness to rely on labels and
appearances in the course of a subsequent induction task.
However, it could be counter argued that effects of
training observed in Experiments 1 and 2 are not due to the
adjustment in attentional weights; instead, participants could
have discovered “the rule of the game” during training.
According to this explanation, change in reliance on labels
and appearances in the course if testing stems from
participants deliberately focusing their attention on a
particular attribute rather than attentional weights being
adjusted in a non-deliberate manner.

General Discussion
Results of the reported experiments indicate that attentional
weights of both labeling and appearance attributes change
flexibly in the course of associative training: when either
attribute became consistently non-predictive during training,
reliance on this attribute decreased markedly during testing.
Moreover, these effects were not entirely task specific, as
decreasing attentional weights of attributes in a similarity
judgment task generalized over to an induction task
(Experiment 2).
These results indicate that attentional weights of labels
and appearances are rather flexible and they can change in
the course of associative training. The reported findings
offer new evidence about processes underlying young
children’s induction. The results do not support the
essentialist claim of feature centrality: young children
flexibly shifted attention away from predictors that are
claimed to be theoretically central (i.e., linguistic labels) to
those that are claimed to be theoretically peripheral (i.e.,
appearances). At the same time, these findings support the
notion that reliance on labels and appearance in the course
of induction stems from automatic attention and not from
the top-down conceptual influences.
However, several important issues remain to be
addressed. First, it must be noted that Experiments 1 and 2
manipulated attentional weights of both labels and
appearances, whereas in the control experiment participants
were only asked to ignore labels. It remains unclear whether
young children would also find it difficult to ignore pictures,
but our preliminary data strongly indicate this to be the case.
Another important consideration with regards to the data
reported above concerns the asymmetry of the associative
training effects: it appears that effects were stronger in the
Label Training condition than in the Appearance Training
condition, particularly for the triads representing Similarity
Level 2. This asymmetry may stem from the fact the labels
have greater attentional weight for younger children, with
weights of labels decreasing with development (Sloutsky &
Lo, 1999; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004). Therefore, it is
likely that stronger effects of appearance training can be
obtained with increasing duration of associative training.
Another interesting issue that would require further
research is independence or interdependence of attentional

Baseline (Experiment 1)
Label Training
Appearance Training
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Similarity Level 1 Similarity Level 2 Similarity Level 3

Figure 4: Proportion of label-based responses by
similarity level and training condition in Experiment 2.

This possibility was addressed in a separate control
experiment with 53 4- to 5-year-old children. In the control
experiment, participants were presented with either a
similarity judgment or an induction triad task similar to the
ones used in Experiments 1-2 in one of the two betweensubjects conditions: Baseline or Ignore Labels. In the
Baseline condition participants were not provided with any
additional instruction about performing the task. In the
Ignore Labels condition participants were asked (on every
trial) to focus on appearances, while ignoring labels. At the
end of the experiment, participants’ memory for the
instructions was tested. If decreased (compared to the
Baseline) reliance on labels during induction in the
Appearance Training condition in Experiments 1 and 2
stemmed from participants discovering ‘the rule”, then we
should observe a similar pattern of results in the control

224

Robinson, C.W., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). Auditory
Dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Sameulson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category structure and syntax
correspond? Cognition, 73, 1-33.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004a). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004b). When
development and learning decrease memory: Evidence
against
category-based
induction
in
children.
Psychological Science, 15, 553-558.
Sloutsky, V. M., & L. Y-F. (1999). How much does a
shared name make things similar? Part 1. Linguistic labels
and the development of similarity judgment.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 1478-1492.
Sloutsky, V. & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth a
thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Spino, M. (2004). Naive theory and
transfer of learning: When less is more and more is less.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11, 528-535.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

weights. First, it is possible that attentional weights are
independent, such that increasing the weight of one attribute
does not affect the weights of other attributes. Alternatively,
it is possible that (due to limited attention capacity) weights
are interdependent, such that increasing the weight of one
attribute decreases the weights of other attributes.
While these important issues remain to be addressed in
future research, experiments presented here indicate that (1)
attention to labels and appearance is allocated in a nondeliberate manner and (2) attentional weights of labels and
appearances can be flexibly change as a result of associative
training. These findings suggest that reliance on labels in
the course of induction may be driven by attention allocated
automatically to labels and appearances.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation (REC # 0208103 and BCS #
0078945) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In
S. Gelman, Susan, E. Byrnes, and P. James (Eds.)
Perspectives on language and thought: Interrelations in
development. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, G. (1991). Perceptual and associative learning. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998). Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103-135.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? Flexible attention in young
children. Child Development, 75, 1850-1870.

225

