UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
From Recall to Discrimination: The Dynamic Neural Field Theory Generalizes Across Tasks
and Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4f73d94c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Schoner, Gregor
Simmering, Vanessa R
Spencer, John P.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

From Recall to Discrimination:
The Dynamic Neural Field Theory Generalizes Across Tasks and Development
Vanessa R. Simmering (vanessa-simmering@uiowa.edu)
John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Gregor Schöner (gregor.schoener@neuroinformatik.ruhr-uni-bochum.de)
Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-University
44780 Bochum, Germany
behavior-in-the-moment. That is, these models are strong on
generalization, but weak on the details so central to processbased models of performance in particular tasks.
The research presented here seeks to achieve both
specificity and generality. In particular, we report theoretical
and empirical work that generalizes a Dynamic Neural Field
Theory (DNFT) of spatial working memory (SWM) beyond
the spatial recall task that was central to the development of
this theory. We extend the DNFT to capture performance in
a position discrimination task, and then use this theory to
generate specific behavioral predictions which we test in an
experiment with adult participants. Next, we probe whether
a core developmental hypothesis implemented in the
DNFT—the spatial precision hypothesis—that has captured
developmental changes in spatial recall can predict
developmental changes in position discrimination. Finally,
we test these predictions in an experiment with 3- to 6-yearold children. Results from our theoretical and empirical
work demonstrate that the DNFT effectively generalizes
across tasks and development. Importantly, such generality
does not come at the cost of behavioral specificity due to
our consistent emphasis on the processes that create
behavior in the moment.

Abstract
Many models developed to account for tasks in cognition and
development are well-suited to a single task or phenomenon.
In recent years, modelers have begun to generalize their
approaches to incorporate other tasks and/or developmental
change. Few models, however, have attempted to generalize
across both tasks and development. This paper presents one
such model, the Dynamic Neural Field Theory (DNFT). The
DNFT was developed to account for biases in spatial recall
across development. A second line of research, presented
here, generalizes the DNFT to a new task, position
discrimination, and predicts a complex pattern of performance
with both children and adults. We conclude with implications
for future theoretical and empirical work.

Specificity vs. Generality in Models of
Cognition and Development
Human behavior is rich and complex. As such, a central
goal in cognitive science is to develop models that can
capture this complexity and predict behavior in a
meaningful way. In many cases, models in cognitive science
are exclusively linked to particular tasks (for a discussion of
this concern in categorization, see, e.g., Murphy, 2002).
This approach is sensible, as it is often very difficult to
capture the details of performance in a task in a way that
sheds light on the processes that underlie behavior.
Although theoretical specificity is essential to capturing the
details of complex human behavior-in-the-moment, it often
comes at the cost of generalization. For instance, there are
relatively few detailed, process-based models that generalize
across multiple tasks (for one exception, see Love, Medin,
& Gureckis, 2004). Similarly, there are few process-based
models that generalize across development. And the set of
models that lie at the intersection of these two types of
generalization is very sparse indeed (for examples, see
Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Vevea, 2000; Morton &
Munakata, 2002).
The difficulty of balancing specificity on one hand and
generality on the other is not simply reflected in the
relatively small number of models that generalize; it is also
reflected in the nature of models that have effectively
moved beyond specific tasks. For instance, the few models
that have generalized across tasks and development have
relatively weak ties between the model and the details of

Dynamic Neural Field Theory: Overview
The DNFT is a process-based theory of spatial working
memory (SWM) instantiated in a neural network model that
captures children’s and adults’ spatial recall performance
(Schutte, Spencer, & Schöner, 2003; Spencer & Schöner,
2003, 2006). In spatial recall tasks, participants are asked to
remember a target location within a large, homogeneous
space. After a short delay (0 – 20 s), adults show systematic
biases away from the midline symmetry axis of the task
space (e.g., Spencer & Hund, 2002). In this same task,
young children show the opposite pattern of bias, that is,
they show systematic bias toward midline (e.g., Schutte &
Spencer, 2002). In the following section, we outline the
DNFT and how this theory accounts for changes in spatial
recall biases over development.
Figure 1 shows a simulation of the DNFT1 during a single
1

Note that for simplicity we show only the relevant portion of the
full model here. For a complete description, see Spencer,
Simmering, Troob, Schutte, & Schöner (2006).

792

A

PF (u)

B

Inhib (v)

C

SWM (w)

of reference frame calibration. Thus, the 3-layer system
shown in Figure 1 can achieve the dual goals of
remembering the target item and staying calibrated with a
perceived reference frame.
This dual ability has both costs and benefits. The benefit,
of course, is maintaining a stable memory for the location
within the object-centered frame of reference. One “cost”,
however, is apparent in Figure 1c: the peak of activation in
SWM “drifts” away from 180° during the memory delay.
Thus, our model shows an emergent bias away from
midline. This occurs because the peak of activation at
midline in PF passes activation to the Inhib layer at 180°.
This creates greater inhibition on the 180°-side of the targetrelated peak in SWM, effectively repelling this peak away
from the reference frame (see, e.g., Spencer & Hund, 2002).
The same model also produces the bias toward midline
early in development. The relatively simple developmental
process we have put forth is captured by our spatial
precision hypothesis (SPH): the spatial precision of neural
interactions becomes more precise and more stable over
development (Schutte et al., 2003; Spencer & Hund, 2003).
This is illustrated in Figure 2. As the interaction functions
move from early development (darker lines) to later
development (lighter lines), the spatial precision of
interaction narrows, and the excitatory / inhibitory gradient
becomes steeper. This results 52
in relatively unstable self- 5
sustaining peaks early in
development that are sensitive 50
to input across a broad spatial 5
range, as well as stable selfsustaining peaks later in 5
2
development that are only
Figure 2. Narrowing
sensitive to input at narrow
interaction over
separations.
development in the DNFT.
Because the peak in SWM
is much broader (due to the broad interactions captured by
the SPH), this peak produces broad activation in Inhib. This
broad inhibition, combined with the relatively weak selfsustaining dynamics in PF, prevents a peak from building in
the perceptual field at midline (i.e., at 180°) during the delay
period. Consequently, SWM receives some excitatory input
around midline—the midline input is still fed into PF and
passed to SWM through the excitatory projection—but no
associated inhibitory “push” away from a peak at midline.
According to the SPH, this interaction function changes
gradually over development (black to gray lines in Figure
2). Spatial recall data with children support this account—
between the ages of 3 and 6, recall biases shift gradually
from biased toward to biased away from midline (Schutte,
2004; Spencer & Hund, 2003).

Time

Activation

spatial recall trial. Figure 1a shows the excitatory layer of a
two-layered perceptual field (PF), and Figure 1c shows the
excitatory layer of a two-layered spatial working memory
field (SWM). Both of these layers are coupled to a single
layer of interneurons (Inhib) in Figure 1b (see reciprocal
green/excitatory and red/inhibitory arrows). In addition, PF
passes excitatory input to SWM. In each field, the x-axis
consists of a collection of spatially-tuned neurons. The yaxis shows each neuron’s activation level. Lastly, time is
captured along the z-axis, with the beginning of the trial at
the front of the figure.

Location (°)
Figure 1. A simulation of a spatial recall trial in the DNFT.

At the start of the trial, the PF brings the midline input
into 180° in the object-centered reference frame2. Next, the
target appears at 220°. This creates a peak of activation
centered at this location. When the target disappears, a peak
re-forms in PF at 180° as the system locks onto the
reference cues in the task space. Figure 1c shows the effect
of coupling PF to SWM. At the start of the trial, SWM
receives relatively weak reference input from PF. Next, the
target is turned on, passing strong target-related input into
the working memory field. This event—combined with a
boost in the resting level of SWM and Inhib—moves the
working memory field into a strongly self-sustaining state.
After the target disappears, the SWM field maintains an
active memory of the target location during the delay.
Importantly, this occurs even though PF has re-acquired the
reference frame. This highlights the bi-stability of SWM:
because SWM is in a stable attractor state, it can effectively
hold on to the target, even while PF deals with the dynamics

Generalizing the DNFT across SWM Tasks:
Position Discrimination
As the previous section illustrates, the DNFT is able to
capture the moment-by-moment details of spatial recall
behavior in both children and adults. The first goal of this

2

Other components of the model, not described here, address
calibrating egocentric to object-centered frames of reference (see
Spencer, Simmering, Troob et al., 2006).
793

discrimination. When the first stimulus (S1) is presented to
the PF field, it forms a peak of activation, and passes
activation to form a corresponding peak in the SWM field.
Thus, at the end of presentation of S1, both fields have
corresponding peaks of activation. After the stimulus is
removed, the SWM peak self-sustains, as the PF peak is
essentially deleted by inhibition from the Inhib field (not
shown). Next, the second stimulus (S2) is presented in a
new location. In the SWM field, S2 falls in the lateral
inhibition of the peak from S2, causing activation to grow
slowly at the spatial position of S2. In the PF field, on the
other hand, S2 is outside of the strong inhibitory region of
S1, so activation builds more quickly. After S2 is removed,
the peak remains in the PF field, leading to a different
decision3.
By modulating a few features, the DNFT is capable of
performing the position discrimination task, showing the
behavioral flexibility captured in this single model of SWM.
Critically, if the same SWM system operates in both spatial
recall and position discrimination tasks, then we should be
able to use the principles of the DNFT established in spatial
recall to make predictions for position discrimination
performance. As illustrated in Figure 3, position
discrimination performance depends on overlap between the
peaks associated with S1 and S2. In the DNFT, overlap
between peaks will be affected by two factors, both of
which stem from the strong reference-related inhibition.
The first factor that should influence peak overlap is peak
width: narrower peaks are less likely to overlap, leading to
enhanced discrimination performance (i.e., different
responses at smaller separations between S1 and S2). In the
DNFT, peak width is determined through local excitation
and lateral inhibition—stronger inhibition leads to narrower
peaks. Recall that biases away from midline in spatial recall
result from strong inhibition near the midline symmetry
axis. This same reference-related inhibition should lead to
narrower peaks. Because this inhibition is stronger near
midline, the DNFT predicts that position discrimination will
be enhanced near versus far from this axis.
Although narrower peaks near midline are a consequence
of reference-related inhibition, the dominant inhibitory
effect seen in spatial recall is directional drift—this is the
second important factor in position discrimination. Figure 4
shows how directional drift should influence position
discrimination in the DNFT. Recall from Figure 3 that the
presentation of S1 forms a peak in SWM, which selfsustains during the delay before S2 is presented. During this
delay, reference-related inhibition repels the peak away
from midline (as seen in spatial recall). If S2 is then
presented in the direction that S1 has drifted (Figure 4a), the
peaks are more likely to overlap, leading to more same

line of research is to generalize the DNFT to a new SWM
task: position discrimination. In position discrimination
tasks, two stimuli are presented in quick succession (e.g.,
500 ms apart) and the participant judges whether the stimuli
were in the same or different locations. We chose position
discrimination because it is viewed in the literature as a
more perceptual task than spatial recall, but is still within
the domain of SWM. Additionally, the shorter time scale of
discrimination allows for closer examination of referencerelated effects.
Position discrimination differs from spatial recall in three
important ways. First, two stimuli are presented in
discrimination, compared to one stimulus per trial in recall.
Second, the delay between stimuli is much shorter in
discrimination (500 ms compared to 5 – 20 s). Lastly, a
same/different decision is required rather than pointing to a
remembered location. To capture position discrimination in
the DNFT, it must accommodate these three differences.
The first two differences are straightforward: a second
stimulus can be presented 500 ms after a first stimulus.
Critically, the third difference—a same/different decision—
can be captured by the DNFT by simply modulating a few
features of the model (for a related modulation in response
to task demands, see Spencer, Simmering, & Schutte, 2006).
Specifically, we can make our model a “difference” detector
by increasing the resting level of neurons in the PF and
Inhib fields when the second stimulus is presented. In some
cases, this will result in a self-sustaining peak in the
perceptual field (and no peak in SWM) after presentation of
the second stimulus—the basis for a different response.
Figure 3 illustrates how this process operates in position
PF field (u)

SWM field (w)

S1
presentation

Activation

Delay

S2
presentation

End of trial

Location (°)

3
We have implemented an explicit same/different response system
using two bi-stable neurons that are dedicated to these labels (i.e.,
when the same node receives strong input, it goes into a selfsustaining state that represents the generation of this response).
This allows us to generate an explicit response and to generate
realistic reaction time curves as well.

Location (°)

Figure 3. A simulation of a different trial in position discrimination.
794

A

same

B

2

1

participated in this study for research exposure credit.
Participants were seated at a large, homogeneous table.
Stimuli were projected onto the surface of the table from
below. Each trial began with a 100 ms warning tone,
followed by a 1 s delay and then a 500 ms presentation of
S1 (2 pixels in diameter). Next came a 500 ms delay, then a
500 ms presentation of S2. After S2 disappeared,
participants entered a same or different response by pressing
corresponding buttons on a keypad. Across trials, S1 was
presented a two target locations: 5° and 25° to the right of
the midline symmetry axis of the table. S2 could then appear
0-7 pixels to the right (away from midline) or left (toward
midline) of S1. Trials were presented in random order.
Results Figure 6 shows mean discrimination thresholds
across targets separately for each S2-direction. As this
figure shows, discrimination performance did not differ
across S2-directions for the location near midline. Far from
midline,
however,
10.5
S2-toward
9.5
thresholds
were
S2-away
8.5
impaired when S2
7.5
was presented away
6.5
5.5
from midline, that is,
4.5
in the direction of
3.5
2.5
drift. These data
5
25
Target (°)
confirm the predicted
pattern of results
Figure 6. Results of Experiment 1.
from Figure 5c.

different

1

2

Figure 4. The effect of directional drift of S1 on discrimination when
S2 is presented in the same (A) or opposite (B) direction of drift.

high

S2-toward
S2-away

A

B

Mean Discrimination Thresholds

Generalizing across Tasks and Development:
Development of Position Discrimination
In the previous section, we used our model of spatial recall
to predict a specific pattern of performance in a position
discrimination task. Here, we probe the generality of the
DNFT on a second front. In particular, we use our account
of the development of SWM to predict developmental
changes in position discrimination.
According to our spatial precision hypothesis (SPH),
neural interactions in SWM become stronger and more
precise over development. In spatial recall, broad
interactions lead to biases toward midline in young children,
whereas narrow interactions lead to biases away from
midline in older children and adults. Because directional
drift led to important predictions for position discrimination
in adults, this developmental shift in the direction of drift
has implications for the development of position
discrimination as well. Specifically, the advantage shown in
adults’ performance based on the direction of S2 should flip
with children who show drift toward midline (i.e., around 3
years of age): performance should now be better when S2
moves away from midline. Moreover, because recall biases
shift gradually between the ages of 3 and 6, this S2-away
advantage should gradually shift to an S2-toward advantage
by 6 years of age (the age when children show the adult
pattern in spatial recall). Lastly, the narrowing interactions
posited by the SPH should also affect peak width over
development, with broad peaks early in development. This

C

low

Threshold

responses at larger separations (i.e., impaired performance).
On the other hand, if S2 is presented in the opposite
direction (Figure 4b), then the peaks are less likely to
overlap and will lead to more different responses at smaller
separations (i.e., enhanced performance). Thus, the DNFT
predicts that discrimination will be impaired when S2 is
presented in the direction of drift, or away from midline for
adults. Moreover, directional drift should affect
discrimination performance most at spatial locations where
recall biases are greatest, around 20-30° (Spencer & Hund,
2002).
In summary, then, the DNFT predicts two novel effects of
reference-related inhibition on position discrimination:
enhanced performance near midline, and impaired
performance when S2 is presented away from midline.
Because these two effects arise through the same
mechanism in the DNFT, they should combine to form a
specific pattern of performance, shown in Figure 5. Based
on peak width, performance will be enhanced (i.e., lower
discrimination thresholds) near versus far from midline,
regardless of the direction of S2 (Figure 5a). At these same
locations, directional drift should not influence performance
near midline, where drift is minimal (Figure 5b). By
contrast, around 20-30° from midline, drift should impair
performance when S2 is presented away from midline, but
improve performance if S2 is toward midline (as shown in
Figure 4). These effects should combine to form the pattern
of performance shown in Figure 5c: comparable
performance across locations when S2 is presented toward
midline, but impaired performance far from midline when
S2 is away from midline. Experiment 1 tested these
predictions with adults.

near

far

near

far

near

far

Target Location

Figure 5. DNFT predictions based on peak width (A),
directional drift (B), and both (C).

Experiment 14
Method Fifteen University of Iowa undergraduates
4

This experiment is presented in Simmering, Spencer, & Schöner
(in press) as Experiment 5.
795

theoretical and empirical work presented her sought to
achieve this balance within the framework of the DNFT.
Previously, this theory was used to capture details of
spatial recall performance in both children and adults, and
we proposed the SPH to account for developmental changes
in reference-related recall biases. The first goal of the
current research was to extend the DNFT to a new SWM
task. This extension was achieved using the concept of
novelty fields, and Experiment 1 confirmed two novel
predictions of our model of position discrimination. The
second goal was to use the developmental account from
spatial recall to predict developmental changes in this new
task. Experiment 2 confirmed a specific developmental
pattern of performance predicted by the DNFT. Taken
together, these experiments provide strong support for the
DNFT account of developmental change in SWM.
The next step in this line of research is to use the results
from these experiments to further develop the DNFT. In
particular, we are currently quantitatively simulating results
from these experiments to determine whether the same
model can capture the rich set of constraints evident in our
data. Although this is a non-trivial undertaking, the work
presented here suggests that this theory provides a general
framework for thinking about the processes that underlie
SWM in multiple contexts and across multiple time scales,
without giving up a core strength of process models—tight
theory-experiment relations.

global change in peak width should produce overall
decreases in discrimination thresholds over development.

Experiment 2

Mean Discrimination Thresholds (pixels)

Method Participants in this experiment were 41 3-year-olds,
42 4-year-olds, 39 5-year-olds, and 39 6-year-olds from the
Iowa City community, and 19 undergraduates. Stimuli were
projected onto the same large, homogeneous table top. The
procedure was similar to Experiment 1, with some changes
to make the task more appropriate for children. Stimuli were
increased to 7 pixels in diameter, and presented for 1 s each
(rather than 500 ms). Across trials, S1 was presented at 10°
or 30° to the right of midline. For children, S2 could then
appear 0-20 pixels from S1, in steps of 4 pixels. For adults,
S2 could appear 0-10 pixels from S1, in 1-pixel steps. Two
other adaptations decreased the total number of trials
required of children. First, children were randomly assigned
to S2-toward or S2-away conditions; adults still completed
both within a single session, although trials were now
blocked by S2-direction. Second, we used a stair-casing
procedure to reduce the total number of trials necessary to
estimate discrimination thresholds (see Simmering &
Spencer, 2006, for details).
Results Figure 7 shows mean discrimination thresholds
across targets and ages separately for each S2-direction. As
this figure shows, the pattern of results changed
systematically across ages. Three-year-olds showed the
expected reversal relative to adults’ performance based on
S2-direction with better performance in the S2-away
condition at the far target. Across 4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds’
data, thresholds in the S2-toward condition decreased,
eventually leading to adult-like performance by 6 years.
Adults’ data replicated the results of Experiment 1, with no
difference at the near target, and better performance for S2toward at the far target. Lastly, across development, we
observed an overall decrease in discrimination thresholds.
10
9

S2-toward

8

S2-away

References
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Vevea, J. L. (2000). Why
do categories affect stimulus judgment? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 220-241.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309-332.
Morton, J. B., & Munakata, Y. (2002). Active versus latent
representations: A neural network model of perseveration,
dissociation, and decalage. Developmental Psychobiology, 40, 255-265.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Schutte, A. R. (2004). A developmental transition in spatial
working memory. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
University of Iowa, Iowa City.
Schutte, A. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2002). Generalizing the
dynamic field theory of the A-not-B error beyond infancy:
Three-year-olds' delay- and experience-dependent
location memory biases. Child Development, 73, 377-404.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2003). Testing
the dynamic field theory: Working memory for locations
becomes more spatially precise over development. Child
Development, 74, 1393-1417.
Simmering, V. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2006). From recall to
discrimination: Generalizing the dynamic field theory
across tasks and development. Manuscript in preparation.
Simmering, V. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (in press).
Reference-related inhibition produces enhanced position

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
10°

30°

3 years

10°

30°

4 years

10°

30°

5 years

10°

30°

10°

6 years

30°

adults

Target x Age

Figure 7. Results across ages for Experiment 2.

Conclusions
A central goal within cognitive science is to develop models
that can capture the complexity of human behavior and
make meaningful predictions. One of the primary challenges
facing theorists who develop these models is the balance
between specificity and generality: being specific enough to
capture the details of behavior-in-the-moment, yet general
enough to still apply across tasks and/or development. The

796

discrimination and fast repulsion near axes of symmetry.
Perception & Psychophysics.
Spencer, J. P., & Hund, A. M. (2002). Prototypes and
particulars: Geometric and experience-dependent spatial
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
131, 16-37.
Spencer, J. P., & Hund, A. M. (2003). Developmental
continuity in the processes that underlie spatial recall.
Cognitive Psychology, 47, 432-480.
Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2003). Bridging the
representational gap in the dynamical systems approach to
development. Developmental Science, 6, 392-412.
Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2006). A dynamic field
theory of spatial working memory. Manuscript in
preparation.
Spencer, J. P., Simmering, V. R., & Schutte, A. R. (2006).
Toward a formal theory of flexible spatial behavior:
Geometric category biases generalize across pointing and
verbal response types. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 32, 473490.
Spencer, J. P., Simmering, V. R., Troob, W. W., Schutte, A.
R., & Schöner, G. (2006). What does theoretical
neuroscience have to offer the study of behavioral
development? Insights from a dynamic field theory of
spatial cognition. To appear in J. M. Plumert & J. P.
Spencer (Eds.), Emerging landscapes of mind: Mapping
the nature of change in spatial cognitive development.
New York: Oxford University Press.
This work was made possible by NIMH RO1 MH62480,
NSF BCS 00-91757, and NSF HSD 0527698, awarded to
John P. Spencer.

797

