UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Further Investigations into Post-completion Error: the Effects of Interruption Position and
Duration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zk2187c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Abeles, Aliza
Blandford, Ann
Cairns, Paul
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Further Investigations into Post-completion Error: the Effects of Interruption
Position and Duration
Simon Y. W. Li, Anna L. Cox, Ann Blandford, Paul Cairns, Richard M. Young and Aliza Abeles
{simon.li, anna.cox, a.blandford, p.cairns, r.m.young, a.abeles}@ucl.ac.uk
UCLIC, UCL Interaction Centre
31/32 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP UK
Abstract

Edwards & Gronlund, 1998), the role of retrieval cues after
an interruption (e.g. Cutrell, Czerwinski & Horvitz, 2001),
control over the interruption (McFarlane & Latorella, 2002),
and preparation before engaging the interruption (Trafton,
Altmann, Brock & Mintz, 2003). However, there has been
no work looking at the effect of interruption on a specific
kind of error, namely PCE.
A particularly useful theoretical framework for the
current study is Altmann & Trafton’s (2002) activationbased goal memory (AGM) model. The AGM model has its
origin in explaining goal suspensions and resumptions in
problem-solving and has been applied to investigating the
disruptiveness of interruption on primary task performance
and explaining the occurrence of PCE.
Using the construct of activation, the AGM model
suggests that, just like other memory elements in the
cognitive system, goals have associated activation levels
and cognition is directed by the most active goal retrieved at
any given time. The amount of activation associated with a
memory item is subject to decay, and this decay process is
time-based and gradual.
If the cognitive system needs to refocus attention to (or
resume) an old goal then this old goal needs to undergo a
priming process to become active again. The priming
process is possible through associative links between
retrieval cues and the to-be-resumed goal. The retrieval cues
can be internal or external to the cognitive system.
The AGM model suggests that task steps in a learned
procedural skill can be viewed as a sequence of associative
links, each action step acting as a retrieval cue for the next.
This procedural cueing mechanism explains how PCE is
usually avoided; hence, people usually manage to carry out
PC tasks, such as photocopying, without committing the
PCE most of the time.
Consideration of the AGM model enables us to predict
that different interruption positions during procedural tasks
will result in different effects on the rate of PCE. An
interruption occurring just before the post-completion (PC)
step is more likely to lead to a PCE than an interruption
occurring at any other point within a task structure. An
interruption just before the PC step will have disrupted the
associative priming from the preceding step, whereas other
interruption points will still allow the pre-PC step to be
carried out (after the correct goal is resumed successfully),
and once it is carried out, it would cue the PC step.
However, the gradual decay process of the AGM model
suggests that the disruptiveness of an interruption also
depends on the duration of the interruption. An interruption

Two experiments were carried out to examine the effect of
interruption position and interruption duration on postcompletion error (PCE) occurrences in a game-like procedural
task. Experiment 1 showed a significant main effect of
interruption position on PCE rate; significantly more PCEs
were obtained when the interruption occurred just before the
PC step than interruptions at any other positions in the task.
The same effect was also obtained for other non-PCEs
suggesting that PCEs are no different to other non-PCEs in
terms of the interruption position effect. Experiment 2
replicated the interruption position effect but did not show a
reliable difference in PCE rates between a 45-sec and a 15-sec
interruption. However, the trend of the differences in PCE
rates between the two interruption durations is consistent with
our initial prediction. The results of both experiments were
explained in terms of the activation-based goal memory
model (Altmann & Trafton, 2002).

Introduction
Post-completion error (PCE) is a specific kind of omission
error, which occurs after the completion of a main task, for
example, forgetting to collect your change after purchasing
from a vending machine.
Recent research has identified various factors that affect
the error rate in routine procedural tasks such as working
memory load (Byrne & Bovair, 1997) and dynamic visual
cues (Lee, 1992; Chung & Byrne, 2004). It has also been
shown that this robust error phenomenon occurs in nonroutine problem-solving situations (Li, Blandford, Cairns &
Young, 2005). Although PCE has received more attention
recently, there are still many open questions about which
factors provoke or mitigate the occurrence of the error.
Given that interruptions are pervasive in most workplace
environments and have been shown to lead to increased
levels of overall error, their direct consequences in safety
critical domains can be serious. Therefore, it seems a logical
route to investigate what effect interruptions might have (or
not have) on the occurrences of post-completion error. This
study set out to investigate the effect of interruption position
and duration on the rate of post-completion error and is
motivated by the activation-based goal memory model
(Altmann & Trafton, 2002).

Background
Several dimensions of interruptions have been
investigated and are thought to affect performance on the
primary task, e.g. the complexity of the interruption and its
similarity to the primary task (Gillie & Broadbent, 1989;
471

has to prevent rehearsal of a to-be-resumed goal, and it has
to last long enough for the goal activation to undergo
substantial decay. Although different interruption durations
have not been found to have differential disruptive effect in
terms of global task performance (Gillie & Broadbent,
1989), using a more sensitive behavioural measure,
resumption lag, recent evidence suggests that interruptions
that last a few seconds longer than others may have greater
costs in terms of resumption lag (Monk, Boehm-Davis &
Trafton, 2004).
Our study examines the effect of interruption position
and duration on PCE in a procedural task.

button labelled “Next Order” changes the centre of the
doughnut task to the current order. The centre of the screen
changes back to indicate the location for the next order
collection when the participant has finished making the
entire order. The presence of this location indicator after the
completion of a trial is a false completion signal, which is a
distinguishing feature of many PC tasks (Reason, 2002).
The Call Centre task
The Call Centre is a simple search task where one has to
find a specified location from the London Underground
Map to get an order before the doughnut-making process.
This search task is to be carried out at the beginning of each
trial. At the beginning of each trial, the centre of the
doughnut-making machine indicates a location where an
order is to be collected. The participant is then required to
physically turn to the Call Centre computer terminal to find
the location. Once the location is found and entered, the
participant then returns to the doughnut-making machine
terminal to begin the doughnut-making process.
Figure 1 shows the screen shots of all three tasks and the
hollow arrows depict the transitional sequence of a trial. The
black arrow depicts the doughnut-packing interrupting the
primary task.

Experiment 1
The objectives of this first experiment are, firstly, to
generate a high enough PCE rate for statistical comparisons,
and secondly, to test out the effect of interruption positions
on PCE occurrences. Based on the activation-based goal
memory model, the following hypothesis was proposed:
interruptions occurring just before the PC step are more
likely to result in PCE occurrences than interruptions
occurring at other points in a procedural task.

Method
Tasks The tasks used in the current study are designed
within a game-like paradigm. The primary tasks consist of a
doughnut-making task and an order collection (Call Centre)
task. The doughnut-making task is the main task which
requires a participant to follow a set of fixed procedures to
operate the machine correctly. The order collection task
requires one to collect an order first before making the
doughnuts ordered. The rationale for the inclusion of the
order collection task is to simulate an environment where
one has to physically move away from the main task
(doughnut-making) when it is completed. A lot of realworld PCE situations involve moving away physically from
the artefact once the task is accomplished. The doughnutmaking task and the Call Centre task were implemented on
two separate computer terminals.
The secondary interrupting task (doughnut-packing task)
is a mental arithmetic task which requires one to pack
different numbers of doughnuts following some simple
arithmetic rules. The interrupting task is implemented in the
same computer terminal as the doughnut-making task; the
doughnut-packing task only serves as an interruption to the
doughnut-making task, lasting 75 seconds.

PCE
A PCE is operationalised as the omission of pressing the
“Clean” button with the following action sequence: 1)
dismissal of a report of performance (no. of doughnuts
made), followed by 2) executing the Call Centre task, and
followed by pressing the “Next Order” button on the
Doughnut task.
Design This is a within-subject design with one independent
variable  interruption position  which has three levels:
Z (just before the PC step), Other and Nil (no interruptions).
Each session consists of 11 trials in the testing phase; 4
trials with interruption position Z, 4 trials with interruption
position Other and 3 trials with Nil interruption. The 4
interruptions at position Other are selected randomly from 5
other positions in the task sequence; no repeating position is
selected in a given testing session. The order of trial
presentation is randomised.
Procedure Participants read documents describing the
experiment then completed a demonstration and a training
phase. Participants first observed the experimenter
performing both the doughnut-making and the doughnutpacking task separately. When performing the doughnutmaking task the experimenter explained the need to respond
to the Call Centre when the location signal flashes in the
doughnut machine. The experimenter also demonstrated
how to respond to a call using the Call Centre. Participants
were then given two training trials on the doughnut-making
task; one with and one without the interrupting doughnutpacking task. Any errors occurring in this training phase
result in on-screen warning messages and beeps.

The doughnut-making task
The doughnut-making task is a procedural task in which
participants are required to carry out a set of predefined
procedures to operate the machine correctly in order to
produce a required number of doughnuts. The PC step is the
“Cleaning” step at the end of the task which requires
clicking on a button labelled “Process/Cleaning”.
At the beginning of a trial the centre of the doughnut
machine indicates the location of the next order. When order
collection from the Call Centre has been finished, pressing a

472

Primary Tasks

Figure 1: The primary and interrupting tasks

The Doughnut Machine

Interrupting Task

Doughnut Packing Express

of the false completion signal; this is to avoid the inclusion
of confounding behaviour such as clicking on random
buttons in a trial-and-error fashion to reach the correct next
step. Other non-PCEs were also recorded for data analysis.

Call Centre

Results
Data from four participants were removed from the analysis:
two of them were making the PCE on every trial, suggesting
that they had not correctly understood the task; one
participant did not follow the task instructions properly in
that the Call Centre task was not performed; and a data file
was lost for one participant due to a technical fault.
Overall PCE rate There were a total of 330 procedural
errors across the 31 participants. A procedural error is
defined as any incorrect action deviating from the correct
sequence. Over half of the participants (20 out of 31) made
at least one PCE. A total of 56 PCEs were obtained
accounting for about 17% (56 out of 330) of all the
procedural errors. Each participant had 11 opportunities to
commit PCEs (making a total of 341 opportunities), so there
was an overall PCE error rate of 16% (56 out of 341).

Participants were required to identify and correct the error in
order to continue. The experimenter was present in the room
with the participant during training, and the participant was
allowed to ask questions about the tasks if necessary.
In the testing phase, participants were required to
perform 11 trials in total and the experimenter left the
participant to carry on the session alone at this point. The
entire experiment took approximately an hour.

Interruption position effect Table 1 shows the distribution
of the PCE occurrences according to the different
interruption points. The error rate in trials with interruption
Z was about three times more than trials with interruption
Other and Nil.

Apparatus The programs were written in Visual Basic 6
and run on two different PC terminals. The two computer
terminals were arranged at 90° so that the participant had to
turn away from one computer to carry out a task on the
other.
Participants 35 participants, undergraduates and
postgraduates from London universities, took part in this
study. Ages ranged from 19 to 37 with a mean of 24.8.
Measures The dependent measure of primary interest is the
number of PCEs made. Apart from the operational
definition stated earlier, a PCE also has a further criterion
that it is not preceded by any other errors after the dismissal

473

Table 1: Number of PCEs and their error rates with respect
to different interruption positions
Z
Total no. of PCE
(Total no. of
opportunities)
Mean error rate
(SD)

Table 2: Number of non-PCEs and their error rates with
respect to different interruption positions

Interruption position
Other
Nil

37
(124)

11
(124)

8
(93)

29.8%
(32.5)

8.9%
(19.9)

8.6%
(21.0)

Interruption position
IA
LA
NI1
Total no. of PCE
(Total no. of
opportunities)
Mean error rate
(SD)

SD = Standard deviation

SD = Standard deviation

Error rates (%) of PCE occurrences were calculated for
the three different interruption trials for each participant.
The error rates are calculated using the number of PCEs
divided by the number of opportunities for the error. The
use of error rates for comparisons eliminates biases imposed
by absolute numbers, because there were only three trials
with no interruption as opposed to four trials with point Z
and Other interruptions each. A one-way repeated ANOVA
on the error rates showed a large significant main effect of
interruption position. The scores did not conform to the
assumption of sphericity, so the Greenhouse-Geisser
correction was used (F(1.338, 40.149) = 9.921 p = .001; Eta
squared = .249).
Planned contrasts comparing the mean error rates of Z
and Other yielded a reliable difference (t(30) = 3.297, p =
.003), and Z versus Nil also yielded a reliable difference
(t(30) = 3.339, p = .002). No significant difference was
detected between Other and Nil (t(30) = .09, p = .929).
A reviewer suggested the same hypothesis should be
explored in relation to other non-PCEs. Therefore, other
non-PCEs obtained were also analysed in terms of the
interruption position effect.

Discussion

31
(124)

13
(124)

111
(5264)

25%
(25)

1.7%
(2.6)

2.1%
(1.4)

An overall error rate of 16% is obtained for PCEs (56 out of
341 opportunities). The current error rate obtained from
trials without interruptions (8.6%; 8 out of 93 opportunities)
is comparable to the 9.3% (13 out of 140 opportunities)
obtained in Byrne & Bovair’s (1997) Experiment 1, which
did not have working memory load manipulation. This
suggests that the current paradigm has successfully
generated PCEs at a level that allows investigation in a
laboratory setting.
A significant difference was found in the PCE rate
between the different interruption positions. As predicted,
the results suggest that more PCEs occur when the task was
being interrupted just-before (Z) the PC step – almost three
times more – than at any other positions in the task.
However, the same interruption position effect was also
obtained for non-PCEs at other steps in the task. The result
suggests that interruption position had the same disruptive
effect on other errors; an interruption occurring just before a
task step was more likely to result in an error than an earlier
interruption or no interruption at all.
A difference was observed between PCEs and non-PCEs
in terms of their qualitative resumption patterns. All the
obtained PCEs were not preceded by any other errors; in
other words, they were errors omitting the PC step and
moving to the Call Centre task immediately. In contrast, for
non-PCEs, 45% (14 out of 31) of them involved resuming to
the task step just before the interruption, and the remainder
lacked a consistent pattern of resumption. We take this as
evidence that participants were using the false completion
signal in the task environment as a primary cue to the next
step in the task sequence after interruptions just-before the
PC step.

Other non-PCEs Errors at other task steps were categorised
into three interruption categories; “immediately after” (IA,
error occurring immediately after an interruption), “later
after” (LA, error occurring later after an interruption), and
“no interruption” (error occurring before an interruption or
in trials with no interruption). These categories are
equivalent to the PCEs’ interruption position Z, Other and
Nil respectively.
Table 2 shows the number of non-PCEs and their
respective mean error rates according to the three
interruption position categories.
A one-way repeated ANOVA on the error rates yielded a
large significant main effect of interruption position. The
Greenhouse-Geisser correction was used because of
violation of sphericity (F (1.015, 30.439) = 25.6, p < .001; Eta
squared = .46). Post hoc comparisons with Bonferroni
correction showed a reliable difference between IA and LA;
difference between IA and NI was also significant. No
reliable difference was detected between LA and NI.

Experiment 2
This experiment is a continuation of the previous
experiment examining the effect of interruption positions of
two different interruption durations. Two shorter durations
1

About half of the errors in NI (117 out of 228) occurred at a
particular step near the very beginning of the task, however, the
interruption manipulation does not involve an interruption just
before the step. Therefore, errors at that particular step were
excluded from the analysis. The occurrence of the particular error
suggests a systematic nature, however, it is beyond the scope of
this paper to discuss this error.

474

of 45 seconds and 15 seconds were used. Based on the
AGM model, the following hypothesis is made about the
interruption positions and durations being tested:
With an interruption duration long enough for a memory
item to decay below retrieval threshold, the interruption
position effect should persist; on the other hand, the effect
should disappear if the interruption duration is too short for
substantial decay to take place. More specifically, we should
expect an interaction effect between interruption position
and duration if the 15-sec interruption is too short for any
substantial decay of memory.

Table 3: Number of PCEs and their error rates with respect
to different interruption positions
Interruption position
Z
Other
Nil

Method
Tasks, apparatus and procedure Adjustments were made
to the computer program to change the duration of the
interruption to 15 seconds for the Short interruption group
and 45 seconds for the Long interruption group. In all other
ways, the tasks, apparatus and procedure were as described
in experiment 1.

Short
interruption
(15secs)

No of PCEs
(no. of
opportunities)

Long
interruption
(45secs)

Mean error
rate
(SD)
No of PCEs
(no. of
opportunities)
Mean error
rate
(SD)

16
(40)

8
(40)

6
(30)

40.0%
(39.4)

20.0%
(30.7)

20.0%
(28.1)

23
(44)

12
(44)

6
(33)

52.2%
(48.0)

27.3%
(30.5)

18.2%
(31.1)

Overall interruption position effect PCE rates were
calculated for the three different interruption trials for each
participant. The error rates were analysed using a mixed 2 ×
3 ANOVA. Greenhouse-Geisser correction was used due to
violation of sphericity. There was a significant main effect
of interruption position (F(1.504, 28.568) = 7.166, p = .002) with
a large effect size (Eta squared = .274).
Although there was no main effect of interruption length
(F(1,19) = .215, p = .648), the trend of the data clearly
demonstrates the predicted direction. In trials where there
was no interruption, or where the interruption occurs in any
of the Other positions, one would not expect any difference
between the groups in terms of the error rate. In trials where
the interruption occurs immediately before the postcompletion step, there was an increase in the error rate in
the Long Interruption group.
The interaction, interruption position × duration, was not
statistically significant (F(1.504, 28.568) = .436, p = .65).

Design The experiment is a mixed design. It has two
independent variables; the within-subject variable is
interruption position with three levels; Z, Other and Nil. The
between-subject variable is the duration of the interruption
with two levels; Short (15 seconds) or Long (45 seconds).
Participants There were 24 participants (12 in each group).
Participants were undergraduate and postgraduate students
from London universities, age ranging from 20-24 with a
mean age of 21.4 years.
Measures The dependent measure of primary interest is the
same as experiment 1’s , namely, the number of PCEs.

Results
The data from one participant in the Long group and two
participants in the Short interruption group were removed as
they made PCE on every trial suggesting that they had not
correctly understood the task.

Other non-PCEs errors There was a total of 29 resumption
errors, accounting for about 10% of the non-PCEs. Due to
time limitation, the analysis of interruption position effect
on non-PCEs is under progress. However, we should expect
the same pattern of results as in the previous experiment.

Overall PCE rate A total of 297 procedural errors occurred
across the 21 participants. More than half of the participants
(16 out of 21) made at least one PCE. A total of 71 PCEs
were obtained, accounting for about 24% (71 out of 297) of
all procedural errors. Each participant had 11 opportunities
to commit PCEs, therefore their obtained number of PCEs
yielded an overall error rate of 31% (71 out of 231
opportunities). Table 3 shows the distribution of PCEs
according to the different interruption positions, for the two
groups.

Discussion
The results confirm the finding from experiment 1 that
the position of the interruption has a critical influence on the
number of PCEs. Interruptions occurring just before the PC
step are more likely to result in a PCE than interruptions
occurring at other positions in the task.
Both the 15-second and 45-second interruptions are of
sufficient length to result in an increase in PCEs when
interrupted at position Z – almost twice the rate – than at
Other and Nil. Although the results suggest a trend in the
predicted direction, that the length of the interruption itself
can also influence the error rate, the results show that the
475

shorter interruption is not short enough to have a
significantly reduced effect on the PCE rate.
The obtained PCEs show a consistent resumption pattern
as those in experiment 1, that is, they were not preceded by
any other errors. This suggests a systematic bias towards
committing a PCE after interruption Z. The systematic bias
suggests that cues in the external task environment might
prompt participants about the completion of the task.
The overall PCE rate of participants in experiment 2 is
higher than that of experiment 1 (31% compared to 16%).
However, statistical comparisons only showed a marginal
significance between the difference of the two experiments
(t(30.721)=.2.011, p = .053). The marginal difference may be
due to slight differences in the random samples obtained in
the experiments.

interruption position and duration. Further analysis of the
non-PCEs from experiment 2 is also in progress to confirm
the effect of interruption on these errors.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded by a UCL departmental studentship.
We would like to thank Dr. A. McClelland for valuable
discussions and an anonymous reviewer for detailed
comments.

References
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
an activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39-83.
Byrne, M. D. & Bovair, S. (1997). A working memory
model of a common procedural error. Cognitive Science,
21, 31-61
Chung, P. H., & Byrne, M. D. (2004). Visual cues to reduce
errors in a routine procedural task. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cutrell E., Czerwinski M. & Horvitz E. (2001) Notification,
disruption, and memory: Effects of messaging
interruptions on memory and performance, in: M. Hirose
(Ed.) Human-Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2001
Conference Proceedings, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 263-269
Edwards M. B. & Gronlund S. D. (1998) Task interruption
and its effects on memory, Memory, 6 (6), 665-687.
Gillie T. & Broadbent D. (1989) What makes interruptions
disruptive? A study of length, similarity and complexity,
Psychological Research , 50 (4), 243-250.
Lee, W. O. (1992). The Effects of Skill Development and
Feedback on Action Slips. In A. Monk, D. Diaper and M.
Harrison (Eds.), People and Computers VII (pp. 73-86).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Li, S. Y. W., Blandford, A., Cairns, P. & Young, R. M.
(2005). Post-completion errors in problem solving.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
McFarlane D. C. & Latorella K. A. (2002) The scope and
importance of human interruption in human-computer
interaction design, Human-Computer Interaction, 17 (1),
1-61.
Monk C. A., Boehm-Davis D. A. & Trafton J. G. (2004)
Very brief interruptions result in resumption cost.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Reason, J. (2002). Combating omission errors through task
analysis and good reminders. Quality of Safety and Health
Care, 11, 40-44
Trafton J. G., Altmann E. M., Brock D. P. & Mintz F. E.
(2003) Preparing to resume an interrupted task: Effects of
prospective goal encoding and retrospective rehearsal,
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58
(5), 583-603

General discussion
Results from the current study suggest that the effect of
interruption position has a critical influence on the
occurrences of PCE: interruptions occurring just before the
PC step are more likely to result in PCEs than interruptions
occurring at other positions in the task. The effect is robust
in that it was replicated in a second experiment in the
current study. However, further analysis into other nonPCEs shows that they were also sensitive to the interruption
position effect. This suggests that PCEs are no different to
other errors in terms of the effect of interruption.
The effect of interruption position is consistent with
predictions made from the AGM model. When associative
priming between procedural steps is disrupted for long
enough that the suspended goal has decayed substantially,
then upon task resumption, external cues in the task
environment are likely to dominate the priming process
cueing the next step in the task sequence. In the case of an
interruption intruding just before the PC step, the
combination of the decay of the PC sub-goal and the
occurrence of the false completion signal is likely to be the
reason for giving rise to the error. This also highlights a
feature distinguishing PCE from other omission errors: that
a PCE is almost always preceded by a completion signal.
The completion signal can be external in the environment,
as in the current study, or internal in one’s mental state (Li
et al., 2005).
Consideration of the results of the two experiments
suggests that longer interruptions can lead to larger
increases in PCE rate when placed just before the PC step
rather than other positions; a threefold increase with a 75sec
interruption compared to a twofold increase with a 45-sec
and 15-sec interruption. There was no significant difference
in error rate between the two groups in experiment 2:
evidence that even relatively short interruptions can result in
a significant increase in PCE rate.
All in all, the effect of interruption position on PCE is
clear and robust; however, further research is required to
confirm the effect of the interruption duration, by including
a shorter interruption duration than the current ones to
examine the predicted interaction effect between

476

