UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generating Collective Spatial References

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4641h9q7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Gatt, Albert

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generating Collective Spatial References
Albert Gatt (agatt@csd.abdn.ac.uk)
Department of Computing Science, Meston 216, King’s College
Aberdeen AB24 3UE United Kingdom

grouping operators (2), which make reference to a group explicit. The expression the group of N X can only be true if
there are N individuals of type X that form a group.

Abstract
Generation of Referring Expressions is concerned with
distinguishing descriptions for target referents in a knowledge
base. Plural reference introduces novel problems, one of
which is the collective/distributive distinction. This paper
presents an empirical study of the production of collective
spatial references, and an algorithm that determines content
for such expressions from spatial data.

(1) the men in the corner
(2) the group of four women in the pub
Much work in formal semantics has focused on giving an
account of the collective/distributive distinction (e.g. Scha,
1983; Landman, 1989; Landman, 1996). This paper, on the
other hand, will be concerned with the automatic generation
of collective references to sets or groups, focusing on spatial
domains. There are three issues to be faced:

Keywords: Natural Language Generation; psycholinguistics;
reference; collective predication.

Introduction
Generation of Referring Expressions (GRE) is an integral part
of the microplanning stage of Natural Language Generation
(NLG). Given a target referent, a GRE algorithm selects properties (or predicates) that will distinguish the target from its
distractors in a knowledge base (KB), assumed to be accessible to both the system and the user/hearer (Dale & Reiter,
1995). Following Dale and Reiter, this process of content determination is usually conceived as a search, during which the
GRE algorithm finds properties that are true of the target and
not true of at least a subset of the distractors. Such properties
are incrementally added to the description, and the process
continues until the intersection of all the selected properties
has only the target in its extension.
Recent work has extended this problem definition to the
generation of plural references. Such work has mostly focused on the two interrelated issues of logical completeness
and naturalness. Completeness requires that a GRE algorithm
find a distinguishing description whenever one exists. In the
case of plurals, this requires dealing not only with the intersection or conjunction of predicates, but also logical disjunction (set union) (van Deemter, 2002). It turns out however,
that extending existing algorithms in this way often results
in extremely complex descriptions. Taking their cue from
Grice’s (1975) notion of Brevity, several authors have proposed ways of controlling the search for a distinguishing description in order to avoid this (e.g. Gardent, 2002; Horacek
2004).
One problem that has recieved very little attention in this
area is that of collective predication. Plural predicates can
have a collective reading, and the difference between such
readings and distributives often has consequences for the
truth conditions of a sentence. For instance, (1) could be (distributively) true of each of the men in question, and collectively true of a group of men, taken as a whole. A collective reading is often forced by the presence of numerals and

P1 The grounding problem: When is it appropriate to refer
to a set in the domain as a group?
P2 Expressive choice: When is it correct to use a grouping
operator and/or a numeral?
P3 Descriptive strategy: When is reference to a group sufficient and when is it necessary to identify it in relation to its
distractors? There are two broad possibilities:
1. absolute strategy: distinguish a group based solely on
its properties
2. navigational strategy: explicitly distinguish a group
from its distractors
In what follows, we assume that there is a domain of entities which have, among other things, a location property,
represented as a vector of coordinates. Here, the grounding
problem (P1) is to determine which sets of entities form a perceptual group, warranting the application of a group operator.
This also has a bearing on descriptive strategy (P3). If a set
of referents form a group, it may be necessary to distinguish
it from distractors that are near enough to it. The question
of expressive choice is an open empirical question: it’s not
clear whether the use of numerals and explicit grouping operators depend on factors such as target set size and distractor
proximity.
The rest of this paper introduces some related work, then
presents an approach to grounding spatial descriptions. An
experiment addressing P2 and P3 is described. Finally, we
bring together these two strands in a procedure that determines the content of spatial descriptions, which is assumed
to constitute the input to a linguistic realisation module.

255

1

Related work
The generation of collectives has been addressed by Stone
(2000) within a constraint-based framework. The idea is to
find, for a given target set R, a salient
cover for the set, i.e.
S
a set of properties P such that p∈P kpk = R. However,
the empirical question of what constitutes a salient cover is
not addressed. Funakoshi et al. (2004) use empirical data to
motivate a navigational generation strategy for singular references in spatial domains. Starting from the entire domain,
their algorithm generates a sequence of groups containing the
intended referent. The sequence is then rendered linguistically. The groups are identified using the perceptual grouping algorithm proposed by Thorisson (1994). This generation
strategy can easily be generalised to sets of objects; however,
it’s not clear that a sequence-of-groups would be the strategy
of choice for non-Japanese speakers, or indeed whether it is
necessary to always start from the entire domain.
Gorniak & Roy (2004) also address the problem of grounding in a reference resolution task. Their approach was to
encode a direct mapping between linguistic devices used by
subjects in (singular) object references and features of the visual scenes those devices referred to. Although it was not
carried out in a controlled setting, their study bears a resemblance to the one reported below. Nevertheless, the grounding
of linguistic expressions in visual scenes is different in a resolution task, since the decision to refer collectively does not
devolve on the system.

2

3

4

5

6

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 1: Example domain

set of entities, each of which has a location attribute, whose
value is a tuple of length n, corresponding to n dimensions.
The distance function δ(a, b), returns the Euclidean distance
between any pair of entities. As a first step, a sparse, directed graph G = hV, Ei is constructed to represent the nearest neighbour relation, where the set V of vertices represents
domain entities, and:

Dealing with the grounding problem


∀e, e′ ∈ V : he, e′ i ∈ E ↔ δ(e, e′ ) =

The symbol grounding problem, as formulated by Harnad
(1990), can be paraphrased as follows: Given a symbol system consisting of a finite alphabet and a set of syntactic rules
to manipulate the symbols, how is it possible to formulate
the meaning of the symbol tokens without reference to other
symbols (which makes the exercise circular)? Problem P1
is an incarnation of this in a limited domain. Consider a
reference to {A1, B4, C5} in Figure 1. The description the
(group of) three lightbulbs is a misleading reference, because
these elements do not constitute a good perceptual group.
Perceptually grounded groups are perceived as identifiable
clusters, or ‘complex entities’ composed of multiple individuals. Wertheimer’s (1938) principles of perceptual organisation hold that such groups are perceived when their elements
are sufficiently close, and sufficiently distant from other domain elements.
Our solution to the grounding problem is to consider only
perceptually well-formed groups as candidates for the application of a grouping operator such as the group of X. Implicit
in this treatment is a semantic view of groups which, following Landman (1989, 1996), treats them as complex individuals formed by a type-raising operation. The operation, which
is triggered by the application of a grouping operator, takes a
set and returns a group.
Perceptual groups are discovered by the procedure
makeGroups(D), a graph-theoretic generalisation of a clustering algorithm proposed by Gatt (2006). The procedure partitions a domain D into groups which satisfy Wertheimer’s
Principle of Proxmity, interpreted in terms of the Nearest
Neighbour Principle (NNP). NNP holds that elements should
be grouped together with their nearest neighbours. D is a

min

x∈D−{e}


δ(e, x)

(3)
Each entity e ∈ V has a single emanating edge, denoted
G[e], leading to its nearest neighbour (hereafter nn(v, G[e])).
In its simplest form, grouping could proceed by taking
the transitive closure of the nearest neighbour relation: If
nn(e, e′ ) and nn(e′ , e′′ ), then {e, e′ , e′′ } are clustered together. However, whether two elements satisfying NNP are
grouped together also depends on the distance between them.
For instance, the nearest neighbour of F 6 in Figure 1 is E3,
which is likely to be grouped with D3. However, F 6 is too
distant to warrant inclusion in this group.
We resolve this by using data from a study on perceptual
grouping (Gatt 2006). 13 participants were shown 4 domains
consisting of 13 points constructed by plotting hx, yi coordinates. They were asked to partition them into groups according to their intuitions. From this data, we extracted all
nearest-neighbour pairs and calculated the proportion of participants who chose to group the pairs together. In all cases,
participants observed NNP, grouping entities with their nearest neighbours, if they grouped them at all.
A regression analysis of pairwise distance on response proportions was conducted, to determine the predicted likelihood of acceptance p(a, b) for a grouped pair ha, bi. This
yielded equation (4), which had an optimal fit to the data
(β = −.96, p < .001):
p(a, b) = 1.091 + (−.364 × δ(a, b))

(4)

makeGroups(D) proceeds by looping through the set of
objects in D. For each entity (vertex) v, the decision to group
v and G[v] together depends on p. A threshold is set, so that

256

a pair is grouped if p(v, G[v]) > .75. In case one of the
two entities is already in some group G, the acceptance rate
is calculated between e and the groups’s geometric centroid
(cen(G)):
P|G|
xi
(5)
cen(G) = i=1
|G|

Grounded semantics for group expressions Since the
output of makeGroups(D) closely approximates human intuitions, it is used to determine whether a given target set of
referents is a good candidate for a collective group description. We first define the notion of a spatially grounded group.

Evaluation The output of makeGroups(D) was evaluated
by calculating an agreement score between the algorithm and
each participant for each entity e in each domain1 . Let Gh be
a group proposed by a participant (H), containing e, and let
Ga be the group containing e found by the algorithm (A). The
score computed by (6) reflects the extent to which human and
algorithm agree on the group that e should be placed in.

∃G ∈ makeGroups(D) : S ⊆ G
Following Landman (1989), grouping operators such as
the cluster are viewed as linguistic counterparts of the semantic operation mapping pluralities, which denote sets, to
groups, which are complex individuals. This is restricted by
the grounding condition.

agr(H, A, e) =

|Gh ∩ Ga |
|Gh ∩ Ua | + |Gh ∩ Ua |

Definition 3. Spatial Grounding
S ⊆ D is spatially grounded iff:

Investigating descriptive strategies
(6)

This section describes some results from an experiment that
addressed the issues introduced under P2 and P3 in the Introduction.

Figure 2 displays mean agreement scores on each of the
thirteen entities in the four domains. Agreement is over 0.85
in 75% of cases.

Design and procedure
The experiment involved a task which required participants
to refer to a target set in a 2D domain where the only feature
that distinguished the elements of the set was their location.

1.2

1

Materials and design A domain consisted of a 3 × 3 matrix, as shown in Figure 1. This created 9 possible locations.
Each space was further subdivided into 4 cells (the ‘object
cells’) of equal size. Domain objects were selected from the
colour version of the Snodgrass/Vanderwart normed picture
set (Rossion & Pourtois, 2004). A trial consisted of a target
set in one of the 9 locations, marked by a faint dotted red circle, surrounded by 8 distractors of identical type. The grid
structure was not visible to participants. Two factors were
manipulated in the experiment:

agreement

0.8
domain1
domain2

0.6

domain3
domain4

0.4

0.2

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

entity

Figure 2: Evaluation of makeGroups(D)
Significant disagreement arose due to reciprocal pairs, that
is, cases where nn(a, b) and nn(b, a). In such cases, the
algorithm simply groups {a, b} together, and no further elements will be added to the group. Humans, on the other
hand, merged such a group with neighbouring groups when
they were close enough. The solution is to extend the nearest
neighbour relation to groups, on which basis we also define a
notion of mergeability. Both relations are defined over pairs
of groups G1 , G2 ∈ makeGroups(D), and will be useful in
the content determination procedure to be described below.

1. Cardinality Target sets contained 1 (C1), 4 (C4), or 8 (C8)
objects.
2. Distractors Distractors were close to or distant from the
target set. In the close condition, distractors in locations
adjacent to the target location were placed in object cells
bordering the target location, as in Figure 1. In the distant condition, at least one object cell separated a distractor
from the border of the target location.
Three sets of 18 trials each were constructed, each of which
contained 6 trials in each level of cardinality, half of which
were in the close and half in the distant distractor conditions.
Trial sets satisfied two constraints: (a) there were two trials
with targets in each of the nine locations; (b) every cardinality × distractor combination was in a different location in
each version.
We expected distractors to strongly impact descriptive
strategy, with more navigational responses overall when distractors were close. However, since large groups are potentially more salient, cardinality should also impact strategy,
with fewer navigational descriptions in C8, and more in C1.
If set size increases salience, grouping operators should be
predominant in C8 relative to C4.

Definition 1. Group Nearest Neighbour
G2 is the nearest neighbour of G1 , nn(G1 , G2 ), iff:
δ(cen(G1 ), cen(G2 )) = minc δ(cen(G1 ), cen(c))
where c ∈ makeGroups(D) − G1 .
Definition 2. Mergeability
G1 and G2 are mergeable, mergeable(G1 , G2 ), iff:
p(cen(G1 ), cen(G2 )) > 0.75
1
See Gatt (2006) for a comparison to Thorisson’s (1994) algorithm.

257

Table 1: Proportions (%) of response types
Cardinality
C1
C4
C8

abs
33
80
76.2

Close
nav
55
16.7
22.2

grp
NA
60
57.1

num
NA
15
58.7

abs
81.7
100
96.8

Distant
nav
6
0
3.2

grp
NA
40
57.1

num
NA
35
58.7

distractors (close: χ21 = 2.40, ns, χ22 = 1, ns, distant:
χ21 = 2.35, p > .1, χ22 = .8, ns).
The most common descriptive strategy overall was the absolute strategy. However, there was a significant effect of
cardinality (χ21 = 32.75, p < .001), with a greater proportion of navigational descriptions in the C1 condition. The
difference between cardinality levels was significant overall in proportions of both absolute (χ22 = 6.58, p = .03)
and navigational responses (χ22 = 16.11, p < .001). Pairwise comparisons within the close condition showed that navigational response proportions were reliably different in the
close condition between C1 and C4 (Z = 3.012, p = .003),
and C1 and C8 (Z = 1.949, p = .05), but not C4 and
C8. Within the distant condition, proportions of navigational
responses were only reliably different between C1 and C8
(Z = 2.23, p = .03), with the C1 − C4 contrast barely reaching significance (Z = 1.79, p = .07).
Descriptive strategy was strongly dependent on the closeness of distractors, with significantly more absolute responses in the distant condition (χ21 = 47.07, p < .001).
By participants, the proportions of both absolute responses
differed significantly across the two conditions (absolute:
χ22 = 16, p < .001, navigational: χ22 = 11.27, p = .001).
The difference in response proportions between close and distant conditions was significant at all three levels of cardinality: C1: Z = 3.08, p = .002; C4: Z = 1.97, p = .05;
and C8: Z = 2.68, p = .007. Proportions of navigational responses displayed a similar pattern, except in the C4
condition, where the difference failed to reach significance
(C1 : Z = 3.04, p = .002, C4 : Z = 1.82, p = .07,
C8 : Z = 2.04, p = .002).

Participants and method 20 (self-rated) native or fluent
speakers of English carried out the experiment remotely on
the internet2 . They were asked to imagine playing a game
which required them to identify a set of objects for a partner.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the three versions; trials were randomised. A trial consisted of a domain,
and a question (Which objects are in the dotted red circle?),
with a text box in which participants typed responses.

Results and discussion
The results consist of a corpus of ca. 360 descriptions, approximately equally divided into references to 1, 4 and 8 objects. Descriptions were classified according to descriptive
strategy and collective expression type as follows:
1. descriptive strategy
(a) navigational: any description to the target set that involved reference to the distractors. E.g. the cluster of
7 balloons: there’s one balloon above and one balloon
below the cluster
(b) absolute: any description that involved reference solely
to the target set. E.g. the four cups closest to the top
right corner
(c) other
2. collective expression (C4 and C8 conditions only)
(a) +/- grouping operator: any description that contained a
group expression and/or a reference to the shape of the
target set. E.g. the 8 bulbs in the conspicuous group on
the top
(b) +/- numeral: any description that contained an explicit
mention of the number of objects in the target set.

General discussion The use of grouping operators and numerals was predominant irrespective of set size or of distractor proximity. The fact that larger sets tend to be described
more often with reference to their size is probably due to the
greater precision afforded by numerals when talking about
relatively large quantities, thus ensuring an unambiguous description.
One possible reason for the overall frequency of the absolute strategy is that participants expected location and cardinality information to be sufficient for identification of large,
and therefore salient, sets. For example, one participant wrote
the group of 8 bottles in the bottom right of the screen, where
distractors were close to the target. The fact that such responses were less prevalent in C1 supports this claim. However, strategy was highly dependent on distractor closeness.
Indeed, C1 only differed reliably from C8 in the distant condition. In some of these cases, an isolated referent could have
been perceived as mergeable with a nearby group, motivating
a navigational strategy. Singletons are also less salient than

Results Table 1 displays proportions of responses by condition. We report results of a by-items analysis (χ21 ) on response
frequencies. By participants, we use a Friedman analysis (χ22 )
on proportions of response types, and signed rank tests (Z)
for pairwise comparisons.
The expectations regarding the effect of cardinality on
grouping and numerals were not borne out: Grouping operators were equally common in C4 and C8 conditions
(χ21 = 1.26, ns, χ22 = 1.47, ns). There was a greater tendency to explicitly use numerals in the C8 condition, reliable both by items (χ21 = 28.66, p < .001) and participants (χ22 = 13.00, p < .001). The use of numerals and
grouping expressions was not dependent on the closeness of
2

Precautions were taken to disallow participants from repeating
the experiment.

258

Algorithm 1 descriptionSet( D, R )
1: dSet ← ∅
2: for all G ∈ makeGroups(D) do
3:
if R ∩ G 6= ∅ then
4:
N ← nearestN eighbour(G)
5:
if mergeable(N, g) then
6:
dSet ← dSet ∪ hR ∩ G, G, N i
7:
else
8:
dSet ← dSet ∪ hR ∩ G, G, ∅i
9:
end if
10:
end if
11:
R ←R−G
12:
if R = ∅ then
13:
return dSet
14:
end if
15: end for

large groups. In this connection, it is interesting to note that
there were descriptions in the C4 and C8 conditions which
made explicit reference to group salience (7)
(7) the 8 balloons forming a conspicuous group
On closer examination, two main types of navigational responses were distinguished: (a) the subset strategy (8) where
the target is identified within a containing group; (b) a complement strategy (9), identifying the target and explicitly describing surrounding distractors. Of these, (a) was the most
frequent, comprising 67% of all navigational responses.
(8) the group of lamps on the right middle . . . take the 4
lamps of the bottom . . . AND the corresponding 4 above
them
(9) the eight ones clustered around the middle . . . this leaves
one object out . . . left of the middle
While the subset strategy has the flavour of a ‘sequence
of groups’, as proposed by Funakoshi et al. (2004), it was
usually limited to a reference to the immediately containing
set, followed by a reference to the target.

A description set constitutes the input to a procedure that
fleshes out its content. Each tuple in the set is mapped to a
description that is maximally of the form the group of R’ in G
excluding N, where G, R′ , N are described in the following
way.

Content determination
This section brings together the results reported, describing a
content-determination strategy for collective descriptions of
spatial groups. Our results suggest that descriptive strategy
depends on whether there are distractors close to the target
set, which occurs in two cases: (a) the target is a proper subset of a grounded group; and/or (b) the nearest neighbour of
the target set’s containing group is mergeable with the group.
The core of the content-determination procedure, shown in
Algorithm 1 builds a description set for the target.
Definition 4. [Description set] A description set dSet for a
target referent set R is a set of tuples hR′ , G, N i where:

1. If G − R′ is nonempty, return a description of the form
grp(R′ ) in grp(G). Otherwise return grp(R′ ).
2. If N is nonempty, return grp(N )
3. grp(S), for any S is constructed as follows:
(a) If S contains 4 or more elements, grp(S) consists of a
group operator, a numeral quantifier, and the location of
the set within its smallest containing set.
(b) If S contains between 2 and 4 elements, grp(S) consists
of a numeral and location only.
(c) If S is a singleton, grp(S) contains location information
only.

1. G and N are grounded in D

2. either nn(G, N ) ∧ mergeable(G, N ) or N = ∅


3. R′ ⊆ R ∧ R′ ∩ G 6= ∅
S
4. R′ ∈dSet = R

In line with the experimental findings, numerals are always
used except in the case of singletons, while group operators
are omitted if the set has fewer than four elements. Navigational strategies are used when G and/or N are nonempty. In
case R′ is contained within a larger group, the subset strategy
is used, describing R′ in terms of its location in its smallest containing set, that is G. A mergeable nearest neighbour,
by contrast, is excluded by relating G to it in what is essentially the complement strategy. Note that both G and N are
described in absolute terms, since their smallest containing
group is the domain itself.

′

In these tuples, R corresponds to (a subset of) the target
satisfying the groundedness condition (Def 3). This is trivially satisfied in case |R′ | = 1. The set G is the spatially
grounded group containing R′ . If G − R′ 6= ∅, then the elements of R′ need to be distinguished from G − R′ , calling
for a navigational strategy. Similarly, if the containing group
has a mergeable nearest neighbour N , R′ needs to be distinguished from this too.
The procedure descriptionSet(D, R) iterates through the
groups returned by makeGroups(D). If a group and the target R have a nonempty intersection (1.3), the desciption set
is updated with a new tuple, whose third element N is either a mergeable nearest neighbour of the containing group
G, or empty (1.4–1.9). Target elements thus accounted for
are removed (1.11). Since makeGroups(D) partitions the
domain, for any element in the target set, there will be one
and only one group that contains that element.

Examples
The following examples are given with reference to Figure 1. We will first consider the case where the target
set is {E1, E2, F 1, F 2}. The procedure makeGroups(D)
returns, among others, the following groups: 1 :
{E1, E2, F 1, F 2, D1}, 2 : {D3, E3}. Group 2 is not

259

merged with Group 1, because D3 and E3 are a reciprocal pair. The call to descriptionSets(D, R) identifies Group 1 as a spatially grounded group which contains all the referents.
As a result, no more referents remain to be distinguished at line (1.11).
The
nearest neighbour of Group 1, Group 2, is mergeable. Hence, the description set returned contains the tuple h{E1, E2, F 1, F 2}, {E1, E2, F 1, F 2, D1}, {D3, E3}i.
Since the target set is contained in Group 1, this part of the
description is fleshed out by a group description of the target
in the containing group. This part of the description has the
form grp(R′ ) in grp(G), where grp(R′ ) contains a numeral,
a group operator, and the target’s location within G, while
grp(G) is described in absolute terms. Since N is nonempty,
it is also described using numeral and location information.
The end result would be realised as shown in (10).

Funakoshi, K., Watanabe, S., Kuriyama, N., & Tokunaga, T.
(2004). Generating referring expressions using perceptual
groups. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
in Natural Language Generation
Gardent, C. (2002). Generating minimal definite descriptions. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gatt, A. (2006). Structuring knowledge for reference generation: A clustering algorithm. Proceedings of the 11th
Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL.
Gorniak, P., & Roy, D. (2004). Grounded semantic composition for visual scenes. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 21, 429–470.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In: P. Cole and J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics: Speech Acts. New
York: Academic Press.
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica,
42, 335–346.
Horacek, H. (2004). On referring to sets of objects naturally.
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference in Natural
Language Generation
Landman, F. (1989). Groups I. Linguistics and Philosophy,
12, 559–605.
Landman, F. (1996). Plurality. In: S. Lappin (Ed.), Handbook
of Contemporary Semantic Theory. Oxford: Blackwell.

(10) the group of four bulbs in the group of five at the
bottom left excluding the two objects towards the
middle
Although there is considerable variation in the corpus, this
output is comparable to several human descriptions in similar
domains, such as (11), which first identifies the containing set
(9 bulbs) via its location, excluding the distractor.
(11) The . . . 8 of 9 bulbs closest to the bottom leftmost
corner of the frame . . . A ninth bulb in this cluster, the one
lying closer to the central part . . .

Reiter, E., & Sripada, S. (2002). Human variation and lexical
choice. Computational Linguistics, 28, 545–553.

Consider next a reference to {B4, B6, F 6}. In this case,
the two relevant grounded groups are {B4, C5, B6} and
{F 6}. None of these two groups have a mergeable nearest neighbour. The description set contains two tuples:
h{B4, B6}, {B4, B5, B6}, ∅i and h{F 6}, {F 6}, ∅i. The
first of these results in a reference to {B4, B6} in terms of
its location within the containing set. For the second, since
G − R′ = ∅ and there is no mergeable nearest neighbour, the
singleton is described in absolute terms.

Rossion, B., & Pourtois, G. (2004). Revisiting Snodgrass and
Vanderwart’s object databank: The role of surface detail in
basic level object recognition. Perception, 33, 216–236.
Scha, R.J.H. (1980). Distributive, collective, and cumulative quantification. In: J. Groenendijk, M. Stokhof, and T.
Janssen (Eds.), Formal Methods in the Study of Language.
Amsterdam: Mathematisch Centrum.
Stone, M. (2000). On identifying sets. Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference in Natural Language Generation
Thorisson, K. (1994). Simulated perceptual grouping: An application to Human-Computer Interaction. Proceedings of
the 16th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.

Conclusions
This paper has discussed the generation of collective spatial
descriptions, focusing on the problems of grounding the semantics of group operators in perceptual data, and finding adequate descriptive strategies. The approach was informed by
two empirical studies on perceptual grouping and collective
spatial reference.
Current work is exploiting the corpus further. While
the present paper focused on when and how to refer using
group operators and numerals, complications arise with lexical choice and realisation, where the corpus evinces considerable individual variation. The data on descriptive strategies
is also being studied more closely, with a view to evaluating
the output of the algorithm more systematically against the
human output.

van Deemter, K. (2002). Generating referring expressions:
Boolean extensions of the Incremental Algorithm. Computational Linguistics, 28, 37–52.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Laws of organization in perceptual
forms. In: W. Ellis (Ed.), A Source Book of Gestalt Psychology. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Kees van Deemter, Ehud Reiter, Graeme Ritchie,
Judith Masthoff and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. This work forms part of the TUNA Project
(http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/ agatt/tuna), supported by EPSRC Grant No. GR/S13330/01.

References
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretation
of the Gricean maxims in the Generation of Referring Expressions. Cognitive Science, 19, 233–263.

260

