UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grounded Representations for Sensory-Motor Learning: A Linguistic Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vq4n4g2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Aloimonos, Yiannis
Guerra-Filho, Gutemberg

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grounded Representations for Sensory-Motor Learning: A Linguistic Approach
Gutemberg Guerra-Filho (GUERRA@Cs.Umd.Edu)
Department of Computer Science, A. V. Williams Bldg.
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA

Yiannis Aloimonos (YIANNIS@Cfar.Umd.Edu)
Center for Automation Research, A. V. Williams Bldg.
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA

consists in the translation from a non-symbolic analog
representation of human activities in the world to a
grounded non-arbitrary symbolic representation according
to invariant features, which allow cognitive tasks such as
recognition.
The sensory-motor projection of primitive words leads to
language grounding. Language grounding for verbs has
been addressed by Siskind (2001) and Bailey at al. (1997)
from the perspective of perception and action, respectively.
Biological evidence, such as the functionality of Broca’s
region in the brain (Nishitani at al. 2005) and the mirror
neurons theory (Gallese at al. 1996), suggests that
perception and action share the same symbolic structure as
a knowledge that provides common ground for recognition
and motor planning.
Furthermore, spoken language and visible movement use
a similar cognitive substrate based on the embodiment of
grammatical processing. With evidence that language is
grounded on the motor system (Glenberg and Kaschak
2002), we propose a visuo-motor language as a grounded
representation for sensory-motor learning.
Our visuo-motor language is called Human Activity
Language (HAL). HAL is specified in a linguistic
approach, where phonetics, morphology and, syntax are
defined. The linguistics framework is used to represent
human movement with a symbolic system. However, the
symbols have a non-arbitrary mapping to the sensorymotor primitives. A linguistic approach benefits from the
theory of Automatic Speech Recognition and Natural
Language Processing.
In kinesiology and movement analysis, the symbolic
representation materializes the concept of motor programs
and enables the identification of common motor
subprograms used in different activities.
In Computer Vision, a visuo-motor language would
allow the visual parsing of human movement which may
be used in action recognition and video annotation to
extract symbolic descriptions from real-world data.
The visuo-motor language may also help humanoid
robots to generalize the planning and control of motor
activities while using a vocabulary of human actions. In
Computer Graphics, this language could lead to a different
approach in animation programming.
We propose HAL as a representation which allows the
use of parsing and symbolic reasoning about information

Abstract
We have empirically discovered that the space of human
actions has a linguistic structure. This is a sensory-motor
space consisting of the evolution of the joint angles of the
human body in movement. The space of human activity has
its own phonemes, morphemes, words (nouns, verbs,
adjectives, adverbs), and sentences formed by syntax. This
has a number of implications for the grounding problem and
cognition in general. We present a Human Activity
Language (HAL) for symbolic manipulation of visual and
motor information. The embodiment of the language serves
as the interface between visual perception and the motor
subsystem. The visuo-motor language is defined using a
linguistic approach. In phonology, we define basic atomic
segments that are used to compose human activity. In
morphology, we study how visuo-motor phonemes are
combined to form strings representing human activity and to
generate a higher-level morphological grammar. In syntax,
we present a model for visuo-motor sentence construction
where the subject corresponds to the active joints (noun)
modified by a posture (adjective). A verbal phrase involves
the representation of the human activity (verb) and timing
coordination among different joints (adverb).
Keywords: grounding problem, sensory-motor intelligence.

Introduction
Natural intelligent systems perceive events occurring in the
environment, reason about what is happening, and act
accordingly. This process involves mapping observed
motor sequences onto a vocabulary of actions. This
vocabulary represents motor patterns performed previously
and stored according to some knowledge representation.
An artificial intelligence with commensurate abilities
may require a symbolic structure for reasoning about
human activities. However, the semantic interpretation of a
symbolic representation system, such as natural language,
cannot be based only on meaningless arbitrary symbols.
The symbol grounding problem, Harnard (1990),
addresses this semantic gap and suggests that the
primitives of a formal symbolic system should be
associated with grounded representation connected to
physical experience in the world.
A grounded representation is a sensory-motor projection
of objects and events to which elementary symbols refer.
In this paper, we concentrate in events associated with
human activities. This way, a sensory-motor projection

1406

frontal, sagital) corresponds to a degree of freedom (DOF)
in a human body.
A joint angle time-varying function for all DOFs
represents a human action. This approach to action
definition is used in this paper for the derivation of a
grounded symbolic representation: the Human Activity
Language.

related to human activities. This representation is compact
and, consequently, computationally efficient.

Sensory-Motor Embodiment
Mirror neurons are brain cells which activate when a
monkey performs a specific action and also fire when the
monkey observes the same action (Gallese at al. 1996).
There is evidence that mirror neurons exist in human
brains. This suggests a common representation for
perceptual and motor information.
A visuo-motor language plays a central role in
supporting activity understanding as a common
representation for visual and motor information. A
perception system takes the visual input and extracts
higher-level representations for human actions. These
representations are parsed and possibly matched to visuomotor programs by the recognition process. If the action
vocabulary does not contain the observed action, no
matching is found and learning occurs through imitation.
The imitation process searches for a physically feasible
plan to execute the observed unknown action in the action
subsystem.

Kinetology
A first process in our linguistic methodology is to find
structure in human movement through basic units akin to
phonemes in spoken language. Kinetology is the study of
the basic atoms of human movement, including the motion
representation, segmentation, and rules modeling and
constraining these atoms.
We propose the concept of a kinetological system and
five principles on which such a system should be based:
compactness, view-invariance, reproducibility, selectivity,
and reconstructivity.
We use human walking gait to illustrate and evaluate our
kinetological system. Human walking is a well constrained
action, involves several coordinated body parts, and it has
been extensively studied. Actual movement data of human
walking gait is analyzed.

Visual Representations
Visual and motor aspects of human activity are abstracted
to a common ground through embodiment which is,
ultimately, the consideration of the human body into the
modeling process. In this paper, we focus in the discovery
of a common embodied symbolic language.
One instance of the visual perception process is achieved
by a Motion Capture (MoCap) system. We captured videos
featuring 90 different human activities and the
corresponding three-dimensional reconstruction for
trajectories of body parts was found using our own MoCap
system, Guerra-Filho (2005). Given this three-dimensional
reconstruction, joint angles were computed to describe
human movement.

Compactness and View-Invariance
The compactness principle is related to describing a human
activity with the least possible number of atoms. We define
a state according to the sign of derivatives of the original
3D motion. The derivatives used in our segmentation are
velocity and acceleration.
A view-invariant representation provides the same 2D
projected description of an intrinsically 3D action captured
from different viewpoints. In order to evaluate viewinvariance, a circular surrounding configuration of
viewpoints is used.
A compactness/view-invariance (CVI) graph for a DOF
shows the states associated with the movement according
to two dimensions: time and space (see Fig. 1). For each
time instant (horizontal axis) and for each viewpoint in the
configuration of viewpoints (vertical axis), the movement
state is associated with a representative color.

Motor Representations
Muscles are stimulated by electrical impulses (action
potentials) that travel from a nerve to a muscle. The nerve
is activated when a threshold current is achieved. Each
nerve action potential activates the muscle propagating
another action potential into the muscle fibers to cause
contraction.
All basic moves a human body can perform result from
single muscle activations. Different muscles collaborate to
perform some specific anatomic action on a particular body
part. Anatomic actions are the most basic movements that
are visible and, hence, they are a starting point for the
cyclic cognitive process between visual and motor
representations. In general, anatomic actions can be
divided into flexion/extension, abduction/adduction, and
rotations. An anatomic action performed by a specific joint
and occurring in a particular anatomic plane (traverse,

Fig. 1: Compactness/View-Invariance Graph.

1407

Fig. 3). Using our kinetological system, six joint angles
obtained very high repeatability: pelvic obliquity, hip
flexion-extension, hip abduction-adduction, knee flexionextension, foot rotation, and foot progression. These
variables seem to be the most related to the movement of
walking forward. Other joint angles obtained only a high
repeatability measure which is interpreted as a secondary
role in the action: pelvic tilt and ankle dorsi-plantar
flexion. The remaining joint angles had a poor repeatability
rate and seem not to be correlated to the action purpose
but, probably, to its stability.

The compactness measurement consists in the number of
segments when the movement varies with time. For each
viewpoint, the compactness measurement is plotted on the
left side of the CVI graph.
The view-invariance measurement concerns the fraction
of the most representative state among all states
considering all viewpoints at a single instant in time. For
each time instant, the view-invariance measure is
computed and plotted on the top of the CVI graph.
The view-invariance measure is affected by some
uncertainty at the borders of the segments and at
degenerate viewpoints (see Fig. 1). The border effect
shows that movement segments are not completely stable
during the temporal transition between segments. The
degenerate viewpoints are special cases of frontal views
where the sides of a joint angle tend to be aligned.

Repeatability
An important requirement for a kinetological system is the
ability to represent actions exactly in the same way even
facing inter-personal or intra-personal variability. A
kinetological system is repeatable when the same symbolic
representation is associated with the same action
performed by different subjects.
Each segment corresponds to an atom , where is a
symbol associated with the segment’s state. The atomic
symbols (R, Y, B, G), called kinetemes, are the phonemes
of our kinetological system. The symbol R is assigned to
negative velocity and negative acceleration segments; the
symbol Y is assigned to negative velocity and positive
acceleration segments; the symbol B is assigned to positive
velocity and positive acceleration segments; and the
symbol G is assigned to positive velocity and negative
acceleration segments (see Fig. 2).

Fig. 3: Repeatability measure for 12 DOFs during gait.
Our kinetological system performance on the
repeatability measure for all the joint angles shows that the
system is repeatable for the DOFs intrinsically related to
the action. Further, the system is useful in the identification
(unsupervised learning) of the variables playing primary
roles in the activity. The identification of the intrinsic
variables of an action is a byproduct of the repeatability
requirement of a kinetological system.

Selectivity
The selectivity principle concerns the ability to discern
between distinct actions. In terms of representation, this
principle requires a different structure to represent different
actions. We compare the compact representation of several
different actions and verify whether their structures are
dissimilar.
Our representation has a qualitative aspect, the state of
each segment, and a quantitative aspect corresponding to
the time length and angular displacement of each segment.
The qualitative aspect is depicted with colors, while the
quantitative aspect is represented by the line segment
length and thickness for time length and displacement,
respectively.
The selectivity property is demonstrated in our
representation using a set of three actions performed by the
same individual. Four joint angles are considered: left and
right hip flexion-extension, left and right knee flexionextension. The three examined actions are walk, run, and
jump (see Fig. 4).

RYBG
BGRYBGRY
(a) Hip Flexion/Extension
(b) Knee Flexion/Extension
Fig. 2: Symbolic representation of joint angle functions.
A repeatability measure is computed for each joint angle
considering a gait database. The repeatability measure of a
joint angle is the fraction of the most representative
symbolic description among all descriptions for the
database files. A very high repeatability measure means
that symbolic descriptions match among different gait files
and, consequently, the kinetological system is repeatable.
The repeatability measure is very high for the joint
angles which play a primary role in the walking action (see

1408

simultaneously. This way, each segment can have two
possible next neighbor segments. However, the transition
B
Y (R
G) is impossible, since velocity cannot
become negative (positive) with a positive (negative)
acceleration.
From the kinetological rules, there are eight possible
sequences of three consecutive segments. Each possible
sequence corresponds to two equations and two inequality
constraints associated with first and second derivatives at
border points. Other two inequalities come from the
derivatives at interior points of the segment.
A simple model for the joint angle function during a
segment is a polynomial. However, low degree
polynomials don’t satisfy the constraints originated from
the possible sequences of kinetemes. For example, a cubic
function has a linear second derivative which is impossible
for sequences where the second derivative assumes zero
value at the borders and non-zero values at interior points
(e.g. GBG). The least degree polynomial satisfying the
constraints imposed by all possible sequences of kinetemes
is a fourth degree polynomial. This way, the reconstruction
process consists in finding the five parameters defining this
polynomial with the two associated equations for the
particular sequence of kinetemes.
Using a fourth degree polynomial, additional constraints
are required to reconstruct the joint angle function
corresponding to a segment. We introduce two more
equations coming from the joint angle values at the two
border points. These values are the time length and the
angular displacement of each segment. Angular
displacement is the absolute difference between initial and
final joint angle of a segment.
With four equations, a linear system is solved up to one
variable. This last free variable is constrained by four
inequalities and it can be determined using some criteria
such as jerk (third derivative) minimization (see Fig. 6).


(a) Walk
(b) Run
(c) Jump
Fig. 4: Compact representations of five different actions.
The three different actions are clearly represented by
different structures with respect to the qualitative aspect.
However, manner variations are only different in the
quantitative aspect. We investigate the quantitative aspect
of manner variations of the walk action (see Fig. 5).

(a) Walk

(b) Walk with
stride

(c) Walk with
exaggerated
stride
Fig. 5: Four manner variations of the walk action.

Each manner variation has a total of 24 segments for the
four joint angles considered. For a pair of variations, we
compute a dissimilarity vector, where each element
corresponds to the difference between the quantitative
aspects of the associated segments in the two variations.
The least median dissimilarity of the manner variations
was 12%. This way, even for the same action, the
representation has enough dissimilarity to select between
different manner variations.



Reconstructivity
Reconstructivity is associated with the ability to
reconstruct the original movement signal up to an
approximation factor from a compact representation. Once
the movement signal is segmented and converted into a
symbolic representation, this compact description is only
useful if we are able to recover the original joint angle
function or an approximation.
In order to use the sequence of kinetemes for
reconstruction, we consider one segment at a time and
concentrate on the state transitions between two
consecutive segments. Based on a transition, we determine
constraints about the derivatives at border points of the
segment. Therefore, we investigate the possible state
transitions that are feasible in our kinetological system.
For this discussion about reconstructivity, let’s assume
that the signs of velocity and acceleration don’t change

(a) Hip Flexion/Extension (b) Knee Flexion/Extension
Fig. 6: Reconstruction of joint angle functions.

Morphology
Given the kinetological representation for an activity
praxicon (lexicon of movement), a hierarchical
organization is derived in the form of morphological
grammars for the activity lexicon. The kinetological strings
for each activity represent the lowest level in the
morphological grammar (see Fig. 7). Each segment i is
represent by a state i and a displacement i. The


1409

displacement
of a segment is a quantization of the
absolute difference between the initial and final joint
angles of a segment.


The sentence verb represents the changes each active
joint experiences during the action execution. The
representation for a HAL verb was discussed previously.
However, further description is required to deal with
coordination among different joints.
A coordinated segment is a time interval delimited by
events representing local minima and maxima in the joint
angle function for any of the active joints. These events
occur in between specific atomic pairs (Y B and G
R ) and, consequently, may be computed from the HAL
verb strings (see Fig. 9).

jog := B0 G0 R2 Y3 B3 V0 G3 R0 Y0
jump := G0 R0 Y0 B2 G1 V0 B5 G3 R0 Y0 R10 Y5 B0 G0 R0 Y0 B0 G1 B0 G0 R0 Y1 B0 V0
run := B4 G7 R1 Y2 B1 G0 R3 Y5 V0 Y0
scuff := R0 V0 Y0 V1 Y0 V0 R0 V0 Y0 V0 R0 V0 Y0 B0 V0 G0 V1 G0 V0 G0 0 V0 0




stomp := G0 R0 Y0 V0 R1 V0 Y2 V1 R0 V0 Y1 V0 Y0 B0 G0 V0 B1 V0 G1 V0 B1 V0 G2 R2 Y
swagger := Y0 V0 R1 V0 Y0 V0 R0 V0 Y0 V0 0 R0 V0 Y0 V0 R0 V0 Y0 B2 G2 V0 B0 V0 G0





tiptoe := B0 G1 V1 B0 V0 G1 0 B0 V0 G0 R0 V0 Y0 V0 Y0 V0 R0 V0 Y0 B0 V0 G0 R0 V0 Y0









toe := R0 V1 R0 V0 Y0 V0 R0 Y0 B0 G1 V2 G1 R0 V0 Y0 B0 G0
troop := R0 Y0 B0 G0 R1 V3 Y3 V1 Y0 B5 G3 R0 Y0 B2 G3 R2 V0 Y2 B0 G0
walk := R0 V0 Y0 V1 Y0 V0 R0 V0 Y0 B2 G2 V0 B0 V0 G0 R0 V0 Y0 0 R0 Y1 V0 R0 V0 Y1


Fig. 7: Morphological grammar at the lowest level.
The generation of a higher-level morphological grammar
involves finding common digrams in different activities of
the lexicon. Our algorithm finds the most frequent pair i i
j j of consecutive atoms in the current grammar. A new
grammar rule Ln := i i j j is then created. A higher-level
grammar is generated using the new rule. Each occurrence
of the pair of atoms i i j j in the current grammar is
replaced by a non-terminal Ln. This process is repeated
until the most frequent pair in the current grammar has less
than two occurrences and, consequently, the highest level
of the grammar is reached.
The highest level of the grammar contains the lexical
units of HAL. The sub-string alphabets embed the structure
that allows the identification of roots, prefixes, and suffixes
in the lexical units. Furthermore, this structure implies
relations that give rise to a hierarchical organization.












Fig. 9: Coordinative segments for the jog action.
A HAL adverb is a string of multiplicative constants
modeling the variation in the execution time and
displacement of each coordinated segment. A HAL adverb
is appended to a verb in such a way that each value in the
adverb string corresponds to a coordinated segment in the
verb.
The Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) pattern of syntax is a
reflection of the patterns of cause and effect. An action is
represented by a word that has the structure of a sentence:
the agent or subject is a set of active body parts; the action
or verb is the motion of those parts. In many such words,
the action is transitive and involves an object or another
patient body part.
A HAL sentence S := NP VP consists of noun phrase
(noun + adjective) and verbal phrase (verb + adverb),
where NP := N Adj and VP := V Adv (see Fig. 10). The
organization of human movement is simultaneous and
sequential. This way, the basic HAL syntax expands to
orthogonal axis based on joint (parallel syntax) and time
(sequential syntax) structure. The parallel syntax concerns
simultaneous activities represented by parallel sentences
St, j and St, j+1 and constrains the respective nouns to be
different: Nt, j
Nt, j+1. This constraint states that

Syntax
In a sentence, a noun represents the subjects performing an
activity or objects receiving an activity. A noun in a HAL
sentence corresponds to the body parts active during the
execution of a human activity and to the possible objects
involved passively in the action.
The initial posture in an activity is analogous to an
adjective in a HAL sentence which further describes
(modifies) the active joints (noun) in the sentence. The
HAL adjective is represented by a string of integers
considering only the active joints in the activity. Each
element in this string corresponds to the quantized initial
angle of an active joint (see Fig. 8).
jog

jump

run

scuff

stomp

swagger

tiptoe

toe

troop

R_Hip

4

4

2

4

5

2

1

3

4

walk
2

R_Knee

7

7

4

8

6

8

8

9

7

9

R_Ankle

8

5

4

5

4

3

0

3

4

4

L_Hip

3

3

4

2

3

1

3

2

2

2

L_Knee

1

9

7

9

7

8

9

7

6

7

L_Ankle

5

4

7

4

3

0

4

0

5

3

Fig. 8: HAL adjectives for an experimental lexicon.



1410

In phonology, we presented a suggestion for the basic
atomic segments that are used to compose human activity.
Segments are characterized according to the sign of the
first and second angular derivatives of joints.
In morphology, we studied how HAL phonemes were
combined to form strings representing human activity.
Basically, we explored common substrings to generate a
higher-level morphological grammar which is more
compact and suggests the existence of lexical units
working as visuo-motor subprograms.
In syntax, we presented a model for visuo-motor
sentence construction where the subject in a sentence
corresponds to the active joints (noun) modified by a
posture (adjective). HAL verbs represent the changes each
active joint experiences during an activity execution.
Coordination among different joints is specified by timing
the atomic segments and appending elastic discrete values
(adverb) to coordinated segments. The adverb is used to
adjust and modify the action execution.
For future work, we plan to investigate other
morphological grammar generation algorithms and
evaluate these algorithms according to the compactness of
the language. The phonology and morphology of nouns,
adjectives, and adverbs are issues that deserve more
attention.

simultaneous movement must be performed by different
body parts. An example of two parallel sentences is an
action with walk and wave simultaneously.
The temporal sequential combination of action sentences
(St, j St+1, j) must obey the cause and effect rule. The HAL
noun phrase (body parts) must experience the verb cause
(motion) and the joint configuration effect must lead to a
posture corresponding to the noun phrase of the next
sentence. Considering noun phrases as points and verb
phrases as vectors in the same space, the cause and effect
rule becomes NPt, j + VPt, j = NPt+1, j (see Fig. 10). The
cause and effect rule is physically consistent and embeds
the ordering concept of syntax.

Fig. 10: Parallel and sequential syntax.

References

The lexical units are arranged into sequences to form
sentences. A sentence is a sequence of actions that achieve
some purpose. In written language, sentences are delimited
by punctuation. Analogously, the action language delimits
sentences using motionless actions such as stop, still, and
freeze, for example. In general, a conjunctive action is
performed between two actions, where a conjunctive action
is any preparatory movement that leads to an initial
position required by the lexical unit.

Bailey D., Chang N., Feldman J., & Narayanan S. (1997).
Extending Embodied lexical development. Proceedings
of the 20th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Browman, C. & Goldstein, L. (1985). Dynamic modeling
of phonetic structure. In V. Fromkin (Ed.), Phonetic
linguistics. New York: Academic Press.
Buccino, G., Lui, F., Canessa, N., Patteri, I., Lagravinese,
G., Benuzzi, F., Porro, CA., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004).
Neural circuits involved in the recognition of actions
performed by nonconspecifics: an FMRI study. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 114-126.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain,
119(2), 593-609.
Glenberg, A. & Kaschak, M. (2002). Grounding language
in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 558565.
Guerra-Filho G. (2005). Optical Motion Capture: Theory
and Implementation. Brazilian Computing Society
Revista de Informática Teórica e Aplicada, 12(2), 61-89.
Harnard S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem.
Physica, D42, 335-346.
Nishitani, N., Schurmann, M., Amunts, K., & Hari, R.
(2005). Broca’s region: from action to language.
Physiology, 20, 60-69.
Siskind J. (2001). Grounding the lexical semantics of verbs
in visual perception using force dynamics and event
logic. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 15, 3190.

Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a visuo-motor language, named
Human Activity Language – HAL, which is the basic
kernel for symbolic manipulation of visual and motor
information of human activity. The visual information is
processed in a perception system which translates a visual
representation of action into an embodied representation
matched to our visuo-motor language. Our instance of the
visual process is a Motion Capture system which
reconstructs human movement from images.
The embodiment is an important characteristic of the
language serving as interface between visual perception
and the motor planning towards action execution. The
visuo-motor language is defined using a linguistic
approach by specifying phonology, morphology, and
syntax. This methodology is one possible way to construct
a visuo-motor language which may build upon the
established results of speech recognition and natural
language processing.

1411

