UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Haptic Pictures, Blindness, and Tactile Beliefs: Preliminary Analysis of a Case-Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1vc4n3p9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
D'Angiulli, Amedeo

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Haptic Pictures, Blindness, and Tactile Beliefs:
Preliminary Analysis of a Case-Study
Amedeo D’Angiulli (adangiulli@tru.ca), Thompson Rivers University
School of Education & Department of Psychology, 103-1402 McGill Road
Kamloops, BC V2C 5N3
Abstract
Research on the identification of raised-outline drawings
(haptic pictures) indicates that blind and sighted individuals
process pictorial information similarly. To explain this
similarity, the partial overlap hypothesis argues that
pictorial representation is constrained by principles
grounded on objective shape perception that are shared by
vision and haptics. In contrast, the tactile beliefs hypothesis
maintains that such similarity is not given by our tactile
experience, but by indirect, meaning-based representation of
such experience. In this case-study, a 13-year old child born
completely blind was invited to explore and identify a set of
haptic pictures. He then was invited to explain, verbally
and/or by drawing, why he believed that the referents he
suggested identified accurately the depicted objects.
Identification and recognition memory of haptic pictures
were interrelated, but unrelated to tactile beliefs. The
findings support the partial overlap hypothesis.

Research on the production and identification of raisedoutline drawings (haptic pictures) suggests that there is a
fundamental similarity in the way blind and sighted
individuals process and use pictorial information from touch.
In identifying haptic pictures, blind individuals can achieve
success rates which are comparable to those of blindfolded
sighted individuals (Kennedy, 1993), and haptic pictures most
frequently identified by blind children and adults are also
those most frequently identified by blindfolded sighted
children and adults (D’Angiulli, Kennedy & Heller, 1998). In
addition, there are basic similarities in the way blind and
sighted participants explore and extract information from
raised-line displays (D’Angiulli & Kennedy, 2001) or from
three-dimensional objects (Morrongiello et al, 1994). Perhaps,
the best evidence of similarity is provided by the numerous
case reports documenting blind children and adults making
realistic pictures of common objects in form of raised-line
outlines, which in most cases are readily interpretable and
meaningful to sighted observers and are indeed comparable to
visual drawings made by sighted peers (e.g., D’Angiulli &
Maggi, 2004; 2003; Kennedy, 2003; 1993); these findings can
be taken as evidence that blind individuals have a genuine
understanding and appreciation of the principles of pictorial
representation, similar to the sighted (Lopes, 1997).
One interpretation of this body of evidence is that the
similarity in haptic picture processing between the blind and
the sighted participants is a reflection of a partial overlap
(D’Angiulli, 2004) between vision and haptics. That is, vision

and haptics share some important principles of representation
of form, such as ground-foreground segregation, use of lines
as edges, basic geometric shapes for sides of familiar objects,
and some rudiments of perspective. This may be so because
the principles that inform realistic depiction in form of outline
are based on objective shapes, which can be perceived
haptically as well as visually. For instance, we can run our
fingers around the contours of an object, and keep track of the
path traced in space, thereby extracting an outline describing
the form of the object represented (Magee & Kennedy, 1980).
Alternatively, if the object is small enough, we can feel its
contour simply by creating an imprint on our skin by pressing
it onto sensitive parts of our body that offer enough points of
contact with the object (Gibson, 1962).
Direct evidence of the overlap between vision and touch
in picture processing comes from an experiment (Kennedy &
Bai, 2002, Experiment 5) in which participants were asked to
identify pictures either haptically, while blindfolded, or
visually, and subsequently they were asked to judge how well
the referents they mentioned fitted the themes depicted by the
picture stimuli (fit judgments). The fit judgments by the
group who made the judgments visually predicted picture
identification accuracy from the group of blindfolded
participants who made the judgments haptically. This
suggests that the assessment of fit between one’s
identification and the depicted referent occurs similarly in
vision and touch because outline picture processing is based
on similar object shape criteria.
However, according to an alternative interpretation, haptic
picture processing similarities in the blind and sighted
participants are not related to knowledge or understanding
acquired through direct experience of the shape of the
objects. Rather, they are by-products of tactile beliefs
(Hopkins, 2000), that is, of inferences based on aspects
related to touching objects without visual feedback. The
assumption is that there is no information about outline shape
present at the same stage in visual and tactile processing.
Thus, while visual experience itself “presents” us with outline
shape, tactile experience may not do so, it may only enable us
to construct some form of knowledge that describes outline
shape. For example, if we run our fingers over an object like a
shoe, we may represent a certain shape of it, but we would
not be able to represent the two-dimensional shape of the
“intersections” (i.e., L, T and Y junctions) within this object.
If the shoe were cut in half along its length, the understanding
of which object the corresponding contour may represent is
not directly given by our tactile experience, but by beliefs

1174

derived on our tactile experience. In short, haptics would
enable us to “deduce” the outline shapes of objects like the
shoe by going beyond the contents of our tactile experience
itself. Notice that the present use of the term ‘beliefs’ does not
call into question the broader notion of ‘theory of mind’, it
simply refers to ‘inferred (perceptual) tactile attributes of the
outline shape of depicted objects’.
The hypotheses of partial overlap and tactile beliefs have
been discussed in relation to one type of experimental task, in
which the blind (or blindfolded) participant explores
haptically a raised-outline picture and then attempts to
identify its referent object once. Another way to contrast
partial overlap and tactile beliefs is by considering a task in
which the participant is given the opportunity to explore and
identify a picture a second time. In this case, he/she may
remember having touched that configuration of lines before,
even though he/she may have not known how to call it
(Heller, 2002). A participant could demonstrate this type of
knowledge by giving the same verbal label to a given picture
twice, in both test and re-test trials. In this way, repeated
naming upon second identification attempt can be related to
recognition memory of a picture previously explored, whether
correctly identified or not.
The two hypotheses here considered imply two different
types of retrieval processes associated with recognition
memory, as proposed in dual-process theories of recognition
(e.g., Mandler, 1980). The partial overlap hypothesis would
lead to argue that response repetition reflects verbatim
memory traces of the touched patterns. On this view, relabelling a stimulus with the same name would correspond to
an identity judgment based on the surface match of the items
presented on the first and second presentation. In other words,
the touched patterns could even be nonsense figures, the label
or meaning that the participant assigns to the picture is not
mediating recognition. The job is done by item-specific,
perceptual memory of the configuration of touched lines.
In contrast, the contending account leads to argue that
repeating a label for a haptic picture presented as stimulus
would reflect gist memory traces of tactile belief or meaning
associated with the stimulus. Namely, the participant just
retrieves the name he/she had assigned to the picture out of
believing that certain raised lines correspond to salient
features of the object/entity represented. In the latter case, the
assumption would be that recognition involves a semantic
relatedness (or similarity) judgment based on meaning match
of the touched patterns.
The case study reported here may shed some new light on
this recent debate concerning the nature of haptic picture
processing in blind individuals. In this study, a child born
completely blind was invited to explore and identify a set of
haptic pictures twice in two separate blocks of trials (without
receiving feedback about his identification accuracy). He then
was invited to explain, either verbally and/or by drawing, why
he believed that the referents he suggested may identify
accurately the depicted objects. The expectation was that if

haptic picture identification were indeed based on object
shape perception and processing of surface form of the
stimuli, then as in previous research there should be a
relationship between picture identification accuracy and
recognition memory (defined as repetition of the same
suggestion for a given picture during re-test, regardless of the
correctness of the identification), but no necessary relation
between these processes and the child’s tactile beliefs about
what the pictures might be representing. If however haptic
picture identification were primarily based on inferring the
meaning of the picture, then the pictorial beliefs of this child
should be associated with his accuracy in identifying the
haptic pictures and in having recognition memory of them.
The work by Kennedy and Bai (2002) suggests yet a third
way in which the hypotheses of partial overlap and tactile
beliefs may be compared. These authors organized their
pictures-stimuli into two categories. One category included
pictures like a fork or a hammer. These pictures may be
called imprints in that they represented “flattish” objects with
little depth and few overlapping parts, so that they could
produce a recognizable imprint on a flat surface. The other
category included pictures like a table or a cup. These other
pictures were “more three-dimensional figures” (Kennedy &
Bai, 2002, p. 1024) and may be called projections as they
represented three-dimensional objects by depicting
overlapping object parts on a two-dimensional surface. If
understanding of pictorial aspects of perspective projection
(e.g., overlap of occluding edges, parallel projection, etc.)
derives from tactile beliefs, for a congenitally blind child
projections should be considerably more difficult to identify
than imprints. For example, one would not need to grasp the
principles of parallel or polar projection geometry, if one was
touching the outline of a fork, as depicted from the side view
along its longest dimension. However, one would need to
have learned projective geometry to identify the outline
describing an object with many internal overlapping parts, for
example, a cabinet or a table. Indeed, haptic pictures
relatively more ‘committed’ to perspective, like the cabinet or
table, should show a relatively stronger association with the
tactile beliefs (see Hopkins, 2000; p. 154-160). Conversely, if
a congenitally blind child can readily appreciate overlap and
parallel projection of shapes, then there should be no
difference between imprints and projections in relation to
their identification, recognition or association with the child’s
tactile beliefs. Thus, a further goal of this study was to test
whether pictures that exploit aspects of perspective
projections show a stronger relationship with tactile beliefs
than pictures that do not depend as much on vantage point.

Method
Participant. C was a 13-year old boy completely blind
from birth who attended a school for the blind in Northern
Italy. Although the cause of his blindness was presumably a
rare genetic disease, this was never fully confirmed. At any
rate, the standard paediatric evaluation reported no pupillary

1175

reflex or light reaction at birth. C started writing and reading
Braille by age of 7. He was originally recruited in the context
of a case-study series investigating the first drawings by blind
children. Because by that time he had already made various
drawings, he was not included in that study. He was however
contacted again and invited to participate in the present study.
Both child's assent and parental consent were conditions for
his participation. Although C had been drawing since he
entered school, this activity was sporadic both at school and
at home. As a result, it is not possible to provide a precise
estimate of the number of drawings he usually made, say, in
the period of a week. While attending school, C received
instruction on how to draw geometric shapes using a variety
of commercially available materials and kits designed as
educational aids for children with visual impairment. He also
received some tuition for making ‘artistic’ raised-line pictures
(i.e., not necessarily realistic pictures or even portraits of
actual objects).
Materials. The stimuli were twelve raised-line drawings,
partly taken from D’Angiulli et al (1998) and partly adapted
from Kennedy and Bai (2002). Eight pictures were used as
targets on the first and second blocks of identification trials
(henceforth referred to as ‘block 1’ and ‘block 2’
respectively). These pictures represented: apple, cup, scissors,
telephone, key, happy face, bottle, and table. Three other
pictures, representing fork, leaf and hand silhouette, were
included with the targets on block 2 as distracters. A raisedline drawing of a tree was used for practice.
The stimuli were produced with a raised-line drawing kit
(available from SIH, The National Sweden Agency for
Special Education, Solna, Sweden) which consists of a board
(21 cm x 31 cm) that has one side coated with rubber; when
plastic sheets are fixed on the board, pressure with a ballpoint pen produces raised lines. Each picture was drawn on a
separate plastic sheet with lines approximately 0.5 mm high.
Regardless of shape, all figures were inscribed within a 16.5
cm x 14.5 cm rectangle (marked in pencil).The set of pictures
presented on block 1 were drawn on Mylar plastic sheets
manufactured in Sweden, whereas the set of pictures
presented on block 2 (copies for the targets and originals for
the distracters) were drawn on Poly film sheets available from
Sewell Metal Processing Corporation (Woodside, New
York); the different textures of these two types of plastic
sheets can be readily picked up by touch.
In keeping with the classification of picture-stimuli
described in the Introduction, half of the targets (i.e., apple,
key, scissors, and face) were “imprints”. The other half (i.e.,
cup, telephone, bottle, and table) were “projections”.
Procedure. The experiment consisted of two blocks of
identification trials. The procedure followed in all
identification trials was an adaptation of the one used by
Kennedy and Bai (2002; Experiment 1). The participant was
given practice on the raised-line picture of a tree, and then he
was asked to identify the other pictures, one at the time. C
was allowed to reflect on his responses by thinking aloud.
1176

However, he was invited to provide one final identification
response only, and to give one final response even if unsure.
Correct identification required offering the object names
listed above (apple, key, etc.) or synonyms (e.g., phone for
telephone). No feedback about accuracy of identification was
provided in any trial, except practice.
In block 1, the presentation order was random. In block 2,
the presentation order differed from that on block 1 and was
‘semirandom’, that is, while the order of all targets was
randomised, leaf, fork and hand silhouette were presented as
the first, fourth and eight pictures respectively. The
randomization was used to show that block 2 was not just a
repeat of block 1, and to discourage C to merely repeat the
sequence of names he had said in block 1. Also, to increase
bias towards novelty, in block 2 the targets were copies drawn
on a slightly different medium. Hence, in the second
identification trials, C could not base his response on features
other than the raised-outline shapes.
After block 1, there was a break of 30 minutes,
immediately followed by block 2. In each trial of block 2,
once that C provided the name of an object as his final
identification response, the experimenter elicited tactile
beliefs about a picture by asking “Why do you think this is a
drawing of a ____ [repeat of the name provided by the
child]?” If the child’s identification response was correct the
experimenter simply moved on to the next stimulus.
Alternatively, if the identification response was incorrect, the
experimenter first asked the question: “May this be the
drawing of a ____ [correct object name]? Could you explain
why you believe that this may/may not (depending on the
response of the participant) be the drawing of a ____ [correct
object name]?” If C did not respond after 1 minute, or
declared/showed not to be able to explain himself, for
example, hesitating to respond, the experimenter handed him
a drawing kit with a blank Mylar sheet and a pen, then asked:
“Would you like to show me how a ____ [correct object
name] should be drawn?” In the latter instances, the rationale
for asking the child to provide a drawing as “graphic
commentary” of his beliefs was twofold. First, drawing
activity can be an aid for both verbalization and thinking in
sighted and blind children (Millar, 1994). Second, on the
basis of previous research (e.g., Kennedy, 2003; D’Angiulli
& Maggi, 2004) it was reasonable to expect, at least in some
trials, very little or no usable verbalization. Thus, in the event
that a response was unclear, incomplete or ambiguous, the
drawing could reveal critical information about the child’s
beliefs.
The experiment was carried out in a quiet room in the
child’s school; it lasted approximately one hour and forty-five
minutes (including the break). The experimenter was a
trained, experienced support teacher unfamiliar with the
hypotheses of the study.
Coding and analysis. In identifications trials, correct
response was denoted with 1, incorrect response was denoted
with 0. Recognition was defined as repetition in trial 2 of the

identification response given in trial 1, regardless of correct
identification (as in D’Angiulli & Waraich, 2002).
Recognition (response in trial 1 being repeated in trial 2) was
indicated with 1, whereas missed recognition (response being
changed in trial 2) was indicated with 0.
Tactile beliefs were operationally defined in terms of
object names that C “accepted” or “rejected” in relation to the
trials of block 2. For each picture, C’s acceptance or rejection
was based on response to the first belief-eliciting question
following accurate identification on trial 2, or based on
response to the second belief-eliciting question in case of
inaccurate identification on trial 2. These responses were
coded as follows: C’s Acceptance that an object name was the
correct referent for a given drawing was coded with 1,
rejection of the object name was coded with 0.
Agreement among pairs of dependent measures (i.e., first
identification, second identification, recognition and belief)
was defined by the occurrence of the same coding number
relatively to a particular picture stimulus (1 and 1, or 0 and 0).
Small-sample probability estimates for the agreement were
based on computation of all agreement permutations, i.e., p =
1/N! (Siegel & Castellan, 1988).

explore that key, then asked and received positive
confirmation that was indeed the kind of key C intended to
represent in his two drawings of the key).
Table 1. Identification, recognition, and accepted object
names for haptic pictures provided by a 13-years old child
born completely blind.
Picture

Identified

Recognized

Accepted
(Drawn)

Trial 1

Trial 2

Apple

I

1

0

0

Cup

P

0

0

1

0(D)

Scissors

I

1

1

1

0

Telephone

P

1

1

1

1

Keys

I

0

0

1

0(D)

Face

I

1

1

1

1

Bottle

P

1

1

1

0

Table

P

1

1

1

0(D)

6/8

5/8

7/8

Proportion

1

3/8

Note. I = imprint, P = projection.
With regards to the drawing of a cup, C stated that the
graphic detail representing the cup handle was sufficiently
appropriate. However, he observed that in the picture of the
cup a very salient feature was missing: the “internal cavity
which usually contains liquids”. To explain, C also made a
drawing. He then made a similar remark regarding the
opening of the bottle in the picture representing this object,
and said that was the reason why he did not find either
stimulus to be a “good” haptic picture.
C identified and recognized the pictures depicting a table
and a pair of scissors but rejected both as inappropriate. To
show how a table should be depicted, C made a drawing. In
contrast with the stimulus, C’s drawing had no parallel
projection, it showed simply a rectangle as the tabletop and,
attached to it, extending legs of approximately same length,
with no hint of occluded parts of any of the legs. Regarding
scissors, C commented that the orientation made the picture
difficult to interpret.
Finally, when each dependent measure, verbalization and
drawing was examined with the intent to uncover differences
between imprints and projections, there was no evidence of
any reliable difference between these subsets.

Results
In block 1 (trial 1 for a given picture) and in block 2 (trial
2 for a given picture), C identified over 60% of target pictures
– 75% and 62%, respectively (see Table 1).
In block 1, most of C’s verbalizations contained
descriptions of salient parts of the pictures which might have
suggested the name of possible object referents fitting the
configuration of raised-lines (e.g., buttons for a telephone) C
provided confidently one final response for all targets except
while exploring apple. Before identifying it as an apple, C
interpreted that picture as representing a face.
The agreement between recognition and identification
responses in both blocks was above chance (p = .001 for first
identification, and p = .0002 for second identification). Thus,
response repetition was associated with identification.
Only a minor proportion of pictures (37%) were accepted by
C as appropriate representations of the named objects. There
were no associations between C’s acceptance/rejection of the
names, identification, and recognition.
Three of the stimuli that C drew were rejected as
inadequate. Two of these drawings depicted a key. Both
drawings were considerably smaller than the picture he
attempted to identify. There were two aspects he could not
“understand”. The first was the groove of the key, which “felt
too widely-spaced”. The second was the big hole in the
circular handle of the key. His remarks suggested a
discrepancy between the specific kind of key C had in mind
and the one depicted by the stimulus. The stimulus
represented a basic standard key for wood doors, whereas C
had in mind the key of his home which had an armoured
entrance door. (Since the experimenter happened to have a
key for an armoured door, during debriefing he let C hold and

Type

Discussion
For most haptic pictures, there was strong agreement
between C’s response to the identification in the first and in
the second trials. Because the latter agreement was based on
perceptual evaluation of shape, the agreement between
identification responses and recognition memory, as reflected
by response repetition in the second trials, was in all
probability also based on item-specific, verbatim trace of the
touched configuration of raised-lines. This finding is
consistent with previous research on blind individuals

1177

(D’Angiulli, Kennedy & Heller, 1998; D’Angiulli &
Waraich, 2001) and on sighted individuals matched to
samples of blind participants (Kennedy & Bai, 2002). Indeed,
the effect sizes obtained in those studies were very similar to
the effect sizes obtained in the present case-study. Thus, it
would seem that the relationships highlighted in this study are
consistently found for the same subset of raised-line pictures
that were also used in other studies.
However, the results pointed out an apparent dissociation
between identification and pictorial belief, since C identified
correctly some stimuli he did not deemed to be adequate or
“good” haptic representations. (Notice that the issue here is
not whether more or less drawings were recognized than
accepted as good drawings, the hypotheses only concerned a
difference or dissociation between the two measures).
Because recognition memory was unrelated to tactile beliefs
as well, it is reasonable to conclude that C’s evaluation of the
haptic pictures in the identification trials was not based on
attempts to encode the raised-line configurations
semantically. Therefore, these findings are clear evidence in
favor of the partial overlap hypothesis.
D’Angiulli (2004) proposed that a well-defined, testable
conceptualization of partial overlap could be derived from the
convergent active processing in interrelated networks model
(CAPIN; cf., Millar, 1994), a theoretical framework that aims
at explaining both the production and the identification of
haptic pictures in blind and sighted children. According to
one interpretation of Millar's theory, a key implication of
CAPIN would be that blind children's representation of raised
line drawings relies on touch and movement, but, most
important, it relies on the partial overlap or convergence
between actual sensory inputs and absent visual information.
Consequently, only some aspects should be equivalently
represented in haptics and vision.
Assuming that the judgment of sighted observers is the
golden standard, CAPIN can be operationally translated as
follows: If the symbols contained in blind children's drawings
reflect partial overlap and convergent representations, only a
portion of those symbols will be identified by sighted
observers, and respectively only a portion of drawings will be
identified. D’Angiulli (2004) tested this prediction by reexamining the data from a longitudinal study of spontaneous
raised-line drawings made by congenitally, totally blind
children (aged 12) who had never drawn before. Naïve
sighted judges viewed and attempted to identify the objects
represented in the blind children’s drawings, they also rated
the contents of the pictures along various scales of
recognizability, complexity, composition styles, salient
features, depiction direction, and depiction of vantage point,
which had been adapted from categories identified in
previous research on drawing development in blind as well as
sighted children. The identification of single parts of the
drawings was strongly related to the identification of the
entire drawing, but the agreement between the sighted coders
along the various scales was good, not perfect. Because

interrater agreement provided an operational crude measure
of the intermodality associated with the content of the blind
children’s drawings, it was concluded that blind children
depicted some aspects common to vision and touch: aspects
of motion of objects, surfaces, edges, three-dimensional solid
structure of objects, and so on. Thus, in line with the
interpretation of CAPIN, the data demonstrated partial
overlap, not complete.
Whether partial overlap is the correct explanation or not,
one legitimate objection to the notion of a dissociation
between identification and pictorial belief is that C might not
have explored the unidentified stimuli efficiently or
systematically enough to note or/and integrate some parts of
the pictures, and therefore his beliefs might just have been
biased by this variable. Because copying reflects how
systematically haptic pictures are explored (D’Angiulli &
Kennedy, 2001), during debriefing C was asked to copy the
two unidentified, rejected pictures, of a key and a cup, for
which he also provided his own free drawings. Both of these
copies were very similar to the copied stimuli. This showed
that although he could not provide a correct identification and
believed he was touching another object, C considered all
parts of the two configurations of raised-lines. Further support
for the dissociation between identification and belief comes
from the converse case, illustrated above, in which C
suggested an alternative way to draw a table even though he
could identify the stimulus presented.
It is in order to comment on one question that arises from
the finding that there was a weak relationship between
drawings that were recognized and those accepted as good
representations. Would blindfolded sighted children tested in
the same conditions behave any differently? On the partial
overlap (or CAPIN) account, there is no reason why they
would. However, this question is being answered empirically
in a forthcoming investigation.
Consistent with other studies (Kennedy, 1993), there were
no reliable differences between C’s responses to the haptic
pictures that represented parallel projection and C’s responses
to the haptic pictures that did not involve that type of
representation. Although the set of pictures tested was
relatively small, this result suggests that C could readily
appreciate overlap and parallel projection of shapes. Hence,
one of the overlaps between vision and touch may be the
ability to identify and recognize pictures with some types of
projection (Kennedy & Bai, 2002).
The latter conclusion, however, is undermined by the fact
that the data on C’s ability to identify "imprint" stimuli, and
failure to identify "projection" stimuli, is not particularly
clear-cut. The child examined four different objects that were
twice presented either as imprints or projections, and he
correctly identified 6/8 projections and 5/8 imprints. Given
the few number of trials and given that the type of picture
(imprint vs. projection) is confounded with object type,
interpreting this result is difficult, with the consequence that
further research is needed to clarify these preliminary
observations.

1178

The present findings have important implications for
theories of pictorial processing as they relate to aesthetics. As
argued by Lopes (1997), it is certainly possible that haptic
pictures can produce genuine aesthetic enjoyment to blind
individuals. Nevertheless, this may not necessarily have
anything to do with how he perceived and evaluated the
haptic pictures. C formed the belief of appropriate meaningful
pictures when he could not identify them correctly. All
together, he rejected as inappropriate pictures that he could
identify perfectly well. The pattern of dissociation suggests an
alternative account in which some stages of haptic processing
may be as “modular” and as “belief-impenetrable” (Pylyshyn,
1989) as some stage of visual processing. Independently of
such modularity and impenetrability, it may be argued that
the enjoyment of haptic pictures or, simply, of haptic lines
can be reached through beliefs, as assumed by Hopkins. This
does imply (contra Lopes) that the essence of the experience
of realistic pictures achieved indirectly through haptics differs
from the experience achieved directly through vision.
Nonetheless, the present case-study shows (contra
Hopkins) that whether or not they have an aesthetic correlate,
and regardless of the type of beliefs they may be associated
with, the basic perceptual principles that govern realistic
depiction are indeed shared by vision and touch. Thus, even
considering all limitations of this study, evidence from singlecases and small-samples studies involving blind participants
are accumulating and seem to converge on one conclusion:
The partial overlap among touch and vision still seems the
most straightforward and parsimonious explanation of why
congenitally completely blind and sighted individuals can
process pictorial information similarly, even though they
adopt strikingly different modes to access information from
the world.

References
D’Angiulli A., Kennedy J. M., & Heller, M. A. (1998).
Blind children recognizing tactile pictures respond like
sighted children given guidance in exploration. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 39, 187-190.
D’Angiulli A., & Kennedy J. M, (2000). Guided
exploration enhances tactual picture recognition in
blindfolded sighted children: implications for blind children.
International Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 23, 319320.
D’Angiulli A, & Kennedy J. M. (2001). Children’s tactual
exploration and copying without vision. International Journal
of Rehabilitation Research, 24, 233-234.

D’Angiulli A., & Waraich P. (2002). Enhanced tactual
encoding and recognition memory in congenital blindness.
International Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 25, 1-3.
D'Angiulli A., & Maggi S. (2003). Drawing development
in a distinct population: Depiction of perceptual principles by
three children with congenital blindness. International
Journal of Behavioural Development, 27 , 193-200.
D’Angiulli A., & Maggi S. (2004). The depiction of car
light beams in a child born completely blind. Perception, 33
419-428.
D’Angiulli A. (2004). Using CAPIN as descriptive
framework for blind children’s spontaneous raised-line
drawings In Touch, blindness and neuroscience MA, Heller,
S Ballesteros (Eds), Madrid: UNED Press, pp 251-259.
Gibson J. J. (1962). Observations on active touch.
Psychological Review, 69, 477-490.
Heller M. A. (2002). Tactile picture perception in sighted
and blind people. Behavioral Brain Research, 135, 65-68.
Hopkins R. (2000). Touching pictures. British Journal of
Aesthetics, 40, 149-167.
Kennedy J. M. (1993). Drawing and the blind. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Kennedy J. M., & Bai J. (2002). Haptic pictures: Fit
judgments predict identification, recognition memory and
confidence. Perception, 31, 1013-1026.
Kennedy J. M. (2003). Drawings from Gaia, a blind girl.
Perception, 32, 321-340.
Lopes D. M. M. (1997). Art media and the sense
modalities: Tactile pictures. Philosophical Quarterly, 47 425440.
Magee L.E., & Kennedy J. M. (1980). Exploring pictures
tactually. Nature, 283, 287-288.
Mandler G. (1980). Recognizing: the judgement of
previous occurrence. Psychological Review, 87, 252–271.
Millar S. (1994). Understanding and representing space:
Theory and evidence from studies with blind and sighted
children. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Morrongiello B.A., Humphrey G.K., Timney B., Choi J.,
& Rocca P.T., 1994. Tactual object exploration and
recognition in blind and sighted children. Perception, 23,
833-848.
Pylyshyn Z.W. (1989). Computing in cognitive science”
In Foundations of Cognitive Science, M. I. Posner (Ed.),
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Siegel S., & Castellan Jr. N. J. (1988). Nonparametric
Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. New York: McGrawHill.

1179

