UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hemispheric Differences Emerge from Perceptual Learning: Evidence from Modeling Chinese
Character Pronunciation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ms0d793

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen
Shillcock, Richard

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hemispheric Differences Emerge from Perceptual Learning: Evidence from
Modeling Chinese Character Pronunciation
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@cs.ucsd.edu)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive # 0404, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA

Richard Shillcock (rcs@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK

Abstract
In Chinese orthography, a dominant character structure exists
in which a semantic radical appears on the left and a phonetic
radical on the right (SP characters); a minority opposite
arrangement also exists (PS characters). As the number of
phonetic radical types is much greater than semantic radical
types, in SP characters the information is skewed to the right,
whereas in PS characters it is skewed to the left. Through
training a symmetrical split fovea model for SP and PS
character recognition, we show that hemispheric differences
emerged as a consequence of the fundamental structural
differences in information between SP and PS characters. The
modeling data also matches well with behavioral naming
performance. This work suggests that perceptual learning is
one of the factors that accounts for hemispheric differences in
visual word recognition.
Keywords: Connectionist modeling; Chinese character
recognition; hemispheric differences; perceptual learning.

Introduction
Hemispheric differences in visual word recognition have
been consistently reported. For instance, there is a classical
right visual field (RVF) advantage in reading English words,
demonstrated first in tachistoscopic recognition (e.g.,
Bryden & Rainey, 1963) and subsequently in other word
recognition tasks, including lexical decision (Faust, Babkoff,
& Kravetz, 1995), and word naming (Brysbaert &
d'Ydewalle, 1990). This RVF advantage has been argued to
be linked to the superiority of the left hemisphere (LH) in
language processing and shown to interact with sex and
handedness (e.g., Voyer, 1996; Kim, 1994).
In addition to this hemispheric dominance account of the
RVF advantage, alternative explanations have also been
proposed. Mondor and Bryden (1992) proposed an
attentional advantage model, which suggests that in addition
to a direct access to the LH, this RVF advantage can also be
influenced by the distribution of attention; the LH is able to
process verbal stimuli with fewer attentional resources
allocated, compared with the RH, and hence gives rise to
this RVF advantage. Evidence supporting this model comes
from several cueing experiments, showing that verbal
stimuli presented to the left visual field (LVF)/right
hemisphere (RH) had stronger cueing effects than those
presented to the RVF/LH, because they required more
attentional resources (e.g., Nicholls, Wood, & Hayes, 2001).
345

In Chinese character recognition, in contrast to English, a
LVF/RH advantage has been reported in tachistoscopic
recognition; this phenomenon has been argued to reflect the
RH superiority in handling holistic pattern recognition tasks
or a more efficient lexical interpretation of character stimuli
in the RH (e.g., Tzeng, Hung, Cotton, & Wang, 1979). As
for phonological processing in Chinese character
recognition, Weekes and Zhang (1999) reported
phonological priming effects on phonetic compound
recognition when the characters were presented in the RVF
but not LVF. Yang and Cheng (1999) also showed that, in a
character recognition task, when the orthographic similarity
of two alternative items for choice was manipulated, there
was an LVF advantage effect; in contrast, when the
phonological similarity of two alternative items for choice
was manipulated, there was a prominent RVF advantage
effect. In short, previous divided visual field studies in
Chinese character recognition usually exhibited a LVF
advantage for orthographic processing and a RVF advantage
for phonological processing.
In the current study, we examine the possibility that
hemispheric differences in visual word recognition can
emerge purely from perceptual learning, or more
specifically, the information structure of the word stimuli to
which the readers have long been exposed. We first report
the predictions from a computational model of word
recognition, and then examine these predictions through a
corresponding behavioural experiment. The materials we
used were a major type of Chinese characters, phonetic
compounds, in order to utilize their distinct information
structure in this examination. We introduce the structures of
these Chinese characters below.
A Chinese phonetic compound consists of a semantic
radical, that signifies the meaning of the character, and a
phonetic radical, that typically contains partial information
about the pronunciation of the character. For current
purposes, we refer to a character whose pronunciation is the
same as its phonetic radical as a regular character;
characters whose pronunciations are the same as their
phonetic radical but with a different tone are called
semiregular characters; and those whose pronunciations are
different from their phonetic radicals are termed irregular
characters. In Chinese phonetic compound recognition, a
regularity effect has been reported: regular characters are

named faster than irregular characters (e.g., Hue, 1992).
Most of the phonetic compounds have a left-right structure;
about 90% of them have their semantic radical on the left
and the phonetic radical on the right. These characters are
referred to as SP characters. The other 10% have the
opposite arrangement, with the phonetic radical on the left
and the semantic radical on the right, termed PS characters
(Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004; see Figure 1). Also, in Chinese
orthography, the phonetic radical types are much more
numerous than the semantic radical types; the ratio is about
ten to one (Harbaugh, 1998). In other words, there is greater
variability in the phonetic radical. Hence, in SP characters,
the information is skewed to the right, whereas in PS
characters, the information is skewed to the left. Given the
dominant percentage of SP characters compared with PS
characters, the overall information distribution is skewed to
the right. As we show later, the distinction between the
structures of SP and PS characters and the overall
information skew allow us to demonstrate how hemispheric
differences in visual character recognition can emerge from
perceptual learning.

೪! !
SP character

such modeling, suggesting the influence of perceptual
learning on the observed hemispheric differences.

Simulations
Figure 2 shows the split fovea model of Chinese character
recognition (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2005a), which maps an
orthographic representation, defined by basic stroke patterns
in Chinese orthography, to a corresponding feature-based
phonological representation. The input layer is split with
respect to a fixation point; the two halves of the input layer
are projected to left hidden layer (LHL) and right hidden
layer (RHL) respectively to simulate the initial contralateral
projections to different hemispheres. The interconnections
between the hidden layers are by analogy with the corpus
callosum (for the importance of these interconnections, see
Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004).
Phonological representation

Left Hidden layer
(Right Hemisphere)

Ⴖ!

Right Hidden layer
(Left Hemisphere)

PS Character
Block1

Figure 1. An SP and a PS character.

Block2

LVF

We first conducted a computational examination with a
split fovea model of Chinese character recognition (Hsiao &
Shillcock, 2004; 2005a). The split fovea model assumes a
precise vertical split at fixation, with the two halves of a
centrally fixated word initially contralaterally projected to
two different hidden layers, by analogy with the two
hemispheres. This foveal splitting phenomenon has been
demonstrated in several anatomical and behavioral studies
(e.g., Lavidor & Walsh, 2004), and has also been shown to
have fundamental implications for hemispheric processing
of visual word/character recognition (Shillcock, Ellison, &
Monaghan, 2000). The split fovea model hence enables us
to examine hemispheric processing in reading. We have
reported previously the model’s behavior for centrally
presented characters (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2005a); the
modeling successfully addressed sex differences observed in
naming SP and PS characters (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2005b).
In the current simulation, we focus on the model’s behavior
when characters are presented entirely to the left or right of
fixation, that is, in the LVF or RVF (Figure 2; See
Simulations for details)1. We show that in a model with a
completely
symmetrical
architecture,
hemispheric
differences emerge as a consequence of the information
structure of the materials with which the network is trained.
We then show that human behavior is well predicted by

Block3

*

Block4

Fixation point

RVF

Figure 2. The split-fovea model of Chinese character
recognition.
Position 1

ِ

ϴ! *

Position 2

!

ِ!

Position 3

!

!

* ϴ! !
*

ِ! ϴ

Fixation point
Figure 3: Three fixation positions in the input layer.
During the simulation, eye fixation behavior was
idealized into three different fixation positions, as shown in
Figure 3 (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004). In order to
accommodate such representations, the input layer
contained four blocks. When a character was presented in
position 1, the current fixation was to the right of the
character; in position 2, the current fixation was between the
two radicals; in position 3, the fixation was to the left of the
character. During training, each character was presented
according to its log token frequency, and equally distributed
among the fixation positions. This equal presentation
frequency among the fixation positions reflected the finding
that there is no tendency for the eyes to land more
frequently at a particular position in a character during

1

For the model’s behavior when characters are centrally presented
and its connection with human data, please refer to Hsiao and
Shillcock (2005a; 2005b).

346

Chinese text reading (e.g., Tsai & McConkie, 2003)2. We
trained the network with 2,159 of the most frequent leftright structured phonetic compounds (i.e., SP and PS
characters), together with their phonetic radicals that can
also be stand-alone characters (presented in block 2 and 3
only), and examined its behavior in different fixation
positions (for more details of the simulation, see Hsiao &
Shillcock, 2004; 2005a).

the processing of the character mainly depended on the LHL;
and had the worst performance when characters were
presented in fixation position 3, i.e., when the processing of
the character mainly depended on the RHL.
Also, there was a significant three-way interaction
between fixation position, character regularity, and position
of the phonetic radical (F(2, 4032) = 8.183, p < 0.001 with
the Greenhouse-Geisser correction). When we examined the
model’s performance in different fixation positions
separately, the interaction between character regularity and
position of the phonetic radical was the strongest in fixation
position 1 (F(1, 2151) = 11.336, p = 0.001) and the weakest
in fixation position 3 (F(1, 2151) = 3.889, p = 0.049; see
Figure 6). This phenomenon can be explained by a denser
mapping problem presented to the model when characters
were presented in fixation position 3 than in fixation
position 1 (Figure 5). When PS characters were presented in
fixation position 1, the model faced a sparser mapping
problem since the phonologically important part of the
characters (i.e., the phonetic radical) was presented in block
1, which had the lowest level of entropy; consequently, the
model had adequate processing resources to remember
individual orthography-to-phonology mappings without
generalization. Hence, there was no regularity effect
observed when PS characters were presented in fixation
position 1 (F(1, 213) < 1; Figure 6)3. When PS characters
were presented in fixation position 3, the denser mapping
problem, compared with fixation position 1, demanded more
generalization in the network. Hence, the regularity effect
became significant when PS characters were presented in
fixation position 3 (Figure 6).

Results

Summed square error

We ran the model ten times and analyzed its average
performance with ANOVA. The independent variables were
fixation position (position 1, 2, and 3), character regularity
(regular/semiregular vs. irregular), character frequency
(high vs. low), and position of the phonetic radical (SP vs.
PS). The dependent variable was averaged summed squared
error.
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Fixation Fixation Fixation
position 1 position 2 position 3

Figure 4: Model’s performance in three different fixation
positions.
10

8.3

6

8.3

7.75

Regular/semiregular

5.46

Summed square error

Entropy

8

4
2
0
block 1 block 2 block 3 block 4

Irregular

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Figure 5: Entropy Analysis of the four blocks in the input
layer during training (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2005a).

SP
characters

PS
characters

Fixation Position 1

The results showed a main effect of fixation position (F(2,
4032) = 16.845, p < 0.001), with the best performance in
fixation position 1 and the worst in fixation position 3
(Figure 4). This phenomenon can be explained by the
overall rightward information skew in the lexicon.
Compared with the LHL, the RHL had a heavier processing
demand due to the greater variability, or entropy in
information theory, on the right of the characters (Figure 5).
Consequently, the model had the best performance when
characters were presented in fixation position 1, i.e., when

SP
characters

PS
characters

Fixation Position 3

Figure 6: Interaction between character regularity and
position of the phonetic radical in fixation position 1 and 3.
The error bars show standard errors.
In contrast, the phonetic radical of a SP character always
fell in a block with a high entropy level (Figure 5), and
hence there was a strong regularity effect across the three
fixation positions. Consequently, the interaction between
3

Note that PS characters also have a smaller percentage of regular
characters than SP characters; it may partly explain the weaker
regularity effect for PS characters.

2

This phenomenon may be because the length of a character is too
short for the effects to emerge (see Tsai & McConkie, 2003).

347

demand presented to the model from the given fixation
position. It also showed that the three-way interaction we
observed when the model was trained with the real lexicon
was at least partly due to the fundamental structural
differences between the processing of SP and PS characters4.

regularity and position of the phonetic radical was strongest
when characters were presented in fixation position 1 and
the weakest in fixation position 3. Note that in fixation
position 3, where the model had the densest mapping
problem, the model had to generalize both the majority SP
and the minority PS characters to a similar extent and
consequently SP and PS characters had an equally strong
regularity effect (Figure 6).

5.38
Entropy

Regular/semiregular

5.50

Irregular

5.28

5.38
5.28

5.25

Summed square error

0.5
0.4

5.00
Block 1 Block 2 Block 3 Block 4

0.3

Figure 8: Entropy Analysis of the four slots in the input
layer for the models trained with the artificial lexicon.

0.2
0.1

Behavioral Experiment

0

In order to examine the model’s cognitive plausibility, we
conducted a divided visual field study of Chinese character
naming. Our prediction was a three-way interaction between
visual field (LVF vs. RVF), character regularity, and
position of the phonetic radical, as predicted by the model.

SP characters PS characters SP characters PS characters
Fixation Position 1

Fixation Position 3

Figure 7: Interaction between character regularity and
position of the phonetic radical in fixation position 1 and 3
when the model was trained with the artificial lexicon. The
error bars show standard errors.

Materials & Participants
The materials consisted of the same 75 pairs of SP and PS
characters used in Hsiao and Shillcock’s (2005b) study.
Hence, each pair shared the same phonetic radical and was
matched in terms of pronunciation and token frequency; the
two groups of characters (i.e., SP and PS characters) were
matched as closely as possible according to syntactic class,
semantic concreteness, and visual complexity of semantic
radical as defined by number of strokes. Of the 75 pairs of
SP and PS characters, 31 were regular or semiregular and 44
were irregular. Character frequencies were within a mid- tohigh range. A further 40 SP and 20 PS filler characters, half
regular and half irregular, were also used in the experiment.
We recruited 16 female and 16 male native Chinese
speakers from Taiwan, with similar (university or higher)
educational background and normal or corrected vision. All
were right-handed according to the Edinburgh handedness
inventory (Oldfield, 1971) and with ages matched between
the male and female groups.

In a separate simulation, we created an artificial lexicon
with the same number of SP and PS characters, in order to
examine the baseline behavior of the model when there is no
overall information skew in the lexicon; the results reflect
the fundamental structural differences between the
processing of SP and PS characters. The artificial lexicon
consisted of 40 phonetic, 10 left semantic, and 10 right
semantic radicals; both SP and PS characters have the same
percentage of regular and irregular characters as the real
lexicon (for details see Hsiao & Shillcock, 2005a). The
results again showed a significant three-way interaction
between fixation position, character regularity, and position
of the phonetic radical (F(2, 792) = 25.360, p < 0.001 with
the Greenhouse-Geisser correction). Figure 7 shows the
interaction between character regularity and position of the
phonetic radical in fixation position 1 and 3. In fixation
position 1, SP characters had a stronger regularity effect
than PS characters; this phenomenon can be explained by a
higher processing demand for SP characters than PS
characters, since the phonetic radicals of SP characters were
presented in a block with a higher entropy value (i.e., block
2) compared with those of PS characters (block 1; Figure 8).
This higher processing demand pushed the model to a
higher level of generalization versus memorization, leading
to a stronger regularity effect. In contrast, PS characters had
a stronger regularity effect in fixation position 3 than SP
characters, since their phonetic radicals were presented in a
block with a higher entropy value. This phenomenon
supported the claim that the level of regularity effect in
different fixation positions was influenced by the processing

Design & Procedure
The design of this study had three within-subject variables:
position of the phonetic radical (PS vs. SP), character
4

In separate simulations, we observed the same three-way
interaction in a non-split model, in which the mapping was
mediated through only a single hidden layer (see Hsiao &
Shillcock, 2005a), for both the real and the artificial lexicons. It
suggested that this three-way interaction was mainly due to the
information structure of the stimuli, rather than the network
architecture.

348

Results
The results showed that there was indeed a significant threeway interaction between visual field, character regularity,
and position of the phonetic radical (F(1, 30) = 4.484, P <
0.05; see Figure 9): there was a significant interaction
between character regularity and position of the phonetic
radical in the LVF (F(1, 31) = 4.878, P < 0.05), but not in
the RVF (F < 1). The results obtained hence matched well
with the model’s predictions. Because of the overall
rightward information skew and the fundamental structural
differences between the processing of SP and PS characters,
when PS characters were presented in the LVF/RH,
individual mappings between orthography to phonology
could be processed without generalization; when they were
presented in the RVF/LH, the denser mapping problem

demanded more generalization. These phenomena gave rise
to a significant interaction between visual field and
character regularity (F(1, 31) = 4.173, P = 0.05) for PS
characters: the regularity effect was significant only when
they were presented in the RVF. In contrast, such interaction
was absent for SP characters (F < 1); they required
generalization in both LVF and RVF presentations.
Regular / Semiregular

Irregular

550

Response Time (ms)

regularity (regular/semiregular vs. irregular), and visual
field (LVF vs. RVF). The dependent variable was the time
taken to begin a correct pronunciation. Characters were
presented in a standard calligraphic font, each measuring
approximately 1 x 1 cm2. Participants sat in front of a screen,
at a viewing distance of 115 cm. Hence, each character
subtended less than one degree of visual angle and fell
within foveal vision. This design was to attenuate any visual
acuity difference when a character was presented in LVF or
RVF (Lindell & Nicholls, 2003).
Each naming trial began with two short vertical lines
presented on the screen for 500 ms. Participants were told to
look at the midpoint between the two lines. The two lines
were followed by a 150 ms presentation of the target
character, which did not allow time for refixation. The target
character was presented immediately either to the right or to
the left of the initial fixation. Occasionally a 9 pt. digit was
presented, instead of a character, exactly between the two
lines where participants should be fixating, to ensure that
participants were fixating the right place; the digit was only
presented for 90 ms. Data from any participant who did not
report the digits to an acceptable accuracy were rejected (cf.
Brysbaert, 1994). After each presentation of a target
character or a digit, participants were asked to name the
character or digit as fast and as accurately as possible. We
measured the response time as the time difference between
the onset of the character presentation and the onset of the
participant’s pronunciation. The stimulus was replaced by a
mask after the presentation; the mask disappeared after the
onset of the participant’s pronunciation. The screen then
turned blank until the experimenter pressed a button to start
the next trial. Participants were put into four groups, with
males and females evenly distributed. The materials
presented to the four groups were counterbalanced along
two dimensions: presentation order of each pair of PS and
SP characters (i.e., the PS character or the SP character first)
and presented visual field for each character. During the
experiment, the SP and PS characters in the same pair did
not appear in the same block or in the same visual hemifield
to minimize priming effects. Characters in each block were
presented in a random order.

540
530
520
510
500

SP

PS
LVF

SP

PS
RVF

Figure 9: Three-way interaction among visual field,
position of the phonetic radical, and character regularity.
The error bars show standard errors.
Nevertheless, there was no main effect of visual field (F
<1). The model predicted a LVF advantage due to the
overall rightward information skew. It is possible that such
an LVF advantage was offset by the fact that the RVF has
direct access to the LH, which is superior in phonological
processing. Thus, Chinese character naming may involve an
interplay between LVF advantage for orthographic
processing and a RVF advantage for phonological
processing5.

Discussion & Conclusion
We have shown, through both computational modeling and
a behavioral experiment, that hemispheric differences in
processing Chinese characters might emerge from
perceptual learning, or more specifically, the information
structures of the characters to which the readers have long
been exposed. Chinese SP and PS characters provide an
important opportunity to examine this phenomenon: the
fundamental structural differences in information between
SP and PS characters and the overall information skew. In
the computational modeling, when the network architecture
was completely symmetrical, we saw a three-way
interaction between visual field, position of the phonetic
5

Note also that in this study, SP characters were responded
significantly faster than PS characters, regardless of the visual field.
It is possible that in hemifield-presentation conditions, characters
were processed through a single processing domain (i.e., LH or RH)
and hence the brain excels in processing the majority SP characters
at the expense of the minority PS characters (refer to male
behavior in Hsiao & Shillcock, 2005b). The smaller response times
for PS characters in the RVF/LH, compared with the LVF/RH,
might have reflected automaticity in the LH over phonology.

349

foveal splitting. Proceedings of the Twenty Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 601606). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (2005a). Differences of split
and non-split architectures emerged from modelling
Chinese character pronunciation. Proceedings of the
Twenty Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 989-994). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (2005b). Foveal splitting causes
differential processing of Chinese orthography in the male
and female brain. Cognitive Brain Research, 25, 531-536.
Hue, C. W. (1992). Recognition processes in character
naming. In H. C. Chen & O. J. L. Tzeng (Eds.), Language
Processing in Chinese (pp. 93-107). Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
Kim, H. (1994). Distributions of hemispheric asymmetry in
lefthanders and right-handers: Data from perceptual
asymmetry studies. Neuropsychology, 8, 148-159.
Lavidor, M. & Walsh, V. (2004). The nature of foveal
representation. Nature Review Neuroscience, 5, 729-735.
Lindell, A. & Nicholls, E.R. (2003). Cortical representation
of the fovea: Implications for visual half-field research.
Cortex, 39, 111–117.
Mondor, T.A., & Bryden, M.P. (1992). On the relation
between visual spatial attention and visual field
asymmetries. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 44, 529–555.
Nazir, T. A., O’Regan, J. K., & Jacobs, A. M. (1991). On
words and their letters. Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society, 29, 171-174.
Nicholls, M. E. R., Wood, A. G., & Hayes, L. (2001).
Cerebral asymmetries in the level of attention required for
word recognition. Laterality, 6, 97-110.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: The Edinburgh Inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97-113.
Shillcock, R., Ellison, T. M., & Monaghan, P. (2000). EyeFixation Behavior, Lexical Storage, and Visual Word
Recognition in a Split Processing Model. Psychological
Review, 107, 824-851.
Tsai, J. L. & McConkie, G. W. (2003). Where do Chinese
readers send their eyes? In J. Hyona, R. Radach & H.
Deubel (Eds.), The Mind's Eyes: Cognitive and Applied
Aspects of Eye Movements (pp. 159-176). Amsterdam,
Netherlands: North-Holland /Elsevier Science Publishers.
Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., Cotton, B., & Wang, S. Y.
(1979). Visual lateralization effect in reading Chinese
characters. Nature (London), 282, 499-501.
Voyer, D. (1996). On the magnitude of laterality effects and
sex differences in functional lateralities. Laterality, 1, 5183.
Weekes, B. S., & Zhang, B. Y. (1999). Chinese character
recognition in the left and right visual fields. Brain &
Cognition, 40, 269-272.
Yang, M. J. & Cheng, C. M. (1999). Hemisphere
Differences in Accessing Lexical Knowledge of Chinese
Characters. Laterality, 4, 149-166.

radical, and character regularity. When there was a balanced
distribution between SP and PS characters, as in the
artificial lexicon, the fundamental structural differences
between the processing of SP and PS characters caused a
stronger regularity effect for SP characters in the LVF and
stronger regularity effect for PS characters in the RVF.
When the distribution between SP and PS characters were
unbalanced, as in the real lexicon, the same three-way
interaction was observed; the overall rightward information
skew demanded more processing load in the RVF, and push
both SP and PS character to a similar level of generalization.
The modeling predictions matched well with the human
data. In the divided visual field study of character naming,
we observed the same three-way interaction as the modeling
data. The results hence suggested perceptual learning of the
information structures of the word stimuli as one of the
factors accounting for hemispheric differences in visual
word recognition. This perceptual learning account may also
partly explain the attentional advantage account: for English
words, contrary to Chinese characters, there is more
information on the left and hence the LVF/RH may have
received more processing demands and consequently the
RH requires more attentional resources. Thus, this
perceptual learning account can more readily accommodate
data from both English and Chinese studies than can the
attentional advantage model.
In addition to the information structure of
characters/words, there are also some other factors which
may account for hemispheric differences in character/word
recognition, such as the RH superiority in handling holistic
pattern recognition and the LH superiority in phonological
processing, and visual acuity, which drops dramatically
from the centre of fixation (Nazir, O’Regan, & Jacobs,
1991); hemisphere differences may also interact with sex of
the participant. Thus, further investigation is required for a
full understanding of how the two hemispheres coordinate
information in visual character/word recognition.

References
Bryden, M.P., & Rainey, C.A. (1963). Left-right differences
in tachistoscopic recognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 66, 568–571.
Brysbaert, M. (1994). Interhemispheric transfer and the
processing of foveally presented simuli. Behavioral Brain
Research, 64, 151-161.
Brysbaert, M. & d'Ydewalle, G. (1990). Tachistoscopic
presentation of verbal stimuli for assessing cerebral
dominance: Reliability data and some practical
recommendations. Neuropsychologia, 28, 443-455.
Faust, M., Babkoff, H., & Kravetz, S. (1995). Linguistic
processes in the two cerebral hemispheres: Implications
for modularity vs interactionism. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 17, 171–192.
Harbaugh, R. (1998). Chinese Characters: A Genealogy and
Dictionary. New Haven: Zhongwen.Com and Yale Far
Eastern Publications.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (2004). Connectionist
modelling of Chinese character pronunciation based on

350

