UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to Make Instructional Explanations in Human Tutoring More Effective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sq3g7zf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Nückles, Matthias
Renkl, Alexander
Wittwer, Jörg

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How to Make Instructional Explanations
in Human Tutoring More Effective
Matthias Nückles (nueckles@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstraße 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Jörg Wittwer (wittwer@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstraße 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Alexander Renkl (renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstraße 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

instead do actively participate in the tutorial dialogue (Chi,
Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi, & Hausmann, 2001; Graesser, Person, & Magliano, 1995).
However, despite the accumulating evidence for this interaction hypothesis, it is also well-documented that human
tutoring is largely dominated by tutor-generated explanations. Tutors frequently lecture tutees to a great extent without providing them with opportunities to being constructive
and active on their own. For example, Chi et al. (2001)
found in their study on tutoring in biology that tutors overwhelmingly controlled and crafted the tutorial dialogue. In
the majority of cases, tutors exclusively focused on pursuing
the explication of knowledge they thought the tutees needed
to know and gave long-winded didactic explanations often
unsolicited by the tutees. As a result, the tutor-generated
explanations had no substantial impact on tutees’ knowledge
acquisition. Similarly, VanLehn, Siler, Murray, Yamauchi,
and Baggett (2003) analyzed tutorial explanations in the
domain of physics. They showed that tutor-generated explanations were seldom beneficial to tutees’ understanding.
Only in a few cases, the explanations helped tutees to learn
principles required for solving physics problems.
These results give rise to the question of why instructional
explanations in tutoring only rarely contribute to tutees’
learning and understanding to a substantial degree. Chi,
Siler, and Jeong (2004) hypothesized that for tutors’ explanations to be effective it is necessary that tutors are capable
of accurately diagnosing tutees’ understanding. Only on the
basis of a detailed mental model about the tutee’s particular
knowledge and misconceptions would tutors be able to
adapt their explanations to the individual tutee. However,
when asked to assess the tutees’ understanding, Chi et al.
found that tutors had great difficulties in estimating what the
tutees actually did know. They tended to overestimate
tutees’ correct knowledge and underestimate their incorrect
knowledge. Similarly, Nathan and Petrosino (2003) investigated teachers’ ability to predict students’ difficulties with
mathematical problems. Regardless of their educational
experience, teachers with high domain knowledge generally
overestimated the students’ knowledge required to solve
symbol-based mathematical tasks. Putnam (1987) analyzed

Abstract
Although tutoring is often dominated by tutor-generated explanations, they are rarely beneficial to tutees’ learning. In
line with previous research, the relative ineffectiveness of tutorial explanations might be attributed to tutors’ insufficient
skills in assessing tutees’ understanding. We conducted an
experiment in which we tested whether the effectiveness of
tutor-generated explanations can be enhanced by helping tutors to assess the tutees’ prior knowledge. We compared a
condition in which tutors received explicit information about
the tutees’ prior knowledge (n = 15 dyads) and a condition
without such help (n = 15 dyads). Results showed that tutees
in both experimental conditions did not differ with respect to
the acquisition of declarative knowledge. However, tutees
whose tutors were provided with knowledge information were
better able to apply their newly acquired knowledge to novel
problems. In addition, these tutees also had fewer false beliefs
about the concepts being applied. With respect to tutees’
question-asking, we found that instructional explanations
generated by tutors with knowledge information reduced the
incidence of questions that tutees returned in response to the
tutors’ explanations. The findings demonstrate that the effectiveness of tutor explanations depends on how well tutors adjust their explanations to the tutees’ individual knowledge
prerequisites.
Keywords: computer-mediated communication; instructional
explanations; question-asking; skill assessment; tutoring

Introduction
There is ample empirical evidence that human one-to-one
tutoring is a very effective means of instruction. It has been
shown to be superior, for example, to traditional classroom
teaching (e.g., Cohen, Kulik, & Kulik, 1982) and intelligent
tutoring systems (e.g., du Boulay & Luckin, 2001). Many
studies have investigated the factors being responsible for
the effectiveness of human tutoring. It has been demonstrated that one important source of its superiority lies in the
interactive nature of the tutorial dialogue (e.g., Graesser,
Person, Harter, & TRG, 2001; Wood, Wood, & Middleton,
1978). Learning is particularly enhanced when tutees do not
simply read or listen to an explanation during tutoring, but

633

and instructional explanations are particularly prevalent in
this context (cf. Shah et al., 2002), tutors and tutees in our
experiment communicated with each other through a textbased computer interface. Using this experimental scenario,
we investigated the effects of tutor-generated explanations
on tutees’ learning and question-asking.

the extent to which tutors used knowledge about their tutees
in order to select appropriate tasks for them. He found that
tutors seldom diagnosed tutees’ understanding. Tutors rather
followed in their presentation of problems the “subject matter logic” of a standard curriculum script (see also Graesser
et al., 1995).
Altogether, the results provide evidence that tutors have
insufficient skills in diagnosing tutees’ knowledge. Therefore, when tutors are not able to accurately assess tutees’
specific needs, they cannot generate effective explanations,
that is, explanations that are adaptive and responsive to the
tutees’ individual understanding (Leinhardt, 2001). However, adaptive instructional explanations could have a number of benefits for tutees and therefore be a valuable complement to other, more self-guided learning activities in
tutoring such as self-explaining (Chi et al., 2001). First, instructional explanations as compared to self-explanations
are often preferred by learners (cf. Aleven & Koedinger,
2000; Schworm & Renkl, 2006). Therefore, it seems reasonable to satisfy the tutees’ needs by providing them, at
least to a certain extent, with instructional explanations.
This recommendation is in line with the observation that
tutor-generated explanations are prevalent in human tutoring, particularly in computer-mediated contexts (Shah,
Evens, Michael, & Rovick, 2002). Secondly, instructional
explanations given by tutors are in the great majority of
cases correct. In contrast, self-explanations can be incorrect,
the result being that wrong knowledge is learned (Renkl,
2002). Thirdly, instructional explanations can help learners
to detect inconsistencies in their own understanding and
thus prevent them from being caught by an illusion of understanding that might inhibit further learning (Chi,
DeLeeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994). And finally, when
learning new material, learners might have comprehension
impasses that they cannot resolve on their own. Thus, instructional explanations might compensate for these difficulties by providing additional information that fills gaps in
the learners’ understanding (VanLehn et al., 2003).
Given the benefits of instructional explanations for learning, it seems sensible to support tutors in providing effective
explanations to tutees. One way to do this is to help tutors to
form a more elaborate mental model about the tutee’s individual understanding (a so-called student model, Putnam,
1987). Accordingly, when tutors have a more precise idea of
what a tutee does and does not know, it should be easier for
them to tailor their instructional explanations to the tutee’s
specific needs (Chi et al., 2001; Nickerson, 1999; Nückles,
Wittwer, & Renkl, 2005). This should benefit tutees’ learning because on the basis of such adapted explanations tutees
should be better able to construct an appropriate model of
the content being explained.
In order to test whether supporting tutors in forming a detailed student model indeed increases the effectiveness of
their instructional explanations, we conducted an experiment in which we analyzed tutoring in clinical psychology
under two experimental conditions: During tutoring, we did
or did not support tutors in constructing a student model by
providing them with explicit information about the tutee’s
background knowledge in clinical psychology. As computer-mediated tutoring is becoming increasingly common

Research Questions and Predictions
Learning Hypothesis
If tutors are provided with information about a tutee’s
knowledge level, they should be better able to adjust their
instructional explanations to the tutee’s particular needs.
This adaptation should facilitate tutees’ knowledge acquisition. If tutors do not receive any information about the
tutee’s knowledge, they have lower chances to tailor their
explanations to the tutee’s knowledge prerequisites. Such
suboptimal explanations should impair tutees’ learning and
understanding. We therefore predicted that tutees should
acquire more correct and less incorrect knowledge when
they received explanations from tutors who were provided
with knowledge information as compared with tutees whose
tutors had no knowledge information available.

Question-Asking Hypothesis
As tutees who were tutored with no knowledge information
were expected to receive explanations that only insufficiently matched with their knowledge prerequisites, they
should experience more discrepancies between the information provided and their own informational needs (Graesser
& McMahen, 1993). This should provoke the tutees to write
back to the tutor and ask for clarifications or further information more often. When information about the tutee’s
knowledge level helps tutors to better adapt their explanations to the tutees’ knowledge, the tutee should be more
content and therefore return fewer questions to the tutor.
Thus, it was predicted that tutees would ask substantially
more questions when tutors had no knowledge information
available, as compared with tutees whose tutors were provided with knowledge information.

Method
Participants
Thirty tutors and 30 tutees participated in the experiment.
Tutors were recruited among advanced students of psychology. They had expertise in the domain of clinical psychology, although they had no tutoring experience or training in
tutoring skills. We focused on unskilled tutors because the
majority of everyday tutors are usually novices (e.g., FitzGibbon, 1977). In order to ensure that all tutors indeed had
sufficient knowledge in clinical psychology, they were
asked to complete a test that measured their knowledge
about different topics in clinical psychology that later would
be addressed in the tutoring session. The test consisted of 15
multiple-choice items. On average, all tutors had a fairly
high knowledge, M = 11.23, SD = 1.91 (maximum score to
be obtained: 15 points). There were no significant differ-

634

ences between the two experimental conditions, F(1, 28) =
0.80, ns.
First-year students in psychology served as tutees in the
experiment. Both tutors and tutees received 7 EURO per
hour for participation.

purpose, a knowledge test (in the following labeled knowledge display test) was developed that contained 6 multiplechoice items representing the general knowledge in clinical
psychology, 6 items representing the knowledge about the
two-factor theory of phobias, and 6 items representing the
knowledge about the attribution theory. The number of
items that a tutee had solved correctly in each of the knowledge subtests was translated into values on the corresponding 3-point scales in the knowledge display. For example, if
a tutee had solved only 1 or 2 items out of the 6 items of the
general knowledge in clinical psychology subtest, this was
indicated as a low knowledge level. In contrast, if the tutee
had solved 5 or 6 items of a subtest, this would be represented in the knowledge display as a high knowledge level.
In order to assess the tutee’s knowledgeability regarding
the specialist concepts, the knowledge display test further
asked the tutees to describe the meaning of each of the concepts. A rater scored the written descriptions for correctness
by using the 3-point rating scale presented in the knowledge
display (see Figure 1).

Design
Tutors and tutees were combined into pairs that were randomly assigned to the experimental conditions. A twoconditions between-subjects design was used with availability of knowledge information as the independent variable:
(a) tutors were provided with information about the tutee’s
knowledge (in the following labeled knowledge information
condition) or (b) tutors were not provided with any information about the tutee’s knowledge (no knowledge information
condition).
Dependent variables encompassed measures of tutees’
learning and question-asking. Tutees’ learning referred to
their declarative knowledge about concepts, their transfer
knowledge, and their false beliefs about concepts. Tutees’
question-asking was measured by the number of follow-up
questions the tutees returned in response to the tutors’ explanations.

Tutors’ texts In order to refresh tutors’ knowledge about
the topics being addressed during tutoring, all tutors read –
prior to tutoring – two texts that provided them with information about the mental disorders “depression” and “specific phobias” along with psychological models explaining
the abnormal behaviors (“attribution theory” and “twofactor theory of phobias“). The texts were taken from the
German version of the book “Abnormal Psychology” written by Ronald J. Comer (2001). In the tutoring session, the
texts were removed and thus no longer available to the tutors.

Materials
The knowledge display The knowledge display provided
tutors with information about the tutee’s prior knowledge in
clinical psychology (see Figure 1). It consisted of three
types of information about the tutee that each was displayed
on a 3-point scale: (1) general knowledge in clinical psychology, (2) topic-specific knowledge (“attribution theory”
and “two-factor theory of phobias“), and (3) knowledge
with respect to two specialist concepts relevant to the topic
discussed during tutoring (e.g., external attribution, classical
conditioning).

Tutees’ texts Prior to tutoring, tutees read two texts that
provided them with general information about the mental
disorders “depression” and “specific phobias”. The texts
served as an introduction to both mental disorders that were
later addressed in the tutoring session. They were presented
online on the tutees’ computer screen.

KNOWLEDGE DISPLAY
My knowledge in clinical psychology is
low

moderate

high

Topics addressed in the tutoring session In the tutoring
session, tutors and tutees discussed about the mental disorders “depression” and “specific phobias”. In order to initiate
the dialogue with the tutor, tutees received two prepared
inquiries they directed one after another to the tutors. The
inquiries required the tutor to explain the mental disorders
“depression” and “specific phobias” with the help of the
attribution theory and the two-factor theory of phobias, respectively.

My knowledge about the attribution theory is
low

moderate

high

My knowledge about the concept
“external attribution” is

low

moderate

high

“self-efficacy” is

low

moderate

high

DIALOGUE WITH TUTEE
Tutee:

Tutor:

Could you please tell me how to
explain the development of depression with the help of the attribution
theory?

Well, first of all it is important to
know that……

Pre- and posttest The pretest declarative knowledge about
concepts consisted of 10 multiple-choice items that required
tutees to answer questions with respect to different concepts
relevant to the attribution theory and the two-factor theory
of phobias (e.g., “What does internal attribution mean?”).
The posttest consisted of the same task. In addition, five
open questions were devised to test tutees’ ability to apply
their knowledge about the attribution theory and the twofactor theory of phobias to new clinical cases (e.g., “Please
explain how Elke’s fear of flying developed.”). These ques-

Figure 1: Knowledge display as it was available to the
tutors in the knowledge information condition.
The values presented in the knowledge display were determined via an objective assessment procedure. For this

635

tions measured tutees’ transfer knowledge (for a similar
classification, see Chi et al., 2001).

“The fear of flying is caused through an avoidance behavior”, for a similar classification, see Chi et al., 2004).

Procedure

Follow-up questions The dialogues between tutors and
tutees were recorded. The follow-up comprehension questions that tutees asked in response to a tutor’s explanation
were counted.

The experiment lasted about three hours and was divided
into three sessions given in sequence – the pretest session,
the tutoring session, and the posttest session.
In the pretest session, tutees were asked to complete the
knowledge display test and the pretest that measured their
declarative knowledge about concepts. The experimenters
analyzed the knowledge display test in a separate room,
where they subsequently entered the results into the knowledge display form (see Figure 1).
In the tutoring session, the tutor and tutee sat in different
rooms and communicated through a text-based interface. In
the experimental condition, the knowledge display with information about the tutee’s knowledge was incorporated
into the interface and visible on the tutors’ screen (see Figure 1). The tutors were informed that the tutee’s knowledge
had been determined in advance and that they should try to
bear in mind the knowledge information when answering
the tutees’ questions. The tutee’s task was to sequentially
direct each of the two prepared inquiries verbatim to the
tutor by typing the prepared wording of the inquiry into the
text form of the interface. The tutor was asked to answer
each inquiry as well as possible. The tutees were free to
write back and ask as many follow-up questions as needed.
When the tutee addressed the second topic by asking the
second prepared inquiry, the knowledge display was automatically updated with regard to the tutee’s topic-specific
knowledge and the knowledge about the specialist concepts
relevant to the current topic.
After tutoring, the tutees again answered the test on declarative knowledge about concepts. In addition, tutees completed the transfer knowledge test that required them to apply their newly acquired knowledge to clinical cases.

Results
Tutees’ Learning
In order to examine tutees’ knowledge acquisition, we differentiated between three types of knowledge: declarative
knowledge about topic-specific concepts, transfer knowledge, and false beliefs. Following the learning hypothesis,
in the condition where the tutors had information about the
tutee, the tutees should acquire more correct and less incorrect knowledge than tutees in the no knowledge information
condition. Table 1 shows the mean values of tutees’ declarative knowledge about concepts (pre- and posttest), their
transfer knowledge, and false beliefs. In order to examine
tutees’ acquisition of declarative knowledge on the concepts
discussed during tutoring, we performed a repeated measures analysis with tutees’ pre- and posttest gains as the
within-subjects factor and experimental condition as the
between-subjects factor. The analysis revealed that tutees in
both experimental conditions displayed a high knowledge
gain, F(1, 28) = 70.26, p < .001, η² = .72 (strong effect).
However, there was neither a main effect for experimental
condition, F(1, 28) = 0.37, ns, nor an interaction effect, F(1,
28) = 1.00, ns. Evidently, tutees in both experimental conditions acquired declarative knowledge about the concepts to
a similar extent.
In a next step, we analyzed tutees’ transfer knowledge and
false beliefs. To this purpose, we performed separate
ANOVAs. The results clearly supported our prediction.
Tutees whose tutors had knowledge information available
more often correctly applied their knowledge to solve clinical cases as compared with tutees in the no knowledge information condition, F(1, 28) = 9.51, p = .001, η² = .25
(strong effect). In addition, they had significantly less misunderstandings about the concepts to be applied than tutees
who were tutored with no knowledge information, F(1, 28)
= 10.98, p = .003, η² = .28 (strong effect).

Analyses and Coding
Declarative knowledge about concepts In the pre- and
posttest that measured tutees’ declarative knowledge about
topic-specific concepts, each correct answer was assigned 1
point. As both the pretest and the posttest consisted of 10
multiple-choice items, the maximum score was 10 points.
Transfer knowledge Tutees’ answers to the transfer questions were scored for correctness. For this purpose, we constructed a reference answer for each of the five questions.
As the maximum score to be obtained was slightly different
for each of the five questions, the points a tutee earned for
each question were divided by the maximum score that was
obtainable for each question. Thus, the score of the transfer
knowledge test was represented by the percentage of points
achieved by a tutee.

Tutees’ Question-Asking
Following the question-asking hypothesis, tutees should ask
fewer questions in response to a tutor’s explanation in the
knowledge information condition compared with the no
knowledge information condition. As there was one tutee in
each of the two experimental conditions whose number of
follow-up questions was at least 3 standard deviations above
the mean, we excluded these two outliers from further calculations. The ANOVA performed on tutees’ follow-up
questions confirmed the question-asking hypothesis, F(1,
26) = 5.38, p = .03, η² = .17 (strong effect). Tutees in the
knowledge information condition asked significantly fewer
follow-up questions than tutees in the no knowledge information condition (see Table 1). When the two outliers were

False beliefs All answers that tutees gave in response to the
transfer knowledge questions were coded for false beliefs.
For this purpose, a blind rater coded whether a tutee incorrectly applied the concepts of the attribution theory or the
two-factor theory of phobias to the new clinical cases (e.g.,

636

trol conditions with no knowledge information (for similar
results, see Nückles, Winter, Wittwer, Hübner, & Herbert,
in press). Evidently, when tutors (or experts) have only an
imprecise mental model about the tutees’ individual understanding, they produce explanations that do not effectively
support tutees’ knowledge acquisition and more often lead
to comprehension breakdowns. This is corroborated by empirical findings that demonstrate the negative effects on
communication when interlocutors misjudge the partner’s
knowledge. For example, Wittwer, Nückles, and Renkl
(2005) investigated the consequences for laypersons’ learning and question-asking when experts overestimated or underestimated a laypersons’ understanding. Results showed
that laypersons’ learning from experts’ explanations was
impaired when experts had biased estimates of the laypersons’ knowledge. In addition, both overestimated and underestimated laypersons asked more questions as compared
with laypersons tutored by experts who had valid knowledge information about the layperson available.
With respect to the acquisition of declarative knowledge,
we found no significant differences between the experimental conditions. Obviously, the instructional explanations
generally helped tutees to accumulate a fairly similar stock
of knowledge about topic-specific concepts, irrespective of
whether the explanations were generated by tutors with or
without knowledge information. However, the results on
tutees’ transfer knowledge showed that explanations generated by tutors with knowledge information more effectively
supported tutees in using their knowledge to solve clinical
cases. This finding suggests that explanations that are tailored to the tutee’s specific needs are more beneficial to the
acquisition of deep knowledge (i.e., knowledge to be applied to novel situations) than to the acquisition of more
shallow knowledge (i.e., declarative knowledge that is directly stated in the tutors’ explanations). This conjecture is
consistent with findings of text revision studies that show
that adjusting instructional texts to a readers’ prior knowledge level often benefits only the readers’ deep understanding and not their shallow learning (e.g., McNamara,
Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996). Apparently, adaptive
explanations particularly facilitate the integration of new
information into a coherent and well-integrated mental representation of the content being explained in the form of a
situation model (Kintsch, 1998). On the basis of such a
situation model, tutees might be better able to generate inferences and thereby better able to apply their knowledge.
Moreover, the result that instructional explanations given
by tutors who were provided with knowledge information
reduced the number of tutees’ false beliefs about topicspecific concepts demonstrates that adaptive explanations
can substantially help to prevent tutees from acquiring incorrect knowledge. This finding is of particular importance
for tutoring because research has shown that tutors are dismal at assessing tutees’ misunderstandings (e.g., Chi et al.,
2004). However, when tutors are not able to diagnose
tutees’ incorrect knowledge, tutee’s false beliefs do persist
and will not be removed. Hence, the provision of instructional explanations that are adapted to the tutees’ individual
knowledge would not only lower the chances of learning
wrong knowledge but also make a continuous diagnosis of

not excluded but instead replaced by scores that were one
unit larger than the next extreme score (for details of this
procedure, see Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996), a similar result
was found, F(1, 28) = 4.24, p = .049, η² = .13 (medium to
strong effect).
Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations (in Parentheses) of
the Dependent Variables of the Experiment.
Experimental Condition
Knowledge
information
condition

No knowledge
information
condition

Tutees’ pretest scores on
declarative knowledge
about concepts

3.67
(2.86)

2.80
(2.54)

Tutees’ posttest scores
on declarative knowledge about concepts

6.87
(2.17)

6.87
(1.19)

Tutees’ transfer knowledge (in %)

86.27
(23.15)

62.72
(18.42)

Number of tutees’ false
beliefs

1.13
(1.19)

4.11
(3.26)

Number of tutees’ follow-up questions during
tutoring

3.14a
(1.96)

4.86a
(1.96)

Dependent Variable

Note. aThe means and standard deviations are computed on the basis of
only 14 tutees in each of the two experimental conditions, because there
was one outlier in each experimental condition that was excluded from
further calculations.

Discussion
This study showed that supporting tutors in adapting their
explanations to the tutees’ knowledge improved the effectiveness and efficiency of tutoring. Tutees whose tutors
were provided with information about their background
knowledge benefited more from the instructional explanations than tutees who were tutored with no knowledge information. As a result, the tutees were not only better able to
apply their newly acquired knowledge to solve clinical cases
but also displayed fewer misunderstandings about the concepts being applied. At the same time, the efficiency of tutoring was raised in the knowledge information condition
because the tutees directed fewer follow-up questions to the
tutors, which shows that they obviously experienced fewer
difficulties in comprehending the tutors’ explanations.
These findings are in line with the study conducted by
Nückles et al. (2005) who found, in the context of computer
counseling, that laypersons acquired more knowledge and
asked fewer questions when experts were presented data
about the layperson’s knowledge level as compared to con-

637

tutees’ false beliefs less necessary. Compared with other
more self-guided knowledge-construction activities, adaptive instructional explanations would also be of relevance
whenever tutees cannot generate a sufficient explanation by
themselves or are particularly prone to learn wrong knowledge (Renkl, 2002).
All in all, the present study shows that tutorial explanations should not be condemned as being an ineffective
means of instruction per se. Rather, their effectiveness
largely depends on how well tutors are able to adjust their
explanations to the tutees’ individual needs (Chi et al.,
2001; Leinhardt, 2001). In so doing, tutors make instructional explanations a valuable complement to other learning
opportunities that exclusively focus on tutees’ own meaningful construction of knowledge.

Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leinhardt, G. (2001). Instructional explanations: A commonplace for teaching and location for contrast. In V.
Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching.
Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch,
W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of
text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of understanding in learning from text. Cognition and Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Nathan, M. J., & Petrosino, A. J. (2003). Expert blind spot
among preservice teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 40, 905-928.
Nickerson, R. S. (1999). How we know – and sometimes
misjudge – what others know: Imputing one’s own
knowledge to others. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 737759.
Nückles, M., Winter, A., Wittwer, J., Hübner, S., & Herbert,
M. (in press). How do experts adapt their explanations to
a layperson’s knowledge in asynchronous communication? An experimental study. User Modeling and UserAdapted Interaction.
Nückles, M., Wittwer, J., & Renkl, A. (2005). Information
about a layperson’s knowledge supports experts in giving
effective and efficient advice to laypersons. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 11, 219-236.
Putnam, R. T. (1987). Structuring and adjusting content for
students: A study of live and simulated tutoring of addition. American Educational Research Journal, 24, 13-48.
Renkl, A. (2002). Learning from worked-out examples: Instructional explanations support self-explanations. Learning & Instruction, 12, 529-556.
Schworm, S., & Renkl, A. (2006). Computer-supported example-based learning: When instructional explanations
reduce self-explanations. Computers & Education, 46,
426-445.
Shah, F., Evens, M., Michael, J., & Rovick, A. (2002). Classifying student initiatives and tutor responses in human
keyboard-to-keyboard tutoring sessions. Discourse Processes, 33, 23-52.
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (1996). Using multivariate statistics. New York: Harper Collins.
VanLehn, K., Siler, S., Murray, C, Yamauchi, T., &
Baggett, W. B. (2003). Why do only some events cause
learning during human tutoring? Cognition and Instruction, 21, 209-249.
Wood, D., Wood, H., & Middleton, D. (1978). An experimental evaluation of four face-to-face teaching strategies.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 1, 131147.
Wittwer, J., Nückles, M., & Renkl, A. (2005). What happens when experts over- or underestimate a layperson’s
knowledge? Effects on learning and question asking. In B.
G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks go to Christine Otieno, Carmen Krieg, Anemari Karacic, Tarik Gasmi, Lisa Hüther, and Isabel Braun
for their help with many practical aspects of the project,
such as data collection, scoring, and proofreading.

References
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2000). Limitations of student control: Do students know when they need help? In
G. Gauthier, C. Frasson, & K. VanLehn (Eds.), Proceedings ITS 2000. Berlin: Springer.
Chi, M. T. H., DeLeeuw, N., Chiu, M.-H., & LaVancher,
Ch. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S., & Jeong, H. (2004). Can tutors
monitor students’ understanding accurately? Cognition
and Instruction, 22, 363-387.
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann, R. G. (2001). Learning from human tutoring. Cognitive Science, 25, 471-533.
Cohen, P. A., Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C. (1982). Educational
outcomes of tutoring: A meta-analysis of findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19, 237-248.
Comer, R. J. (2001). In G. Sartory (Hrsg.), Klinische Psychologie [Abnormal Psychology]. Heidelberg: Spektrum.
du Boulay, B., & Luckin, R. (2001). Modelling human
teaching tactics and strategies for tutoring systems. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
12, 235-256.
Fitz-Gibbon, C. T. (1977). An analysis of the literature of
cross-age tutoring. Washington, DC: National Institute of
Education.
Graesser, A. C., & McMahen, C. L. (1993). Anomalous
information triggers questions when adults solve quantitative problems and comprehend stories. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 136-151.
Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., Harter, D., & TRG (2001).
Teaching tactics and dialog in AutoTutor. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 257279.
Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., & Magliano, J. P. (1995).
Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-on-one
tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 495-522.

638

