UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Impact of Epistemological Beliefs on Hypertext Learning: A Pilot-Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hh1h00g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bromme, Rainer
Pieschl, Stephanie
Stahl, Elmar

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Impact of Epistemological Beliefs on Hypertext Learning: A Pilot-Study
Stephanie Pieschl (pieschl@uni-muenster.de)
Psychology Department, Fliednerstr. 21
48143 Muenster, Germany

Elmar Stahl (stahlel@psy.uni-muenster.de)
Psychology Department, Fliednerstr. 21
48143 Muenster, Germany

Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Psychology Department, Fliednerstr. 21
48143 Muenster, Germany

Abstract
This explorative pilot-study investigated the relationship
between epistemological beliefs, prior knowledge and selfregulated learning with a hierarchical hypertext. Students who
varied in their epistemological beliefs and prior knowledge
learned about the topic of genetic fingerprinting. Logfiles and
questionnaire data were collected. Results indicate that both
epistemological beliefs and prior knowledge are significantly
associated with process data such as processing different
hypertext parts and calibration to task demands, as well as
with the learning outcome.
Keywords:
Epistemological
Beliefs;
Metacognitive
Calibration; Hypertext Learning; Prior Knowledge

Theoretical Background
Research on epistemological beliefs, i.e. learners' beliefs
about the nature of knowledge and knowing, has expanded
considerably in recent years (e.g. Hofer & Pintrich, 2002).
One important theoretical assumption in these fields of
research is that learners’ epistemological beliefs develop
from more “naive” views (e.g., knowledge is absolute;
knowledge is an accumulation of facts) to more
“sophisticated” beliefs (e.g., knowledge is relative and
contextual, knowledge is a complex network) during
educational processes. An increasing number of empirical
studies shows that more sophisticated epistemological
beliefs are related to more adequate learning strategies and
better learning outcomes in traditional classrooms (e.g.,
Hofer & Pintrich, 1997; Schommer, 1990). There are some
studies concerning computer-based learning environments
as well: For example, epistemological beliefs are related to
learning with hypertext (e.g., Jacobson & Spiro, 1995),
learning processes with computer-simulations (Windschitl
& Andre, 1998), information retrieval from the Internet
(e.g., Hofer, 2004) and help-seeking in interactive learning
environments (e.g., Bartholomé, Stahl, Pieschl, & Bromme,
2006). Thus, on the one hand, there is growing empirical
evidence that epistemological beliefs are learner variables
that effect learning processes and outcomes, on the other
hand the exact functional relationship between
epistemological beliefs and learning still remains an open
issue, i.e. how they exactly exert their influence.

We assume that hypertexts are well suited to examine this
relationship in detail for two reasons. First, methods like
log-file analyses or screen capturing allow for detailed
analyses of learning processes. Second, information
retrieval from the Internet and therefore with hypertexts
plays an increasingly important role in today’s selfregulated learning, which has advanced into a relevant and
desired key competency.
An encouraging theoretical background that helps to
specify a functional relationship between epistemological
beliefs and learning is given by the COPES-model (e.g.
Winne & Hadwin, 1998) According to this model, selfregulated learning occurs in four weakly sequenced and
recursive stages: (1) task definition, (2) goal setting and
planning, (3) enactment and (4) adaptation. In the task
definition stage (1), a student generates her own perception
about what the studying task is, and what constraints and
resources are in place. Consequently, the student generates
idiosyncratic goal(s) and constructs a plan for addressing
that study task (2). In the enactment stage (3) the previously
created plan of study tactics is carried out. The adaptation
stage (4) pertains to fine-tuning of strategies within the
actual learning task as well as to long-term adaptations
based on the study experience.
All four stages are embedded in the same general
cognitive architecture. In the centre of this architecture are
processes of metacognitive monitoring and controlling that
students’ might use to calibrate their learning process to
perceived task demands. If and how such metacognitive
calibration occurs depends on five constituents whose
acronym gave the model its name: conditions (C),
operations (O), products (P), evaluations (E) and standards
(S). Conditions pertain to external task conditions (e.g. time,
resources) as well as to internal cognitive conditions (e.g.,
motivational factors, domain and task knowledge).
Epistemological beliefs and prior knowledge are a part of
these internal conditions. Conditions influence the whole
learning process, especially the operations and standards.
Operations include all cognitive processes (e.g. tactics,
strategies) that learners utilize to solve a learning task. In
each learning stage, these operations create internal or
external products. These include internal mental (e.g. a
mental model of how to solve the task) as well as external
products (e.g. an observable behavior, such as hypertext

1956

navigation). Students’ goals are represented as multivariate
profiles of standards. Standards can be described as a profile
of different criteria that a student sets for the learning task
(e.g. targeted level of understanding or targeted time on
task). Evaluations occur during the whole learning process
when a student metacognitively monitors her learning
process. These evaluations are based on comparisons
between the intermediate products on the one hand and her
standards on the other. When she notices discrepancies she
is able to perform metacognitive control by executing fix-up
operations (e.g. re-reading a hypertext node).
Based on the COPES-model we hypothesize that learners
with more sophisticated beliefs should be better in
metacognitively calibrating to task demands during
hypertext learning. For example, we believe that learners
with naïve epistemological beliefs will set matching naïve
internal standards, e.g. “this content is very easy to learn,
therefore, I need only superficial understanding and will
achieve it by only spending little time and paying little
attention”. Consequently, they will metacognitively monitor
and control their whole learning process according to these
standards, e.g. they will employ more superficial learning
strategies (control) such as memorizing and probably will
not realize (monitor) that superficial learning is not
sufficient. Learners with more sophisticated beliefs in more
uncertain and complex knowledge on the other hand will set
higher standards, e.g. “as this content is very complex, I
have to deeply elaborate to really understand it, furthermore,
as it is uncertain, I will have to consider different
perspectives to evaluate it critically”. Consequently, these
learners will employ strategies for deep elaboration (control)
and will monitor their whole learning process against these
high standards. For very easy tasks such as memorizing a
factual detail, these different standards will not elicit strong
effects. Learners with all kinds of epistemological beliefs
will be able to solve such tasks although they might slightly
differ in their learning process. But with ascending task
complexity, the differences between learners with different
epistemological beliefs will become more pronounced.
Naïve learners will underestimate content and task
complexity which will result in superficial learning and
suboptimal results. More sophisticated learners will be
better in calibrating their standards to real task complexity.
Consequently this will result in a more adequate learning
process and outcome. We will investigate this issue in detail
with a series of studies within a larger project.
In this article we present the results of a first explorative
study within this series. We asked students of biology and
humanities to learn with a hypertext about the topic genetic
fingerprinting (mtDNA analysis). Thus, we were able to
analyse learners with a wide range of prior knowledge. We
choose to include different levels of prior knowledge
because prior domain knowledge is the one learner
characteristic that most consistently influences computersupported learning (e.g. Michell, Chen & Macredie, 2005).
The main objective of this study was to develop and test
material for the main studies of the project. In addition, we
also examined two explorative research questions: Our
hypertext encompasses three hierarchical level of different
complexity (for more details see below). Thus, the COPES-

model would predict that learners with different
epistemological beliefs would differ in their calibration to
this complexity of the learning material, mediated by their
different internal standards. Therefore, our first question is:
(1) Are learners’ epistemological beliefs and prior
knowledge related to their calibration processes? In terms of
the COPES-model: Do learners’ with different
epistemological beliefs and different prior knowledge
employ different operations and do they set different
standards for hypertext parts of different complexity and
thus come to different evaluations? We also used a
knowledge test to measure learning outcome. Therefore, the
second question is: (2) Do epistemological beliefs and prior
knowledge influence the learning outcome (in terms of the
COPES-model: the product of learning)?

Method
Participants
Fifty-one students participated and received 15 € as
reimbursement. The mean age was 23.1 years (SD = 2.5).
Twenty-five (13 males and 12 females) studied in the 4.5th
(SD = 1.0) semester biology or related majors. Their
background knowledge was confirmed by the results of a
short microbiology knowledge test (8 points maximum; M =
7.7, SD = 0.7). The other 26 participants (10 males and 16
females) studied in the 6.1th semester psychology or other
humanity majors (SD = 3.9). The knowledge test revealed
minimal background knowledge (M = 2.8, SD = 1.7). Thus,
our students demonstrated a wide range of prior knowledge.

Material

1957

Epistemological Beliefs Questionnaires Epistemological
beliefs were measured by one questionnaire of Wood and
Kardash (2002) that we labeled WKI (Wood and Kardash
Instrument). It measures students’ general beliefs about the
nature of knowledge and knowing. A second questionnaire,
the CAEB (Connotative Aspects of Epistemological Beliefs;
Stahl & Bromme, submitted), measured students beliefs
referring to the domain of genetics. We decided to calculate
factor analyses even with this small sample size and
obtained meaningful solutions: The factor solution for the
WKI encompassed two factors labeled “simplicity” (9
items, Cronbach’s α = .69) and “certainty” (5 items,
Cronbach’s α = .73) which explained 39 % variance. The
factor “simplicity” measures whether students assume that
knowledge is an accumulation of facts versus a complex
network of interrelated concepts (sample item: “When I
learn I prefer to make things as simple as possible.”). The
students in this study tended to believe in simple knowledge
(M = 4.6, SD = 0.8; on a 7-point scale from 1 = knowledge
is seen as complex to 7 = knowledge is seen as simple).
Students of biology and humanities students did not differ
on this factor. The factor “certainty” refers to students’
beliefs in absolute and exact versus tentative knowledge.
Students believed more in uncertain knowledge (M = 5.9,
SD = 0.7; on a 7-point scale from 1 = knowledge is seen as

Knowledge tests Eight multiple-choice questions were
developed with the help of a domain expert to test students’
prior knowledge. To measure the learning outcome
multiple-choice questions each specific to one hypertext
node were developed for half of the nodes (15 questions).

certain to 7 = knowledge is seen as uncertain). Students of
biology and humanities students did not differ on this factor.
The solution for the CAEB comprised two factors, “texture”
(11 items, Cronbach’s α = .81) and “variability” (9 items,
Cronbach’s α = .80) and explained 41 % variance. The
factor “texture” encompasses beliefs about the structure and
accuracy of knowledge in a domain and ranges from beliefs
that knowledge is exact and structured to beliefs that it is
unstructured and vague. A sample item is “structured –
unstructured” (The CAEB is conceptualised as a semantical
differential. Thus, the students had to judge such pairs of
adjectives on a 7-point scale.). Students tended to believe
more in structured knowledge in genetics (M = 2.9; SD =
0.7). Humanities students displayed a tendency to belief in
more unstructured knowledge (F (1, 47) = 3.7, p = .06). The
factor “variability” encompasses beliefs about the stability
and dynamics of domain knowledge and ranges from beliefs
that knowledge is dynamic and flexible to beliefs that it is
stabile and inflexible. The students of this study believed in
relative knowledge (M = 4.8; SD = 0.8; on a 7-point scale
from 1 = absolute to 7 = relative). Students of biology and
humanities students did not differ on this factor.
Correlational analysis of these factors revealed two
significant relations: The WKI factor “simplicity” was
significantly related to the CAEB factor “texture” (-.29; p =
.04). Students who believed in simple knowledge in general
also believed in structured knowledge in genetics.
Furthermore, the correlation between the two domainrelated factors of the CAEB “texture” and “variability” was
significant (r = .43; p < .01). Students who believed in
unstructured knowledge in genetics also believed in relative
knowledge in genetics.

Procedure
Students worked in sessions lasting about 2 hours with a
maximum of 6 students per session. During the session each
student first completed questionnaires on demographics,
epistemological beliefs and prior knowledge. Then they
were introduced to the structure and navigational options of
the hypertext. Afterwards, they were instructed to read the
eight-node introduction and subsequently to learn as much
as possible about mtDNA analysis. We chose such an
unspecific learning task to investigate their spontaneous use
and navigation of the hypertext. During this task they had to
give comprehensibility ratings for all nodes they read. After
one hour of working with the hypertext the students
completed the knowledge test, rated their motivation during
learning and their interest in the topic.

Results
Because of the explorative character of the study we define
(p < .05) as significant and (p < .10) as a trend.
On average the students rated to be motivated during
learning (M = 5.1, SD = 1.2, on a 7-point scale with 7 =
very motivated) and to be interested in the topic (M = 5.8,
SD = 1.1, on a 7-point scale with 7 = very interesting). We
found no relationships between their ratings and any of the
other independent variables. Thus interest and motivation
were excluded from all subsequent analyses.

Research Question 1

Hypertext The hypertext was created with MetaLinks
(Murray, 2003), an authoring software for hierarchical
hypertexts with additional thematic linking. Technically
MetaLinks is Filemaker based and uses Netscape Navigator
as a browser. It collects logfile data automatically.
The hypertext encompasses an eight-node introduction to
genetic fingerprinting that provides general background
knowledge necessary to understand the topic (e.g. structure
of DNA). The main part of the hypertext (thirty-one nodes)
explains the topic of mtDNA analysis. Fourteen of these
nodes are arranged in a hierarchical structure with three
levels. The first level encompasses five introductory nodes;
the two deeper levels give more detailed and specific
information (level 2 = 6 nodes; level 3 = 3 nodes). Besides
this hierarchical structure, the hypertext contains seventeen
nodes (appendices) that are linked thematically with the
main text. They belong to the categories of “biological
background” (2 nodes), “examples” (7 nodes) and
“uncertainties / problems” (8 nodes). Those nodes differ in
length as well as difficulty.
Comprehensibility ratings All students had to judge the
comprehensibility of each node they processed on a 7-point
scale from 1 = “very comprehensible” to 7 = “very
incomprehensible”.

For each hypertext part, i.e. the three hierarchical levels and
the three appendices, three variables were computed for
each student: (1) Average Processing Duration per Node
(APDN = total time spent in a hypertext part divided by
number of processed nodes), (2) Percentage of Processed
Nodes (PPN = number of processed nodes divided by
number of existing nodes) and (3) Average
Comprehensibility Rating for each hypertext part (ACR).
We calculated a MANCOVA with the three hierarchical
levels as repeated-measure factor, prior knowledge and the
four epistemological beliefs factors as independent variables
and APDN, PPN, and ACR as dependent variables. To
further validate our results we also computed correlations
and visualized our effects.
The results revealed no main effect of the repeatedmeasure factor hierarchical levels (F (6, 32) = 1.9, p = .11.
Nonetheless, effects were visible in all separate univariate
analyses: Nodes on deeper levels were processed longer (F
(2, 74) = 2.6, p = .08), a lower percentage of nodes was
processed on deeper levels (F (2, 74) = 4.2, p = .02) and
nodes on deeper levels were judged to be less
comprehensible (F (2, 74) = 2.5, p = .09).

1958

Epistemological beliefs MANCOVA results reveal a main
effect for the epistemological belief factor WKI “simplicity”

(F (3, 35) = 4.1, p = .01) and an interaction effect between
WKI “simplicity” and level of hierarchy (F (6, 32) = 2.3, p
= .07). The main effect was corroborated univariately on all
three dependent variables (APDN: F (1, 37) = 7.6, p = .01;
PPN: F (1, 37) = 4.5, p = .04; ACR: F (1, 37) = 5.9, p = .02).
Students who believed in simple knowledge processed
single nodes longer, processed a smaller percentage of
nodes and judged nodes to be more comprehensible than
their counterparts who believed in more complex
knowledge. These results are supported by the correlation
results: The belief in simple knowledge (WKI “simplicity”)
was positively correlated with more comprehensible node
evaluation on level 2 and 3 (see Table 1). The multivariate
interaction effect was univariately only replicated on one
dependent variable (APDN: F (2, 74) = 6.5, p < .01).
Students who believed in simple knowledge not only
processed nodes longer (see main effect above) but this
difference also became distinctively more pronounced on
deeper hierarchical levels (for visualization with a mediansplit WKI “simplicity” see Figure 1a). Correlation results
also reveal a significant association between the belief in
simple knowledge (WKI “simplicity”) and average
processing duration per node (APDN) on level 3 (Table 1).

Knowledge
test score

Level 1 (N = 49)
APDN
.03
-.19
-.07
PPN
-.13
.09
-.19
ACR
.21
-.01
-.20
Level 2 (N = 47)
APDN
.09
.06
.09
PPN
-.18
.06
-.24
ACR
.19
-.09
-.33*
Level 3 (N = 43)
APDN
.06
.14
.42**
PPN
-.06
.14
-.13
ACR
.29+
.09
-.38*
Biological background (N = 14)
APDN
-.05
-.15
.19
PPN
.18
.28
.42
ACR
.06
-.28
-.41
Examples (N = 22)
APDN
.25
.06
.09
PPN
-.31
-.32
.00
+
ACR
.43*
.04
-.37
Problems (N = 17)
APDN
.39
.56*
.22
PPN
-.57*
-.06
.13
ACR
.17
-.03
-.29

WKI
certainty

WKI
simplicity

CAEB
variability

CAEB
texture

Table 1: Correlations pertaining to research question 1

-.07
-.02
.03

-.30*
.15
-.40**

-.08
.19
-.14

-.32*
.33*
-.41**

-.01
+
.26
-.01

.00
+
.26
-.51**

-.14
.28
.08

-.12
.17
-.30

-.01
-.12
.05

-.24
.17
-.26

.13
.37
-.04

.09
.49*
-.15

MANCOVA results reveal no multivariate effect for the
epistemological belief factor WKI “certainty”. Still, an
interaction between WKI “certainty” and level of hierarchy
was detected univariately (F (2, 74) = 3.1, p = .05): Students
who believe in uncertain knowledge processed an
increasingly higher percentage of nodes (PPN) on deeper
levels than their more naïve counterparts (for visualization
with a median-split WKI “certainty” see Figure 1b). This
effect was corroborated by correlational results: The belief
in uncertain knowledge (WKI “certainty”) was associated
with a higher PPN on level 3 (see Table 1).
MANCOVA results reveal no significant effect for the
epistemological belief factors of the CAEB. Nevertheless,
the belief in unstructured knowledge in genetics (CAEB
“texture”) was significantly associated with judging the
nodes on level 3 less comprehensible (see Table 1).
Table 1 also displays the correlations within the three
appendices. Beliefs in unstructured knowledge in genetics
(CAEB “texture”) and complex knowledge in general (WKI
“simplicity”) were associated with judging nodes in the
“examples” less comprehensible. Further significant
correlations were found concerning the “problem” nodes:
Students who believed in unstructured knowledge in
genetics (CAEB “texture”) processed fewer nodes (PPN).
Students who believed in relative knowledge in genetics
(CAEB “variability”) spent more time on nodes (APDN).
Prior knowledge MANCOVA results reveal a main effect
for prior knowledge (F (3, 35) = 4.8, p = .01). This effect
was corroborated univariately only on one dependent
variable (ACR: (F (1, 37) = 9.6, p < .01): Students with
higher prior knowledge judged all nodes to be more
comprehensible. This effect was supported by correlational
results: Higher prior knowledge was associated with judging
nodes more comprehensible on all three levels (see Table 1).
We also found an univariate interaction effect between level
of hierarchy and prior knowledge for comprehensibility
ratings (ACR): Students with higher prior knowledge not
only judged the nodes’ comprehensibility higher on all
levels (see main effect above) but this effect became also
more pronounced with deeper levels (F (2, 74) = 5.4, p <
.01). For a visualisation of this effect with group affiliation
(biology vs. humanities students) as a factor, see Figure 1c.
Results of the correlations demonstrated that higher prior
knowledge was also associated with a lower processing
duration of single nodes (APDN) on level 1 and 2, with
higher percentage of processed nodes (PPN) on level 2 and
3, and with higher percentage of processed nodes in the
“problem” nodes (see Table 1).

Research Question 2
To examine the learning outcome we calculated the total
test score of the mtDNA knowledge test as dependent
variable, but also two sub-scores: The percentage of
correctly answered questions pertaining to processed nodes
(PP = Percentage when Processed) will show how much
students recalled the information they had read.
Furthermore, the percentage of correctly answered questions
pertaining to non-processed nodes was calculated (PNP =
Percentage when Not Processed).

APDN = Average Processing Duration per Node
PPN = Percent of Processed Nodes
ACR = Average Comprehensibility Ratings
** p < .01; * p < .05; + p < .10

1959

Figure 1: Visualization of significant interaction effects concerning research question 1
We calculated a MANCOVA with prior knowledge and
the four epistemological beliefs factors as independent
variables, and the total test scores, PP and PNP as dependent
variables. We found a main effect for WKI “simplicity”: F
(3, 39) = 3.5. p = .03, corroborated univariately only for
total test score (F (1, 41) = 4.7, p = .04). We also found a
main effect of prior knowledge (F (3, 39) = 4.3, p = .01).
This effect was corroborated univariately only for total test
score (F (1, 41) = 12.6, p < .01) and the percentage of
correctly answered questions for none-processed nodes
(PNP: F (1, 41) = 3.6, p = .06), but not for processed nodes
(PP: F (1, 41) = 2.3, p = .14). Correlations supported this
effect (total score: r = .56, p < .01; PP: r = .27, p = .07; PNP:
r = .35, p = .02).

Discussion
The central aim of this study was to test material for the
main experiments of the project. Thus, students were asked
to navigate through one chapter of a large hypertext that we
are developing. It is interesting that we found calibration
effects even within such a small hypertext (31 nodes) and
with a rather unspecific learning task.

Research Question 1
We found clear evidence that students do calibrate their
learning to the different levels of the hypertext hierarchy
and that this calibration is effected by their epistemological
beliefs and prior knowledge.
Concerning the epistemological belief factor WKI
“simplicity” we found that students who believed in simple
knowledge processed a smaller percentage of nodes across
all levels. On the other hand, they process nodes on all
levels longer, and this effect becomes more pronounced on
deeper levels, especially on level 3. A possible explanation
might be that these naïve students who believed in simple,
factual knowledge and a structured learning process
probably wanted to memorize detailed facts which can be
found mainly on deep-level nodes. Because they
concentrated on such nodes, these students probably run out
of time and were not able to visit more nodes. The more
sophisticated students who believed in more complex
knowledge on the other hand probably tried to get an

1960

overview by processing as many nodes as possible and to
understand the most important concepts and their
interrelations. Thus they probably ignored very specific
details of deep-level nodes. Furthermore, students who
believed in simple knowledge judged nodes to be more
comprehensible across all levels, probably because they
judged comprehensibility in terms of understanding single
facts without considering their interrelations. Concerning
the epistemological belief factor WKI “certainty” we found
that students who believe in uncertain knowledge processed
an increasingly higher percentage of nodes on deeper levels,
especially on level 3. In accordance with the COPES-model,
these students probably tried to get an overview of the
whole hypertext by trying to process as many nodes as
possible to judge the relevance and validity of the given
information. For the domain-related CAEB factors no
significant MANCOVA effects were found. Still,
correlations demonstrate that the sophisticated belief in
unstructured knowledge (CAEB “texture”) is associated
with judging nodes on deeper levels less comprehensible.
As expected more sophisticated students scrutinized the
nodes more critically and thus discovered more
comprehensibility problems. But, it should be noted that
there is also a relation between prior knowledge and CAEB
“texture”: Humanities students possess less prior knowledge
in biology and tended to display more sophisticated beliefs
in unstructured knowledge (see above). Concluding, there is
an interesting relationship between prior knowledge, CAEB
“texture” and comprehensibility. But the exact causal
relationship is still unclear and will be investigated in
subsequent studies. We also found significant correlations
between the CAEB factors and the dependant variables
within the appendices (i.e. “biological background”,
“examples” and “problems”). For example, students who
displayed more sophisticated beliefs also processed a higher
percent of nodes about problems (CAEB “texture”) and
processed each of these node longer (CAEB “texture” and
“variability”). It is in accordance with the COPES-model
that these students with more “sophisticated” beliefs access
and scrutinize information about potential problems of
mtDNA analysis. Such information assists the evaluation of
the validity of the factual information presented in the
remainder of the hypertext.

Concerning prior knowledge, the effects were not
surprising: Students with higher prior knowledge judged
nodes across all levels to be more comprehensible. This
effect became more pronounced on deeper hierarchical
levels. Because these students were familiar with some of
the facts explained in the hypertext, the nodes were easier to
comprehend. Further, higher prior knowledge resulted in
shorter processing of nodes on level 1 and 2, and processing
of more nodes on level 3, probably for the same reason.

Research Question 2
We found significant effects of epistemological beliefs and
prior knowledge on learning outcome.
Students believing that knowledge is complex (WKI
“simplicity”) demonstrated higher learning outcomes than
students who believed in simple knowledge. This means
that the “naive” students’ navigational behavior (i.e. taking
more time to read the most complex nodes) did not result in
deeper knowledge about the main concepts of the nodes. It
is remarkable that we found such an effect within this study:
Both, the task (“learn as much as possible”) and the test
(multiple-choice questions about single facts), concentrate
on detailed knowledge of facts. We had assumed that for
such an easy task like memorizing facts, students with more
“naïve” and “sophisticated” epistemological beliefs would
not differ much in the standards they set themselves and
consequently they would not differ much in their learning
outcome. When considering more complex tasks (e.g. “How
valid is mtDNA testing. Write a pro and contra
argumentation.”), students with more “sophisticated” beliefs
would be better in calibrating their standards to such
enhanced task complexity whereas more “naïve” students
would underestimate task complexity and thus set more
superficial standards (e.g. Stahl, Pieschl, & Bromme,
accepted). Consequently, differences in their learning
outcomes would become higher. Considering these
arguments, it is promising all the more that we found such
effects even with regard to factual knowledge. We will
investigate the impact of different kinds of learner tasks,
especially more complex ones, in subsequent experiments.
Prior knowledge effected students learning outcome in a
selective way: Students with higher prior knowledge were
better able to answer those questions pertaining to nodes
they did not read (PNP), but no effect for read nodes (PN)
was found. Thus, even students with low prior knowledge
were able to comprehend the main concepts of processed
nodes equally well.

Conclusion
Summarizing the results, epistemological beliefs and prior
knowledge are both significantly associated with the
hypertext learning process and the learning outcome.
Nevertheless, our results are only explorative in nature.
Further research to investigate these research questions
more deeply is needed. The COPES-model appeared to be
an appropriate framework. It allows for concrete hypotheses
about the effects of epistemological beliefs and prior
knowledge on metacognitive calibration within different
stages of a learning process.

Acknowledgements
This study was funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG). We thank Stephanie Adrian, Sabine Joachim and
Mike Pillukat, the research assistants of this project.

References
Bartholomé, T., Stahl, E., Pieschl, S., & Bromme, R.
(2006). What matters in help-seeking? A study of help
effectiveness and learner-related factors. Computers in
Human Behavior, 22, 113-129.
Hofer, B. K. (2004). Epistemological understanding as a
metacognitive process: Thinking aloud during online
searching. Educational Psychologist, 39(1), 43-55.
Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of
epistemological theories: Beliefs about knowledge and
knowing and their relation to learning. Review of
Educational Research, 67(1), 88-140.
Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (Eds.). (2002). Personal
epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge
and knowing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Jacobson, M. J., & Spiro, R. J. (1995). Hypertext learning
environments, cognitive flexibility, and the transfer of
complex knowledge: An empirical investigation. Journal
of Educational Computing Research, 12(4), 301-333.
Michell, T. J. F., Chen, S. Y. & Macredie, R. D. (2005).
Hypermedia learning and prior knowledge: domain
expertise vs. system expertise. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, 21, 53-64.
Murray, T. (2003). MetaLinks: Authoring and affordances
for conceptual and narrative flow in adaptive hyperbooks.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Education, Vol. 13
(Special Issue on Adaptive and Intelligent Web-Based
Systems).
Schommer, M. (1990). Effects of beliefs about the nature of
knowledge on comprehension. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82(3), 498-504.
Stahl, E., & Bromme, R. (submitted). CAEB. An instrument
to measure connotative aspects of epistemological beliefs.
Stahl, E., Pieschl, S, & Bromme, R (accepted). Task
complexity, epistemological beliefs and metacognitive
calibration: An exploratory study. Journal of Educational
Computing Research.
Windschitl, M., & Andre, T. (1998). Using computer
simulations to enhance conceptual change: The roles of
constructivist instruction and student epistemological
beliefs. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(2),
145-160.
Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A. F. (1998). Studying as selfregulated learning. In D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky & A. C.
Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and
practice (pp. 277-304). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Wood, P. & Kardash, C. A. (2002). Critical elements in the
design and analysis of studies of epistemology. In B. K.
Hofer & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Personal epistemology: The
psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

1961

