UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Learning of Form-Meaning Connections

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/06s2d7bm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Leung, Janny
Williams, John N

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Learning of Form-Meaning Connections
Janny Leung (janny@cantab.net)
Research Centre for English and Applied Linguistics,
University of Cambridge, English Faculty Bldg., 9 West Rd., Cambridge, CB39DP, UK

John N. Williams (jnw12@cam.ac.uk)
Research Centre for English and Applied Linguistics,
University of Cambridge, English Faculty Bldg., 9 West Rd., Cambridge, CB39DP, UK
Abstract

Cohen, & Corkin, 1988) can learn novel word forms, as
assessed by tests of implicit memory such as fragment
completion and priming. But they seem to have great
difficulty learning new vocabulary; for example they are
unable to recognise or use words that they have been
exposed to over long periods after the onset of amnesia.
Amnesics are unable to recall specific experiences – they
have impaired episodic memory. So their inability to acquire
vocabulary implies that episodic memory is involved in
learning form-meaning mappings, perhaps through
conscious comparison processes between different
occasions of use of a word (Ellis, 1994). However, more
recent evidence suggests that amnesics can learn vocabulary
after all (e.g., Vargha-Khadem et al., 1997). These studies
count against the claim that vocabulary learning is
necessarily dependent upon conscious memory for specific
episodes of word use. Rather, the process of abstracting the
meaning of words from experience may occur implicitly.
But even if we allow for implicit meaning abstraction in
memory, there remains the question of how the requisite
data gets into memory in the first place. For example, when
a novel word is encountered, is it necessary to attend to the
connection between that word and a (hypothesised)
meaning? In the context of first language acquisition,
Merriman (1999) argues that when the “principle of mutual
exclusivity” is violated the child will “seek out, discover,
and dwell on features that are uniquely associated with the
second label” (ibid., p. 350). And in adult second language
acquisition Doughty & Williams (1998) stress not only
attention to form and meaning, but also their integration
within the learning episode (ibid., p.245). These quotations
imply that learners need to attend to relationships between
forms and meanings. However, these arguments are merely
speculative, and we know of no experimental investigations
of implicit (as opposed to incidental) learning of formmeaning connections.
In researching these issues we have chosen to focus on
function, rather than content, words. This makes it possible
to examine potential interactions with prior grammatical
knowledge and allows us to address the issue of whether
some kinds of regularity are more readily learned implicitly
than others because they capitalise on linguistic concepts
that the learner already possesses.
The starting point was an earlier study (Williams, 2005)
in which subjects first learned four determiner-like words:

We report two experiments that used derived attention
paradigms to examine implicit learning of associations
between forms and meanings in semi-artificial languages.
Both experiments examined learning of rules governing
article usage, and the dependent measure was the time to
locate objects referred to by article-plus-noun expressions in
pictures. Learning was measured by slow-downs in search
times when the learned associations were violated.
Experiment 1 demonstrated implicit learning of associations
between articles and the accompanying noun’s thematic role
in a sentence. Experiment 2 found no implicit learning of an
association between articles and the position of the object
referred to by the noun in a scene (only explicit learning
effects were obtained). We explain this difference in terms of
the possibility for interactions between implicit learning and
grammatical knowledge.

Introduction
Studies of implicit learning have generally focused on the
learning of rules and associations concerning forms in a
single modality, for example letters in artificial grammar
experiments, or spatial locations of visual stimuli in serial
reaction time experiments. In the case of natural language
systems learning such form-form associations might
contribute to the acquisition of syntactic rules, but there
remains the problem of learning how those forms relate to
meanings. In this research we address the issue of whether
people become sensitive to associations between forms and
meanings without an intention to learn them, and without
awareness of what they are.
The issue of learning form-meaning connections is
usually considered in the context of vocabulary acquisition.
Ellis (1994) argues that learning form-meaning connections
is dependent upon declarative memory. For one thing,
variables that are known to affect episodic memory also
influence vocabulary learning, e.g. intelligence, depth of
processing, meta-cognitive and mediational strategies.
Gupta & Dell (1999) make a similar argument on purely
computational grounds, pointing out that the arbitrariness of
form-meaning mappings makes them very difficult to
assimilate using the kinds of implicit (in their view,
connectionist) learning mechanisms that underlie skill
learning. Important evidence is also provided by research on
amnesia. For example, amnesics such as H.M. (Gabrieli,

465

Experiment 1

gi, ro, ul, and ne. They were told that these functioned like
the English definite article, except that they also encoded
the distance between the speaker and the object, gi and ro
being used for near objects, and ul and ne being used for far
objects. They were then exposed to training sentences such
as “I was terrified when I turned around and saw gi lion
right behind me”, “The researchers studied ul bees from a
safe distance”, “As I was passing I knocked over ro vase”,
“I asked the removal men to fetch ne boxes from the van”.
What the subjects were not told was that determiner usage
also depended upon the animacy of the accompanying noun
– gi and ul were used with animate objects, whilst ro and ne
were used with inanimates. After training, subjects
performed a generalisation test in which familiar words
occurred in novel contexts and they had to choose between
two possible determiners, e.g. “The art collector went to
Greece to collect ul / ne vases”, neither of which had
occurred with that noun during training. Out of 44 subjects,
33 said that they were not aware of the relevance of animacy
to article usage during training or testing phases, yet they
were 61% correct in selecting the correct article in the test
phase (p < 0.001). After a subsequent rule discovery task on
the test items, 22 subjects were still unaware of the rule, yet
their generalisation test performance was still above chance,
58% (p < 0.05).
The Williams (2005) experiment appears to provide
evidence of implicit learning of one type of form-meaning
connection. However, this may be a special case because the
relevant meaning feature was part of the lexical
representation of the nouns, and did not derive from the
actual context of use of the word. To address the more
general issue of learning form-meaning connections it is
necessary to examine meaning features that derive from the
context in which the word is used. This was one of the aims
of the experiments reported here.
The experiments again used the words gi, ro, ul and ne,
which were introduced to the subjects as article-like words.
In Experiment 1 the target rule concerned the thematic role
of the accompanying noun, whereas in Experiment 2 it
concerned the spatial position of the noun’s referent. Both
experiments tested whether contextually, rather than
lexically, derived meanings can become implicitly
associated with novel words.
The methods we have adopted bear some similarity to the
contextual cuing paradigm of Chun & Jiang (1998), and
derived attention paradigm of Lambert and colleagues (e.g.
Lambert & Sumich, 1996). Following work done within the
“visual world” paradigm (Tanenhaus, et al, 1995) we
assume a close linkage between language forms and
attentional processes, but here we are using changes in
attentional processes over time as indicators of learning. In
addition, it may be through the effects of implicit learning
on attention that the transition from implicit to explicit
knowledge occurs (Jiminez, 2002). We therefore consider
derived attention paradigms to be ideal for studying
language learning processes.

Method
Materials The learning target was a miniature article
system. Participants were introduced to four artificial
articles: gi, ro, ul and ne, where gi and ro were used before
personal names referring to adults and ul and ne before
personal names referring to children. What subjects were
not told was that article use also depended on the thematic
role of the noun phrase; gi and ul were used with agents and
ro and ne with patients1.
There were 98 training trials followed by 16 ‘control’
trials and 16 ‘violation’ trials. Each trial consisted of a
distinct picture (like that in Figure 1) with an accompanying
audio description, such as “Kiss ul Mary a boy on the face”.

Figure 1: A sample picture used in the experiment
The subjects’ primary task was to indicate whether the
named individual (Mary in this case) appeared on the left or
right hand side of the picture. To avoid some articles
becoming more salient than others due to the position they
appeared in, two sentence orders were used in the picture
descriptions. Sentences followed this pattern:
V + NP1 + NP2 + PP
Where either NP1 or NP2 could be an agent or patient;
NP1 was always a proper name and NP2 always a common
noun; V was always in its infinitive form. Two possible
sentence constructions to describe Fig. 1 were:
1. Kiss
V
2. Kiss
V

ul Mary
NP1(Agent)
ne David
NP1(Patient)

a boy
NP2 (Patient)
a girl
NP2 (Agent)

on the face.
PP
on the face.
PP

Pictures were selected so that an agent and a patient of the
depicted action were clearly identifiable. Three common
names for each gender were used with each possible article
with equal frequency to avoid any input bias in article-name
associations. The sound clips for the articles had been edited
such that each of them lasted exactly the same amount of
time, and the interval between the onset of the article and
onset of the noun was 1 second. This provided a time
window in which the article could be used to orient attention
1

The terms ‘agent’ and ‘patient’ are used more loosely here than
the specialist linguistic sense. For instance, ‘agent’ would include
technical concepts such as agents, actors, causers, etc.

466

even before the noun was presented. Reaction time was
measured from the onset of the article. We reasoned that if
subjects had learned the relationship between the articles
and thematic roles they would come to orient their attention
to one or another individual in the picture even before the
name was heard. For example, on hearing “Kiss ul ..” in the
context of Figure 1 they might anticipate that the following
name refers to the kisser, i.e., the girl on the right of the
picture in this case. If they heard “Kiss ne ..” they would
anticipate reference to the kissee, i.e., the boy on the left of
the picture (note that all pictures were presented only once;
we present this contrast here for expository purposes).
The critical data came from the last 32 trials of the
experiment, divided into control and violation blocks (there
was no division between these and the training trials from
the subject’s point of view). All of the pictures used in these
blocks depicted either two adults or two children, so that
only by knowing the mapping from articles to thematic roles
would articles have any predictive value. In the control
block the sentences respected the same system that was used
in training, whereas in the violation block the mapping
between articles and thematic roles was reversed (i.e. gi and
ul were used with patients instead of agents). Items were
rotated between the Control and Violation blocks over two
groups of subjects so as to control for differences in item
difficulty.

most obvious clue was gender; where there was a man and a
woman in the picture, subjects should have been able to
react once they had heard the proper name. Having learnt
about the adult-child distinction, where there was a child
and an adult in the picture, the subjects could also react once
they had heard the article, and before they heard the proper
name. Adult-child pictures accounted for about 12 per cent
of the trials. They served the purpose of keeping the subjects
attending to the articles.
In a debriefing session subjects were probed for whether
they had any feelings about when gi vs. ro and ul vs. ne
were used, apart from the adult-child distinction. Subjects
were asked to report any idea that came to mind. Based on
their answer in this verbal report, they fell into ‘aware’ and
‘unaware’ groups.
The whole experiment took approximately one hour. A
three minute break was inserted in the middle of the
experiment to prevent fatigue.

Results and Discussion
Twenty out of twenty five participants remained unaware of
the system at the end of the experiment. Subjects who were
able to link the use of articles with concepts such as
‘someone doing something to the other person’ or ‘one
person takes an active role and the other is more passive’
were all counted as aware, even if these were not the first
guesses they made. Some subjects made up to four guesses.
Many unaware subjects said it did not come to their mind at
all that the two articles used for adults and children were
used in different conditions, and were surprised when asked
to comment on it. Those who thought there might be a
differentiation most commonly reported that they speculated
a gender distinction, but after some trials realised that it was
not the case.

Procedure Twenty five subjects were tested, all of whom
were native English-speaking university undergraduate or
postgraduate students. None of them had knowledge of
languages with highly developed case systems such as
German and Latin. They first received vocabulary pretraining for the four articles, and they were told that the
order of words in the sentences presented to them would not
be as in English. Examples were given so that subjects
became familiar with the articles and the sentence structure.
They were given as much time as they needed for this pretraining.
For each picture, the subjects had to perform the
following tasks (subjects had to click to proceed from one
task component to the next):
Picture description: to describe the picture in their own
words (this was to draw their attention to the action
portrayed in the pictures);
Reaction time test: to click left or right on the mouse as
quickly as possible as they listened to a picture description,
once they could decide on which side of the picture the
named individual appeared;
Sentence Reformulation: to put the sentence they heard in
correct English order, retaining the article used (to stimulate
concurrent active processing of the action portrayed and the
article used).
A recall test was inserted between every two pictures,
during which subjects had to repeat the sentence they
reformulated in correct English for the last two pictures.
It is worth explaining that there were a few possible clues
the subjects could rely on for the reaction time test. The

Figure 2. Reaction time over blocks in Experiment 1
Figure 2 shows the average reaction time against trial
blocks for the unaware subjects. There is clearly a large task
practice effect early in training, but what contribution does
learning of the target system make to this learning curve?
We can only gauge learning of the target system by looking
at the reaction time difference between the violation block
and the preceding control block. One can see in Fig. 2 that

467

there was a sudden increase in reaction time at the violation
block, which went against the trend of the learning curve.
The mean reaction time in the control block was 1663 ms,
SE = 46 ms, and in the violation block it was 1785 ms, SE =
47 ms. The reaction times for these blocks were
significantly different, p<0.01.
Error rates in the reaction time task were also informative.
An error means that subjects clicked on the wrong side of
the mouse (i.e. wrongly identified the named individual). If
subjects had learnt the article system, error rate might
increase in the violation block. The error rates in the control
and violation blocks were 4.1% and 7.8% respectively, and
the difference between them was significant, p<0.05.
Both a significant slow-down in reaction time and a
higher error rate in the violation block indicated that the
subjects were sensitive to the grammatical violation. In
combination with their reported lack of awareness in the
debriefing this suggests that they had implicitly learnt the
agent-patient article system.
It is worth mentioning that the aware group showed a
rather different pattern of results. Like that of the unaware
group, the reaction time of the aware group showed a sharp
decrease early in training, reflecting a task practice effect.
Later in training, however, their average reaction time rose,
before it gradually decreased again. The reaction time
between the control and the violation blocks did not show a
significant difference. Such a pattern could be explained by
the fact that most ‘aware’ subjects had only become
partially aware of the article system. Even though they had
some idea that the agent/patient roles were relevant to article
use, most of them could not yet match the articles with their
respective roles, and thus they were still in the process of
hypothesis formation and testing. This assumption is
supported by the high error rate of the aware group when
compared with the unaware group: the error rate of the
aware group was about 5 times higher than the unaware
group in the grammatical blocks, and was still 3 times
higher during the violation block. Lambert & Roser (2001)
report a similar lack of a violation effect in semi-aware
participants.
Experiment 1 provides evidence for implicit learning of a
connection between articles and thematic roles. The formmeaning connections were learned even though the relevant
meanings were derived from the context, rather than the
lexical representations of the nouns. This result is perhaps
rather surprising in the light of the general assumption that
learning form-meaning connections requires declarative
memory, or at least the integration of forms and
hypothesised meanings at encoding. It is also surprising in
the context of skepticism about the possibility of acquiring
even simple contingencies between stimuli without
awareness. Lovibond & Shanks (2002) argue that, for
example, there is no convincing evidence for classical eye
blink conditioning in subjects who are not aware of the
relationship between the unconditioned stimulus (puff of
air) and conditioned stimulus (e.g. tone).

One reason for the appearance of an effect in this
experiment may be that the target system relied on
representations of thematic roles that are embedded in the
language system, that were actively utilised in the sentence
formulation task, and that were available for association
with the articles. This is to say that there were interactions
between implicit learning and grammatical knowledge.
Likewise, in the Williams (2005) experiment the articles
were associated with the animacy feature, which, crosslinguistically, also typically interacts with grammatical
processes (see also Lambert & Sumich, 1996, for a
demonstration of an animacy effect on learned derived
attention). It therefore becomes important to see whether
implicit learning effects can be obtained when forms are
associated with concepts that are not typically
grammaticised.

Experiment 2
Method
In this experiment, subjects first learned the pairing between
the novel articles gi and ul and the English definite article
‘the’ (printed in red and green respectively), and ro and ne
and the English indefinite article ‘a’ (in blue and grey
respectively). Subjects learned these pairings, and then
proceeded to the main task in which they saw pictures (e.g.
Figure 3) and heard phrases (e.g. “ul crane”).

Figure 3. An example picture from Experiment 2
The subjects’ task was to indicate whether the object
referred to by the phrase they heard was in the foreground or
the background of the picture by pressing one of two
response keys (arranged horizontally for half of the subjects,
and vertically for the remaining half). Having made their
response they repeated the phrase (“ul crane”) and translated
it into English (“the crane”). What they were not told was
that objects in the foreground of the picture (and also below
a fixation cross just below the centre of the display) were
systematically referred to using gi (for ‘the’) and ro (for
468

‘a’), whereas ul (for ‘the’) and ne (for ‘a’) were used with
objects in the background (and also above fixation). Note
that this meant that the novel words were also systematically
associated with specific response keys (gi and ro with the
foreground key, ul and ne with the background key). We
reasoned that if the subjects learned this regularity then, on
hearing ul for example they would be anticipating an object
in the background of the picture, and be prepared to press
the background response key. Should that regularity be
reversed in a violation block, then a slow down in responses
should be observed. The auditory phrases were again
constructed so that there was a one second interval between
onset of the article and onset of the noun.
There were 56 training stimuli, repeated over 3 blocks of
trials. For the first two blocks the location of the target
object was cued by a box which appeared coincident with
the onset of the article in the auditory stimulus. There is
evidence that task-irrelevant perceptual associations are
only learned if they coincide with task-relevant stimuli (e.g.,
Seitz & Watanabe, 2005). Without the box as a cue the
subjects would only orient their attention to the correct
location after hearing the noun. However, in the final
training block no box was presented and subjects had to find
the object as quickly as they could for themselves (and
hence could show sensitivity to the predictiveness of the
article). The training trials were followed by 8 trials in
which new pictures and phrases were used. These were
followed by the final 24 critical trials, again using new
pictures and phrases. For 12 of these, the control items, the
novel articles were used in the same way as in the training,
whilst for the 12 violation items a reversed mapping was
used (e.g. gi and ul now used for background objects). The
items were rotated between these two conditions across two
presentation lists. In addition, half of the participants
received the control items before the violation items, and
half had the reverse order. In the debriefing, subjects were
first asked if they noticed any regularities in the way that the
articles were used. Specifically, given that there were two
words for ‘the’ and two words ‘a’, why was sometimes one
used and sometimes the other? Subjects who were unaware
of the rule then worked through up to one block of training
trials again, this time trying to work out the rule. They were
told to think aloud as they did this.

SE = 89 ms (error rate 1.5%) and over violation items it was
2354 ms, SE = 79 ms (error rate 2.6%). The difference
between the conditions was not significant, and in any case
was in the opposite direction to that predicted. For the 11
subjects who were able to work out the rule in the rule
search task the mean response times in the control and
violation blocks were 2440 ms and 2367 ms respectively.
In order to check that the predicted violation effect could
be obtained in aware subjects, another version of the
experiment was constructed using the same items, but this
time subjects were also required to recall the phrase used
with each picture after two intervening items (items were
presented in blocks of 3, followed by phrase recall cued by
the picture + box). Out of 7 subjects tested, 5 became aware
of the rule during training. Mean response times in the
control and violation blocks were 2548 ms and 2845 ms
respectively, t(4) = 3.19, p < 0.05. Thus, it cannot be argued
that the present paradigm was insensitive to learning the
correlation
between
the
articles
and
the
foreground/background distinction. Rather, learning effects
were not obtained in the absence of awareness.

Conclusion
Clearly one must be cautious in making direct comparisons
between Experiments 1 and 2 because of the procedural
differences between them, forced in the main by the desire
to keeps levels of learner awareness to a minimum. We
note, however, that in many respects one would have
expected implicit learning effects in Experiment 2 rather
than Experiment 1. First, in Experiment 2 subjects were
required to attend to the relevant meaning features in order
to make their decisions, whereas in Experiment 1 those
features remained implicit in the subjects’ sentence
formulation processes. Second, any violation effect could
have occurred either through miscuing of attention, or
through a change in the actual relationship between articles
and response keys. Third, the majority of subjects in
Experiment 2 rapidly became aware of the rule when invited
to search for it, suggesting that it was an extremely simple
regularity. So why then was it not learned implicitly?
Our hypothesis is that what is critical here is the potential
relevance of the meaning features to grammatical systems.
Features like animacy and semantic (thematic) role are
closely related to grammatical processes, and might be
expected to be relevant to the distribution of function words
like articles. It is this notion of potential relevance which
accounts for the greater availability of such features for
associating with function words in these experiments. But a
concept such as foreground / background (or more
generally, near or far from the observer) whilst expressed in
deictic terms such as “this” and “that” in English, for
example, are less likely to interact with grammatical
processes (for example, to control agreement within noun
phrases). In the context of our experiments the situation
becomes more like general vocabulary learning, which it has
been argued is dependent upon explicit learning processes,

Results and Discussion
A total of 16 subjects were tested, all of them native
English-speaking university students. None of them
reported awareness of the foreground/background rule
during the training. However, when invited to search for a
rule, 11 of them found the rule, in many cases after only a
few examples. These subjects were adamant that they had
not thought about the foreground/background distinction
during the training phase, and did not notice any changes in
the materials in the violation block. Indeed, they were rather
surprised that they had not noticed such a simple regularity,
especially given the correlation with their actual responses.
The mean response time over control items was 2413 ms,

469

‘Derived Attention’. New Zealand Journal of Psychology,
30, 15-22.
Lambert, A.J. & Sumich, A.L. (1996). Spatial orienting
controlled without awareness: A semantically based
implicit learning effect. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49A, 490-518.
Lovibond, P.F. & Shanks, D.R. (2002). The role of
awareness in Pavlovian conditioning: theoretical evidence
and theoretical implications. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behaviour processes, 28, 3-26.
Merriman, W. E. (1999). Competition, attention, and young
children's lexical processing. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.),
The Emergence of Language (pp. 331-358). Mahwah,
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Newport, E.L & Aslin, R.N. (2004). Learning at a distance
I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies.
Cognitive Psychology, 48, 127-162.
Newport, E.L., Hauser, M.D., Spaepen, G. & Aslin, R.
(2004). Learning at a distance II. Statistical learning of
non-adjacent dependencies in a non-human primate.
Cognitive Psychology, 49, 85-117.
Seitz, A. & Watanabe, T. (2005). A unified model for
perceptual learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 329334.
Tanenhaus, M.K. et al (1995). Integration of Visual and
Linguistic
Information
in
Spoken
Language
Comprehension. Science, 268, 1632-4.
Vargha-Khadem, F., Gadian, D. G., Watkins, K. E.,
Connelly, A., Van Paesschen, W., & Mishkin, M. (1997).
Differential effects of early hippocampal pathology on
episodic and semantic memory. Science, 277, 376-380.
Williams, J.N. (2005). Learning without awareness. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 269-304.

or at least attention to forms and hypothesised meanings at
encoding. Alternatively, linguistic expectations may actually
suppress learning in this situation because learners do not
expect certain kinds of feature to be related to article
systems. Prior linguistic knowledge might both facilitate
and interfere with implicit learning.
Implicit / incidental learning research has only recently
begun to re-consider natural language-like systems, but
clearly as soon as one addresses this question one has to
confront the issue of how prior linguistic knowledge
influences the learning process. For example, Newport &
Aslin (2004) have found that humans cannot learn nonadjacent dependencies between syllables under incidental
learning conditions, whereas Tamarins can (Newport et al,
2004). One possible explanation of this is that the way in
which phonological representations are structured actually
prevents humans from being sensitive to non-adjacent
dependencies at the syllable, but not the segment, level. In
this case then, prior linguistic knowledge would be said to
interfere with implicit learning. In general, findings such as
these, and those reported here, begin to shed light on how
domain-general statistical learning mechanisms interact with
domain-specific knowledge.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Sir Edward Youde
Memorial Fellowship to Janny Leung.

References
Chun, M.M. & Jiang, Y. (1998). Contextual cuing: implicit
learning and memory of visual context guides spatial
attention. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 28-71.
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (1998). Pedagogical choices in
focus on form. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus
on Form in Classroom Second Language Acquisition (pp.
197-261). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, N. (1994). Vocabulary acquisition: The explicit ins
and outs of explicit cognitive mediation. In N. C. Ellis
(Ed.), Implicit and Explicit Learning of Languages (pp.
211-282). London: Academic Press.
Gabrieli, J. D. E., Cohen, N. J., & Corkin, S. (1988). The
impaired learning of semantic knowledge following
medial temporal lobe resection. Brain & Cognition, 7,
157-177.
Gupta, P., & Dell, G. S. (1999). The emergence of language
from serial order and procedural memory. In B.
MacWhinney (Ed.), The Emergence of Language (pp.
447-481). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Jiminez, L. (2002). Introduction: Attention to implicit
learning. In L. Jiminez (Ed.), Attention and Implicit
Learning (pp. 1-7). John Benjamins: Amsterdam.
Lambert, A.J. & Roser, M. (2001). Effects of bilateral color
cues on visual orienting: revisiting William James’

470

