UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Information in Directionality of Verbal Probability Expressions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/424567vm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Honda, Hidehito
Yamagishi, Kimihiko

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Information in Directionality of Verbal Probability Expressions
Hidehito Honda (hito@ky.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Kimihiko Yamagishi (kimihiko@ky.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Decision Science & Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology
2-12-1, Ohkayama, Meguro-Ku, Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan
the research about the listeners’ inferences from the selected
frame.

Abstract
Many verbal probability expressions (verbal probability) can
be categorized into either positive terms (e.g., likely, small
chance) or negative terms (e.g., uncertain, poor chance). This
distinction reflects the semantic function of communicative
focus called “directionality.” Previous studies have shown
that positive (or negative) terms refer to potential occurrence
(or non-occurrence). We conducted two experiments investigating what implicit information was conveyed by directionality. The results show that the verbal probability expressions
not only convey explicit probability information, but also implicit information about the speaker’s prior beliefs.

Judgment of Speaker’s Optimism Based on
Directionality

Introduction

Teigen and Brun (2003b) explored the effects of directionality on the judgment of the speaker’s optimism. In their Experiment 2, the participants were presented with a story
about a student who was preparing for an important exam.
The student described his/her chance to satisfy the requirements using either positive or negative terms, such as “It’s
possible that I will succeed,” (positive term) or “It is not
certain that I will succeed” (negative term). Teigen and
Brun found that the participants rated the speaker who used
a positive term as more optimistic than the speaker who
used a negative term even when the verbal probabilities
seem to denote comparable probabilities of success. From a
normative viewpoint, if the verbal probabilities denoted
analogous probabilities, the participants should have judged
the speakers as equally optimistic. However, results in Teigen and Brun (2003b) imply that directionality implicitly
conveys the speaker’s degree of optimism.

We often communicate probability information with verbal
probability expressions (hereafter called “verbal probability”) such as “likely” or “uncertain”. Previous studies have
shown that many verbal probabilities can be divided into
two categories, positive terms or negative terms (Teigen &
Brun, 1995). For example, when we communicate low
probability, we can say either “There is small chance
that…” (positive term) or “There is a poor chance that …”
(negative term). According to Teigen and Brun (2003a),
positive terms are “pointing upwards, directing our focus of
attention to what might happen” (p130), while negative
terms are “pointing in a downward direction, asking us to
consider that it might not happen after all” (p130). This semantic function of communicative focus is called “directionality.” Directionality affects decisions, predictions, and
probabilistic reasoning (Teigen & Brun, 1999; Honda &
Yamagishi, in press). Because analogous focus has been
observed in quantifiers (see General Discussion), the semantic function of directionality can be regarded as a general
property in linguistic expressions conveying quantity.
According to Teigen and Brun’s (2003a) definition of
directionality, the difference between positive and negative
terms is in whether the verbal probability points into occurrence or nonoccurrence of an uncertain event. Therefore, if
the positive and negative terms denote comparable magnitudes of probability information, they can be assumed to
convey explicitly equivalent information. However, recent
studies have argued that explicitly equivalent information
does not guarantee equivalence of the information
(McKenzie, 2004; Sher & McKenzie, in press). If this is the
case, then what does the listener infer about an uncertain
event from the difference of directionality? Two areas of
research are closely related to this question. One is research
about judgments of the speaker’s optimism, and the other is

Listeners’ Inference from the Selected Frame
McKenzie and Nelson (2003) examined listeners’ inferences
based on the frame the speaker had selected from two logically equivalent expressions. They showed that the listener’s
inference about the speaker’s reference point was systematically different depending on the selected frame. For instance,
a 4-ounce cup containing water up to the 2-ounce line can
be described as either “half full” or “half empty.” McKenzie
and Nelson (2003) found that when the cup was described
as “half full,” the participants inferred that the cup had been
previously empty, while when the cup was described as
“half empty,” the participants inferred that it had been previously full. Thus, the participants made different inferences
about the speaker’s reference point based on the selected
frame. McKenzie and Nelson also demonstrated that listener’s inference about the speaker’s reference point was
consistent with the actual speaker’s reference point.
McKenzie and Nelson concluded that frames communicate
implicit information about the situation in addition to the
explicit content of the situation (McKenzie (2004), and Sher
and McKenzie (in press) called this “information leakage”).

Hypothesis of the Current Study

1517

The previous research by Teigen and Brun, and McKenzie
and Nelson suggest that even when the verbal probabilities

have comparable strength of uncertainty, connotations due
to differences in directionality might diverge.
When a speaker describes an uncertain event with a
verbal probability, the utterance could reflect his/her subjective belief (e.g., optimism, Teigen & Brun, 2003b) or known
facts of the event (e.g., reference point about the amount of
water, McKenzie & Nelson, 2003). The belief or facts could
be represented as the prior expectation for the uncertain
event. On the basis of this consideration, we propose that
the directionality of verbal probabilities conveys implicit
information about the speaker’s prior expectation for an
uncertain event.
Experiment 1 and 2 investigated whether listeners’ inferences about the speaker’s prior expectation for an uncertain event are different depending on the directionality of
the verbal probability. Recall that Teigen and Brun (2003a)
characterized positive terms as “pointing upward,” and
negative terms as “pointing in a downward direction.” We
predict that listeners infer the speaker’s prior expectation on
the basis of this communicative focus of directionality. Specifically, our hypotheses are as follows:
(A) For a given current situation (e.g., there is X% that the
uncertain event will happen), when listeners hear a positive
term about the situation, they infer that the speaker’s prior
expectation was less than X%.
(B) When listeners hear a negative term, they infer that the
speaker’s prior expectation was more than X%.

Experiment 1
Method
Participant Three hundred and thirty native speaking Japanese undergraduate students enrolled in an introductory psychology class participated in Experiment 1. They were randomly allocated into one of 6 conditions.
Tasks and Materials In one of the 6 conditions, the participants were presented with the following the story:
There is a jar with 100 balls. The balls are either
red or white. You will be asked to reach into the
jar and draw a red ball. You are not allowed to
see the contents of the jar. A friend of yours was
allowed to see the contents of the jar. The friend
found that there were 20 red balls and 80 white
balls. Then he said, “There is a slight hope that
you will draw a red ball.” From this statement,
how many red balls do you think that your friend
had expected were in the jar before the friend
saw the contents of the jar?
The participants then selected either “The friend expected
that there were more than 20 red balls” or “The friend expected that there were fewer than 20 red balls.” In short, the
task was a binary choice between the “more than” and the
“fewer than.” In the second condition, the participants read
the same story except that the friend said “There is a poor

hope that you will draw a red ball. In the third condition, the
friend said, “It is 20% that you will draw a red ball.” Hence,
in each condition, the friend’s statement was presented with
one of the three expressions, a positive term (a slight hope),
a negative term (a poor hope), or a number (20%).
In the other 3 conditions, the participants read the same
story, except that the number of red and white balls was 50
and the friend’s statement was changed into “It is likely that
you will draw a red ball” (positive terms), “It is quite doubtful that you will draw a red ball” (negative terms), or “It is
50% that you will draw a red ball” (number). Hereafter, we
call each of the conditions, the positive term condition, the
negative term condition, or the number condition.
The verbal probabilities1 describing each of the situations were selected based on the results of a pilot study. The
pilot study showed that each of the words had either positive
or negative directionality and was appropriate to describe
the uncertain events (i.e., 20% or 50%).
Procedure The experiment was conducted in class. The
participants were given a booklet which presented one of the
6 conditions. After being given instructions, they read the
story in the booklet and answered the question. This took
about 5 minutes.

Results and Discussion 1
Table 1 shows the percentages of inference for “more than
20 (or 50) red balls.” The results reveal that the listeners’
inference about the speaker’s prior expectation dramatically
varied depending on the directionality of the verbal probability. For the 20-red-balls story, 90.9% of the participants
in the negative term condition inferred that the friend’s prior
expectation about the number of red balls had been more
than 20. However, only 39.8% of the participants in the
positive term condition inferred that the friend had expected
more than 20 red balls. The inference in the number condition was intermediate (78.2%). These three percentages
were found to significantly differ (χ2 (2)=36.45, p<.001).
Multiple comparisons between the conditions, using Ryan’s
method, found significant differences between the positive
and negative term conditions (p<.001), and between the
positive term and number condition (p<.001).
Next, we examined the specific hypotheses about the
listeners’ inferences. The participants in the negative term
condition inferred that the friend’s prior expectation had
been more than 20 red balls (p<.001, binomial test), which
supports our hypothesis. Although the participants in the
positive term condition significantly inferred the friend’s
prior expectation in the predicted direction, this tendency
was not significant (p=.17, binomial test). The participants
in the number condition significantly inferred that the
1
Japanese verbal probabilities used in the present study were:
“Wazukanamikomi”(small hope), “Mikomiwaamarinai”(poor
hope), “Kangaerareru”(likely), and “Yayautagawashii” (quite
doubtful).

1518

friend’s prior expectation had been more than 20 balls
(p<.001, binomial test).
For the 50-red-balls story, about 70% of the participants in the negative term condition inferred that the
friend’s prior expectation about the number of red balls had
been more than 50. In contrast, only 20% of the participants
in the positive term condition made this inference. The inference in the number condition was intermediate (57.7%).
These inferences were significantly different between the
conditions (χ2 (2)=27.01, p<.001). Multiple comparisons,
using Ryan’s method, showed that there was a significant
difference between the positive and negative term conditions (p<.001), and between the positive term and number
conditions (p<.001). Regarding the specific hypothesis of
the listeners’ inference, the participants in the negative term
condition inferred that the friend’s prior expectation was
significantly more than 50 red balls (p<.01, binomial test).
In contrast, the participants in the positive term conditions
inferred that the speaker’s prior expectation was significantly fewer than 50 balls (p<.001, binomial test). Therefore,
these results confirmed our hypothesis. The inference tendency in the number condition was not significant (p=.33,
binomial test).
Taken together, these results support our hypothesis
that the listeners’ inference about the speaker’s prior expectation varied depending on the directionality of the verbal
probabilities.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 might be an artifact arising
from the binary choice task. In order to resolve this question,
we examined whether our hypothesis could be confirmed
using an open-ended method (numerical estimation). The
task in Experiment 2 was the same as Experiment 1 except
that participants gave a specific number for their inference.

Method
Participants and Procedure Two hundred and eighty native speaking Japanese undergraduate students in an introductory psychology class participated in Experiment 2.
They were randomly allocated into one of 6 experimental
conditions. The procedure was the same as Experiment 1.
Tasks and Materials The participants read the same stories
in Experiment 1. However, instead of selecting from the two
responses, they were asked to fill in the blank in the following sentence with a number from 0 to 100: “Before seeing
the contents of the jar, your friend expected that there were
( ) red balls in the jar.” Hence, the participants had to estimate a number for the friend’s prior expectation in stead of
choosing between the “more than” and “fewer than” response options.

Results and Discussion 2
Figure 1 displays the results for the 20-red-balls story. The
results showed that even for the numerical estimation, the
listeners’ inferences about the speaker’s prior expectation
varied based on the directionality of the verbal probability.
We conducted multiple comparisons, using Ryan’s method,
of the mean numbers of estimated red balls. Every pairwise
comparison of the three conditions yielded a significant difference (see Figure 1 for significance levels). These results
show that inferences about the speaker’s prior expectation
significantly varied between the three conditions. Thus, our
hypothesis was supported. Next, we analyzed the specific
hypotheses about the listeners’ inferences. We tested the
mean numerical estimation from every condition against the
null hypothesis that the mean numerical estimation equals
20. In the positive term condition, we found that the inference about the speaker’s prior expectation was significantly
more than 20 red balls (M=32.14, t(48)=3.45, p<.01). This
result is in the opposite direction from our prediction. In the
negative term condition, the participants significantly inferred that the speaker’s prior expectation was more than 20
red balls (M=52.60, t(47)=22.12, p<.001). This result supports our prediction for the negative term condition. The
participants in the number condition also inferred that the
speaker’s prior expectation was more than 20 red balls
(M=43.41, t(47)=9.78, p<.001).
Figure 2 shows the results for the 50-red-balls story.
Observe the resemblance between Figure 1 and 2. We analyzed whether the inferences about the speaker’s prior expectation were different between the three conditions using
multiple comparisons (Ryan’s method). There was a signifi-

Table 1:
Percentages of inference for “more than 20 (50) red balls.”
Experiment 1

positive
(n=53)
39.6

20-red-balls story
negative
number
(n=55)
(n=55)
90.9
78.2

50-red-balls story
positive
negative
number
(n=53)
(n=52)
(n=52)
20.8
69.2
57.7

Experiment 2

positive
(n=48)
54.2

20 red-balls-story
negative
number
(n=48)
(n=38)
100.0
89.5

positive
(n=43)
9.3

50 red-balls-story
negative
number
(n=47)
(n=37)
97.9
54.1

1519

cant difference between all of the pairs (p<.001). These
findings confirm our hypothesis. Regarding the specific
hypothesis about the listeners’ inference, we carried out the
equivalent analyses as we had used for the 20-red-balls story.
In the positive term condition, the participants inferred that
the friend’s prior expectation was fewer than 50 red balls
(M=28.94, t(46)=-7.94, p<.001). The inference in the negative term conditions was significantly more than 50 red balls
(M=73.00, t(47)=11.72, p<.001). These results are consistent with our predictions. In the number condition, the inference pattern was not significant (M=48.86, t(48)=-0.34,
p=.73).
To compare the responses in Experiment 2 to the responses in Experiment 1, where the participants produced
categorical responses, we coded the data in Experiment 2 as
whether the participant’s numerical estimation was “more
than 20 (50) red balls” or “fewer than 20 (50) red balls.” For
example, in the 20 red balls condition, if a participant made
a numerical estimation “40 red balls,” we coded this as a
“more than 20 red balls” inference. Likewise, if another
participant made a numerical estimation “10 red balls,” we
regarded this estimation as a “less than 20 red balls” inference. For those participants answering “20 (50) red balls,”
we discarded their data from this dichotomous analysis.
Table 1 shows the percentages of “more than 20(50)
red balls,” inferences in Experiment 2. As Table 1 shows,
the results of Experiment 1 and 2 are analogous. For the 50
red balls story, the percentages in the negative term condition relatively differed between Experiment 1 and 2. However, each of the results supports our hypothesis (as previously mentioned, the inference pattern in Experiment 1 was
significant). Therefore, our hypothesis does not detract from
the difference.
Taken together, the findings from Experiment 1 were
almost replicated using numerical estimation in Experiment

2. Furthermore, Experiment 2 mostly confirmed our specific
hypotheses about listeners’ inferences (the unexpected results of the positive term condition in the 20-red-balls story
is discussed in the General Discussion).

General Discussion

Figure 1: Means of numerical estimation for the friend’s
prior expectation for red balls in the 20-red-balls story.

In the two experiments, we investigated listeners’ inferences
about a speaker’s prior expectation for an uncertain event
based upon the phrasing of verbal probabilities. The results
revealed that the directionality of verbal probabilities influenced how the listener interpreted the speaker’s implicit
intention. Our specific hypotheses about listeners’ inferences were confirmed using two tasks, an inference task
with a binary choice (Experiment 1), and numerical estimation (Experiment 2).
For the 20-red-balls story, the inference pattern in the
positive term condition was not exactly consistent with the
prediction from our hypothesis. In particular, in Experiment
2, the participants in the positive term condition made the
opposite numerical estimations from our prediction. We
speculate that the inequality in the number of candidates
between the two inferences (the “more than” and “less
than”) caused these unexpected results. In the 20-red-balls
story, the “more than” inference has 80 candidates as to the
number of red balls (from 21 to 100). The “less than” inference, however, has only 20 candidates for the number of red
balls (from 0 to 19). This inequality might have led the participants to prefer the “more than” inference in the 20-redballs story. Here, we focus on the results in the number condition. Teigen and Brun (1999) claimed that numerical
probabilities are equivocal in terms of the directionality.
According to this claim, the results in the number condition
would reflect general tendency of inference pattern immune
from the effect of directionality. In the 20-red-balls story,

Figure 2: Means of numerical estimation for the friend’s
prior expectation for red balls in the 50-red-balls story.

1520

the participants in the number condition showed significantly “more than” inference in both Experiment 1 (binomial test, p<.001) and Experiment 2 (binomial test, p<.001).
On the other hand, in the 50-red-balls story, each of the
inferences equally has 50 candidates as to the number of red
balls (from 51 to 100 for the “more than” inference, from 0
to 49 for the “less than” inference). Based on the perspective
of the number of candidates, we should not find any tendencies for the inference pattern. We also examined this hypothesis in the number condition. In Experiment 1, the participants did not prefer the “more than” inference (p=.20,
binomial test), and neither did in Experiment 2 (p=.74, binomial test).
Taken together, these results indicate that the number
of candidates of red balls influenced the inferences about the
speaker’s prior expectation. However, note that the basic
point of our hypotheses (that directionality influences the
inference pattern, and people infer a higher probability for
the speaker’s prior expectation when they hear a negative
term than when they hear a positive term) was supported.
Furthermore, the inference pattern found in the positive
term condition of the 50 red balls story is consistent with the
hypothesis. Thus we do not think that the unexpected results
in the positive term condition in Experiment 2 pose a large
theoretical problem for our hypothesis.
Finally, we discuss two other issues: previous research
related to implicit information in directionality, and implications for effects of directionality on decision making.

few” seem to convey similar information in terms of proportion. However, the findings of Moxey and Sanford suggest
that negative quantifiers convey different implicit information about the writer’s prior expectation than positive quantifiers. These findings are analogous to the results of our
present study.
Moxey and Sanford have argued that the focus produced by quantifiers has an important role in inducing distinct cognitive processes. Our findings are basically consistent with their idea. In considering the information processing of verbal probabilities, clarifying the role of directionality is necessary.

Implications for Effects of Directionality on
Decision Making

Previous Research Related to Implicit Information
of Directionality

A fundamental question is why do the listeners make an
inference based on the semantic functions of directionality?
We speculate that the most important aspect of this issue
lies in the speaker’s selection of directionality. Probably
speakers choose either a positive or a negative term depending on their prior expectation about the situation. Imagine a
situation where a speaker’s prior expectation for an uncertain event had been a 20% chance of occurrence, and he/she
then found a 40%. In this case, we conjecture that the
speaker would express the situation using a positive term. In
an opposite situation with a 60% prior expectation and a
40% actual occurrence, we conjecture that the speaker
would use a negative term. If this is true, it follows that listeners can successfully infer the speaker’s actual prior expectation for an uncertain event.
This discussion has very intriguing implications for
explaining the effects of directionality on decisions. Previous studies have shown that directionality influences decision making (Teigen & Brun, 1999; Honda & Yamagishi, in
press). These studies have shown that, even when positive
and negative terms seem to communicate the same probability, decisions changed dramatically depending on the directionality of the verbal probabilities. These findings suggest
that when people make decisions based on verbal probabilities, they make different decisions even in the same situation due to the effects of directionality. The classic normative decision theories would regard such decisions as irrational, because they tell decision makers to make the same
decisions in the same factual situations regardless of the
wording of the situation.
However, this argument might not be valid when considering the effects of directionality of verbal probabilities.
Shifts of decisions stemming from the effects of directionality might imply sensitivity to the speaker’s prior expectation.
As discussed, the speaker’s prior expectation would consist
of subjective belief and objective facts. This information
could convey relative status information about the current
situation (e.g., an increase or decrease of probability from a
prior situation). The relative status could be important information in making decisions. Thus, it is premature to conclude that decisions influenced by directionality are irrational. Further empirical research is needed to examine
speaker’s use of directionality in interpersonal communication settings.

Moxey and Sanford examined focus effects produced by
quantifiers such as “a few,” “few,” “many,” and “not many”
(Moxey & Sanford, 1993a, 2000; Moxey, Sanford, &
Dawydiak, 2001). They found that negative quantifiers such
as “few” and “not many” led to different focus patterns than
positive quantifiers (e.g., “a few”, ”many”). For example,
when presented with a statement like “Few students attended the cognitive science class. They ( )” and asked to
complete the sentence, people tended to describe a set of
students who did not attend the class (e.g., “They studied at
the library instead”). On the other hand, when the statement
includes a positive quantifier such as “A few students attended the cognitive science class. They ( ),” people tended
to write about a set of students who attended the class (e.g.,
“They concentrated on the lecture in the class”).
In addition to the difference of focus, Moxey and Sanford claimed that negative quantifiers have the property of
introducing a presupposition. For instance, the statement
“Few students attended the cognitive science class” introduces the possibility that the writer of the statement might
have expected that more students did. Moxey and Sanford
(1993b) examined this hypothesis and demonstrated that
participants rated the writer’s prior expectation as higher for
the statements with negative quantifiers than those with
positive quantifiers. Moxey and Sanford have also explained
the processes of focus generation in terms of the processes
of negation for the introduced presumption. “Few” and “A

1521

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grand-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (B), No. 14510093, from Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science, to KY.

References
Honda, H., & Yamagishi, K. (in press). Directional verbal
probabilities: Inconsistencies between preferential
judgments and numerical meanings. Experimental
Psychology.
McKenzie, C. R. M. (2004). Framing effects in inference
tasks-and why they are normatively defensible.
Memory and Cognition, 32, 874-885.
McKenzie, C. R. M., & Nelson, J. D. (2003). What's a
speaker's choice of frame reveals: Reference points,
frame selection, and framing effects. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 10, 596-602.
Moxey, L. M., & Sanford, A. J. (1993a). Communicating
quantities: A psychological perspective. Hove, UK:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associate.
Moxey, L. M., & Sanford, A. J. (1993b). Prior expectation
and the interpretation of natural language quantifiers. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 5,
73-91.

Moxey, L. M., & Sanford, A. J. (2000). Communicating
quantities: A review of psycholinguistic evidence of
how expressions determine perspectives. Applied
Cognitive Psycgology, 14, 237-255.
Moxey, L. M., Sanford, A. J., & Dawydiak, E. J. (2001).
Denials as controllers of negative quantifier focus.
Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 427-442.
Sher, S., & McKenzie, C. R. M. (in press). Information
leakage from logically equivalent frames. Cognition.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1995). Yes, but it is uncertain:
Direction and communicative intention of verbal
probabilistic terms. Acta Psychologica, 88, 233-258.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1999). The directionality of
verbal probability expressions: Effects on decisions,
predictions, and probabilistic reasoning. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 80,
155-190.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (2003a). Verbal expressions of
uncertainty and probability. In L. Macci & D.
Hardman (Eds.), Thinking: Psychological perspectives on reasoning and decision making (pp. 125145). New York: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (2003b). Verbal probabilities: A
question of frame? Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 16, 53-72.

1522

