UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Improving Understanding of Science Texts: iSTART Strategy Training vs. a Web Design
Control Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8b19m9v6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
McNamara, Danielle S.
O'Riley, Tenaha
Rowe, Mike
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Improving Understanding of Science Texts:
iSTART Strategy Training vs. a Web Design Control Task
Roger S. Taylor (rtaylor@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Tenaha O’Reilly (t.oreilly@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Mike Rowe (mprowe@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems
Psychology Department, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

material, such as science texts. Chi et al.’s research has
demonstrated large gains in learning for students when they
were prompted to self-explain. McNamara and colleagues
have built upon this research by providing learners with
scaffolded training in metacognitive reading strategies
(McNamara, 2004). In the training program, called selfexplanation reading training (SERT), students learn to use
metacognitive reading strategies (e.g., comprehension
monitoring, paraphrasing, elaboration, and bridging
inferences). Empirical studies have indicated that SERT
improves comprehension, particularly for low-knowledge
readers (e.g., McNamara, 2004; O’Reilly, Best, &
McNamara, 2004).

Abstract
Scientific literacy is a critical skill that requires the ability to
deeply comprehend difficult scientific concepts. However,
comprehending science texts is often a challenge for lowknowledge readers. This research assessed the effectiveness
of an automated reading strategy training program (iSTART)
to improve comprehension for low-knowledge students.
Eighty-four high school students were either trained to use
iSTART or they were given instruction on how to design
science web pages (i.e., control). Following a several month
delay after training it was found that the students in the
iSTART condition comprehended more from a science text
than students in the control condition.

Introduction
The impact of science literacy on our economy and society
is significant, and has been widely documented (e.g. AAAS,
1993; NRC, 1996). The recent report by the National
Academy of Sciences (NAS, 2005) describes how American
leadership in the areas of science and technology has
eroded, and lays out the serious economic problems that will
result if this trend is not reversed. A primary mode of precollegiate science instruction involves the reading of
expository science texts. Given that the intended purpose of
such texts is the introduction of new and unfamiliar
concepts, it is not surprising that many students have
difficulty reading such materials (Bowden, 1999; Snow,
2002). This problem is made more difficult because students
are often not equipped with the knowledge to succeed in
their courses (Snow, 2002) and furthermore, students do not
typically use good reading strategies (Cox, 1997; Garner,
1990). Therefore, one promising approach is to provide
students with training in the use of more effective reading
strategies, which they can employ when reading expository
science texts. Indeed, empirical studies have demonstrated
that interventions focused on teaching reading strategies
have been successful in improving reading comprehension
(e.g., Pressley et al., 1992; Rosenshine & Meister, 1994;
Rosenshine, Meister, & Chapman, 1996).
Recently, attention has been given to a reading
intervention called Self-Explanation (Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu,
& LaVancher, 1994). Self-explanation is a process in which
a learner explains aloud the meaning of challenging

Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and
Thinking: iSTART
While previous investigations of SERT were encouraging,
there are also two limitations of its future implementation on
a larger scale. First, the high cost of human tutors makes
widespread adoption of the program problematic,
particularly in economically distressed areas. Second, the
structure of the SERT program does not allow for dynamic
instruction that is tailored to the specific needs of the
learner. Consequently, McNamara and colleagues developed
an automatized version of SERT training called iSTART
(Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and
Thinking; see McNamara et al., 2004). Training with
iSTART occurs in three phases (Introduction,
Demonstration, and Practice) and takes approximately 2 1/2
hours. The delivery of information and feedback to students
is accomplished via animated pedagogical agents. The
content of the feedback is determined based on the quality
of the students’ self-explanations, as assessed via a set of
linguistic algorithms (for details, see McNamara et al.,
2004; McNamara, Boonthum, Levinstein, & Millis, in
press).
The first phase of training is strategy Introduction. This
phase includes definitions and examples of the process of
self-explanation as well as five reading strategies
(comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing, prediction,
bridging inferences, and elaboration). After each strategy is
presented, students are asked to answer four multiple-choice

2234

questions and are then provided with immediate feedback
by the program. The second phase of training is strategy
Demonstration. In this phase, pedagogical agents model the
use of the reading strategies while they are self-explaining a
science text. The student is asked to identify the strategies
used by the pedagogical agent during self-explanation, and
is provided with feedback. The third phase of training is
strategy Practice. In this phase, students read two short
science passages and are asked to apply the newly learned
strategies while typing self-explanations of the sentences in
the texts. As they proceed through the text, several
algorithms are employed to evaluate the quality (e.g., selfexplanation length and the number and type of content
words) of the generated self-explanations (McNamara et al.,
2004). Based upon this analysis, scaffolded feedback is
provided. For instance, a student who gives an
“impoverished” self-explanation that does not go beyond the
content of the text's sentence is prompted by the agent to
provide more information.

iSTART system is adaptive to the specific level of the
student, low-knowledge students who were trained in
iSTART would learn more from science texts than those in
the control condition.

Method
Participants
The initial sample consisted of 446 students in 10 physical
science classes (9th grade) and 10 biology classes (10th
grade) from a suburban Tennessee high school. Of these
students, 153 completed all of the training, pretest, and
posttest assessments under investigation. A median split was
performed on prior science domain knowledge and the
resulting 82 low-knowledge students were included as the
participants for this study.

Assessment Materials

Current Study

Reading Ability General reading skill was measured using
a modified version of the standardized Gates-MacGinitie
reading skill test for grades 7-9 that consisted of 48
multiple-choice
questions
which
assess
student
comprehension on several short text passages.

Previous investigations have revealed that iSTART
improves comprehension as compared to normal reading
controls (O'Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara, 2004a).
However, many students lack the knowledge in order to
succeed in their courses (Snow, 2002). Therefore, a
principle aim of this study was to determine whether
iSTART can help low-knowledge readers learn more from
typical high school level science texts. While prior
investigations with human trained self-explanation strategy
training (SERT) have shown benefits for low-knowledge
readers (e.g., McNamara et al., 2004), it was not clear
whether these results would transfer to iSTART training. In
particular, we were interested in whether the effect of the
strategy training would hold under challenging but realworld conditions. Therefore, we tested the effectiveness of
the training in live classrooms during regular class time.
Furthermore, we also assessed the impact of the training
after an extended delay so that we could determine whether
the training was flexible enough to persist over time.
In order to provide a challenging comparison with
iSTART, students in a control condition were taught to
design web pages containing science-related information.
The web design task was developed to engage students with
a computerized activity, while at the same time being
exposed to the same scientific content as the iSTART group.
This kind of control condition accounts for effects of
novelty pertaining to computer use as well as exposure to
the scientific information involved in iSTART training.
In the current study, we investigated the efficiency with
which the iSTART program can be used in the classroom to
teach high school students reading strategies. A major
experimental goal was to assess potential improvements of
students’ science text comprehension as a function of
iSTART training, particularly for the students most in need
of remediation – those who possess the least amount of
scientific domain knowledge. We predicted that, because the

Prior Science Knowledge Prior general science knowledge
was measured with a 20-item, four-alternative, multiplechoice test. The test covered several areas including
biology, chemistry, earth science, research methods and
mathematics. Questions were selected from high school
science tests collected from several states (i.e., Colorado,
Georgia, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia).

2235

Pretest Science Passage Comprehension Two passages
were presented to the students to assess pre-training science
text comprehension. The first pretest passage was a 449word passage on petroleum that described the refining
process of heating petroleum to different temperatures,
thereby allowing for the separation and collection of
methane versus diesel fuel and other similar products. The
31-sentence passage had a Flesch Reading Ease of 39.7 and
a Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level of 11.2. The second pretest
passage was a 322-word passage on the carbon cycle that
described how carbon passes through the food supply of the
ecosystem. The 17-sentence passage had a Flesch Reading
Ease of 50.5 and a Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level of 10.6.
There were eight open-ended questions presented for each
passage. The answers to four of the questions could be
found within a single sentence of the passage, and they are
referred to as text-based questions. The answers to the
remaining four questions required the reader to combine
information contained in two or more sentences of the
passage, and are referred to as bridging-inference questions.
Posttest Science Passage Comprehension Two passages
were presented to the students to assess post-training
science text comprehension. The first posttest passage was a
307-word passage on the most common types of medical
problems involving the heart. The 21-sentence passage had

comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing, prediction,
bridging inferences, and elaboration). During the
demonstration phase, pedagogical agents modeled the
previously presented reading strategies. Lastly, during the
practice phase, students typed their self-explanations for a
text on thunderstorms followed by a text on coal. Target
sentences were self-explained in a sequential order, on a
sentence-by-sentence basis. Self-explanations appeared in
part of the screen called the self-explanation box. After
completing each self-explanation, the participant was
required to submit their self-explanation to be evaluated by
the pedagogical agent. The student was then given feedback
(e.g., the agent requested more details to be added, or
offered a hint that the student should add more details next
time). Once the final protocol for a given target sentence
had been accepted, the next sentence was displayed.

a Flesch Reading Ease of 55.9 and a Flesch-Kincaid Grade
Level of 9.0. The second posttest passage was a 477-word
passage on the origins of the universe, which described
theories related to the Big Bang. The 31-sentence passage
had a Flesch Reading Ease of 39.1 and a Flesch-Kincaid
Grade Level of 11.5. There were eight open-ended questions
presented for each passage. As with the pretest passages,
there were four text-based questions and four bridging
inference questions.

Design and Procedure
The experiment used a pretest, intervention, posttest design
with a between-subjects manipulation comparing iSTART
strategy training (experimental condition) with web design
training (control condition). Using matched-samples
assignment (based on reading skill and prior knowledge),
half of the students in each classroom were assigned to the
iSTART condition, and half were assigned to the control
condition.
The experiment consisted of three phases: pretest,
training, and posttest, with the pretest and posttest phases
being identical for both the iSTART and control conditions.
During the pretest, students in the iSTART and control
group were administered the pretest measures in the
following order and time frame: prior science knowledge
(10 min), Gates-MacGinitie reading measure (Form K, 15
min), and two science passages on petroleum and the carbon
cycle, along with the sets of comprehension questions (15
min).
Based on pretest scores on reading skill and prior
knowledge, the experimenters used a matched-samples
assignment to randomly assign half the students to the
iSTART condition and the other half to the control
condition. The training phase (described in detail below)
lasted for four days.
In order to better measure the robustness of any potential
effects of training, there was a planned “delay” between the
training phase and the posttest phase. Logistical classroom
constraints required that for approximately half of the
participants in both conditions, the training phase occurred
two months before the posttest phase, while for the
remaining students, the training phase occurred five months
before the posttest phase.
During the posttest, students in both groups were
administered the posttest measures in the following order
and time frame: two science passages on heart disease and
the universe, along with corresponding sets of
comprehension questions (15 min).
iSTART Strategy Training iSTART training was
facilitated by University of Memphis researchers and was
completed over four consecutive days. Students worked
through the iSTART modules in a sequential order –
Introduction, Demonstration and Practice. Training required
a total of 2.5 to 3 hours, and occurred over four class
periods. During the introduction phase, students were
provided with information on five reading strategies (i.e.,

Web Design Training In order to provide a fair comparison
between conditions, students in the web design condition
covered the same science content as those in the iSTART
condition. Across four days, control students were trained in
the creation of web pages, which was facilitated by
University of Memphis researchers. The first day was spent
learning and practicing the tags needed for web page
creation. Template pages were provided as a starting point
for each lesson. Led by an instructor, students opened the
templates and saved them under a new name as the
foundation for their web page. Using their new web pages,
students were instructed in the proper use of the hypertext
markup tags (e.g., <p></p>, <a></a>, and <br>). Each
student was instructed to follow along and use the tags in
their own page. After all the tags were demonstrated, the
students were given tasks to practice the tags’ proper use.
On the second day students were instructed to create a
web page to answer science questions using the tags they
learned the previous day. Study sheets containing all the
tags and examples of their use were provided along with the
questions the students were to answer. The instructor
answered a sample question first by again showing students
how to create a web page from the template. This question
was then used as a title for the web page. Answers to the
questions could be found on various text-based science web
pages created by the experimenters linked to a main page
saved on each computer. The instructor opened a science
web page that answered the question and copied the content
to the body of the web page. The name of the page from
which the content was taken was also copied and placed
beneath the answer. After each student completed the
example, they were told to answer the remaining questions
in the same way.
Day three and day four followed the same procedure.
However, instructors no longer provided a demonstration to
begin each lesson. Instead, instructors provided support and
helped troubleshoot students’ problems as needed. The
students were provided with study sheets along with a list of
science questions they were to answer that day, as well as a
selection of science web pages from which they were to
answer each question.

2236

Results

0.6

Pretest Individual Difference Scores
Proportion Correct

There were no significant differences in pretest prior science
knowledge scores between the iSTART condition (M =
0.53, SD = 0.16) and the control condition (M = 0.52, SD =
0.17), t(71) = 0.39, p = .70 (2-tailed). There were also no
significant differences in pretest reading ability scores
between the iSTART condition (M = 20.74, SD = 8.30) and
the control condition (M = 20.98, SD = 7.41), t(147) = 0.18,
p = .86 (2-tailed). Therefore, any effects of condition cannot
be accounted for by any pre-training differences in prior
science knowledge or reading ability.

Table 1. iSTART and control condition values for textbased (TB) and bridging inference questions (Br).
Condition
iSTART
(TB)

Pretest
.306
(.174)

Posttest
.522
(.206)

p value

Cohen's d

< .001

1.13

Control
(TB)

.329
(.184)

.448
(.233)

.014

0.57

iSTART
(Br)

.091
(.075)

.278
(.171)

< .001

1.42

Control
(Br)

.127
(.094)

.258
(.194)

.001

0.86

Control

0.4

iSTART

0.3

0.2
Pre

Post

Figure 1. Proportion of correct textbase questions as a
function of training condition (iSTART vs. Control).

Text-Based Questions
The proportion of correctly answered text-based questions
(n = 8) is depicted in Table 1. Analyses were performed to
ensure that there were no significant differences between the
two levels of delay (i.e., two month vs. five month gap
between the training and posttest phases). Since no
significant effects were found in this analysis, the two levels
of the delay were collapsed across the remaining analyses.

0.5

Additional analyses (i.e., paired samples t-tests) were
performed to examine pretest/posttest changes for both
conditions. As predicted, there was a significant increase in
performance for students in the iSTART condition, t(48) =
6.21, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 1.13. Similarly, there was a
significant increase in performance for students in the
control condition, t(32) = 2.61, p = .014, Cohen’s d = 0.57
(see Table 1). Thus, both conditions significantly improved
from pretest to posttest – with a moderate increase for the
control condition (d = 0.57) and a large increase (d = 1.13)
for the iSTART condition.
Bridging Inference Questions

Performance gains for students were examined via a 2
(iSTART, Control) X 2 (Pretest, Posttest) Mixed Model
ANOVA. There were significant gains in performance from
pretest to posttest for all participants, F(1, 80) =35.12, p <
.001. The main effect of Condition was not significant, F(1,
80) = 0.54, p = .463. However, the Test by Condition
interaction was marginally significant, F(1,80) = 2.92, p =
.091 (see Figure 1).
Further analyses were conducted to determine whether the
magnitude of the learning gains were different as a function
of condition. As predicted, an independent sample t-test
revealed that the students in the iSTART condition had a
significantly higher gain in learning in comparison to those
in the control condition, t(80) = 1.71, p = .046 (one-tailed),
Cohen’s d = 0.38 (see Table 1). These results demonstrate
how, in comparison to the control condition, the iSTART
strategy training leads to significantly greater performance
on text-based reading comprehension questions.

The proportion of correctly answered bridging inference
questions (n = 8) was used to assess performance on the
bridging inference questions. Analyses were performed to
ensure that there were no significant differences between the
two levels of delay (i.e., two month vs. five month gap
between the training and posttest phases). Since no
significant effects were found in this analysis, the two levels
of the delay were collapsed across the remaining analyses.
Performance gains for students were examined via a 2
(iSTART, Control) X 2 (Pretest, Posttest) Mixed Model
ANOVA. There were significant gains in performance from
pretest to posttest for all participants, F(1, 80) = 61.92, p <
.001. The main effect of Condition was not significant, F(1,
80) = 0.11, p = .740. The Test by Condition interaction was
not significant, F(1,80) = 1.97, p = .165.
Further analyses were conducted to determine whether the
magnitude of the learning gains was different as a function
of conditions. As predicted, an independent sample t-test
revealed that the students in the iSTART condition had a
marginally higher gain in learning in comparison to those in
the control condition, t(80) = 1.40, p = .083 (one-tailed),
Cohen’s d = 0.30 (see Table 1). These results provide
support, albeit somewhat weak, that the iSTART strategy
training can lead to better performance on bridging
inference questions in comparison to the control condition.
Additional analyses (i.e., paired samples t-tests) were
performed to examine pretest/posttest changes for both
conditions. There was a significant increase in performance

2237

for students in the iSTART condition, t(48) = 8.55, p < .001,
Cohen’s d = 1.42. Similarly, there was a significant increase
in performance for students in the control condition, t(32) =
3.53, p = .001, Cohen’s d = 0.86 (see Table 1). In sum, in
addition to the statistical significance, in terms of effect size,
both the control condition (d = 0.86) and the iSTART
condition (d = 1.42) had large increases from pretest to
posttest.

Discussion
The principal aim of this study was to examine the impact of
an adaptive computer-based reading strategy tutoring
system (iSTART) on high school students’ comprehension
of expository science texts. The focus was to assess the
potential facilitation of comprehension for the students who
need it the most –low-knowledge readers. In addition, we
sought to test the system under ecologically valid conditions
by assessing it in high school classrooms. Our prediction
was that low-knowledge readers trained with iSTART
would have significantly greater gains in reading
comprehension performance, in comparison to those in the
control condition.
The results of this study provided some support for our
predictions – participants in the iSTART condition
outperformed students in the control condition on text-based
questions. While participants in the iSTART condition
scored higher than the control on bridging inference
questions, this effect was only marginally significant.
These results echo earlier findings that have shown that
iSTART can improve comprehension (O'Reilly, et al.,
2004a), and that SERT based training improves
comprehension for low-knowledge readers (McNamara,
2004), primarily on text-based questions. We are certainly
not surprised to see a larger effect on text-based questions.
Enhanced effects of reading strategy training (using SERT
or iSTART) for low-knowledge (or less-skilled readers) on
text-based questions have been observed in five previous
studies (Magliano, et al., 2005; McNamara, 2004; O'Reilly,
Sinclair, & McNamara, 2004a,b; McNamara, O’Reilly,
Best, & Ozuru, in press). This result indicates that reading
strategy training allows low ability readers to better
understand the basic ideas in the text – certainly a
worthwhile goal. We’re hopeful that additional, extended
training for low ability readers will help them to go beyond
textbase level comprehension and learn to understand text
more deeply.
This is the first study to show that iSTART is effective in
high school classrooms, and in particular, it is the first study
to demonstrate that iSTART helps improve comprehension
for low-knowledge readers. Also noteworthy is that the
beneficial effects of training persisted over an extended
period of time and were evident months later. Lastly, this
experiment employed a challenging contrast to the iSTART
intervention – the active and engaging process of designing
science web pages as a control condition.

The control condition in this study was quite stringent in
that it controlled for time on task, the engagement level of
the task, the task being computer based, and the scientific
information read by the students during the task. Given that
this experiment occurred over a period of several months,
the improvement in student reading ability and knowledge
levels may have resulted from their normal academic
experiences. However, we observed significantly higher
gains for students in the iSTART condition than those in the
control condition, which indicates that iSTART effectively
improved students’ ability to understand science text over
and above their normal academic experiences.
In conclusion, the growing recognition of the national
importance of science literacy highlights the need to provide
students with the ability to learn from expository science
texts. The results presented here demonstrate how the use of
powerful educational tools such as the iSTART instructional
system can help make this possible.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Grant Sinclair, Pavan Pillarisetti,
and Chutima Boonthum. This project was supported by the
NSF (REC-0241144) and IES (R305G040046). Any
opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the NSF or IES.

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS), Project 2061. (1993). Benchmarks for science
literacy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bowen, B. A. (1999). Four puzzles in adult literacy:
Reflections on the national adult literacy survey. Journal
of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 42, 314–323.
Chi, M. T. H., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & LaVancher, C.
(1994).
Eliciting
self-explanations
improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Cox, B. D. (1997). The rediscovery of the active learner in
adaptive contexts: A developmental-historical analysis of
transfer of training. Educational Psychologist, 32, 41-55.
Garner, R. (1990). When children and adults do not use
learning strategies: Toward a theory of settings. Review of
Educational Psychology, 60, 517-529.
Magliano, J. P., Todaro, S., Millis, K. K. Wiemer-Hastings,
K., Kim, H. J., & McNamara, D. S. (2005). Changes in
reading strategies as a function of reading training: A
comparison of live and computerized training. Journal of
Educational Computing Research, 32, 185-208.
McNamara, D. S. (2004). SERT: Self-Explanation Reading
Training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
McNamara, D. S., Boonthum, C., Levinstein, I. B., &
Millis, K. (in press). Using LSA and word-based
measures to assess self-explanations in iSTART. In T.
Landauer, D. S., McNamara, S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch
(Eds.), LSA: A Road to Meaning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

2238

McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B., & Boonthum, C.
(2004). iSTART: Interactive strategy training for active
reading and thinking. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36, 222-233.
McNamara, D. S., O’Reilly, T., Best, R., & Ozuru, Y. (in
press). Improving adolescent students’ reading
comprehension with iSTART. Journal of Educational
Computing Research.
National Academies of Sciences (NAS). (2005). Rising
above the gathering storm: Energizing and employing
America for a brighter economic future. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). (1996). National science
education standards. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
O'Reilly, T. P., Best, R., & McNamara, D. S. (2004). SelfExplanation Reading Training: Effects for low-knowledge
readers. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1053-1058). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
O'Reilly, T. P., Sinclair, G. P., & McNamara, D. S. (2004a).
Reading strategy training: Automated versus live. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, T. & Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of

the 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1059-1064). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
O'Reilly, T. P., Sinclair, G. P., & McNamara, D. S. (2004b).
iSTART: A web-based reading strategy intervention that
improves students’ science comprehension. In Kinshuk,
D. G. Sampson, & P. Isaías (Eds.), Proceedings of the
IADIS International Conference Cognition and
Exploratory Learning in Digital Age: CELDA 2004 (pp.
173-180). Lisbon, Portugal: IADIS Press.
Pressley, M., Wood, E., Woloshyn, V. E., Martin, V., King,
A., & Menke, D. (1992). Encouraging mindful use of
prior knowledge: Attempting to construct explanatory
answers facilitates learning. Educational Psychologist, 27,
91-109.
Rosenshine, B., & Meister, C. (1994). Reciprocal teaching:
A review of the research. Review of Educational
Research, 64, 479-530.
Rosenshine, B., Meister, C., & Chapman, S. (1996).
Teaching students to generate questions: A review of the
intervention studies. Review of Educational Research, 66,
181-221.
Snow, C. (2002). Reading for understanding: Toward an R
& D program in reading comprehension. Santa Monica,
CA: RAND.

2239

