UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inducing Low-level Schema Extraction with Artificial Suffixes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wn2j47z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Brooks, Patricia J.
Kempe, Vera
Seva, Nada

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inducing Low-level Schema Extraction with Artificial Suffixes
Nada Ševa (ns9@stir.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, University of Stirling,
Stirling, Scotland, FK9 4LA, UK

Vera Kempe (vk2@stir.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, University of Stirling,
Stirling, Scotland, FK9 4LA,UK

Patricia J. Brooks (pbrooks@mail.csi.cuny.edu)

Department of Psychology, College of Staten Island, City University of New York
Staten Island, NY 10314, USA
Abstract
Serbian and Russian children produce fewer adjective-noun
gender-agreement errors with diminutive nouns (e.g. ribica
‘little fish’) than with their simplex counterparts (e.g. riba
‘fish’). This study explores factors responsible for the
diminutive advantage, using a gender-agreement task with
Serbian-speaking children (N=24, mean age 4;4). Over four
sessions, children were introduced to pictures of unfamiliar
objects and animals that were labelled using novel nouns,
varying in grammatical gender and derivational status, with half
of the nouns introduced in simplex form and the other half in
pseudo-diminutive form. Pseudo-diminutives were artificial
derivations that mimic the regular morphological gender
marking of Serbian diminutives, using unfamiliar artificial
suffixes (–upa for feminine, –uf for masculine). Results
indicated a pseudo-diminutive advantage for gender agreement
by Session 2, suggesting that low-level schema extraction is a
relatively fast process, based on morpho-phonological
homogeneity of word clusters.
Keywords: Psychology; Language acquisition; Learning;
Developmental experimentation.

Introduction
Early cross-linguistic studies showed that the complexity and
transparency of morpho-phonological features at the ends of
words affects the learning trajectories of languages with
complex morphological systems (Johnston & Slobin, 1979;
Slobin & Bever, 1981). Despite the observed cross-linguistic
differences in learning rates, it has generally been assumed
that complex morphological systems are fully mastered by
children between two and four years of age. However, in a
recent study of case-marking in adult native speakers of
Polish, using an elicitation task with novel nouns, Dabrowska
(2004) showed that even adults commit a sizable number of
errors involving neuter nouns, which despite their high
regularity within the case-marking system comprise only a
small proportion of Polish nouns. These data suggest that the
acquisition of complex morphological systems like case
marking is heavily dependent on the type frequency and
phonological homogeneity of clusters of words, and that
while the most prominent and frequent parts of the system are
learned by the age of four, the less frequent constructions may
be acquired at a later point during development, and may still
present problems in adulthood. These findings emphasize the
role of low-level schema extraction in the organization of the

mental lexicon: Learners of complex morphological systems
start out with generalisations over a limited set of
phonologically homogeneous words before moving on to
rule-like generalizations that apply more broadly across the
system (Bybee, 1995; Dabrowska, 2004; Tomasello, 2003).
Recent research on the role of child-directed speech (CDS)
in the acquisition of complex morphological systems has
shown that the input presented to children tends to contain
sizable clusters of morpho-phonologically homogeneous
words. Specifically, one of the features shown to be pervasive
in the CDS of many languages is the frequent use of
diminutives. Diminutives are morphological derivations (e.g.
in English doggy, bootie, Patty) that indicate smallness, and
connote endearment and affection. The semantic and
pragmatic features of this derivation are almost universal
across languages (Jurafsky, 1996).
In a series of corpus analyses, a high frequency of
diminutives in CDS has been observed in a wide range of
languages including Russian, Spanish, Italian, Polish, Dutch,
Greek and Lithuanian (De Marko, 1998; Haman, 2003;
Kempe, Brooks & Pirott, 2001; Melzi & King, 2003;
Savickiene, 1998; Stephany, 1997). In those languages,
diminutives form densely populated phonological
neighbourhoods, which serve as low-level schemata so that
acquired inflectional changes can be applied to all members
of the cluster in a uniform way. Moreover, in some languages,
such as Russian and Lithuanian, diminutives regularize the
system of noun morphology by rendering morphophonological gender and case marking more transparent.
Because of these features, diminutives are excellent
candidates for the formation of a low-level schema.
Consequently, in these languages diminutives should facilitate
the acquisition of noun morphology, with children learning
gender agreement and case marking faster with diminutives
than with their simplex counterparts. This hypothesis has been
tested experimentally for Russian and Polish. Using a genderagreement elicitation paradigm, Kempe, Brooks, Mironova
and Fedorova (2003) presented Russian three- and four-yearolds with familiar and novel, simplex and diminutive nouns,
and demonstrated that children produced fewer genderagreement errors with diminutive nouns in comparison to
simplex forms of the same nouns (the children also
committing fewer errors with familiar nouns than novel ones,
and with masculine nouns than feminine ones). Similarly,
Russian and Polish children have been shown to commit

2135

fewer case-marking errors with diminutives as compared to
simplex nouns (Dabrowska, 2006; Kempe, Brooks,
Mironova, Pershukova & Fedorova, in press). Furthermore,
adult English speakers exposed to a limited set of Russian
phrases over four language learning sessions showed faster
acquisition of grammatical gender and fewer agreement errors
if the input consisted of diminutive nouns rather than their
simplex counterparts (Kempe & Brooks, 2001). In sum,
studies of first and second language learners of Russian, and
child and adult native speakers of Polish converge on the
finding that morphological features are first generalized to
highly dense phonological neighbourhoods such as
diminutives, and are more easily applied to novel words that
fall into this low-level schema. Two parameters seem to be
important for the process of low-level schema extraction: high
type frequency of a particular cluster of words and
phonological homogeneity of neighbourhood, which renders
the cluster sufficiently distinct from other clusters of words.
However, the specific role of frequency and phonological
homogeneity in the process of low-level schema extraction is
not clear. Is the facilitating effect of diminutives in the
learning of noun morphology mainly due to their high
frequency of use or is it due to the phonological similarity of
derivational morphemes creating highly homogeneous word
clusters? The present study explores the role of phonological
homogeneity by studying gender agreement in Serbian
children. The choice of language is motivated by the fact that
Serbian is similar to Russian and Polish with respect to its
morphology, but differs dramatically in its frequency of
diminutive usage. The next section briefly describes Serbian
noun morphology in terms of its similarities and differences
to Russian. It is followed by a section providing evidence of
differences in diminutive frequency in Serbian and Russian
CDS and its effect on morphology acquisition in the two
languages.

Description of Serbian Noun Morphology
Serbian is a south Slavic language, similar to Russian and
Polish, with highly inflected nominal and verb morphology.
Nominal words (nouns, adjectives, pronouns and some
numbers) are grouped into three major gender categories:
masculine nouns usually end in a consonant, like zec-Ø
[rabbit]; feminine nouns end in –a, like mačk-a [cat] and
neuter nouns end in –o and –e, like sel-o [village] or det-e
[child]. There are also sets of nouns that are non-transparent
with respect to the relationship between word ending and
gender. The first is a relatively small group of masculine
nouns ending in –a. These are nouns like sudija [judge], as
well as hypocoristic forms of proper male names like
Aleksandar [simplex] vs. Aca [hypocoristic], and hypocoristic
forms for some animal and kinship terms like medved
[bearSIM] vs. meda [bearHYP]. Serbian has also a few
masculine nouns ending in –o or –e. Additionally, like
Russian, Serbian has a small set of feminine nouns ending
with a consonant, comprising mostly abstract nouns like
ljubav [loveFEM], smrt [deathFEM] or noć [nightFEM], and
a few concrete nouns, like kost [boneFEM]. Another group of
feminine non-transparently gender marked nouns is derived
using the productive suffix -ost, which is usually used for the

nominalization of adjectives (for example gord [adj. proud] gordost [n. pride]).
Serbian has seven cases: nominative, genitive, dative,
accusative, vocative, instrumental and locative. Nouns are
declined according to four declensions (for the three
transparently marked genders and for non-transparent
feminine nouns). Serbian case marking exhibits a large degree
of inflectional syncretism, with only nine suffixes used in the
entire system.

Morpho-phonological Characteristics
of Serbian Diminutives
As in Russian, diminutivization in Serbian is a productive
process. Diminutives can be derived from most concrete
nouns and some abstract ones, e.g. želja [wish] - željica
[wishDIM], as well as from some adjectives and adverbs.
Several suffixes are used for diminutive derivation. The most
frequent Serbian diminutive suffixes are –ić for masculine, –
ica for feminine, and –ce for neuter nouns. There is also a set
of complex derivations of masculine and neuter suffixes –čić,
–ance, –ence, –ašce, –ešce, and more archaic and regional
forms like –ak and –če. Diminutive suffixes retain the
grammatical gender of the simplex forms of the nouns. As in
Russian, Serbian has lexicalised or frozen diminutives, which
have taken on distinct meanings from the corresponding
simplex noun, e.g. četkica, [toothbrush] is the lexicalized
diminutive of četka [brush].
The major difference between Serbian and Russian
diminutive formation is that Serbian diminutive suffixes are
poly-functional (Stevanović, 1964; Klajn, 2003). In addition
to denoting smallness, endearment and affection, they are
used in other derivational processes, such as nominalization
of adjectives and adverbs or derivation of compound nouns.
For example, the Serbian diminutive suffix –ica is considered
to be the most productive suffix in Serbian (Stevanović, 1964;
Klajn, 2003). It is used as a suffix which changes the gender
of simplex nouns from masculine to feminine, e.g. lav
[lionMAS]-lavica [lionessFEM], or derives a new noun
semantically related to the stem, e.g. sto-stolica [table-chair].
Despite this difference, the Serbian noun system is very
similar to Russian. Based on the high degree of similarity
between the systems, one might expect a similar distribution
of diminutives in Serbian CDS as in Russian CDS.

Distribution of Diminutives in Serbian CDS and
Its Effect on Learning Noun Morphology
A preliminary corpus analysis of the distribution of
diminutives in Serbian CDS (Ševa, Kempe & Brooks, 2005)
revealed a rather unexpected difference in frequency relative
to Russian. For both languages, the distribution of diminutives
was calculated from the first 100 nouns produced by 4
mothers in conversations with their children, 2 boys and 2
girls, at 20 and 34 months of age, who were selected from
larger corpora of CDS to match the age of the children across
the two languages. As depicted in Figure 1, the frequency of
diminutives in CDS differs by a magnitude (an average of
45% of nouns in Russian and 7% in Serbian), despite the
relatively similar noun and diminutive morphology in Serbian
and Russian.

2136

diminutives that increase morpho-phonological similarity at
the ends of words that are responsible for the beneficial
effects on noun morphology acquisition. The present study
uses pseudo-diminutives to try to demonstrate if and when the
diminutive advantage emerges given an increased amount of
morpho-phonological homogeneity among word endings.

100
90

Russian

80

Serbian

70

%

60
50
40
30

Gender Agreement in Serbian Simplex and
Pseudo-diminutive Nouns

20
10
0
20

m onths

34

Method
Figure 1: Diminutive Usage in Russian and Serbian CDS
A possible explanation for the obtained difference, which
may be related to cultural differences, different recording
conditions, or a combination of several other factors, is
beyond the scope of this paper. Still, whatever the basis for
the relatively small frequency of diminutives in Serbian CDS,
it should attenuate the diminutive advantage in morphology
learning, if frequency is indeed the crucial factor that drives
low-level schema extraction. If, on the other hand, Serbian
children exhibit a diminutive advantage in gender agreement
and case-marking production of similar magnitude as in
Russian, this would suggest that it is not frequency per se that
is responsible for the effect, but that the low-level schema
extraction is also strongly driven by morpho-phonological
homogeneity.
In Ševa et al. (2005), we utilized the gender-agreement
elicitation methodology developed for Russian (Kempe et al.,
2003), in order to see whether the diminutive advantage
would be attenuated given the lower frequency in Serbian
CDS. Children (N=22, mean age 3;7) were presented with 32
pictures of familiar and unfamiliar pictures of animals. The
results showed effects of noun familiarity, derivational status
and noun gender similar to the ones obtained for Russian.
Most importantly, the diminutive advantage was similar to
Russian, both in terms of the distribution of gender-agreement
errors as well as its effect size.
To study case marking, we used the elicitation
methodology developed for the Russian case-marking
experiment of Kempe et al. (in press). Serbian-speaking
children (N=24, mean age 3;8) were presented with twelve
familiar and twelve novel objects and a toy elephant walking
towards or away from each object, to prompt the children to
use od+genitive [from+genitive] or prema+dative
[towards+dative] constructions (Ševa & Kempe, 2005). The
results again demonstrated that there was an advantage for
diminutives compared to simplex nouns and for familiar
nouns compared to novel nouns. Thus, for case-marking, the
diminutive advantage was also strikingly similar to the
Russian findings despite the much lower frequency of
diminutives in Serbian CDS.
In sum, the strong diminutive advantage for both gender
agreement and case marking in Serbian suggests that it is not
the frequency of diminutives in the input nor the degree of
regularization (in Serbian, gender marking in diminutives is
as regular as in simplex nouns) that drives low-level schema
extraction. Instead, it seems that it is the properties of

Participants 24 Serbian-speaking children age 3;6-5;0, mean
age 4;4 years were recruited in various day-care centres in
Belgrade (Serbia).
Materials We created 32 unfamiliar nouns, 16 of which
ended in –a thus resembling the form of feminine nouns, and
16 ending in a consonant thus resembling the form of
masculine nouns. All novel nouns were bi-syllabic with stress
on the first syllable. We selected pictures of 16 novel animals
and 16 novel objects, which were highly unusual and not
readily nameable by Serbian children or adults, and assigned
the novel words to the novel animals and objects. We also
constructed two pseudo-noun suffixes: –upa for feminine
nouns and –uf for masculine nouns, which resembled the
Serbian diminutive suffixes –ica and –ić but were not
familiar to the children. These suffixes were then used for the
derivation
of
pseudo-diminutives
(e.g.
feminine:
krufa/krufupa, timza/timzupa.; masculine: forzak/forzakuf,
narap/narapuf). The nouns and their pseudo-derivations were
distributed across two lists in such a way that each noun
appeared as simplex in one list, and as pseudo-diminutive in
the other. Nouns were divided into four groups (8 nouns per
group). Order of groups and lists was counterbalanced over
the four sessions. Presentation of the pictures was randomised
in each session.
We selected another four familiar nouns and corresponding
pictures of familiar animals and objects for practice purposes.
Two antonymous adjective pairs were used to prompt the
children to talk about the animals. These pairs were lep-ružan
(mas.) vs. lepa-ružna (fem.) [beautiful-ugly] and dobar-loš
(mas.) vs. dobra-loša (fem.) [good-bad]. The adjective
endings served as indicators for correct or erroneous gender
agreement. In addition, we used a toy elephant which served
as protagonist in the phase of the experiment designed to
increase the children’s exposure to the nouns using other
constructions.
Procedure Children were tested individually in four different
sessions (2-7 days apart), by a female native speaker of
Serbian in a room adjacent to the main activity room of the
day care centre.
Each session comprised three blocks utilizing different
tasks: (1) In the Practice block, children engaged in the
process of labelling and describing objects and animals, and
were introduced to a specific pair of adjectives to be used to
describe the subsequently presented 4 test items; (2) In the
Test block, the experimenter elicited the use of gendermarked adjectives as descriptions of objects and animals by

2137

Some items were coded as missing values because the
children failed to produce an answer, or the experimenter
accidentally revealed the noun gender (three in the first
session, zero in the second session, one in the third session
and one in the fourth session). Average agreement errors per
child over four sessions computed as proportions of
completed trials, corrected for the number of lost trials per
subject and condition are presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Mean percentage of non-targeted answers per
child. Standard derivations are given in parentheses.
% non-targeted answers
20.3 (14.3)
18.2 (15.2)
15.6 (16.7)
11.5 (16)

Session 1
Session 2
Session 3
Session 4

We performed a (4) session x (2) derivational status:
simplex vs. pseudo-diminutive x (2) gender: feminine vs.
masculine within-subjects ANOVA on the proportions of
non-targeted answers. The analysis yielded a main effect of
noun gender, F(1,23) = 13.9, p < 0.001, which indicated that
children committed more errors with feminine than with
masculine nouns in all four sessions (see Figure 2), as well as
a significant two-way interaction between session and noun
derivation, F(1,23) = 5.8, p < 0.001 (see Figure 3).
100

2138

Masculine

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1

2 Se s sion 3

4

Figure 2: Mean percentage (and 1 S.E.M.) of nontargeted answers over four sessions and two genders.

Results

100
90

s im

80

dim

70
60
%

For each trial of the Test block, we transcribed the child’s first
instance of adjective-noun gender agreement. Cases of nontargeted gender agreement as reflected in the adjective endings
were recorded as the dependent variable. We coded two types
of answers as non-targeted gender agreement responses: a)
low frequent neuter responses (To je lepo. [ThisNEUT is
beautifulNEUT].), which appeared only in the first two
sessions and which were grammatically unmarked answers to
the pronominal subject from the experimenter’s item
introduction sentence: Ovo je XX. [This is XX.] but did not
conform to the provided response template, and b) real
agreement errors (Krufa je lep. [KrufaFEM is
beautifulMASC.] or Forzak je lepa. [ForzakMASC is
beautifulFEM.]).

Feminine

90
80

%

prompting the production of adjectives or adjective-noun
phrases; (3) In the Additional Exposure block, children were
given more opportunities to familiarize themselves with the
novel nouns using the case-marking elicitation methodology
described earlier.
First, the children were shown one template (practice)
picture, i.e. the spider, and told: Ovo je pauk. Da li je pauk
dobar ili loš? [This is spiderNOM. Is spiderNOM goodMAS
or badMAS?]. The practice pictures were used to introduce the
children to the activity, and to encourage them to produce
whole sentences. Then the experimenter presented the first test
picture, accompanied by the utterance: Ovo je krufa. Pauk je
dobar. A krufa? [This is krufaNOM. SpiderNOM is
goodMAS. And what about krufaNOM?]. This elicitation
form avoided the experimenter’s use of gender agreement, and
gave the children the opportunity to pick one of the members
of the adjective pair. The same adjective pair was used for four
consecutive test nouns, after which the experimenter
introduced a new template noun, along with the other
antonymous adjective pair. Alternation of adjective pairs and
order of template gender were counterbalanced.
The third block was used as an additional exposure phase,
giving the children more opportunities to familiarise
themselves with the nouns from the second block, but in a
different type of task (case-marking task). This task was
presented last because grammatical gender and case
paradigms are related in Serbian (each gender is associated
with a different case-marking paradigm). By presenting the
case-marking task last, we eliminated the possibility that
children implicitly detected the gender of the novel nouns. In
this last block, we used the same elicitation paradigm as in the
Russian and Serbian case-marking experiments (Kempe et al.,
in press, Ševa & Kempe, 2005). Childrens' responses were
prompted by a toy elephant walking towards or away from
each object to produce od+genitive [from+genitive] or
prema+dative [towards+dative] constructions with same set
of nouns as in the test phase.
In total, each session had 24 trials containing novel nouns,
so that the children could hear and repeat every novel noun
three times. Note that during the Test block, the children did
not receive corrective feedback when they produced nontargeted adjective-noun gender-agreement in order to keep
exposure conditions identical across children.

50
40
30
20
10
0
1

2 Se s s io n 3

4

Figure 3: Mean percentage (and 1 S.E.M.) of nontargeted answers over four sessions and two derivations.

Separate ANOVAs with gender and noun derivation as
within-subjects factors were conducted for each session to
qualify the interaction. For Session 1, this analysis revealed a
main effect of gender, F(1,23) = 8.9, p < 0.05, with better
performance for masculine nouns, and a main effect of noun
derivation, F(1,23) = 8.3, p < 0.01, indicating that the children
performed better with simplex nouns than with the pseudodiminutives. For Session 2, we found a main effect of gender,
F(1,23) = 7.7, p < 0.05, with better performance for masculine
items, and a main effect of noun derivation, F(1,23) = 4.4, p <
0.05, this time due to better performance for the pseudodiminutives compared to the simplex nouns. For Sessions 3
and 4, we found only a significant main effect of gender, due
to better performance for masculine nouns. In sum, these
analyses suggest dramatic change in the effect of pseudodiminutives: while children performed worse in these items
compared to simplex nouns in Session 1, the effect was
reversed in Session 2.
Separate 2 (gender) x 4 (session) ANOVAs for the simplex
nouns revealed a main effect of session, F(3,21) = 3.5, p <
0.05 and a main effect of gender, F(1,23) = 12.6, p < 0.01
confirming the masculine advantage. For the pseudodiminutives, the 2 (gender) x 4 (session) ANOVA revealed a
main effect of session, F(3,21) = 4.5, p < 0.01, as well as an
effect of gender, F(1,23) = 12.4, p < 0.01. Bonferronicorrected t-tests comparing performance between all sessions
confirmed an improvement in performance between Session 2
and Session 4, t(23) = 3.0, p < 0.05, for the simplex nouns,
and an improvement in performance between Session 1 and 2,
t(23) = 3.4, p < 0.05 for the pseudo-diminutives. These
analyses suggest that the apparent increase in errors for the
simplex nouns between Session 1 and 2 was not significant,
while the decrease in errors for pseudo-diminutives was.
Thus, performance in the simplex nouns remained largely
unchanged while performance in pseudo-diminutives
improved rapidly after only one session of exposure. The lack
of a 3-way interaction suggests that this pattern holds for both
genders.

Discussion and Conclusions
As in previous studies, we found that the children committed
fewer agreement errors with masculine nouns than with
feminine nouns. This confirms earlier findings on gender
agreement both for Russian and Serbian, despite the fact that
in the present study, the children were almost a year older (4;4
years) than in the Ševa et al., (2005) study (3;7 years). The
source of the masculine advantage is not clear: One
possibility is that it is due to the relatively high frequency of
gender ambiguous words both in CDS and in children’s
speech (words like tata [daddy], meda [teddy bear] or proper
names ending in –a), which end like feminine nouns, but take
masculine gender adjectives. Such words exist in Russian as
well, and Russian children also exhibit superior gender
agreement performance for masculine nouns (Kempe et al.,
2003). It is also possible that the masculine advantage is due
to the shorter and, thus, morphologically less complex
masculine adjectives (e.g. lep, loš) which are often one
syllable shorter than their feminine counterparts (e.g. lepa,
loša). Preliminary work on gender agreement in Lithuanian

(Savičkiene, Kempe & Brooks, in preparation), where
masculine and feminine adjectives are of equal length,
confirms the diminutive advantage but does not show a
masculine advantage in gender agreement performance. Thus,
gender agreement in Serbian and Russian masculine nouns
might be aided by the fact that the adjectives are
phonologically less complex and, thus, easier to produce.
Crucially, our findings show that a pseudo-diminutive
advantage emerged already at Session 2. While the children at
first committed many errors with the unfamiliar derivations,
they soon seemed to treat these nouns as a phonologically
more homogeneous cluster of words compared to the simplex
pseudo-words, which facilitated correct gender agreement
within this cluster. Thus, low-level schema extraction does
not take a long time nor does it seem to require a lot of
exposure to the particular word cluster. In other words,
phonological homogeneity is as crucial a factor as frequency
in the process of low-level schema extraction, and may be
sufficient to trigger the process if a highly homogeneous
cluster of words is not very frequent in the input. This can
help to explain why the diminutive advantage in Serbian is of
similar magnitude as in Russian despite markedly lower
frequency of diminutives in the input of Serbian children.
In conclusion, we suggest that in the initial stages of lowlevel schema extraction, learners do not need much time and a
high frequency of exposure to detect morpho-phonologically
homogeneous clusters of words, and to start to generalize
inflectional changes within the clusters. It seems that children
are quite sensitive to morpho-phonological similarities, and
that just a small cluster of homogeneous words may be
enough to trigger the process of generalization given that this
cluster of words is sufficiently distinct in morphophonological space. The fact that the high frequency of
diminutives in Russian CDS did not provide an additional
advantage for the Russian children suggests that phonological
homogeneity might be the more important factor. Further
systematic cross-linguistic work, complemented by neural
network simulations, may shed more light on the interaction
between frequency and morpho-phonological homogeneity
over the course of morphology learning.

References
Bybee, J. L. (1995). Regular morphology and the lexicon.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 10, 425-455.
Dabrowska, E. (2004). Rules or schemas? Evidence from
Polish. Language and Cognitive Processes, 19 (2), 225271.
Dabrowska, E. (2006). Low-level schemas or productive
rules: The role of diminutives in the acquisition of Polish
case inflections. Language Sciences, 28, 120-135.
De Marco, A. (1998). The acquisition of diminutives in
Italian. In S. Gillis (Ed.), Studies in the acquisition of
number and diminutive marking. Antwerp papers in
Linguistics, 95. Antwerp: Universiteit Anwerpen.
Gillis, S. (1997). The acquisition of diminutives in Dutch. In:
W. Dressler (ed.) Studies in pre- and protomorphology (pp.
165-179). Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften.

2139

Gillis, S. (Ed.) (1998). Studies in the acquisition of number
and diminutive marking. Antwerp Papers in Linguistics, 95.
Antwerp: Universiteit Anwerpen.
Haman, E. (2003): Early productivity in derivation: A case
study of diminutives in the acquisition of Polish.
Psychology of Language and Communication, 7, 37-56.
Johnston, J. R. & Slobin, D. I. (1979). The development of
locative expressions in English, Italian, Serbo- Croatian and
Turkish. Journal of Child Language, 6, 531-547.
Jurafsky, D. (1996) Universal tendencies in the semantics of
the diminutive, Language, 72, 533-578.
Kempe V. & Brooks, P. J. (2001). The role of diminutives in
Russian gender learning: Can child-directed speech
facilitate the acquisition of inflectional morphology?
Language Learning, 51, 221-256.
Kempe V., Brooks, P. J. & Pirott, L. (2001). How can childdirected speech facilitate the acquisition of morphology? In
M. Almgren, A. Barrena, M.-J. Ezeizabarrena, I. Idiazabal,
& B. MacWhinney (Eds.), Research on Child Language
Acquisition: Proceedings of the 8th conference of the
International Association for the Study of Child Language
(pp. 1237-1247). Medford, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Kempe, V., Brooks, P. J., Mironova, N. & Fedorova, O.
(2003). Diminutivization supports gender acquisition in
Russian children. Journal of Child Language, 30, 471-485.
Kempe, V., Brooks, P. J., Mironova, N., Pershukova, A. &
Fedorova, O. (in press). Playing with word endings:
Morphological variation in the learning of Russian noun
inflections. British Journal of Developmental Psychology.
Klajn, I. (2003). Tvorba reči u srpskom jeziku: Sufiksacija i
konverzija. Zavod za udžbenike i nastavna sredstva, Matica
srpska i Institut za srpski jezik. Beograd.

Melzi, G. & King, K.A. (2003). Spanish diminutives in
mother-child conversations. Journal of Child Language,
30, 281-304.
Savičkiene, I. (2003). The acquisition of diminutives in
Lithuanian. In S. Gillis (Ed.), Studies in the Acquisition of
number and diminutive marking. Antwerp Papers in
Linguistics, 95. Antwerp: Universiteit Anwerpen.
Savičkiene, I., Kempe, V. & Brooks, P. J. (in preparation).
The diminutive advantage in gender agreement of
Lithuanian children.
Ševa, N & Kempe, V. (2005). Serbian diminutives aid casemarking acquisition in Serbian. Poster presented at the
Post-Cognitivist Psychology Conference. Glasgow, UK.
Ševa, N. Kempe, V. & Brooks, P. J. (2005). Serbian
diminutives facilitate gender acquisition despite low
frequency in child-directed speech. Poster presented at the
Biennial conference of the Society for Research in Child
Development. Atlanta, USA.
Slobin, D. I., & Bever, T. G. (1982). Children use canonical
sentence schemas: A crosslinguistic study of word order
and inflections. Cognition, 12, 229-265.
Stephany, U. (1997). Diminutives in early child Greek. In W.
U. Dressler (Ed.), Studies in pre- and protomorphology.
Vienna: Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Stevanović, M. (1964). Savremeni srpskohravtski jezik I-II.
Beograd: Naučna knjiga.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of child language acquisition. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.

2140

