UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Induction in Children and Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sq3j447

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Feeney, Aidan
Wilburn, Catherine Jane

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Induction in Children and Adults
Catherine Jane Wilburn (c.j.wilburn@durham.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Queen’s Campus Durham University,
Thornaby, Stockton-on-Tees, Cleveland TS17 6BH, UK

Aidan Feeney (aidan.feeney@durham.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Queen’s Campus Durham University,
Thornaby, Stockton-on-Tees, Cleveland TS17 6BH, UK
against perceptual similarity. In each of the experimental
trials children were shown two objects and taught a fact about
each. The child’s task was to then infer which of these two
facts applied to a third object which was perceptually similar
to the first item, but shared the same category label as the
second. Gelman and Markman found that children as young
as 3 years consistently used category membership as a basis
for their inductive judgments, even when perceptual
similarity would have led to a different conclusion.
Subsequent studies have shown the same pattern of inference
in children as young as two years of age, (Gelman and Coley,
1990).
However, just as feature-level accounts of adult induction
have been proposed (see Sloman, 1993) it is also possible to
give accounts of children’s generalization based entirely on
similarity (see Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004b). Under such an
account, children’s inductive differences are dependent on the
perceptual similarity that holds between the base instance and
the target instance, rather than on shared category
membership. In a real-world context, perceptual similarity is
often confounded with category membership, making the two
approaches difficult to definitively separate either on an
empirical or a theoretical level (see Heit and Hayes, 2005).
For example, although overall children appear to favor
category-based induction in the triad task, Sloutsky and
Fisher’s (2004b) reanalysis of this data showed that only
when the same-label (category-based choice) was as similar
to the target as the different-label choice could induction be
claimed to be performed solely on the basis of shared labels at
an above chance level. In the remaining cases where the
shared-label choice was markedly different to the target, the
results showed a main effect of both perceptual similarity and
shared category-membership. This finding nicely illustrates
how difficult it can be to disentangle similarity and categorybased approaches to induction.
Despite this difficulty, Sloutsky and Fisher (2004 a&b;
Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005) have recently described an
experimental paradigm that they claim allows them to
distinguish between inferences drawn on the basis of
perceptual similarity and those drawn on the basis of shared
category membership. They claim that participants’ memory
for presented stimuli may be one observable (and measurable)
outcome that is likely to vary depending on the generalisation
strategy used. The thinking behind this assumption is as

Abstract
Sloutsky and Fisher (2004 a&b) have demonstrated that
children have better recognition memory for the items they
generalise to than do adults. Based on this finding, Sloutsky and
Fisher (2004 a&b) have claimed that children and adults use
different mechanisms for inductive generalizations. They argue
that while adults focus on shared category membership,
children project properties on the basis of perceptual similarity.
Under this view, children’s enhanced recognition memory is a
by-product of the more detailed processing required by a
similarity-based mechanism. The present study proposes an
alternative explanation for these findings. We demonstrate that
when children are given just 250ms to inspect stimulus items
they remain capable of making accurate inferences, but that
their subsequent memory for those items decreases
significantly. These findings suggest that there are no necessary
conclusions to be drawn about the nature of generalization
processes from rates of recognition memory.
Keywords: Induction; Reasoning; Learning; Development.

Introduction
Inductive inference by definition is inextricably linked with
learning. The ability to extend knowledge from known
examples to novel instances is central in allowing children to
develop their understanding of the world, and as such
underlies learning, category formation and scientific thinking.
However, despite its particular importance in childhood, there
exists no consensus about how best to explain this early
ability.
One idea about how children make inductive inferences is
that they use category structure from an early age. One very
influential theory of adult category-based induction
(Osherson et al., 1990) assumes that reasoners possess a
stable hierarchy of categories. According to this similaritycoverage model there are three processes required: similarity
calculations, coverage calculations and the generation of the
closest super-ordinate category for certain arguments
involving a specific conclusion (e.g. a conclusion concerning
‘chickens’ rather than ‘birds’).
There is also evidence in the literature on childhood
induction that category structure is important in determining
the inductive generalizations made by quite young children.
For example, in Gelman and Markman’s (1986) classic triad
tasks, 3 and 4 year old children were asked to examine
inductive inferences which pitted category membership
888

unannounced recognition memory phase which follows,
participants are shown 28 pictures, again drawn from three
different categories; 14 cats (7 old, 7 new), 7 bears (all old),
and 7 squirrels (all new). The participant’s task is then to
attempt to discriminate ‘old’ stimuli (i.e. presented during the
induction task phase) from ‘new’ stimuli (i.e. not presented
during the induction task phase).
In Sloutsky & Fisher’s studies, correct inductive
performance was particularly high, averaging between 75%
and 90% in five-year olds and around 90% in adults. The
pattern for recognition memory accuracy however is reversed,
with children accurately recognising the presented test stimuli
and rejecting the critical lures significantly more often than
adults.
In this experiment we will examine whether age-related
differences in the attention paid to the pictures may account
for Sloutsky & Fisher’s findings. Simply put, children and
adults may use the same category-based strategy for
generalisation, but children may have better recognition
memory for the pictures because they attend to them more
closely, or look at them for longer without necessarily using
this additional perceptual information to draw inferences.
We make two main predictions. First, we predict that if
children’s enhanced recognition memory is a product of
greater perceptual engagement with the stimuli then limiting
children’s inspection times in the induction phase will
significantly decrease their subsequent recognition memory.
Second, if this enhanced perceptual engagement is unrelated
to generalisation strategy and children do use a categorybased strategy we should also find that limiting their exposure
to the stimuli has no effect on their inductive performance.
On the other hand, if children generalise based on perceptual
similarity and enhanced recognition memory is a by-product
of this, then we would expect significantly poorer recognition
memory and significantly less accurate generalisations under
limited time conditions.

follows; first, if induction is performed on the basis of
category membership, then participants must categorise the
stimulus items they are asked to consider, creating a ‘gist’
representation. Studies suggest that when pictures are
spontaneously categorised in this way, the lack of perceptual
encoding decreases participants’ memory for the presented
items, (Brainerd, Reyna and Forrest, 2002). In addition,
working at the level of categories rather than individuals may
also leave participants open to memory distortions such as
false recognition of same category lures, (Koutstaal and
Schacter, 1997). Hence, if induction is performed in a
category-based manner, subsequent memory for the presented
items should be poor as the underlying mechanisms do not
promote the creation of strong memory traces. Conversely, a
similarity-based generalisation strategy actively requires that
the perceptual details of items be encoded for the inferences
to be made. Therefore, when induction is performed using
this strategy, the very nature of the process means that
participant’s susceptibility to critical lures should be less and
their memory for the presented stimuli greater.
On the basis of the considerations outlined above, Sloutsky
& Fisher predict that if adults use a category-based strategy
and children generalise on the basis of perceptual similarity,
then adults should demonstrate poorer recognition memory.
In a series of experiments using the induction-thenrecognition (ITR) paradigm Sloutsky and Fisher have
confirmed this prediction, showing approximately equal rates
of correct inductive inferences in eight year olds and adults,
but significantly poorer recognition memory for the presented
items in the adult data. Additionally, Sloutsky and Fisher also
trained young participants to apply a category-based strategy
and showed that although their recognition accuracy
decreases in the first instance, younger children do not
spontaneously reuse such a strategy when subsequently
retested (Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005). Not only have Sloutsky
and Fisher used these results to argue for fundamentally
different generalisation processes in adults and children, they
also argue that their secondary developmental results have
important implications for our understanding of how
inference changes across development, and the age at which
assumptions about category structure become manifest.
While the relationship between reasoning and recognition
memory is likely to be a fruitful area of study, we will argue
that there may be an alternative account of these particular
findings. Using a variation of their original methodology, we
will attempt to show that Sloutsky & Fisher’s recognition
memory data say more about differences in visual attention
between children and adults than they do about
developmental differences in inductive inference.

Pre-Test: Determining Exposure Time
In order to decide for how long children and adults should see
the stimuli in the limited exposure condition, an experimental
pre-test was undertaken. The aim of this pre-test was to
determine approximately the minimum inspection time
required for accurate identification of the stimulus pictures.
As adults are likely to require no less time than children, we
tested only children in the pre-test.

Attention and the ITR Paradigm
In the ITR paradigm participants are first shown a picture of a
cat and told that it has ‘beta cells inside its body’. They are
then shown 30 further pictures from three different categories
(10 cats, 10 birds and 10 bears) and must decide whether each
of these animals also has beta cells inside their body.
Participants receive yes/no feedback on their responses. In the

889

Method

Experiment: Manipulating Exposure Time

Participants 11 children aged 4 to 5 years drawn from local
primary schools in the Stockton-on-Tees/Tees Valley area
took part in this study.

Method
Participants 64 children aged 4 to 5 years (mean age = 60.17
months, SD = 3.44 months) drawn from local primary schools
in the Stockton-on-Tees/Tees Valley area, and 64 adults
(mean age = 270.7 months, SD = 60.22 months) mainly
drawn from the University of Durham, took part in this study.

Materials, Design and Procedure The materials consisted of
the 52 colour photographs of animals which were to be used
in the main experiment (see Figure 1 for examples). The
experiment took the form of a within-participants design, with
all participants seeing each of the 52 pictures.
During the pre-test each of the pictures were displayed on
screen for either 100ms, 175ms, 250ms or 325ms. The
children’s task was to attempt to name the animal they had
seen on screen. The experimenter then recorded whether the
child could provide a name for the animal and whether the
name provided was correct. The presentation order of the four
timings was randomised as was the order of the 52
photographs.

Materials, Design and Procedure The materials consisted of
52 colour photographs of animals presented on a plain white
background, (see Figure 1 for examples). The experiment
took the form of a mixed-model design, comparing adult and
child groups, across two between-participant conditions;
limited time and unlimited time.
In both conditions of the experiment, the participant’s task
was broken up into two phases; the induction phase and the
recognition memory phase. During the induction phase of the
experiment, participants were first shown a picture of a cat
and told that it had ‘beta cells inside its body’. Participants
were then shown 30 further pictures, one picture at a time,
from three different categories (10 cats, 10 birds and 10
bears). The participant’s task was to decide whether each of
these presented animals also had beta cells inside their body
or not. After each response, participants were given yes/no
feedback on their answers, indicating that this property should
be projected to the cats but not the bears or birds.
This general procedure remained the same across both the
limited and unlimited time condition. The only major
difference between conditions related to the amount of time
participants had to study each of the stimulus pictures
presented. In the unlimited time condition each of the 30
pictures remained on the computer screen until the participant
provided a response, at which point the picture disappeared,
verbal feedback was given, and the next picture was
displayed. In the limited time condition, each picture
remained on screen for 250ms, then the screen went blank
until a response was recorded and feedback had been given, at
which point the next picture appeared on screen. The
subsequent recognition memory task was not mentioned to
participants at this stage in the experiment.
The recognition memory phase was presented directly after
the induction task. During this phase of the experiment,
participants were presented with 35 pictures, again drawn
from three different categories; cats (7 old and 7 new), bears
(7 old and 7 new) and squirrels (all 7 new). Their task was to
decide whether each of these pictures were ‘old’ (i.e. had
been presented during the induction task phase) or ‘new’ (i.e.
had not been presented during the induction task phase). In
this section of the experiment all pictures were presented to
participants in a self-paced manner, with no feedback given in
relation to their responses.

Figure 1: Example of Stimulus Pictures Used

Results
A one-way ANOVA showed a strong main effect of exposure
time on children’s naming accuracy, F(3, 40) = 146.67, MSE
= .13, p <>.001. At 100ms mean accuracy was 12%
(SD=8.67%), rising to 29% (SD=20.09%) at 175ms, 90%
(SD=6.22%) at 250ms, and 97% (SD=5.29%) at 325ms.
Tukey HSD post-hoc tests revealed significant differences
between all condition pairs (all ps < .01) except between the
250ms and 325ms accuracy scores. These findings suggest
that 250ms is the shortest exposure time at which children
could consistently identify the animal presented.
Accordingly, 250ms was set as the exposure time for the
limited condition of the experiment proper.

Results
Inductive Accuracy Although the two-way ANOVA (Age
group x Induction condition) conducted shows that adults
were significantly more accurate than children overall,
890

Of most interest is the marginally significant interaction
between Age and Exposure Time, F(1, 124) = 2.95, MSE =
.04, p = .09. The means involved in this interaction are
displayed in Figure 2 where it may be seen that in the
unlimited time condition children discriminate well between
target items and critical lures, with an overall A’ score of
.6903. In the same condition, adults’ discrimination accuracy,
although above chance, is significantly poorer than that of the
children, (A’ = .5912). These finding replicate those of
Sloutsky & Fisher (2004 a&b).
In the limited condition however, although both adults’ and
children’s recognition accuracy is significantly affected by
the exposure time constraint, this effect is much greater in the
children’s scores. In this condition, the adults’ overall A’
score is .5360. Although this is a minor decrease, an
independent samples t tests show that the difference due to
Exposure Time is not statistically significant, t(62) = -1.243;
p=.219.
The children’s A’ scores on the other hand fall dramatically
in this condition, with A’ being reduced to just above the 0.5
chance level (A’ = .5274). Planned comparisons showed that
A’ scores for children in the unlimited time condition were
significantly higher than A’ scores in each of the other three
conditions (all ps < .05). There were no other significant
differences between conditions. These findings suggest that
although an age difference in recognition memory is apparent
when participants are given unlimited time to inspect the
stimuli, this effect of age disappears when inspection time is
limited.

F(1,124).=.49.94,.MSE.=.1.13,.p<>0.001, scores remained
high across the age divide, with all groups recording a mean
accuracy rating in excess of 90%, (27 out of 30). Further to
this, the ANOVA shows no effect of Induction condition,
F(1,124).=.1.56, MSE.=.1.13,.p.=.0.22, nor an interaction
between Induction condition and Age group, F(1,124) = .007,
MSE = 1.13, p =.93. Although adults are generally more
accurate than children, the constraints placed upon
participants in the limited time condition had no effect on
their ability to perform sound inductive judgments.
Table 1: Mean Inductive Accuracy Scores
Adult

Limited
95.42 (3.14)

Unlimited
96.15 (2.82)

Total
95.78 (2.98)

Child

90.94 (4.25)

91.77 (3.78)

91.35 (4.02)

Total

93.18 (4.34)

93.96 (3.98)

93.57 (4.17)

Recognition Memory Accuracy In all conditions both
children and adults were more than 90% accurate in their
rejection of distracters from an un-presented category (i.e.
squirrels). Therefore respondents can be assumed to have
been paying attention and taking the task seriously.
In order to analyse participant’s recognition memory
accuracy, memory sensitivity A’ scores were calculated. A’ is
a non-parametric analogue of the signal detection statistic d’
(Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). It compares the number of
‘hits’ (correctly identified ‘old’ pictures) to the number of
‘false alarms’ (incorrectly recognized ‘new’ pictures) made
by each individual participant. If participants do not
discriminate the target items from the critical lures, A’ is at or
below .5. The closer A’ scores are to 1 the greater the level of
discrimination accuracy. Mean A’ scores for each condition of
the design are shown in Table 2.

0.75
0.7

A' Scores

Table 2: Mean A’ Recognition Accuracy Scores
Adult

Cats

Limited
.5005 (.2195)

Unlimited
.5629 (.2544)

Bears

.5566 (.2311)

.6211 (.2427)

Cats

.4892 (.1795)

.6774 (.1608)

Bears

.5793 (.2143)

.6897 (.1484)

0.69

0.65
0.6
0.55

0.59

0.5

0.54

0.53

Adult

Child

0.45
0.4

Child

0.35
Adult

Child

UNLIMITED

LIMITED
Experiment 1

The results of a 2(Animal: Bear vs. Cat) x 2(Age) x
2(Exposure Time) mixed-model ANOVA contained a
marginally
significant
main
effect
of
Age,
F(1,124).=.3.78,.MSE.=.04,.p.=..054, such that children’s
accuracy scores were higher than adults’. The results also
show a strong main effect of Induction condition,
F(1,124).=.18.11,.MSE.=..04, p <. .001, with A’ scores
decreasing significantly in the limited time condition.

Figure 2: Mean A’ Recognition Accuracy Scores
Finally, the ANOVA also showed a significant main effect
of Animal. Recognition accuracy for Bears (A’ = .61) was
significantly higher than for Cats (mean A’ =. 56),
F(1,124).=.3.93,.MSE.=..05, .p.<..05.

891

ranging from ‘Very Similar’ to ‘Not at all Similar’. Both the
ordering of the two pictures within each pair and the ordering
of the pairs in general was randomised to avoid any order
effects occurring either within or across individual similarity
ratings.

Discussion
In this experiment the conditions of stimulus exposure were
specifically designed to be unfavorable to the use of a
similarity-based strategy. By reducing children’s stimulus
exposure to just a quarter of a second it was assumed that
participants would be unable to extract sufficient featural
information on which to base a similarity-based judgment. As
expected, this manipulation severely affected children’s
recognition memory, reducing children’s A’ scores to a
comparable level with those shown by adults in both the
limited and unlimited conditions. However, despite this
reduction in recognition memory, children’s inductive
accuracy was unaffected by the manipulation. This suggests
that although children’s enhanced recognition accuracy does
stem from a greater perceptual engagement with the stimulus
pictures as Sloutsky and Fisher (2004b) might suggest, this
heightened perceptual engagement need not be related to their
generalisation strategy. Enhanced recognition in children does
not necessarily imply a similarity-based mechanism.
Although the results of Experiment 1 support our
alternative attentional account of Sloutsky and Fisher’s (2004
a&b) results, our finding of significantly higher recognition
accuracy scores for bears than for cats may be problematic for
the attentional account. The effect is that participants have
better memory for items they did not generalize to than for
items to which they did. Our alternative explanation is based
on the assumption that children perform generalisations in a
category-based manner and that enhanced recognition
memory is the product of greater perceptual engagement.
Accordingly, we might expect that if any differences between
the stimulus sets were observed, this difference should favor
the items to which the property was generalised, as these
stimuli might be expected to receive more attention.
However, it is also possible that there was greater similarity
between our sample of cats than between our sample of bears
thus making it harder to discriminate ‘old’ from ‘new’ cats.
To test this possibility we carried out an experimental posttest of our stimuli.

Results and Discussion
Participants rated ‘old’ and ‘new’ cat pictures (Mean = 4.56,
SD = 0.97) as significantly more similar than ‘old’ and ‘new’
bear pairings, (Mean = 5.04, SD = 0.91),
t(11).=.3.08,.MSE.=..16,.p.<..05. This suggests that the
greater recognition memory for ‘bear’ pictures shown in
Experiment 1 was most likely due to the relatively high
discriminability of these items.

General Discussion
We observed a clear effect of limiting exposure time on
children’s memory performance, with recognition accuracy
substantially decreased in the reduced exposure conditions.
At the same time as reducing memory performance however,
the limited exposure condition had no effect on children’s
inductive accuracy, with 5 year olds still being capable of
near perfect generalizations. These findings are therefore
consistent with the alternative attentional hypothesis we have
put forward to account for Sloutsky and Fisher’s (2004 a&b)
original findings. Although children and adults attend to the
objects they are asked to reason about differently, with
children seeming to pay greater attention to the stimuli, both
groups appear to apply similar generalisation strategies. That
is, both groups make accurate generalizations in conditions
unfavorable to the use of a similarity-based mechanism.
One possible counter-argument to this interpretation is that
participants may apply some restricted version of a similaritybased approach utilising a limited number of features across
which to make comparison judgments. Although this is
possible, it should be remembered that we selected an
exposure time that only just gave participants sufficient time
to categorise the stimuli. As similarity-based process might be
expected to take longer than a category-based process, (for a
recent review of the relevant empirical evidence see Brainerd
and Reyna, 2005), we think it unlikely that a feature-matching
strategy could be executed to produce accurate inferences in
the time available to participants.
The fact that our results do not definitively show which
strategy participants used when making their inductive
judgments also means it may be the case that generalisations
made in the limited time condition are the product of a
different strategy to those of the unlimited time condition. It
may be that children of this age are capable of a number of
overlapping and eventually converging inductive strategies.
This co-existence of more and less sophisticated reasoning
processes has been argued in other areas of cognitive
development such as the acquisition of mathematic skills,
where current thinking suggests that rather than alternating
between problem-solving strategies in a step-like manner
(Case, 1992), children are capable of a number of different
strategies (Siegler, 1999) and switch between them both

Post-Test
Method
Participants 12 adults aged between 17 and 61 years (Mean
age = 42.9 years, SD = 14.7 years) took part in this study.
They were drawn from the Stockton-on-Tees/Tees Valley
area.
Materials, Design and Procedure The materials consisted of
the 14 cat and 14 bear pictures used in the recognition
memory phase of Experiment 1, (7 old cats, 7 new cats, 7 old
bears, 7 new bears). In each of the cat and bear stimulus sets,
‘old’ and ‘new’ pictures were paired up to create all of the 49
possible combinations, so every ‘new’ cat picture was paired
with every ‘old’ cat picture and so on.
The pairs were presented to participants as Microsoft
PowerPoint slides which they could work through in a selfpaced manner. Participants task was to rate the similarity of
the two pictures in each pair, on a 9-point Likert scale,
892

within and between tasks. Applying this view to the present
data, it may be the case that when children have the option of
choosing between inductive strategies i.e. in the unlimited
time conditions, by preference they use a time-heavy
similarity-based strategy on which to base their inductive
inferences. However, in the limited time conditions when this
strategy is no longer viable children of this age are equally
capable of using a category-based strategy in order to draw
their inductive judgments. This explanation is supported by
the ease with which children picked up a category-based
strategy in Sloutsky and Fisher’s (2004 a&b) second training
study. Heit and Hayes (2004) have suggested that rather than
‘teaching’ the children a ‘new’ induction strategy, Sloutsky
and Fisher may simply have directed them towards the use of
the category-based approach already within their repertoire.
Even allowing for the objections outlined, the fact that our
results are so consistent with the alternative attentional
hypothesis means that although multiple strategies may be
possible, at the very least there are no necessary conclusions
to be drawn about developmental differences underlying
inductive inference from recognition memory data.
As outlined in the introduction to this study, Fisher and
Sloutsky (2004) have claimed that induction is a changing
developmental process, which does not result in the ability to
apply category concepts to inductive inference until between
the ages of 7 and 11 years. The present study suggests that
this is not the case. Regardless of whether children performed
category-based induction in both the limited and unlimited
conditions, or whether the use of this strategy was restricted
to the limited condition only, children in this study, as young
as 4 years of age, spontaneously used a category-based
strategy.
As it concerns very young children, this finding is
problematic for Fisher and Sloutsky’s (2004) claims about a
developmental trajectory as well as their more general
developmental argument. The patterns in the memory data
can more parsimoniously be explained by differences in
attention than they are by positing different generalisation
strategies in children and adults. In other words, children may
remember more simply because they pay more attention, and
not because they think differently.

References
Brainerd, C.J., Reyna, V.F., and Forrest, T.J. (2002). Are
young children susceptible to the false-memory illusion?
Child Development, 73, 1363-1377.
Brainerd, C.J., and Reyna, V.F. (2005). The Science of False
Memory. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Case, R. (1992). The mind’s staircase: Exploring the
conceptual underpinnings of children’s thought and
knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fisher, A.V., and Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for a gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development, 76, 583-597.
Gelman, S.A. (2003). The Essential Child. Oxford University
Press: Oxford.
Gelman, S.A. and Coley, J. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 796-804.
Gelman, S. A., and Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Hayes, B.K., and Heit, E. (2004). Why learning and
development can lead to poorer recognition memory.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 337-339.
Heit, E., and Hayes, B.K. (2004). Relations between
categorization, induction, recognition, and similarity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 596605.
Koutstaal, W., and Schacter, D.L. (1997). Gist-based false
recognition of pictures in older and younger adults. Journal
of Memory and Language, 37, 555-583.
Madole, K.L., and Oakes, L. (1999). Making sense of infant
categorization:
Stable
processes
and
changing
representations. Developmental Review, 19, 263-296.
Osherson, D.N., Smith, E.E., Wilkie, O., López, A., and
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based Induction. Psychological
Review, 97, 185-200.
Sielger, R.S. (1999). Strategic development. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 3, 430-435.
Sloutsky, V.M., and Fisher, A.V. (2004a). When
development and learning decrease memory: Evidence
against category-based induction in children. Psychological
Science, 15, 553-558.
Sloutsky, V.M., and Fisher, A.V. (2004b). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 166188.
Snodgrass, J.G., and Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to Dementia
and Amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 117, 34-50.

Acknowledgements
The experiments described were carried out by the first author
under the supervision of the second as partial fulfillment of
the requirements for an M.A. in Research Methods at Durham
University. The first author is supported by the Economic and
Social Research Council; grant number PTA-031-200400339.
We would like to thank all the teachers and students who
assisted with this study. Thanks also to Vladimir Sloutsky and
Anna Fisher for sending us their original stimulus materials.

893

