UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactions between Nouns and Verbs in Interpreting Events

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2ds8b86j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Proctor, Andrea S.
Rips, Lance J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactions between Nouns and Verbs in Interpreting Events
Andrea S. Proctor (a-proctor@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Lance J. Rips (rips@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
Verbs and verb phrases

Previous research shows that readers judge inherently
unbounded actions to be bounded when (a) a verb describes
the irreversible consumption of an object, and (b) the
grammatical object is a count noun, rather than a mass noun.
We seek to extend these findings by examining whether the
mass/count distinction will affect readers’ interpretations of
verbs from additional aspectual classes. Participants read
scenarios containing either an observation verb (e.g.,
watching) or a destruction verb with a temporal profile
resembling one of three of Vendler’s (1967) classes of lexical
aspect: activities (e.g., eating), accomplishments (e.g.,
destroying), or achievements (e.g., bursting), and responded
to questions designed to assess whether they interpreted the
entire event as bounded or unbounded. Responses suggest
that the presence of physical boundaries on objects will only
affect the aspectual class of events in limited circumstances.
Results also indicate that, in cases where a VP’s characteristic
temporal structure conflicts with its context, the VP’s inherent
lexical aspect is overridden, to bring its meaning into line
with the context that surrounds it (aspectual coercion).

atelic

states

activities accomplishments

telic

achievements

Figure 1. Vendler’s taxonomy of verb types.
as much. Count nouns treat objects as countable entities
with defined boundaries, while mass nouns treat them as
noncountable substances, such as mud or tea (though mass
nouns may also refer to aggregates, e.g., cattle; see
Jackendoff, 1991).
The current experiments explore how the distinction in
verbs’ aspect interacts with count/mass status of nouns to
affect readers’ interpretations of events in narratives.

Introduction

Interactions between Nouns and Verbs

The verb system of many languages contains a distinction
between verbs that imply an endpoint and verbs with no
inherent endpoint. Telic verbs (e.g., deliver) presuppose an
endpoint, or temporal boundary, for the events they
describe. Once an object has arrived at its destination, for
example, delivering has ended and cannot logically
continue. Atelic verbs (e.g., sing) do not presuppose an
inherent boundary; the corresponding actions have the
potential to go on without end. Several schemes have been
proposed for dividing telic and atelic subclasses, based on
further distinctions in temporal structure. One popular
scheme, due to Vendler (1967) appears in Figure 1 and
divides atelic verbs and verb phrases into states (e.g., know)
and activities (e.g., sing). In this scheme, telic items divide
into accomplishments (e.g., deliver) that occur over an
interval of time and achievements (e.g., explode) that occur
at a single time point. These distinctions among verbs or
verb phrases are commonly referred to as lexical aspect.
English and many other natural languages also possess a
distinction among nouns that is in some ways parallel to
telic/atelic difference. Count nouns (e.g., cat) have plurals
(cats) and occur with quantifiers such as many; mass nouns
have no plural forms (*teas) and occur with quantifiers such
1980

Count or mass nouns can sometimes influence the aspect of
the verb phrases in which they occur. Several authors have
noted that the telicity or boundedness of a verb phrase can
depend on whether it has a mass or count noun as its object
(e.g., Dowty, 1991; Filip, 1999; Garey, 1957; Krifka, 1992;
Pustejovsky, 1991; Tenny, 1987; Verkuyl, 1993). This
effect can be given a general formulation in terms of
incremental themes, but for present purposes, the following
Aspectual Composition principle is sufficient: When an
activity verb is combined with a count NP, it will yield a
telic verbal predicate, but when such a verb is combined
with a mass NP, it will yield an atelic verbal predicate,
provided the whole sentence expresses a statement about a
single event. Consider, for example, an activity verb, such
as eating, that describes the destruction or consumption of
something. If the verb has a count noun object (e.g., eating a
candy bar), the telicity of the entire verb phrase is telic. The
resulting VP is no longer an activity, but an
accomplishment, since the depletion of the object must end
with the object itself. When such a verb takes a mass noun
as its object (e.g., eating chocolate sauce), however, the VP

is atelic: Since the substance is unbounded, the depletion
could potentially go on indefinitely.
The present studies determine how combining mass and
count NPs with various types of verbs affect participants’
interpretations of events in narratives. Earlier experiments
support the idea that count or mass nouns influence the
telicity of VPs with activity verbs of destruction (Proctor,
Dickey, & Rips, 2004; Solomon, Proctor, & Rips, 2006,
Experiment 2). In this paper, we explore the limits of this
effect by comparing such verbs with verbs of other types.
First, the influence of nouns on telicity should only occur
with a subset of activity verbs—for example, certain
consumption and destruction verbs—as these describe
events as having an irreversible effect on their objects
(Krifka, 1998). Activity verbs that do not entail an
irreversible effect should not produce an aspectual shift. For
example, whether a mass or count noun appears as the
object of a verb of observation (e.g., watch) should not
affect the VP’s telicity (Krifka, 1992). The action of
watching a mug should be just as unbounded as the action
of watching soup. For expository convenience, we use
“destruction verb” in what follows to apply to both verbs of
consumption or destruction that have an irreversible effect,
and we compare these to observation verbs.
Second, we contrast activity-type destruction verbs with
destruction verbs with temporal profiles similar to two of
Vendler’s
other
classes:
accomplishments
and
achievements. Since accomplishments and achievements are
both telic, they possess a necessary and inherent endpoint—
in the case of our destruction verbs, this endpoint
corresponds to the complete destruction of the direct object.
We therefore expected that, for both accomplishment-type
and achievement-type verbs, the grammatical object would
have no effect on participants’ judgments. Since a temporal
boundary was already present, a count noun could not add
one, and a mass noun could not take it away.
Accomplishment and achievement verbs differ, however, in
the duration of the events they describe. While
accomplishments (e.g., dismantling a building) may occur
over an extended period of time, achievements (e.g.,
exploding a building) occur virtually instantaneously. We

therefore
expected
participants
to
associate
accomplishment-type destruction verbs with longer intervals
than those involving achievement-type verbs.
In sum, if verbs and their objects are combined by
Aspectual Composition, the aspect of VPs with activity-type
destruction verbs will depend on the mass or count status of
their objects. However, mass/count status will not affect
activity-type observation verbs. Similarly (and with the
same proviso), the mass/count distinction will not affect
accomplishments or achievements. The reason for our
proviso—that people use Aspectual Composition to
interpret the VPs —will become clear in later discussion of
the first experiment.

Experiment 1: Time Envelopes for VPs
We presented participants with scenarios describing
characters either destroying or observing an object, where
the object was either a count or mass NP. Table 1 contains
an example involving an observation verb (contemplating)
and a count NP (chocolate bar). After reading each story,
participants saw a graphical timeline representing the time
course of the narrative (see bottom of Table 1). They were
asked to mark the timeline at two points: once where the
character began his or her action, and again at the point
where the character “has Xed” (e.g., has contemplated
Hershey’s chocolate bar).
The question of when the character “has Xed” provides
evidence about whether participants interpreted the VP as
telic or atelic. Atelic VPs obey the subinterval property
(Bennett & Partee, 1978): a subpart (down to some lower
limit) of the whole is qualitatively equivalent to the whole—
any part of eating is itself eating. This subinterval property
does not hold for telic events, however: any part of running
a mile (e.g., running the first half of the mile) is not itself
running a mile. If participants interpret a VP as atelic, then
they should think that a character “has Xed” earlier than if
they interpret the VP as telic.
We created four versions of each story so that, for each
narrative, there were observation/mass, observation/count,
destruction/mass, and destruction/count versions. We
consulted Levin (1993) in selecting destruction and

Table 1. Sample story, questions, and time line from Experiment 1.
Martin is a chocoholic. Every time he gets depressed, Martin eats lots of anything made of chocolate. Wednesday morning, his girlfriend
broke up with him. Martin was devastated by the news, and went off in search of chocolate. Upon returning from the convenience store,
where he had bought vast quantities of chocolate, he sat down and was contemplating Hershey’s chocolate bar. A few moments later, his
girlfriend called and wanted to talk. Martin had to stop contemplating the chocolate bar, and go over to his girlfriend’s. The discussion
didn’t go very well, and Martin returned home and continued contemplating the chocolate bar.
Please mark the time line to indicate:
a) What time you think Martin started contemplating Hershey’s chocolate bar.

AND

b) What time you think it would be fair to say "Martin has contemplated Hershey’s chocolate bar".
|-------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------|
Fight with girlfriend
Returns from store
Call from girlfriend
Returns home
Goes to bed

1981

observation verbs—the majority of the destruction verbs
were selected from the classes of destroy verbs, break verbs,
and verbs of ingesting. The bulk of the observation verbs
were drawn from the class of verbs of perception; others
were drawn from the psych verbs class. The destruction
verbs were subdivided into three classes based on their
aspect, which we assessed by applying Dowty’s (1979)
linguistic tests. One third of the destruction verbs were
activity-type destruction verbs (e.g., eat) that have no
inherent temporal boundary. Verbs of this type describe
homogeneous, unbounded processes in which the object is
consumed over time. Events described by destruction
activity verbs may be bounded, but in such cases, the
presence of a temporal boundary depends on the object, as
we noted earlier.
Another third of the destruction verbs were
accomplishment-type (e.g., annihilating). These verbs
describe actions that possess an inherent temporal boundary
and occur over an extended period of time. The actions
begin with a process of destruction but, in addition, have a
qualitatively different endpoint.
The remaining destruction verbs were achievement-type.
These describe actions that contain an inherent temporal
boundary, but unlike the accomplishment destruction verbs,
there is no process leading up to the endpoint. Verbs of this
type describe actions that occur instantaneously (e.g.,
bursting) or over very brief intervals (e.g., smashing). The
telicity of both achievement-type and accomplishment-type
destruction verbs should be independent of the count/mass
status of the NP. Because verbs of these types imply an
inherent, temporal boundary (the point at which the NP is
gone), actions involving these destruction verbs should be
bounded, regardless of whether their grammatical object
also implies a boundary.
Our main prediction was that there would be an
interaction between verb and noun in the responses to the
“has Xed” question—mass/count status should affect
responses for activity-type destruction verbs, but have no
effect for the other verb types. We expected no differences
in responses to the “started” questions.

Method
In this study, participants read through a series of scenarios
and gave their judgments about the time course of the events
described. Participants received a booklet containing 36
brief scenarios. Each participant saw the scenarios and their
associated follow-up questions in a different random order.
Materials Thirty-six base stories were written, all with the
same abstract structure: A character begins destroying or
observing some object or substance, is interrupted midaction, and after a pause resumes his or her action. Four
versions of each of the 36 base stories were generated by
crossing verb type (destruction vs. observation) with NP
type (mass vs. count), yielding a set of 144 experimental
texts (a sample story is presented in Table 1). The 36
destruction verbs were equally divided among the three

types: activities, accomplishments, and achievements. We
classified the destruction verbs by applying Dowty’s (1979,
p. 60) linguistic tests, as noted earlier.
The 144 experimental texts were separated into four lists,
such that each of the four variations of any given base
scenario was assigned to a different list, and each list
contained 18 observation verb stories (nine with mass and
nine with count nouns), and six of each type of destruction
verb stories (three mass and three count nouns each). Thus,
participants saw only one version of each scenario, and an
equal number of mass and count versions for each verb type.
Two questions and a timeline representing the course of
events in the scenario appeared after the stories (see Table 1
for sample questions and timeline). The first question
assessed when, in the course of the narrative, participants
felt that the character had started performing the action. The
second question assessed when participants felt it would be
fair to conclude that the critical event could be said to have
taken place. Each timeline was labeled with five points
corresponding to different moments in the narrative. For
each story, the five time points corresponded to a moment:
1) before the action would have started, 2) the earliest point
at which the action could have begun, 3) the point at which
the character was interrupted, 4) the point at which the
action resumed, and 5) a point after the action was
complete. Note that valid responses to either question could
not fall within the first interval on the timeline (between
points 1 and 2), as the entire interval occurs prior to the
action’s start. This leaves three valid intervals.
Participants Twenty-eight undergraduate students at
Northwestern University participated in this experiment.
Participation was part of a course requirement in an
introductory psychology course. All participants were native
English speakers.

Results and Discussion
We present the data in terms of how far along the timeline
participants made their marks, taking the second marked
timepoint as the beginning of the timeline (as noted earlier,
this is the earliest possible point at which the event could
begin). Position is reported in percentage form (i.e., a mark
made on the second timepoint would be entered as a 0; one
made at the very end of the line would be 100). Average
position of “started” and “has Xed” marks for each verb/NP
combination appear in Figure 2. The position of the
beginning of each bar represents the average position of the
“started” mark, and the position of the end of each bar
represents the average position of the “has Xed” mark.
Statistical analyses were computed separately using
participants and items as random factors.
Analyses of “Started” Marks The participants analysis
supported our expectation that no differences would be
observed in the position of the “start” mark. There was,
however, an effect of verb in the items analysis. A mixedmodel ANOVA revealed that actions involving observation

1982

verbs began reliably later than actions involving
destructions verbs (FI(1,33) = 7.53, p < .05) however, this
difference was very small (12.41% vs. 10.80%,
respectively).
Analyses of “Has Xed” Marks Responses to the question
of when it would be fair to say that a character “has Xed”
largely supported the prediction that the time course of
events in narratives is sensitive to both verb type and noun
type. As Figure 2 suggests, the noun affected judgments for
only one type of verb: the activity-type destruction verbs.
This difference replicates the results of previous studies, and
shows that for these verbs, the mass/count difference is what
determines whether the VP as a whole is telic or atelic.
The effect of nouns on activity verbs (but not other verbs)
produced a significant verb by noun interaction (FP(3,81) =
3.25, p < .05). The structure of the items analysis is more
complex than that of the participants analysis because of the
way particular nouns (e.g., chocolate bar/sauce) were paired
with observation and destruction verbs. For this reason, the
participants analysis contained factors for noun (mass vs.
count), verb (observation vs. destruction), and verb subtype
(activity destruction verbs plus the observations verbs with
which they were paired, accomplishment destruction verbs
plus the observations verbs with which they were paired,
etc.). This ANOVA revealed a significant verb by noun
interaction and a marginally significant verb by noun by
subtype interaction (FI(1,33) = 4.27, p < .05 and FI(2,33) =
2.96, p < .07). Planned comparisons showed that these
interactions were due to the fact that activities with mass
nouns occurred significantly later than activities with count
nouns (tP(27) = 3.57, p = .001; tI(11) = 2.91, p < .05). No
other verb type produced such a difference.
As Figure 2 also shows, there was also a main effect of
verb on participants’ judgments of when the character has
“Xed” (FP(3,81) = 29.43, p < .001; FI(1,33) = 137.46, p <
.001). Tukey’s HSD tests reveal that this reflects the fact
that “has Xed” marks for observation events occurred earlier
on the timeline than marks for any other type of verb. This
finding is not surprising: Since the observation events are
atelic, they obey the subinterval property, and the character
can be said to “have Xed” almost as soon as he or she has
begun.
Stories involving accomplishment-type destruction verbs
produced marks significantly further along the timeline than
stories involving either activity-type or achievement-type
destruction verbs. In the items analysis, main effect of
destruction verb type (FI(2,33) = 22.10, p <. 001) and
subsequent HSD analyses confirmed this pattern. This
finding, too, is explainable with reference to the subinterval
property: Since accomplishment-type destruction verbs
imply the complete elimination of the NP, it would not be
appropriate to say that a character “has Xed” until near the
end of the scenario, when the narrative implies that the NP
has been completely consumed.
Finally, and unexpectedly, achievement-type destruction
verbs (e.g., shatter) elicited marks that were intermediate

between those of observation and accomplishment-type
destruction verbs. This suggests that aspectual coercion is
taking place in these cases. Aspectual coercion occurs when
a verb’s inherent aspect is inconsistent with the temporal
characteristics of the context in which it appears. In the
present case, events that typically occur instantaneously
(e.g., shattering) were suspended and then resumed. Under
aspectual coercion, the verb’s inherent lexical aspect is
reinterpreted to bring it into line with the context. In this
case, the achievement-type destruction verbs might take on
an iterative reading (e.g., repeatedly shattered). Such a
reading would allow the event as a whole to continue for
long enough to be suspended and resumed. We address this
issue more directly in the second study.

Figure 2. Mean start and stop responses, Experiment 1.

Experiment 2: Composition and Coercion
To confirm our intuition that participants were interpreting
the achievement events as iterated, we asked participants in
a second study how many iterations they believed the
character to have performed. We anticipate that this number
will be larger for achievements than for other verb types.
In addition, participants in the present study received a
bulleted list with precise times from the stories to guide
their responses rather than a timeline. Table 2 shows an
example of such a list and the associated questions.
Participants were asked to write down a time (e.g., 9:07) in
response to the questions. In the previous study, the size of
the interval between marked points on the timeline was
equal, regardless of how long a described event might take
in reality. It is conceivable that this unrealistic
representation misled or confused participants. In the second
study, participants were given time information that was
tailored to each event (e.g., a coffee break might last 15
minutes, and a trip to a friend’s house an hour), providing a
more realistic time frame for the stories.

Method

1983

Procedure The procedure for the second study was nearly
identical to that of the first. Participants were told that they
would be reading a series of scenarios and would be asked

for their intuitions about the time course of the events
described. Participants received a booklet containing 36
brief scenarios. Three questions appeared beneath each
story, and participants were asked to respond by writing
their answers in the spaces provided.
Each participant saw the scenarios and their associated
questions in a different random order.
Materials The second study used the same materials as the
first study, except for the following changes. Rather than a
timeline, participants saw a bulleted list indicating the
precise times at which four events in the story had taken
place. The bulleted events were the same events that served
as the final four labels on the timeline in the previous study.
(Table 2 provides the bulleted list which appeared with the
story of Martin, for comparison with Table 1). In addition to
the “started” and “has Xed” questions, participants were
asked whether or not they felt the character’s action was
iterated, and, if so, how many iterations they felt the
character performed (see Table 2).
Participants Twenty-eight undergraduates participated in
this experiment. Participation was part of a course
requirement. All participants were native English speakers.
None had been in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Unlike the previous study, the intervals in the present stories
were not of equal length. In order to make the data
comparable to the previous experiment, each of the intervals
for each of the stories is given 33% of the imaginary
timeline of the story, regardless of how many minutes the
bulleted list indicated it took. Responses are again reported
in percentage form. The average point of “started” and “has
Xed” judgments for each verb/NP combination are presented
in Figure 3 (in the same manner as in Figure 2).
Analyses of “Started” Judgments As in Experiment 1,
participants judged actions described by observation verbs
to begin later than actions described by any other type of
verb (FP(3,81) = 9.11, FI(1,33) = 13.01, p < .01 for both).
Observation may require less in the way of preliminaries
than destruction (which may entail acquiring tools and other
materials), and hence observation can be initiated faster.

Figure 3. Mean start and stop responses, Experiment 2.
Analyses of “Has Xed” Judgments Judgments about when
the character “has Xed” were again largely consistent with
predictions. Though the verb by noun interaction was not
significant (FP(3,81) = 1.88, p > .10), planned t tests
revealed that the predicted mass/count difference for the
activity-type destruction verbs was significant in the
participants analysis, and marginal in the items analysis
(tP(27) = 2.98, p < .01; tI(11) = 1.97, p < .08). No other verb
types showed a significant mass/count difference, though
the difference for accomplishment-type verbs was marginal
in the participants analysis (tP(27) = 1.83, p < .10)—this was
largely due to a single participant’s judgment that a
character could be said to have incinerated waste paper after
0% of the story’s time course had elapsed.
The analyses also revealed a main effect of verb (FP(3,81)
= 14.66; FI(1,33) = 70.11, both p < .001). Events described
by observation verbs were judged to have occurred earlier
than those involving any type of destruction verb. In
addition, activity-type destruction verbs elicited earlier
judgments than accomplishment-type destruction verbs.
Analyses of Iteration Data Estimates of number of
iterations varied greatly from participant to participant
(means ranged from 1.41 to 52.03 iterations). We therefore
transformed each participant’s estimates into a set of z
scores, and used these in our analyses. Figure 4 show these
data and indicates that, as predicted, estimates of number of
iterations were higher for achievement-type verbs than for
any of the other types of verb (FP(3,108) = 20.55, FI(3,68) =
26.51, p < .001 for both).

Table 2. Response choices for Experiment 2.
•
•
•
•

Martin got back from the store at 10:02.
At 10:07, he left for his girlfriend's.
He got back home at 11:23
At 11:48, he left for work.

a) At what time do you think Martin started contemplating Hershey’s chocolate bar? ___:___
b) At what time do you think it would be fair to say "Martin has contemplated Hershey’s chocolate bar"? ___:___
c) Is Martin's contemplating iterated?

Yes

No

If so, roughly how many iterations? ______
1984

verb interactions take place. In the present case, the
interaction occurred only when a verb implies that an
event’s length correlates with the decreasing amount of the
object in question. In addition to these compositional
effects, the context in which an event occurs seems to
greatly influence inferred aspect. Knowledge about the
overall duration of an event can sometimes contradict what
the verb implies. Where the two are incompatible, aspect is
reinterpreted.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF grant SES-9907414. We
would like to thank Mike Dickey and the members of our
lab for helpful discussions about the implementation of
these studies, Steve Persch for his help with data collection,
and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.

Figure 4. Mean number of estimated iterations.

General Discussion
Together, the two studies reported here replicate and extend
previous findings about readers’ inferences about the
boundedness of events. As in previous work, we found that
participants treated activity-type destruction verbs as
unbounded events when their grammatical objects were
mass nouns, but as bounded events when their grammatical
objects were count nouns. The current studies further
demonstrate that this difference affects participants’
interpretations of the time course of events in brief
narratives.
The present studies also show that the effect of noun on
aspect is constrained in two important ways. First, we
included two types of destruction verbs that possess
inherently necessary endpoints. We expected, and found,
that there would be no differences between mass and count
versions of stories involving these types of destructions
verbs. Since the verbs themselves possessed temporal
boundaries, there was no way for the NP to impose a
boundary or to remove one. Second, we found that there
was no effect of noun when stories involved observation
verbs. Because these verbs neither possess an inherent
endpoint, nor imply an irreversible effect upon their
grammatical object, they remained unbounded and atelic
regardless of the mass/count status of the noun they were
paired with.
Both studies further demonstrated the occurrence of
aspectual coercion in cases where participants were faced
with verbs whose lexical aspect is inconsistent with the
context in which they appear. When verbs that typically
occur instantaneously were involved in actions that were
extended in time, the inherent lexical aspect of the verbs
was overridden in order to bring the verbs’ temporal
structure into line with the narrative. The results of the
second study demonstrate that this extension was made
possible by iterative readings.
In short, our results suggest that readers understand the
aspect of a described event by taking into account both
internal semantic and external contextual cues. Aspect
depends on the lexical class of the verb itself (e.g., the
Vendler categories). However, in some, but not all cases, the
count/mass status of the object noun can modify the verb’s
aspect. Precise conditions seem to govern when these noun-

References
Bach, E. (1986). The algebra of events. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 9, 5-16.
Bennett, M., & Partee, B. (1978). Toward the logic of tense
and aspect in English. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana
Linguistics Club.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague grammar.
Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Dowty, D. (1991). Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language, 67, 547-619.
Filip, H. (1999). Aspect, eventuality types and nominal
reference. New York: Garland Publishing.
Garey, H. B. (1957). Verbal aspect in French. Language, 33,
91-110.
Jackendoff, R. (1991). Parts and boundaries. Cognition, 41,
9-45.
Krifka, M. (1992). Thematic relations as links between
nominal reference and temporal constitution. In I. Sag, &
A. Szabolcsi (Eds.), Lexical matters (pp. 29-53).
Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Krifka, M. (1998). The origins of telicity. In S. Rothstein
(Ed.), Events and Grammar. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Proctor, A. S., Dickey, M. W., & Rips, L. J. (2004). The
time-course and cost of telicity inferences. Proceedings of
the Twenty-sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Pustejovsky, J. (1991). The syntax of event structure.
Cognition, 41, 47-81.
Solomon, K. O., Proctor, A. S., & Rips, L. J. (submitted).
Concept boundaries: Analogies between objects and
events.
Tenny, C. (1987). Grammaticalizing aspect and
affectedness. Doctoral dissertation, MIT.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Verkuyl, H. J., (1993). A theory of aspectuality. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

1985

