UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Knowing What's Going On. The Influence of Contextual Knowledge on the On-line Resolution
of Structural Ambiguity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5g22d36r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Sandbank, Ben
Vershueren, Niki
Whitmore, Jeannette M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Knowing What’s Going On. The Influence of Contextual Knowledge
on the On-line Resolution of Structural Ambiguity
Nina Versteeg (Nina.Versteeg@let.uu.nl)
Utrecht University, Utrecht institute of Linguistics OTS
Trans 10, 3512JK, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Ted Sanders (Ted.Sanders@let.uu.nl)
Utrecht University, Utrecht institute of Linguistics OTS
Trans 10, 3512JK, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Frank Wijnen (Frank.Wijnen@let.uu.nl)
Utrecht University, Utrecht institute of Linguistics OTS
Trans 10, 3512JK, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Ni, Crain & Shankweiler,
1996; Van Berkum, Brown & Hagoort, 1999).
However, the extent to which world knowledge has an
immediate impact on parsing has not been investigated very
intensively as yet. In the present study world knowledge is
operationalized as a reader’s knowledge about the
(interpersonal) relations between the referents in a sentence.
In other words, when you know that Pete hates Mary but not
Ellen, does that affect your inclination to treat the last two
proper names in the string “Pete hates Marry and Ellen…”
as a coordinated noun phrase (cf. Hagoort, Hald,
Bastiaansen, & Petersson 2004)? This is the question asked
in the present study. In order to find an answer, we look at
NP/S-coordination ambiguities such as those in (1).

Abstract
Can world knowledge modulate on-line parsing preferences?
This was investigated in two off-line experiments and an online reading study. World knowledge was manipulated
through the discourse context. More specifically, it concerned
the mental representation that readers build up of the state of
affairs described by the text. The results showed that this
“contextual knowledge” immediately influenced the initial
analysis of the critical sentence. Second, contextual
knowledge appeared to overrule not only syntax-based
principles, but the influence of topic-structure as well. These
results provide evidence for the notion of an interactive parser
that deals with different sources of information at the same
time.
Keywords: contextual knowledge; syntactic ambiguity
resolution; interactive processing; constraint satisfaction.

1a. Pete said that he was very annoyed by the unfounded
opinion of Mary and Ellen, a remark that they both found
very rude. [NP-coordination]

Introduction

1b. Pete said that he was very annoyed by the unfounded
opinion of Mary and Ellen actually found that the
discussion was blown up out of all proportion. [Scoordination]

Many studies of language processing focus on the question
whether non-syntactic linguistic information, such as lexical
semantics and discourse structural factors, such as topicstructure or referential success, have an immediate influence
on the resolution of ambiguities. The foundation of many
studies on the impact of referential success has been laid by
Crain & Steedman (1985). Crain and Steedman claim that
whether readers are garden-pathed in sentences like the
famous the horse raced past the barn fell depends on the
preceding context. If more than one equally plausible
referent for the horse is available, readers need to restrict the
set of possible referents when they encounter this phrase.
Since a restrictive relative clause is a good way of doing
this, readers would, according to the theory, immediatey
interpret the sentence as a relative clause – i.e. arrive at the
correct interpretation. However, if the preceding discourse
contains only one possible referent for the horse, there is no
set of possible referents that needs to be restricted.
Therefore, readers are expected to initially select the simple
NP analysis, causing a garden path effect. In other words,
the degree of referential success of the possible analyses of
a sentence predicts which one is preferred. Since 1985 much
evidence has been reported in favor of this idea (e.g.

Previous research has shown that readers are inclined to
initially interpret the ambiguous NP Ellen as part of a
complex object NP, as in sentence (1) (Frazier, 1987;
Hoeks, Vonk & Schriefers, 2002). Frazier (1987) uses her
Minimal Attachment strategy to explain this preference: NPcoordination requires fewer syntactic nodes and is therefore
more economical.
However, Hoeks et al. argue that readers prefer the
structure that requires fewest accommodations of the
existing topic-structure. An S-coordination requires two
topics (Pete and Ellen in example sentence (1b)) and is
therefore preferred if the preceding discourse has a twotopic structure, i.e. if two people have been in the center of
attention throughout the preceding discourse. An NPcoordination on the other hand, requires one topic (Pete in
example (1a)) and is therefore preferred if the preceding
discourse has a one-topic structure, i.e. if one person has
been in the center of attention throughout the preceding
discourse. Hoeks et al. report evidence for their prediction in
852

on-line parsing preference for NP-coordination to a
preference for S-coordination. In other words, we expect
ambiguity resolution to be an interactive process in which
different knowledge sources are invoked at the same time.
To test this prediction we carried out three experiments: an
off-line completion study, an off-line judgment study and an
on-line reading experiment. In the remaining part of this
paper all three experiments will be discussed in turn.

a completion study, a self-paced reading experiment and an
eye tracking study.
In the present study the focus will not be on the influence
of a semantic or discourse-structural factor but on a more
general type of knowledge, namely world knowledge, as
provided by means of discourse context (i.e. contextual
knowledge). More specifically we will investigate whether
readers’ knowledge about the state of affairs described in
the text guides the parsing of ambiguities.
The critical manipulation was to embed S-coordinations
that were temporarily ambiguous between S- and NPcoordination in contexts that were either supportive or nonsupportive of S-coordination. Consider the following
translations of Dutch experimental items that were either
supportive of S-coordination (example text 2a.) or not
supportive of S-coordination (example text 2b.):

Experiment 1: sentence completion
The main goal of the completion study was to investigate
the influence of contextual knowledge on structure building.
Furthermore, the experiment was conducted to test our
materials, in particular the manipulation of contextual
knowledge.
The experimental texts were designed to manipulate
contextual knowledge in the way described in the previous
section. The dependent factor was the syntactic structure of
the target sentence as completed by the participants. The
target sentence was interrupted after the first NP (proper
name) after the connective ‘and’, as in example sentence
(3):

2a.
Young writer Bart Schut has lashed out at critic Manon
Thijssen during the literary TV-programme ‘The
Plantation’. (1) The writer said that he was very upset by
Thijssen’s negative review of his debut. (2) In the broadcast,
on the other hand, the debutant did receive appreciation
from journalist Francien Koopmans. (3) This he could
appreciate more, he pointed out. (4) Schut said that he was
very annoyed by the unfounded opinion of Thijssen and
Koopmans actually found that the discussion had got
completely out of hand. (5) Next week ‘De Volkskrant’ will
publish a review of the book too. (6)

3. Schut said that he was very annoyed by the unfounded
opinion of Thijssen and Koopmans…
At the point of interruption, the target sentence is
ambiguous between S- and NP-coordination.
We expected contextual knowledge to affect the way
participants completed the interrupted target sentence. More
specifically, we expected participants to complete the target
sentence more often as an NP-coordination when the
context biased towards NP-coordination (i.e., when it is
highly plausible based on the context that Schut is annoyed
by both Thijssen and Koopmans) and more often as an Scoordination when the context biased towards Scoordination (ie., when it is highly plausible based on the
context that Schut is annoyed by Thijssen, but not by
Koopmans).

2b.
Young writer Bart Schut has lashed out at critic Manon
Thijssen during the literary TV-programme ‘The
Plantation’. (1) The writer said that he was very upset by
Thijssen’s negative review of his debut. (2) In the broadcast
the debutant was criticized by journalist Francien
Koopmans as well. (3) This he could not appreciate either,
he pointed out. (4) Schut said that he was very annoyed by
the unfounded opinion of Thijssen and Koopmans actually
found that the discussion had got completely out of hand.
(5) Next week ‘De Volkskrant’ will publish a review of the
book too. (6)

Method
Participants One hundred and thirty students at the Faculty
of Arts of Utrecht University participated in this and the
following experiment for course credits. All were native
speakers of Dutch and naïve as to the purpose of the
experiment.

Sentence (3) of text (2a) states that writer Bart Schut
received appreciation from journalist Koopmans. Based on
this information it is highly plausible that the reader
immediately chooses to interpret sentence (5), the target
sentence, as an S-coordination. After all, it is not plausible
at all that Schut is annoyed by both Thijssen and Koopmans.
Sentence (3) of text (2b) however states that writer Bart
Schut is criticized not only by critic Manon Thijssen, but by
journalist Francien Koopmans as well. Based on this
information it is highly plausible that the reader chooses to
interpret sentence (5) not as an S-coordination, but as an
NP-coordination. After all, in this case the contextual
knowledge of the reader makes it highly plausible that Schut
is annoyed by both Thijssen and Koopmans.
Our main prediction is that contextual knowledge guides
the parsing of ambiguities and can therefore modulate the

Materials For this and the following experiments twentyfour experimental texts similar to those in example texts
(2a) and (2b) were constructed, each with an NP- and an Scoordination-supportive version. All the materials were
written in Dutch. They were designed to resemble short
newspaper reports. All experimental texts contained a one
topic-structure, so both syntax-based principles and topicstructure strongly biased against S-coordination.
Design For this and the following experiment eight
experimental lists were constructed, so that each condition
was equally represented and no two conditions from the
853

same item appeared in the same list. Each list consisted of
twenty-four experimental texts interspersed among twentyfour filler items in such a way that the list started with two
filler items and after this every experimental text alternated
with a filler item. The fillers consisted of texts that closely
resembled the experimental texts. The main differences
were that different interpersonal relations were described
than in the experimental texts and that the S-coordinations
were replaced by NP-coordinations and constructions with
other connectives.

Experiment 2: judgements
Experiment 1 tells us what readers consider as an adequate
continuation of an ambiguous sentence fragment, based on
their contextual knowledge. Experiment 2 was designed to
test whether a certain continuation-type is judged to be
easier, more plausible, and more natural in one context as
compared to another.
Contextual knowledge was manipulated in the same way
as in Experiment 1. We measured participants’ judgments of
the perceived complexity, plausibility and naturalness of the
target sentence within its context. We expected that
participants would judge the target sentence, which was
always an S-coordination, to be easier, more plausible and
more natural when it was embedded in a context supporting
S-coordination than when it was embedded in an NPcoordination-supportive context. The reason for making the
target sentence an S-coordination in all cases was that by
comparing the processing of the non-preferred Scoordination in both supportive and non-supportive
contexts, we were able to investigate whether contextual
knowledge can modulate the preference for NP-coordination
to a preference for S-coordination.

Procedure Participants were instructed to complete the
target sentence after the third proper name of the sentence in
a way they considered grammatical as well as plausible,
given the preceding text. It was emphasized that it was not
important that the continuations were funny or original.
Because participants took part in the experiment during
class time, they had approximately one hour to finish the
experiment.

Results & discussion
Ungrammatical continuations and missing data, for instance
from participants who were unable to finish in time, were
excluded from further analyses. This concerned 2% of the
data. The remaining data were submitted to hierarchical
regression analyses.1 The results showed that the target
sentence was completed more often as an S-coordination
when the context supported S-coordination and more often
as an NP-coordination in a context that was supportive of
this structure (χ2 = 14.33; df = 1; p < 0.001; see Figure 1).
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Method
Procedure After participants finished the completion study
they had a short break, after which they participated in the
judgment study. Again, they had approximately one hour to
finish the experiment. Participants were told that they were
about to judge the completions of other students that
participated in the completion study the week before. Their
task was to judge the target sentences (alleged completions)
on understandability, plausibility within the context and
naturalness. They indicated their assessments by markings
on three separate 5-point scales, one for each variable. Scale
value 1 was used to indicate a negative evaluation once
(very difficult) and a positive evaluation twice (very
plausible / very natural) and scale value 5 was used to
indicate a positive evaluation once (very easy) and a
negative evaluation twice (very implausible / very
unnatural).

NP-completions
S-completions

Results and discussion
NP-context

Missing data, for instance from participants who were
unable to finish in time, were excluded from the analyses.
This concerned 1% of the data. The remaining data were
submitted to hierarchical regression analyses. The
difficulty-scale was reversed in the analysis, so that scale
value 1 always indicated a positive evaluation and scale
point 5 always indicated a negative evaluation. The results
showed that participants judged the target sentence to be
easier, more plausible and more natural in the Scoordination-supportive context than in the NPcoordination-supportive context (χ2 = 3.58; df = 1; p = 0.03 /
χ2 = 26.81; df = 1; p < 0.001 / χ2 = 6.80; df = 1; p < 0.01
respectively; see Figure 2). These results confirm our
hypotheses.

S-context

Figure 1. Percentages of completion as NP-coordination or
S-coordination as a function of contextual knowledge.
Apparently, readers continue a sentence in the way that is
most plausible based on their contextual knowledge. This
result confirms our hypothesis. We also conclude that our
manipulations had effectively determined readers’
contextual representation of the text.

1

Many thanks go to Huub van den Bergh for his statistical advice.
854

reanalysis of the sentence to S-coordination turns out to be
necessary when the disambiguating verb ‘found’ is
encountered, leading to an increase in processing time.

2.9
2.7
2.5

Method

2.3

Easiness

2.1

Plausibility

1.9

Naturalness

Participants Fifty-three students at the Faculty of Arts of
Utrecht University participated in the experiment. None of
them participated in experiment 1 and 2. They were paid
€ 7,50 for their participation. All were naïve as to the
purpose of the experiment.

1.7
1.5
S-Context

Materials The materials that we used were basically the
same as those in experiment 1 and 2. On the basis of the
results for these studies, we only made some minor changes
in some of the texts in order to strengthen the context
manipulation.

NP-Context

Figure 2: Mean judgments on the easiness, plausibility
and naturalness of the target sentence as a function of
contextual knowledge (five-point scale).

Design The experiment started with a practice session
comprising three filler texts. Then, the first twelve
experimental texts and nine filler items were presented in a
random order to the participants. After a one-minute break
the remaining texts were presented randomly. Two
experimental lists were constructed, so that each condition
was equally represented and no two conditions from the
same item appeared in the same list. The texts that appeared
together in the same condition were randomly selected; this
co-occurrence was the same for both lists. The texts that
appeared in the first part of the experiment in the first list
appeared in the second part of the experiment in the second
list and vice versa.

The most important conclusion that we can draw from the
judgment study is that contextual knowledge influences the
representation of a sentence that a reader has after reading
(i.e. the product of sentence processing). Apparently,
participants’ judgments were not ultimately based on the
syntactic simplicity of the target sentence in itself or on the
degree in which the existing topic-structure had to be
accommodated, but, again, contextual knowledge appeared
to overrule these factors. We take this as more evidence for
the effective manipulation of contextual knowledge.

Experiment 3: self-paced reading
The two off-line studies clearly showed that contextual
knowledge influences structure building and the mental
representation that readers have built from a sentence after
reading. In the third experiment we measured on-line
reading processes, using a moving window self-paced
reading paradigm. Specifically, we investigated whether
contextual knowledge can overrule the parsing preference
for NP-coordination. The Dutch target sentence and its
literal translation, including the way it was segmented, is
presented in (4a.) and (4b.) respectively.

Procedure Participants were seated in front of a computer.
They were instructed that short texts would be presented.
For contextual knowledge to be an independent variable, it
was necessary that participants had properly processed the
manipulated discourse information by the time they were
reading the target sentence. To increase the likelihood that
they had actually done so, participants were instructed to
pay specific attention to the mutual relationships between
the characters in the texts.
The texts were presentend using the software programme
E-prime. Initially, only the title of a text was visible on the
screen, the letters of each word of the rest of the text
appeared in dashes, so that only the basic lay out of the text
was visible. Full stops were also presented. Every time the
spacebar was pressed, the dashes of one constituent were
replaced by the actual words. When the spacebar was
pressed again, the words of the following constituent
appeared and the words of the previous one were replaced
by dashes again. In this fashion the entire text was read,
making it impossible to look back in the text. We chose to
present the texts constituent-by-constituent because this was
considered less unnatural than a word-by-word presentation.
However, to be able to measure the reading times of the
critical segments as accurately as possible, all critical parts
of the target sentence were presented word-by-word.
After each text, participants had to verify three
statements. The first statement of an experimental text

4a. Schut / zei / zich te storen aan / het ongegronde oordeel
van / Thijssen / en / Koopmans / vond / eigenlijk / dat / de
discussie / te veel / werd opgeblazen.
4b. Schut / said / to be very annoyed by / the unfounded
opinion of / Thijssen / and / Koopmans / found / actually /
that / the discussion / too much / was blown up.
The concrete expectations for example sentence (4b.) would
be the following. If contextual knowledge affects on-line
parsing decisions, readers will immediately select an Scoordination in an S-coordination-supportive context, i.e.
the correct interpretation of the sentence. Because of this, no
reanalysis is needed and no increase in processing time will
occur. However, if the context is supportive of NPcoordination, readers will initially select NP-coordination as
the correct interpretation of the sentence. Because of this,
855

always questioned the manipulation of contextual
knowledge. This statement was always true to avoid any
effects due to possible processing differences between
answering affirmative or negative. For our example this
means that if the text biased towards NP-coordination the
statement would be ‘Schut did not receive appreciation from
Koopmans’ and if the context biased towards S-coordination
the statement would be ‘Schut received appreciation from
Koopmans’. The basic idea was that if participants were not
capable of correctly verifying this statement, we could not
be sure that they had properly gathered the contextual
knowledge of the corresponding text.

critical statement questioned whether participants had
understood the part of the text that provided S-coordinationsupportive or NP-coordination-supportive knowledge. For
that reason, and because these participants had wrong
answers, one could assume that they erroneously considered
the context as supportive of S-coordination when it in fact
was not, and vice versa. Then, to support the idea that
contextual knowledge immediately influences ambiguity
resolution, the reading times should show a pattern opposite
to the ones realized by participants with correct answers.
Interestingly, this is indeed what the results for participants
with wrong answers show: the adverb was processed faster
in the NP-coordination-supportive context than in the Scoordination-supportive
context
(χ2 = 2.76;
df = 1;
p = 0.048; see Figure 4). Note that the participants with
wrong answers did not differ from participants with correct
answers in other respects than their answers to the critical
statements. The differences between texts, for instance,
were the same for both groups of participants. Therefore, it
is unlikely that participants with wrong answers to the
critical statements were just guessing and had no
representation of the passage whatever. There was no
overall effect of contextual knowledge, nor was there a main
effect of this factor on the third proper name and the
disambiguating verb separately.

Results and discussion
The reading times of the participants with correct answers to
the critical statement were submitted to hierarchical
regression analyses. The results for the third proper name
(‘Koopmans’), the disambiguating verb (‘found’) and the
adverb (‘actually’) are shown in Figure 3. We included the
proper name prior to the disambiguating verb in the
analysis, because this is the first point at which participants
might have started anticipating the structure of the target
sentence. After all, at the third proper name participants had
received enough information to decide if NP- or Scoordination would be a plausible structure of the target
sentence.

560
540

520

520

500

500

480

480
460

NP-context
S-context

460

NP-context
S-context

440

440

420

420

Koopmans

400
Koopmans

found

found

actually

Figure 4: Reading times (msec) for participants who had
wrong answers to the critical statement as a function of
discourse information.

actually

Figure 3: Reading times (msec) for participants who had
correct answers to the critical statement as a function of
contextual knowledge.

Another interesting result was that contextual knowledge
not only outweighed syntax-based principles (i.e., minimal
attachment), but also the principle of topic-structureeconomy (readers prefer the structure that requires fewest
accommodations of the existing topic-structure, cf. Hoeks et
al. 2002).
The results for the verification task showed that
participants did very well on the critical statement in general
and that there was no effect of contextual knowledge on the
amount of correct answers: in the NP-context the proportion
of correctly verified statements was 89%, in the S-context
this was 88%. Apparently, contextual knowledge provided
by the discourse context was processed equally well in both
conditions.

For the critical segments there was no overall effect of
contextual knowledge. When we analyzed the critical
segments separately, we found no effect of contextual
knowledge on the processing of the disambiguating verb
and the third proper name. However, there was a main effect
of contextual knowledge on the processing of the adverb
(actually): it was read faster in the S-coordinationsupportive context than in the NP-coordination-supportive
context: (χ2 = 9.52; df = 1; p = 0.001).
As mentioned before, the data from participants with wrong
answers to the critical statement were excluded from the
analyses. However, these data could still be interesting: the

856

In conclusion, the role of world knowledge provided
through the discourse context is crucial and, most
importantly, overrules the principle of economy that is
based upon syntactic or discourse factors (topic-structure).
This is an adjustment of the idea of a parsing process that
always makes decisions following the same (syntax-based)
principles.

The reading results for both participants with correct and
wrong answers to the critical statement show that parsing
“… X and Y …” as S-coordination is easier when the
discourse context makes it clear that X and Y do not belong
together. This supports the notion of an interactive parser
that is immediately affected by contextual knowledge.
That the expected effect was found not on the
disambiguating verb, but one word later, on the adverb, can
be explained by the fact that using a moving window selfpaced reading design can cause some delayed effects, so
called spill-over effects (see e.g. Hoeks et al. 2002).

Future research
We are in the process of constructing several experiments
using eye-tracking in which different constraints (topicstructure and contextual knowledge) are manipulated at
different points within the sentence and discourse context.
Also, possible effects are not only measured at the
disambiguating word, but within the ambiguous part of the
sentence as well (cf. MacDonald 1994). The aim of these
experiments is to gain a more detailed insight in the time
course during which factors like contextual knowledge and
topic-structure are used.

General Discussion
In this paper, three experiments were presented that
investigated the influence of contextual knowledge on the
processing of the NP- versus S-coordination ambiguity. This
knowledge was provided through the discourse context and
consisted of knowledge about the interpersonal relations
between the three central figures of the text. Contextual
knowledge was manipulated to either bias towards
interpreting the sentence as an NP-coordination or as an Scoordination.
The results of Experiment 1 showed that readers continue
a sentence in the way that is most plausible according to
their contextual knowledge. Furthermore, Experiment 2
showed that readers find S-coordination easier, more
plausible and more natural if their contextual knowledge
supports S-coordination then if it supports NP-coordination.
Finally, Experiment 3 showed that processing an Scoordination is easier when it is embedded in an Scoordination-supportive context than when it is embedded in
an NP-coordination-supportive context. Thus, the
interpersonal relationships in the described situation
appeared to have an immediate impact on the on-line
analysis of sentences in which these figures appeared.
Our results highlight the flexible, adaptive nature of
sentence processing: based on the results we can claim with
some certainty that the parser changes its preferences based
on the contents of the previous discourse context if it
changes in a critical way. In other words, this is an
adjustment of the idea of a parsing process that always
makes decisions following the same (syntax-based)
principles.
A second important result is that contextual knowledge
not only appeared to be of greater importance than syntactic
principles, but also than topic-structure. As mentioned
before, all our experimental texts had a one-topic structure:
the character that was introduced first, stayed in the center
of attention throughout the part of the text that preceded the
target sentence. On the basis of the results by Hoeks et al.
(2002) this would lead to a preference for NP-coordination,
since this structure requires only one topic. We have shown
how contextual knowledge overrules this preference for NPcoordination. Therefore, whereas Hoeks et al. conclude that
the influence of topic-structure overrules syntactic
principles like the Minimal Attachment strategy (Frazier
1987), we can go one step further and conclude that in our
study contextual knowledge overruled not only syntactic
principles, but also pragmatic principles concerning the
topic structure of the text.

Altmann, G., & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with
context during human sentence processing. Cognition, 30,
191-238.
Crain, S., & Steedman, M. (1985). On not being led up the
garden path: The use of context by the psychological
syntac processor. In D. R. Dowty, L. Kartunnen, & A. M.
Zwicky (Eds.), Natural language parsing (pp. 320-358).
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Frazier, L. (1987a). Sentence processing: A tutorial review.
In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and performance XII: The
psychology of reading (pp.601-681). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Bastiaansen, M.C.M., & Petersson,
K.M. (2004). Integration of Word Meaning and World
Knowledge in Language Comprehension. Science, 304
(5669), 438-440.
Hoeks, J. C. J., Vonk W., & Schriefers, H. (2002).
Processing coordinated structures in context: The effect of
topic-structure on ambiguity resolution. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 99-119.
MacDonald, M. C. (1994). Probabilistic constraints and
syntactic ambiguity resolution. Language and cognitive
processes, 9, 157-201.
Ni, W., Crain, S., & Shankweiler, D. (1996). Sidestepping
garden paths: Assessing the contributions of syntax,
semantics and plausibility in resolving ambiguities.
Van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., & Hagoort, P. (1999).
Early referential context effects in sentence processing:
Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Journal of
Memory and Language, 41, 147-182.
Versteeg, N., Sanders, T.J.M., & Wijnen, F.N.K. (submitted
for publication). Knowing what’s going on. The influence
of contextual knowledge on the on-line resolution of
structural ambiguity.

857

