UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Knowledge, Performance, and Task: Décalage and Dynamics in Young Children's Noun
Generalizations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7rj9k229

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Dobbertin, Brandi N.
Horst, Jessica S.
Samuelson, Larissa K.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Knowledge, Performance, and Task: Décalage and Dynamics in Young Children’s
Noun Generalizations
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Jessica S. Horst (jessica-horst@uiowa.edu)
Brandi N. Dobbertin (brandi-peterson@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, Ell Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Anne R. Schutte (aschutte2@unl.edu)
Department of Psychology, 238 Burnett Hall
Lincoln, NE 68588 USA
study”: the same pattern of performance in novel noun
generalization occurring at two points in development
across two different tasks—an example of what Piaget
referred to as décalage (Piaget, 1952). We will show how a
close examination of the interaction of the child in the task
via a computational model furthers our understanding of the
processes that underlie early word learning in young
children. This sets the stage for future work that integrates
the real-time dynamics of children’s response generation
with an understanding of the development of children’s
word learning and categorization abilities.

Abstract
Studies of cognitive development often find that children’s
abilities shift across age and task. The present paper examines
an example of such developmental décalage: the same pattern
of performance in novel noun generalization occurring at two
points in development across forced choice and yes/no tasks.
A formal model of these tasks, and an experiment directly
comparing performance of children at the same
developmental level in each task, demonstrate the importance
of understanding how knowledge interacts with the specifics
of the task to create behavior and development.

Introduction

Naming Deformable Things

The cognitive development literature contains numerous
studies that have attempted to examine whether children at a
particular age possesses some knowledge only to find that
children’s abilities shift across ages and tasks. This results
in cases where older children do not seem to be able to do
something that younger children do. For example, studies
with young infants suggest that three and four-month-old
children can use knowledge of physical laws of continuity
and solidity to determine where a ball rolled down a ramp
should stop (Spelke, Breinlinger, Macomber, & Jacobson,
1992). Yet, when tested in similar paradigms, 2- and 3-yearold children do not seem to have this same knowledge
(Berthier, DeBlois, Poirier, Novak, & Clifton, 2000).
Similarly, research has suggested that 6- to 8-month-old
infants can detect the numerical equivalence between sets of
auditory and visual stimuli (Starkey, S., & Gelman, 1990).
Yet, 3-year-old children fail at a similar task (Mix,
Huttenlocher, & Levine, 1996). Such examples leave the
field in a difficult position: how are we to know when a
child possesses some bit of knowledge?
We argue that this is the wrong question because it
focuses on knowledge as something that can be had. Rather,
we suggest that knowledge should be viewed as something
that is created in a moment, out of the interaction of the
child’s previous history of perceiving and acting and the
current task. From this perspective, the question to be asked
is how the specifics of the task bring the child’s prior
history of perceiving and acting to bear in the moment. We
illustrate the utility of this perspective by examining a “case

A young child shown a novel solid object and told a
novel name (e.g. “this is a dax”) will most likely say that
only other objects that share the same shape as the exemplar
can be called by the same name (Landau, Smith, & Jones,
1988). Thus, young children are said to show a “shape bias”
when generalizing novel names for solid objects. There is
some debate in the literature concerning the nature and
origin of the shape bias. Nevertheless, recent studies suggest
that children who learn to attend to shape when naming
novel objects subsequently show accelerated vocabulary
development (Samuelson, 2002; Smith, Jones, Landau,
Gershkoff-Stowe, & Samuelson, 2002) and that
development of a shape bias is related to the development of
the early noun vocabulary (Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith,
2004; Samuelson & Smith, 1999).
A bias to attend to shape, although useful for learning
nouns such as table, hammer and key that name solid
objects in shape-based categories (Samuelson & Smith,
1999), may not be appropriate for all nominal categories,
however. For instance, it is not clear that children should
attend to shape when naming things made from deformable
materials such as paper, blankets and towels because, while
these typically have characteristic shapes, they are
organized into categories based on similarity of material
(Samuelson & Smith, 1999, 2000), and material substance is
often critical to what can be done with these things. Thus, in
Experiment 1 we examined how young children generalize
names for deformable stimuli. In particular, we recruited
children in the early stages of productive vocabulary
720

development (c.f. Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 2004;
Samuelson & Smith, 1999), and asked them to make
generalizations following demonstrations that highlighted
the deformable nature of the exemplar. Children were also
asked to generalize novel names for rigid stimuli under
similar conditions.

Proportion
Shape
Choices

Experiment 1

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

*

*

*

0-25 26-50 51+
Deformable

Methods
Participants Fifty-nine monolingual, English-speaking
children, 31 girls and 28 boys, (range = 18m 12d – 23m
23d, M = 21m 8d) were recruited from county birth records.

*

0-25 26-50 51+
Rigid

Figure 1: Data from Experiment 1. Proportion of
shape choices for children at each vocabulary level for
sets with deformable and rigid exemplars. * denotes
performance different from chance at p < .05 level

Stimuli Four sets of novel objects, each with an exemplar
and four test objects, were used. The exemplars were made
from sponge, plastic bean bag, wood and Styrofoam. For
each set, two of the test objects were the same shape as the
exemplar but were different colors and made from different
materials, and two were made from the same material as the
exemplar but were different shapes and colors.

As can be seen in Figure 1, noun generalizations were
influenced by the rigidity of the exemplar and the
vocabulary level of the children. Across these vocabulary
levels, children tended to generalize novel names for rigid
exemplars to test objects that were the same shape. In
contrast, children with very few (0-25), or very many (51+)
count nouns in their productive vocabulary generalized
novel names for deformable exemplars to test objects made
of the same material, while children with 26-50 count nouns
in their productive vocabulary, were more likely to
generalize names for deformable exemplars to test objects
that matched the exemplar in shape.

Task The experiment began with a series of training trials to
familiarize the child with the forced choice task. On each
trial the child was shown a plastic egg, which was named,
and shown that the egg could open. The experimenter then
placed two test objects—a second egg identical to the
named exemplar, and another object that differed from the
egg in shape, color and material—on a tray and asked, “Can
you get another egg?” while sliding the tray towards the
child. Children were praised if they chose the egg and
corrected otherwise.
The experimental trials proceeded in the same manner as
the training trials, with the exception that the child’s
responses were neither praised nor corrected. Thus, for each
trial the experimenter named the exemplar and demonstrated
a property designed to highlight the shape of the rigid
exemplars and the material of the deformable exemplars
(e.g. rolling for a rigid exemplar, and squishing for a
deformable exemplar). Two test objects were then placed on
the tray, and the tray slid forward while the experimenter
asked the child “Can you get the (novel name)?” Within
each set, each shape match was presented once with each
material match for a total of four trials. Children’s choices
were coded offline from videotape by coders blind to the
experimental hypotheses. Twenty-five percent of the
sessions were coded by two coders. Agreement between
coders was 94%. Disagreements were resolved by review of
the videotapes.

Discussion
The finding of a relationship between the properties of the
productive vocabulary and children’s behavior when
generalizing novel nouns is consistent with previous work
(Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 2004; Samuelson & Smith,
1999). However, the reduction in the strength of the shape
bias from the middle to high vocabulary group contrasts
with previous results suggesting that the shape bias
increases in strength until 3 years of age (Jones & Smith,
1993). Further, the fact that the 18- 23 month-old children
with the most count nouns in their productive vocabularies
did not attend to shape when generalizing novel names for
deformable stimuli, is in opposition to a previous finding by
Samuelson and Smith (2000). These researchers found that
36-month-old children generalized novel names for
deformable stimuli by shape. It seems very likely that the
much older 36-month-old children in that study would have
had many more count nouns in their productive vocabularies
compared to the young children tested here. One difference
between Experiment 1 and Samuelson and Smith’s work,
however, is that we used a forced choice procedure, whereas
Samuelson and Smith used a yes/no procedure. Thus, in
Experiment 2 we used the same stimuli to examine the noun
generalizations of a group of children at the high vocabulary
level from Experiment 1 in a yes/no task. We also ran a
group of 36-month-old children in order to replicate
Samuelson and Smith’s prior finding, and a group of 48month-old children to examine whether attention to shape is
also modulated later in development in the yes/no task.

Results
Children were divided into three groups based on the
number of count nouns in their productive vocabulary; 0–
25, 26-50, 51+ count nouns. These divisions were based on
natural breaks in the data that yielded approximately equal
numbers of children in each group (17, 23, and 19
respectively).

721

deformable stimuli by similarity in shape. In contrast, both
the 24- and 48-month-old children generalized names for
deformable stimuli in different ways than they generalized
names for rigid stimuli. Specifically, both these groups of
children generalized names for rigid exemplars by shape but
were equally likely to generalize a name for a deformable
exemplar to shape-or material-matching test objects.

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants Sixteen 2-year-old children (range = 23m 25d
– 27m 5d M = 25d 19m), 16 3-year-old children (range 36m
20d – 38m 28d, M = 37m 12d), and 16 4-year-old children
(range = 48m 5d – 49m 18d, M = 48m 27d) were recruited
from the same population as Experiment 1. All children
were learning English as their first and only language, and
none had participated in Experiment 1.

Discussion
The data from Experiment 2 seem to conflict with those
from Experiment 1. How is it that we can see the same
curvilinear trend in children’s naming of deformable stimuli
in a group of 18-to 23-month-old children with different
numbers of count nouns in their productive vocabularies, as
we see with 24-, 36-, and 48-month-old children using the
same stimuli? Clearly, there are important differences in the
word learning and categorization abilities of children across
these age ranges. Nevertheless, what may be critical in
understanding this developmental décalage is how the
specifics of the task bring these developmental differences
to bear and create behavior in a moment in time.
In particular, there are two critical differences between
the forced choice task used in Experiment 1 and the yes/no
task used in Experiment 2. First, in the forced choice task,
children see the two test objects at the same time in close
proximity (i.e. on the same tray). In contrast, in the yes/no
version of the task, children see the test objects one at a
time. Thus, children can make direct comparisons between
the test objects in the forced choice task, but must make
these comparisons in memory (if at all) in the yes/no version
of the task. Second, the nature of the forced choice task is to
force the child to pick one object to the exclusion of the
other. In contrast, in the yes/no version of the task, the child
is free to say yes (or no) to all of the test items individually.
These differences have important implications for how a
child’s prior history of perceiving and acting are brought to
bear in a moment in time. For example, a relatively small
bias to attend to shape may appear larger when children are
forced to pick between a test object that matches an
exemplar in shape and one that matches it in material.
Likewise, a relatively weak bias to attend to material with
deformable stimuli may be more apparent in a yes/no task

Stimuli In order to replicate the procedure used by
Samuelson and Smith (2000), two test objects that matched
the exemplar in color were added to each stimulus set. In all
other respects the stimuli were identical to those used in the
previous experiment.
Task As in Experiment 1, the experiment began with
training trials. These were used to familiarize the child with
the yes/no procedure. On the first training trial the child was
shown a plastic egg. The experimenter demonstrated that it
opened and then brought out a series of test objects one at a
time and, for each, asked “Is this an egg?” The test objects
included two plastic eggs identical to the exemplar and
several other small objects that were all different from the
egg in shape, color and material. During training the
experimenter praised the child for correct responses and
corrected incorrect responses. The experimental trials
proceeded in the same manner as the training trials with the
exception that the experimenter did not praise or correct the
child. For each set, the six test objects were presented one
time in one of two random orders. The order of sets was
counterbalanced across children.

Results
As can be seen in Figure 2, there were differences in
children’s tendency to attend to shape across age and
exemplar. Overall, the data from the 36-month-old children
replicate Samuelson & Smith’s (2000) previous finding—
these children generalized novel names for both rigid and

36-month-olds

24-month-olds

1.0

*

0.9

48-month-olds

*

*

*

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

*

0.4

*
*

0.3
0.2

*

0.1

*

*

*

Deformable

Rigid

Deformable

Rigid

Deformable

ia
l
er
at

M

pe

Co
lo
r

Sh
a

l
ia
er
at

M

pe

Co
lo
r

Sh
a

ia
l
er

M

at

pe
Sh
a

Co
lo
r

l
ia
er
at

Co
lo
r

M

pe
Sh
a

l
ia
er
at

M

pe

Co
lo
r

Sh
a

l
ia
er

M

at

pe
Sh
a

Co
lo
r

0.0

Rigid

Figure 2. Data from Experiment 2. Proportion yes responses to test objects that matched deformable and rigid exemplars in
shape, color or material for children at each age level. * denotes performance different from chance at p < .05 level.
722

because judgments of the similarity of shape and material
test objects are made independently. This suggests that we
may see very different patterns of behavior in these two
tasks even when children access the same underlying
knowledge.

Decision Field

Input

Forced Choice Response

Model
To probe these task differences in greater detail, we
simulated performance in the forced choice and yes/no
versions of the novel noun generalization task by adapting
two recent dynamic field models. The goal of these
simulations is to test the claim that very different patterns of
behavior can arise in these tasks even when the same stimuli
are used and the same knowledge structures are accessed. If
this is the case, it suggests that some of the differences
observed in the previous experiments may arise from the
specifics of the real-time processes that turn perceptual
inputs into responses in novel noun generalization tasks.
Insights into these processes come from work by
Spencer and colleagues modeling the dynamics of responses
in discrimination (same/different) and forced choice tasks
(Simmering, Spencer, & Schöner, in press; Spencer,
Simmering, & Schutte, in press). Our model, pictured in
Figure 3, is an extension of the Dynamic Neural Field
Theory (DNFT), a general theory of spatial working
memory. The x-axis in each panel of Figure 3 shows a set of
neurons arranged by “similarity”. Neurons that are tuned to
respond, for instance, to similar perceptual features would
be close neighbors along this dimension, while neurons that
are tuned to respond to dissimilar features would be far from
one another along this dimension. The activation of each
neuron is plotted along the y-axis. Time is shown along the
z-axis as the sequence of events in a trial unfold.
Importantly, neurons in this model interact according to
a local excitation/lateral inhibition function. This means that
neurons with similar “preferred” inputs will excite one
another while neurons tuned to very different inputs will
inhibit each other. This allows the network to form stable
peaks of activation that represent behavioral decisions to,
for instance, select a particular input in a forced choice task.
It is also possible, however, that the model will fail to form
an activation peak. Whether this occurs depends on the
similarity of inputs and the resting level of the neurons in
the field. The critical differences between the forced choice
and yes/no versions of the novel noun generalization task
can be captured in this general framework. Such differences
emerge from differences in the strength and time structure
of the inputs, and in the dynamics of the response field.

“Yes” Response

Decision Field

Input

“No” Response

Figure 3. The models of the forced choice (top panel)
and yes/no (bottom panel) tasks.
Conceptually, the forced choice version of the
novel noun generalization task presents a more constrained
type of decision. To capture this, the resting level of the
neurons is set to a relatively low level at the beginning of
the trial, and the inputs are strong. Thus, the field reflects
the input strongly and is competitive, allowing for a detailed
“comparison” between stimuli. It is this competition
between inputs that is the basis for picking one test object
over the other. As can be seen in the decision field of this
model, at the start of the trial (back of figure) all three inputs
are fed into the field. The resting level of the neurons in this
field is raised at time X, corresponding to the boost of
activation the child receives when the tray with the test
objects is slid forward. In the model, this change increases
competition among the neurons and forces the creation of a
single stable peak centered over one of the test objects. The
model’s choice corresponds to the location of this peak
along the x-axis.
Yes/No Model In the yes/no version of the novel noun
generalization task, the child is presented with each test
object individually and must make a yes or no response for
each. Thus, the yes/no model is also presented with each
input separately. The middle two fields of Figure 3 present a
simulation where there is relatively high similarity between
the exemplar and the test object, while the bottom panel
shows a simulation with relatively low similarity. As above,
the exemplar (leftmost peak in the input fields) is present
throughout the trial but at a lower activation strength.
Conceptually, the yes/no version of the task presents a
less constrained type of decision. Consequently, as long as

Forced Choice Model In the forced choice version of the
novel noun generalization task, the child is presented with
two test objects at the same time and encouraged to pick one
on each trial. Thus, the forced choice version of the model
(top panel of Figure 3)is also presented with two test stimuli
at the same time and encouraged to pick one—that is, to
form a peak of activation centered at one input or the other.
Note that the exemplar (the leftmost peak in the input field)
is also present throughout the trial, but its activation is lower
because it is farther from the child.
723

inputs are reasonably similar a “yes” decision can result. To
capture this, the resting level of the neurons in the field is
set at a high level and the individual inputs are weak. Thus,
the field is more interactive, allowing more blending of the
stimuli and good sensitivity to overlap in the input. It is this
overlap that is the basis for yes/no decisions in this task. As
can be seen in Figure 3, when the inputs are close together
(corresponding to a test object that is similar to the
exemplar) the locally excitatory interactions among neurons
will cause the activation associated with these stimuli to
blend and increase over time, ultimately combining to form
a single peak. If this peak reaches a critical threshold—an
activation level above 0—the model responds “yes”. As can
also be seen in the figure, however, when the input peaks
are farther apart (corresponding to a test object that is less
similar to the exemplar), the peaks do not blend in the
response field. Thus, no above-threshold peak is formed and
the model responds “no”.

Experiment 3
Methods
Participants Thirty monolingual, English-speaking
children, 18 girls, 26 boys, (M = 31m 19d, range = 30m 0d –
32m 24d), were recruited from the same database as the
previous studies. None of the children had participated in
the previous studies. Roughly half of the children
participated in a Forced Choice task (6 females, 8 males)
and half in a Yes/No task (6 females, 10 males). Children in
the forced choice and yes/no conditions did not differ in age
(Ms 31m 32d and 31m 16d, respectively) or total vocabulary
(Ms 621 and 644, respectively), t(28) = .822, ns for age and
t(26) = .99, ns for total vocabulary.
Stimuli, Design, and Task The same stimuli and tasks used
in Experiments 1 and 2 were used in the forced choice and
yes/no conditions (respectively) of this experiment.

Simulations At issue is whether the differences between the
forced choice and yes/no versions of the novel noun
generalization task might mean that a young child’s
performance in the two tasks will differ even when the same
stimuli are used. To examine this, we gave the same inputs
to each version of the model and recorded the responses.
The input consisted of Gaussians representing the relative
similarity of the exemplar and the shape- and materialmatching test objects. Note that the exact same Gaussians
were input to both models. The similarities of the inputs
captured the proposal that for deformable things children
view things that are the made of the same material as more
similar than things that are the same shape. It is important to
note, however, that while these proposals have support in
the literature (Subrahmanyam, Landau, & Gelman, 1999)
the veracity of these relative similarities is not the critical
issue here. Rather, the question is whether giving these same
inputs to two models that capture different tasks produces
different performance.
This answer is “yes”. When these inputs were given to
the forced choice model, the peak that formed was centered
at the input location of the material-matching test object. In
contrast, when these inputs were given to the yes/no model,
the model generated a yes response for both test objects. In
other words, the model generalized the novel name for the
deformable exemplar according to similarity in material in
the forced choice task, but generated a relatively nonspecific response in the yes/no task.

Results

1.0
0.9

0.8
The top panel of
0.7
Figure 4 shows the
0.6
proportion of shape
0.5
0.4
choices for rigid and
0.3
deformable exemplars.
0.2
As can be seen in this
0.1
figure, when asked to
0.0
Deformable
Rigid
choose whether a
novel name for a rigid
exemplar should be
generalized to a shapeor material-matching
test object, 31-monthold children picked the
shape-matching
test
object. In contrast,
Deformable
Rigid
when asked to choose
Figure
4.
Data
from
Experiment
3.
whether a novel name
for a deformable exemplar should be generalized to a shapeor material-matching test object, 31-month-old children
picked the material-matching test object.
Data from the Yes/No condition are pictured in the
bottom panel of Figure 4. Overall the 31-month-old children
in this experiment said yes to test objects that matched the
exemplar in shape more often than those that matched the
exemplar in color or material. This tendency was modulated
by the rigidity of the exemplar such that children said yes to
shape-matching test objects more when the exemplar was
rigid than when it was deformable. Nevertheless, it is also
clear in the figure that children were more likely to say yes
to test objects that matched deformable exemplars in shape
than those that matched these exemplars in material.
In a final analysis we compared the yes/no and forced
choice data directly by converting the yes/no data to
proportion of shape choices via the Luce choice rule (Luce,
1963). Specifically, the proportion of shape choices for a
given stimulus set was taken to be equal to the proportion of
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Shape

Discussion
The simulations confirm the prior analysis of the task—the
very same inputs to the models created vastly different
behavior in these two tasks. This further suggests that
children who have the same underlying knowledge
structures, should perform differently when tested with the
same stimuli in the two different versions of the task. To test
this, in Experiment 3, we ran children at the same
vocabulary level in the forced choice yes/no versions of the
task with the same stimuli.
724

Color

Material

Shape

Color

Material

References

Proportion Shape Choices

1.0
0.9

Berthier, N. E., DeBlois, S., Poirier, C. R., Novak, J. A., &
Clifton, R. K. (2000). Where's the ball? Two- and threeyear-olds reason about unseen events. Developmental
Psychology, 36, 394-401.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L. B. (2004). Shape and the
first hundred nouns. Child Development, 74(4), 10981114.
Jones, S. S., & Smith, L. B. (1993). The place of perception
in children's concepts. Cognitive Development, 8, 113139.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Luce, R. D. (1963). Detection and recognition. In R. D.
Luce, R. R. Bush & G. E. (Eds.), Handbook of
mathematical psychology. New York: Wiley: Wiley.
Mix, K. S., Huttenlocher, J., & Levine, S. C. (1996). Do
preschool children recognize auditory-visual numerical
correspondences? Child Development, 67, 1592-1608.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children.
New York: Norton.
Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Statistical regularities in
vocabulary guide language acquisition in connectionist
models
and
15-20-month-olds.
Developmental
Psychology, 38(6), 1016-1037.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category organization and
syntax correspond? Cognition, 73(1), 1-33.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (2000). Children's
attention to rigid and deformable shape in naming and
non-naming tasks. Child Development, 71(6), 1555-1570.
Simmering, V.R., Spencer, J.P., & Schöner, G. (in press).
Reference-related inhibition produces enhanced position
discrimination and fast repulsion near axes of symmetry.
Perception and Psychophysics.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Object name learning
provides on-the-job training for attention. Psychological
Science, 13(1), 13-19.
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., & Jacobson,
K. (1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review,
99(4), 605-632.
Spencer, J.P., Simmering, V.R., & Schutte, A.R. (in press).
Toward a formal theory of flexible spatial behavior:
Geometric category biases generalize across pointing and
verbal response types. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance.
Starkey, P., S., S. E., & Gelman, R. (1990). Numerical
abstraction by human infants. Cognition, 36, 97-128.
Subrahmanyam, K., Landau, B., & Gelman, R. (1999).
Shape, material, and syntax: Interacting forces in
children's learning of novel words for objects and
substances. Language and Cognitive Processes, 14(3),
249-281.

0.8
0.7
0.6

Yes/No
Forced Choice

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Deformable

Rigid

Figure 5. Direct comparison of data from the two
conditions of Experiment 3.
yeses to shape-matching test objects divided by the sum of
the proportion of yes responses to shape- and materialmatching test objects. The proportion of shape choices made
when a rigid exemplar was named did not differ across task.
Importantly, however, the proportion of shape choices made
when a deformable exemplar was named differed markedly
across tasks. In particular, children generalized novel names
for deformable exemplars by shape in the yes/no task but by
material in the forced choice task.

Discussion
These results, then confirm the task analysis and the
results of the model; whether 31-month-old children
generalize names for deformable stimuli by shape depends
on the task.

General Discussion
Taken together, the data from Experiment 3 and the model
suggest that the specific processes that bring children’s
knowledge to bear in a moment in time are critical to
understanding the developmental décalage in young
children’s naming of deformable stimuli. Further, this case
study and model suggest the importance of viewing
knowledge as created in the moment out of the interaction
between the child’s prior history of perceiving and acting
and the specifics of the context. The bigger lesson from this
case study, then, is that knowledge is not all or none, but
incremental. It must be combined with the here-and-now of
the specific task and realized in real-time activations. This
means that understanding of the processes that support
young children’s early noun learning, for example, will
come from detailed analysis of the knowledge children
bring to the task, the moment-by-moment unfolding of the
task, and the interaction of these factors. The model
presented here is intended as a first step in this direction.
The next step in this program of work will be to capture the
full pattern of developmental data across the entire age
range and in both forced choice and yes/no tasks.

Acknowledgments
We thank the parents and children for participating in the
studies. Preparation of this paper was supported by NICHD
grant number 5 R01 HD045713 to the first author.
725

