UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lateral Inhibition Explains Savings in Conditioning and Extinction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6706w6zg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Gupta, Ashish
Noelle, David C.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lateral Inhibition Explains Savings in Conditioning and Extinction
Ashish Gupta & David C. Noelle
({ashish.gupta, david.noelle}@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University; Box 1679 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235, USA

extinction training involves the superimposition of some
separate decremental process that works to inhibit previously learned responses, leaving most of the originally
acquired CS-US association intact. These phenomena
involve a restoration of responding to a CS that was
first associated with the US through acquisition training and then disassociated through extinction training.
The phenomenon of savings involves the relatively small
amount of reacquisition training needed to restore responding after extinction in comparison to the amount
of initial acquisition training. In spontaneous recovery,
responding to the CS is restored simply by the passage
of time, after extinction training. Renewal is said to
occur when a shift in environmental context away from
that in which extinction training took place results in
renewed responding. In reinstatement, the response is
restored through the presentation of US, alone. All of
these phenomena suggest that learned associations are
not completely lost during extinction training.
Recognition of this retained association knowledge,
even after responding has been extinguished, has led to
theories involving residual synaptic plasticity and subthreshold responding. These theories hold that extinction
training does not completely reverse synaptic changes
made during initial acquisition, but only reverses these
changes enough to effectively inhibit responding. When
presented with the CS after extinction, the neural system
involved in producing a response continues to become
somewhat active, but not sufficiently active to produce
an actual response. Thus, only small changes in association strength are needed to return this system to a state
in which responding to the CS is robust.
Theories based on residual synaptic plasticity cannot account for some important additional observations,
however. In particular, there is evidence that, just as
extinction does not remove associations built up during
previous acquisition training, subsequent reacquisition
training does not remove the inhibitory force built up
during previous extinction training. For example, animals continue to show spontaneous recovery — a phenomenon that only arises after extinction training —
even if they experience a subsequent period of reacquisition that removes the behavioral impact of the previous extinction process (Rescorla, 2001). Also, just as
reacquisition after extinction is faster than initial acquisition, subsequent extinctions are also faster than the
first extinction (Reynolds, 1975; Rescorla, 2001). Ob-

Abstract
Animal conditioning experiments have shown that acquired behaviors that are subsequently extinguished are
reacquired at a faster rate than during their initial acquisition. Residual synaptic plasticity in the relevant
neural circuits has been the prevalent explanation for
this form of savings. According to this theory, extinction
training does not completely revert synaptic changes induced during initial acquisition, resulting in faster reacquisition. This account cannot explain more recent findings, however, that show that subsequent extinctions are
also faster than the first. Rescorla has proposed an alternative to the residual synaptic plasticity account, in
which acquisition and extinction involve the formation
of two separate kinds of associations. We have explored
this dual-pathway account using a neurocomputational
model of conditioning. In our model, associations related to acquisition and extinction spontaneously become segregated as a result of the interaction between
general neural learning processes and the presence of
lateral inhibition between neurons. This model exhibits
appropriate savings in both acquisition and extinction,
and it captures the experimental results that prompted
Rescorla to hypothesize separate acquisition and extinction pathways.

Introduction
The relationship between the learning of an association
and the unlearning of that same association is commonly thought to involve a singular representation of
the strength of association, with that strength rising
during learning and falling during unlearning. In animal conditioning, this view suggests that the extinction
of a behavior involves reversing the synaptic modifications made during the initial acquisition of that behavior.
During acquisition training, the association between the
conditioned stimulus (CS) and the unconditioned stimulus (US) is encoded by changing the strength of the
synaptic interconnections between certain neurons in the
brain. During extinction training, the changes made to
these connections are reversed, causing the animal to
stop producing the conditioned response (CR) (Kehoe,
1988; Klopf, 1988; Medina et al., 2001). While this theory is simple and elegant, it is not consistent with a
growing body of behavioral findings.
Evidence from numerous behavioral studies points to
the possibility that extinction isn’t a mere reversal of
the associations formed during acquisition. Phenomena
like savings, spontaneous recovery, renewal, and reinstatement (Rescorla, 2001; Bouton, 2004) suggest that

309

that a CS undergoing retraining is particularly quick to
acquire new associative connections with the US due to
its prior history. To investigate these two alternatives,
Rescorla conducted the following experiments.
In one experiment, two stimuli, A and C, were initially trained and then extinguished. Two other stimuli,
B and D, were presented without reinforcement. Once
A and C were extinguished, A and B then each received
the same number of conditioning trials, encouraging responding to these stimuli. At the end of this training
sequence, A elicited stronger responding than B. This
is a demonstration of savings, since A was previously
acquired and extinguished and B was not. This observation does not distinguish between Rescorla’s two alternatives, however. The A stimulus could have begun
reacquisition training with some residual synaptic plasticity or the reaquisition process could have operated
at a faster rate for A. In order to separate these hypotheses, Rescorla tested responding to the compound
stimuli AD and BC. Any residual synaptic plasticity in
A should also be present in C, so responding to these
two compounds should be roughly equivalent if both A
and B grow equally in associational strength during reacquisition training. If, however, an association to A is
learned faster because of its previous extinction, then
greater responding should be seen to the AD compound.
Surprisingly, neither of these outcomes were observed.
Responding to BC was stronger than responding to AD.
Rescorla concluded the A’s dominance over B was the result of residual synaptic plasticity, and he explained the
dominance of the BC compound in terms of blockinglike effect. If associative change is governed by an errorcorrection learning mechanism, and if stimulus A begins
reacquisition training with a “head start” over stimulus
B, there will be less error when stimulus A is presented,
so the associational strength for A will grow more slowly
than that for B. Since A’s residual synaptic plasticity is
shared by C, and since B’s associational strength grows
faster than that of A during reaquisition training, the
BC compound dominates over AD (Rescorla, 2002).
This explanation gave rise to a question: Would A
or B show greater associative change if the error signal during reacquisition training was equilibrated between them? In another experiment, Rescorla addressed
this question by presenting the AB compound stimulus, rather than A and B separately, during reacquisition
training (Rescorla, 2003). When this was done, greater
responding was generated by the AD compound than
by the BC compound. Hence, Rescorla concluded that,
in addition to leaving residual associative strength, extinction also causes the stimulus to gain new associative strength at a faster rate when it is, once again,
reinforced. Through a similar set of experiments, he
concluded that a stimulus that was previously extinguished and reacquired is more sensitive to subsequent
non-reinforcement.

servations of this kind have led Rescorla to hypothesize
that the effects of acquisition and those of extinction
are maintained within dual pathways, with the competition between these separated pathways determining the
magnitude of response to the CS (Rescorla, 2001). His
experiments also have led him to conjecture that these
pathways interact, with the strengthening of one pathway making the other more sensitive to further training (Rescorla, 2002; Rescorla, 2003). (Some of these
experiments are described in the next section.)
In this paper, we show that fundamental principles
of neural computation, embodied in the Leabra modeling framework (O’Reilly and Munakata, 2000), spontaneously capture these phenomena of conditioning and extinction without requiring the incorporation of separate
modules for acquisition and extinction. In particular,
we demonstrate how synaptic plasticity, bidirectional excitation between cortical regions, and lateral inhibition
within cortical regions interact so as to spontaneously
segregate neural pathways associated with acquisition
from those associated with extinction, allowing the effects of previous acquisition and extinction sessions to
be retained. Of particular importance are processes of
lateral inhibition, which introduce competition between
neurons involved in the encoding of stimuli. Along with
the mechanisms of synaptic learning, this competition
separates the neurons that associate the stimulus with
responding, called acquisition neurons, from those that
associate the stimulus with non-responding, called extinction neurons. During extinction training, for example, synaptic strengths change so as to encourage the
activation of extinction neurons and discourage the activation of acquisition neurons. Importantly, the weakening of excitatory synapses on acquisition neurons only
continues until these neurons begin to lose their competition with extinction neurons, brought about by lateral
inhibition, at which point the activation levels of the acquisition neurons drop dramatically, causing the synaptic modification process to effectively cease. Thus, much
of the associational knowledge embedded in the synapses
of the acquisition neurons is retained even after extinction. Similarly, many of the changes in extinction neuron
synapses wrought during extinction training are retained
after reacquisition training. Through this retention of
synaptic strengths, our model exhibits a speeding of both
subsequent reacquisitions and subsequent re-extinctions,
demonstrating the savings seen in animals. It also captures the patterns of performance observed by Rescorla,
without requiring an explicit mechanism for modulating
the speed of learning within one pathway or the other.

Background
Behavioral Results
Rescorla identified two different mechanisms that might
be responsible for faster reacquisition of responding after
extinction. First, it is possible that the association with
the CS is not completely removed by extinction training
— that residual synaptic plasticity retains some associational connection. Second, it might be the case that
extinction training triggers faster subsequent learning —

Leabra Modeling Framework
In this paper, we show that these results arise naturally from the mechanisms of neural computation em310

bodied in the Leabra modeling framework. The Leabra
cognitive modeling framework (O’Reilly and Munakata,
2000) offers a collection of integrated formalisms that
are grounded in known properties of cortical circuits but
are sufficiently abstract to support the simulation of behavior. The framework has been used to model a broad
range of cognitive processes, including aspects of perception, attention, language, learning, and memory. Leabra
includes dendritic integration using a point-neuron approximation, a firing rate model of neural coding, bidirectional excitation between cortical regions, fast feedforward and feedback inhibition, and synaptic plasticity
that incorporates both error-driven and Hebbian learning. Of particular relevance to our model is Leabra’s
lateral inhibition formalism.
The effects of inhibitory interneurons tend to be strong
and fast in cortex. This allows inhibition to act in a
regulatory role, mediating the positive feedback of bidirectional excitatory connections between brain regions.
Simulation studies have shown that a combination of
fast feedforward and feedback inhibition can produce
a kind of “set-point dynamics”, where the mean firing
rate of cells in a given region remains relatively constant
in the face of moderate changes to the mean strength
of inputs. As inputs become stronger, they drive inhibitory interneurons as well as excitatory pyramidal
cells, producing a dynamic balance between excitation
and inhibition. Leabra implements this dynamic using
a k-Winners-Take-All (kWTA) inhibition function that
quickly modulates the amount of pooled inhibition presented to a layer of simulated cortical neural units, based
on the layer’s level of input activity. This results in a
roughly constant number of units surpassing their firing threshold. The amount of lateral inhibition within a
layer can be parameterized in a number of ways, with the
most common being either the absolute number or the
percentage of the units in the layer that are expected,
on average, to surpass threshold. A layer of neural units
with a small value of this k parameter (e.g., 10-25% of
the number of units in a layer) will produce sparse representations, with few units being active at once.
In our model, acquisition-related and extinctionrelated learning occurs in two distinct sets of neurons
that compete with each other via this lateral inhibition
mechanism. Indeed, it is lateral inhibition, in conjunction with Leabra’s synaptic learning mechanism, that
gives rise to a segregation between acquisition neurons
and extinction neurons.

Figure 1: The Leabra network. Each gray box corresponds to a neural processing unit. Each arrow represents complete interconnectivity between the units in
two layers.
first 5 units were interpreted as encouraging a positive
response in the face of the stimulus, the aggregate activation over these units determining the strength of the
response. The remaining 2 units in the output layer
coded for a null response, and they offered a means to
suppress activity in the first 5 units via lateral inhibition.
When simulating more than one CS, each was encoded
over a separate input unit and a separate layer of 40
hidden units. All of the hidden layers participated in
bidirectional excitatory connections with a single shared
output layer, identical to the one previously described.
Thus, different stimuli could not be represented using
shared neural resources. This amounts to an assumption that the stimuli are all highly dissimilar, with each
activating different neurons in the brain. This simplifying assumption is not a critical feature of this model.
Leabra’s default parameters were used in these simulations, with only a few exceptions. To accommodate
the relatively small size of this network, the range of
initial random synaptic weights was reduced ([0.0, 0.1]
rather than the default range of [0.25, 0.75]) and learning rate for synaptic modification was set to a smaller
value (0.005, half of the default of 0.01). Also, individual neuron bias weights were removed. Modifications of
these kinds are common in smaller Leabra networks.
During acquisition training, the network was expected
to activate the first 5 units in the output layer. During
extinction training, it was expected to activate the last
2 units. Each training session was terminated when the
sum squared error (SSE) between the network’s output
and these expected output patterns fell below a criterion
value of 1. All simulation experiments were repeated 20
times, and mean results across these runs are reported.

The Model
The learning performance of a simple multi-layer Leabra
network, as shown in Figure 1, was examined. For simplicity, each stimulus (CS) was encoded as a single input
unit. The stimulus was recoded over the firing rates of
40 units grouped into a hidden layer. This hidden layer
incorporated strong lateral inhibition, using a kWTA parameter of k = 3, encouraging only 3 of the 40 units
to be active at any one time. The hidden layer had a
bidirectional excitatory projection to the output layer.
The output layer contained 7 units, with k = 5. The

Experiments
Experiment 1
Our first simulation experiment was designed to uncover
the degree to which our model exhibits savings. Recall that animals are faster to reacquire an extinguished
behavior, as compared to initial acquisition, and they
are faster to extinguish a reacquired behavior, as com311

Table 1: The three training sessions, and single testing
session, used in Experiment 2. Letters correspond to
different stimuli. A plus indicates acquisition training,
and a minus indicates extinction training.
Acquisition

Extinction

Reacquisition

Test

A+
BC+
D-

ABCD-

A+
B+

AD
BC

Table 2: The three training sessions, and single testing
session, used in Experiment 3. Letters correspond to different stimuli. A plus indicates acquisition training, and
a minus indicates extinction training. Note that “AB+”
indicates that both A and B were presented together, as
a compound, and this compound was reinforced.

Figure 2: The number of training trials required to reach
criterion (Y axis) decreases as number of prior acquisition and extinction training sessions (X axis) increases.
Error bars report the standard error of the mean.

pared to initial extinction. A randomly initialized network was trained to respond upon the presentation of
the CS (A+). Once this training reached criterion, the
network was trained to not-respond upon the presentation of the CS (A-). This pattern was repeated 5 times.
Figure 2 shows the number of trials required for successive acquisition and extinction trainings. Note that the
required time quickly decreases. The model predicts that
the required number of trials will asymptote to a small
value after just a few acquisition-extinction iterations.
Why does this model exhibit savings? The network
starts with small initial synaptic weights. Hence, a large
change in weights is required for success during the first
acquisition training session, and these weights are slowly
built up on those acquisition neurons in the hidden layer
that happen to win the competition imposed by lateral
inhibition. During the first extinction training session,
feedback from the output layer to the hidden layer encourages a different set of hidden units to become active,
and these units take on the role of extinction neurons.
The weights to the acquisition neurons start decreasing
and the weights to the extinction neurons start increasing. As soon as the extinction neurons win the inhibitory
competition, the acquisition neurons tend to fall below
their firing threshold. At this stage, the weights to the
acquisition neurons stop decreasing, as these neurons
are no longer contributing to erroneous outputs. The
weights to the extinction neurons continue to increase
until the training criterion is met. During the second acquisition training, the weights to the acquisition neurons
begin increasing again and the weights to the extinction
neurons start to decrease. Once again, as soon as the
extinction neurons lose the inhibitory competition, their
activity falls essentially to zero, and their weights do not
decrease further. Over successive acquisition and extinction trainings, the amount of change in weights keeps de-

Acquisition

Extinction

A+
BC+
D-

ABCD-

Reacquisition

Test

AB+

AD
BC

creasing. Thus, acquisition and extinction associations
are eventually maintained side by side in the network,
allowing for the rapid switching between them based on
recent conditioning feedback.

Experiment 2
The design of our second experiment is shown in Table 1. As previously discussed, Rescorla designed this
experiment to assess whether the rapidity of reacquisition was a result of residual synaptic plasticity or of an
increase in acquisition speed after extinction (Rescorla,
2002). A randomly initialized network was first trained
on two CSs (A+ and C+) while two other stimuli were
non-reinforced (B- and D-). Once the network reached
criterion, it was then trained to extinguish A and C (Aand C-). During this session, B and D were presented
in a non-reinforced manner as well (B- and D-). This
was followed by training on A and B (A+ and B+) for
20 trials.1 At the end of these training sessions, the response to A was much stronger than the response to B
(t(38) = 26.1, p < 0.001), as shown in Figure 3. This
is in accordance with Rescorla’s observations. Finally,
the network was tested on the compounds: AD and BC.
As observed behaviorally, the network showed greater
responding for BC than for AD (t(38) = 2.9, p < 0.006).
See Figure 4.
In addition to capturing these general empirical re1

This number of trials was chosen to make these results
comparable to those from Experiment 3. In Experiment 3,
it was found that 20 trials were needed, on average, to train
the AB compound to criterion.

312

Figure 3: Experiment 2. Top: Results from Rescorla’s
experiment — mean responding for A, B, and with no
stimulus present (Pre) during the reacquisition phase.
Bottom: Simulation result — response magnitude for A
and B at the end of the reacquisition phase, with error
bars showing standard errors of the mean.

Figure 4: Experiment 2. Top: Results from Rescorla’s
experiment — mean responding for AD, BC, and with
no stimulus present (Pre). Bottom: Simulation result —
response magnitude for AD and BC compounds, with
error bars showing standard errors of the mean. Note
that BC produced a stronger response than AD.

sults, our model also matches more subtle nuances in
Rescorla’s data. First, the compound BC produced a
much stronger response in animals than either B or C
alone. Second, the compound AD was found to produce
significantly weaker responding than stimulus A, alone.
Our model captures both of these results. How can these
results be explained? First, weights to B’s acquisition
neurons were strong, due to acquisition training, but it
maintained only weak extinction neuron weights, since
B was never extinguished. After extinction, C was left
with strong weights for both acquisition neurons and extinction neurons. Interacting through bidirectional excitation with the output layer, the acquisition neurons for
both B and C were able to mutually support each other,
producing a strong overall response. In comparison, the
weakly extinction-biased weights of D, when combined
with the strong but balanced weights of A, were enough
to start to tip the inhibitory competition in the direction
of a null response when A and D were combined.

to identify speeded learning after extinction by equalizing for the amount of error experienced by both A and
B during reacquisition training. A randomly initialized
network was trained as before, with the only difference
being the use of a compound stimulus (AB+) during
reacquisition training. Reaching criterion during reacquisition required 20 trials, on average. As observed in
animals, the network produced stronger responding for
AD than for BC (t(38) = 5.0, p < 0.001). See Figure 5.
Our model contains no mechanism for increasing the
rate of learning for A after its extinction. So, how did
our model capture this pattern of performance? This
was not due to a speeding of learning with regard to
the A stimulus, but due to a blocking of learning with
regard to the B stimulus. When we measured the overall increase in the weights from the input layer to the
acquisition neurons for the B stimulus, we found that
this increase was only 0.083 for this experiment, while
an increase of 0.407 was found for Experiment 2. At the
beginning of the reacquisition phase, the AB compound
produced very little responding. Hence, the error signal
driving synaptic changes was strong. However, within

Experiment 3
Table 2 shows the design of our third experiment. As
previously discussed, Rescorla designed this experiment
313

mance exhibited by animals.
In this paper, we have conceptualized the output of
the network as encoding the propensity to produce the
conditioned response. Alternatively, the network output
could be interpreted as encoding an expectation of reward. In this case, separate neural circuitry would be
responsible for converting this reward expectation into
a response. Note that both of these interpretations are
consistent with the results that we have presented here.
It is important to note that the learning mechanisms of
our model are very similar to those used in other simple
associative models of conditioning. Thus, this model can
easily capture common conditioning results like blocking, summation, and overshadowing. Our model also
seems well suited to explore other extinction-related behavioral results, such as conditioned inhibition, counter
conditioning, latent inhibition, reinstatement, renewal,
and spontaneous recovery. We are in the process of modeling all of these phenomena.
This work is part of a broader effort to explain the
full range of conditioning phenomena in terms of the
fundamental properties of neural circuits. Notice that
our model depended not at all on the specific properties
of particular brain areas. If successful, this effort will
help us understand why vastly different brains produce
similar patterns of learning.

Acknowledgments
The authors extend their thanks to the members of the
Vanderbilt Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory (CCNL) and to three anonymous reviewers.
Figure 5: Experiment 3. Top: Results from Rescorla’s
experiment — mean responding for AD, BC, and with
no stimulus present (Pre). Bottom: Simulation result —
response magnitude for AD and BC compounds, with
error bars showing standard errors of the mean. Note
that AD produced a stronger response than BC.

References
Bouton, M. E. (2004). Context and behavioral processes
in extinction. Learning and Memory, 11:485–494.
Kehoe, E. J. (1988). A layered network model of associative learning: Learning to learn and configuration.
Psychological Review, 95(4):411–433.
Klopf, A. H. (1988). A neuronal model of classical conditioning. Psychobiology, 16(2):85–125.
Medina, J. F., Garcia, K. S., and Mauk, M. D. (2001).
A mechanism for savings in the cerebellum. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 21(11):4081–4089.
O’Reilly, R. C. and Munakata, Y. (2000). Computational Explorations in Cognitive Neuroscience: Understanding the Mind by Simulating the Brain. MIT
Press.
Rescorla, R. A. (2001). Retraining of extinguished pavlovian stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 27(2):115–124.
Rescorla, R. A. (2002). Savings tests: Separating differences in rate of learning from differences in initial
levels. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 28(4):369–377.
Rescorla, R. A. (2003). More rapid associative change
with retraining than with initial training. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 29(4):251–260.
Reynolds, G. S. (1975). A Primer of Operant Conditioning. Scott, Foresman and Company.

only a few trials the network started producing a strong
response, due to A’s prior history of acquisition. At this
point the magnitude of error signal dropped substantially, and B’s weights stopped growing. In contrast,
Experiment 2 included reaquisition trials involving B,
alone, which produced a small response for the 20 trials
in this phase, driving strong weight changes throughout.

Discussion
We have proposed a neurocomputational model for savings in conditioning and extinction. This model rejects
the notion that extinction involves only a reversal in
previously acquired synaptic associations, positing, instead, the existence of a separate pathway for extinction
effects. This separate pathway is not an isolated architectural component of the model, however. Segregated
acquisition and extinction pathways arise spontaneously
through the interaction of foundational neural processes,
including error-driven synaptic plasticity, bidirectional
excitation, and strong lateral inhibition. We have shown
that our model captures the relevant patterns of perfor314

