UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning to Control Dynamic Systems: Information Utilization and Future Planning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d38x744

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Fu, Wai-Tat
Gonzalez, Cleotilde

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning to Control Dynamic Systems: Information Utilization
and Future Planning
Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@uiuc.edu)
Human Factors Division and Beckman Institute
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1 Airport Road, Savoy, IL 61874

Cleotilde Gonzalez (conzalez@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Social and Decision Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Behavioral research on dynamic systems shows
surprisingly poor performance, sometimes even with
practice (e.g., Berry & Broadbent, 1984; Brehmer, 1992;
Jensen & Brehmer, 2003; Kerstholt & Raaijmakers, 1997;
Sterman, 1989). One possible reason for the poor
performance is the individuals’ inability to incorporate
delayed feedback into their decisions (Brehmer & Allard,
1991). In particular, people often fail to account for actions
which had been initiated but not yet had their effects. In
many cases, people have to respond to a new stimulus
before they receive feedback from the previous trial. In
addition, people often attribute the dynamics they
experience to external events, when in fact these dynamics
are internally generated by their own actions. This “openloop” mental model (Sterman, 1989) is believed to hinder
learning of the temporal dynamics of complex systems.
Indeed, we believe that the temporal dynamics inherent in
the system create a very difficult credit-assignment problem
for the learners: positive or negative outcomes of actions
have to be associated with the corresponding earlier actions
(e.g., see Fu & Anderson, 2006 a, b) so that better choice of
actions can be made in the future. The credit-assignment
problem not only requires a reinforcement-learning
mechanism (Fu & Anderson, 2006b), but also an
appropriate mental representation of how the states of the
dynamic system may change wit different actions.
We chose to study subjects’ behavior in a simulated
supply chain management system. Supply chain
management is a common and simple concept: your
customer orders products from you; you keep track of what
you're selling, you order enough raw materials from your
suppliers to meet your customers' demand and keep your
inventory and backorders as low as possible. Although the
concept is simple, the dynamics of the input-output
relationship in the whole supply chain have known to cause
significant difficulties for people to perform optimally (e.g.,
Croson & Donohue, 2002). Coordination and
communication between suppliers, manufactures, and
wholesalers is often considered the main difficulty in supply
chain management (Croson and Donohue, 2000). However,

Abstract
Dynamic systems involve states that change both
autonomously and as a consequence of the learner’s actions.
Research has shown surprisingly poor performance when
people learn to control dynamic systems. Many researchers
have proposed that learners often misperceive the feedback
provided by the dynamic system, although it is still unclear
how the feedback is misperceived and what can be done to
improve learning. In two experiments, we studied learning
behavior in a dynamic system called the beer game. We found
that performance did improve through repeated practice, but
subjects had a strong tendency to ignore the temporal
dynamics in the system. Concurrent verbal reports indicated
that performance improved mostly through better utilization
of information related to the temporal dynamics of the system.
As a consequence, subjects learned to anticipate changes in
the system. In the second experiment, we provided only
information that was critical for their decisions and found that
initial performance was significantly better, indicating faster
learning. It is concluded that poor utilization of information
that is critical to the temporal dynamics of the system and
insufficient anticipation of system changes are the major
problems for learning in dynamic systems.

Introduction
Recent research on decision making has shed significant
light on human behavior in a variety of microeconomic
contexts. Despite its success of explaining behavior in static
and discrete decisions or judgments, relatively little work
has been done to study decision behavior in dynamic
systems. One of the characteristics of dynamic systems is
that actions of the decision maker often cause, either
directly or indirectly, changes in the system itself, which
then affect the effects of future actions. For example, a
firm’s decision to increase production feeds back through
the market to influence the demand and price of goods;
greater output may also tighten the markets for labor and
raw materials to which competitors may react – all
influencing future production decisions. Such multiple
feedbacks, some of them with time delays, are arguably the
norm rather than the exception in real problems of decision
making.
244

a retailer, a distributor who supplies the wholesaler, and a
factory that brews the beer (it obtains it from an
inexhaustible external supply) and supplies the distributor.
We developed a computerized version of the beer game that
was used in all the experiments reported in this paper. A
screenshot of this simulation is presented in Figure 1.
In the original version of the game, individuals play the
game in groups of four, with each participant playing the
role of one of the four facilities. Their goal is to minimize
the cost for the entire supply chain. Each player contributes
to this goal by ordering beer from their respective supplier
in a manner that maintains enough beer in their respective
inventory to meet the demand from their respective
customer (i.e., the facility they supply, or the consumer in
the case of the retailer).
The customer’s order is filled with available inventory,
and then the player orders more beer from their supplier to
replenish the loss from their inventory. Difficulties arise
when players must anticipate demand, as there is a oneweek delay between when an order is placed and when the
supplier receives the order. Assuming that the supplier has
enough inventories, there is an additional two-week
transportation delay before the player receives the ordered
beer. If the supplier’s inventory is too small to fill the order,
additional delays will occur.
Costs accrue as follows. Each week, each player is
charged a 50¢ holding fee for each case of beer in their
inventory. If inventory is too small to meet demand, the
shortage is backlogged to be filled as soon as possible.
Players are charged a weekly $1 shortage fee for each case
of backordered beer. The basic strategy, therefore, is to
minimize inventory while avoiding backorders. The
dynamics of the beer game make successful performance
difficult.

our focus in this paper is on the psychology of decision
making that emerge from individual behavior.

Misperception of feedback
In its strongest form, the misperception of feedback
hypothesis implies that people simply cannot learn to
control dynamically complex systems. Indeed, researchers
often demonstrate that individuals cannot understand the
‘basic building blocks’ of systems thinking such as the
concept of stocks and flows (e.g., Sweeney & Sterman,
2000). On the other hand, significant learning is observed in
complex dynamic systems, suggesting that although people
may not understand the building blocks of dynamic systems,
extended practice may give them the opportunity to
accumulate experiences with the relationships between
control inputs and system outputs, utilize relevant
information that will affect their performance and dynamics
of the system, and how to engage in future planning to
anticipate common situations (Kerstholt and Raaijmakers,
1997). The goal of this paper is to collect detailed protocol
data to understand the changes underlying the improvement
in performance as subjects learn to control a dynamic
system.
One possible explanation for the negative effects of
information delays is that people do not detect there are
feedback delays despite the fact that they had all the
information that they need to infer them. For example, in the
experiments by Brehmer and Allard (1991), although
subjects consistently reported having detected that outcomes
of their actions were delayed, most subjects could not infer
the nature of the delays and failed to adopt the appropriate
strategy to compensate for the delays. In fact, Brehmer and
Allard found that subjects simply adopted the same strategy
in situations when there were significant delays and in
situations when there was no delay.
We focus on two questions related to the learning of
temporal dynamics: (1) what information do people utilize
to make decisions in a dynamic situation, and how the
utilization of information change with experience, and (2)
what are the major differences in terms of strategies or
processes when we compare learning behavior between a
static and a dynamic situation. To preview our results, we
found that people tended to ignore the temporal dynamics
initially, and as a consequence failed to utilize information
that indirectly influenced the outcome of their decisions. In
addition, we found that future planning was essential to
anticipate changes as well as outcomes of actions in
dynamic systems, and it often took a significant amount of
experience for people to learn to engage in future planning.

Supply Chain Management: The Beer Game

Figure 1.A screenshot of the beer game simulation.

We collected empirical data from individuals as they
performed a supply chain management task called the “Beer
Game” (Sterman, 1989). The beer game represents a
simplified supply chain consisting of a single retailer who
supplies beer to a consumer (simulated as an external
demand function), a single wholesaler who supplies beer to

The Temporal Dynamics in the Beer Game
Figure 2 shows the simplified temporal dynamics
involved in the beer game when the player is deciding on
how much to order from the factory (i.e., the player works
245

and oscillations are very costly, but unfortunately the
bullwhip effect is very common and it has been treated as an
inevitable effect of every supply chain.
In multiple experiments, Sterman (1989, 2004) has
demonstrated the bullwhip effect in the laboratory, using the
beer game. Analyzing individual behavior he has concluded
that individuals do not learn to control the system because
they often fail to account adequately for the supply line
(they misperceive the feedback provided by dynamic
systems). Thus, in responding to high demand, players
increase their orders too much leading to excess inventory.
Researchers have identified several causes for the
bullwhip effect. Rational decision makers must use current
demand to forecast future demand in an effort to control the
impact of order delays, transport delays, production delays,
etc. on inventory. Forecasts based on simple ordering
formulae (e.g., moving averages) lead to the bullwhip effect.
Ordering in batches (e.g., monthly instead of daily) can also
create the bullwhip effect. Other causes include fluctuating
prices which lead to forward buying, and rationing where
suppliers divide limited inventory among customers who
then inflate their orders to get a bigger share (Croson &
Donohue, 2002).
The Beer Game is much simpler than real world supply
chains. Since prices are fixed players have no incentive for
forward buying. The frequency with which orders are placed
is fixed at one per week. This prevents order batching. Each
facility in the supply chain has only one customer. Thus
rationing is not possible. In addition, in the scenario
commonly used in the beer game experiments, external
consumer demand starts at a constant of 4 cases of beer per
week and then jumps to a constant of 8 cases per week at the
fifth week and remains there for the remainder of what is
typically a 52 week scenario.

as the distributor). Once the order is placed, it will go to the
factory, but there is a one-week delay (i.e., the “recent
order” box) before it reaches the factory. When the factory
sends out the beer, it will be in the supply line (i.e., the
arrows and the trucks between the Factory and the
Distributor in Figure 1) and it takes two weeks before the
beer can be used to satisfy the demand from the wholesaler.
The current inventory (if any) or backorder will be updated
after beer is sent to the wholesaler.
In the experiments reported here, subjects played the role
of the distributor, and decided how much to order from the
factory. The order took one week to reach the factory. After
the order was received, the factory sent the beer to the
distributor, which took 2 weeks. The dotted arrow indicates
a common misperception, that the order placed would
directly influence the inventory/backorder without delay,
ignoring the temporal dynamics in the system.
Recent
order

Place
order

Factory

Inventory/
Backorder

Supply
line

Demand
from
wholesaler

Figure 2. The temporal dynamics in the beer game and the
common misperception by subjects.
The retailer, wholesaler and factory were played by the
same computer algorithm, which ordered the demand
associated to the position. Thus, variability was not added to
the external customer demand as it propagated upstream
through the supply chain.
Previous studies show that people tended to under-weigh
the supply line, which eventually led to large fluctuations in
inventories (Sterman, 1989; Croson & Donohue, 2002). In
other words, instead of developing the mental model as
shown in Figure 2, people tend to assume a direct influence
from the order to the inventory/backorder (i.e., the dotted
arrow in Figure 2), instead of the delayed influence through
the factory and the supply line. The underweighting of the
supply line seems to be persistent and robust across
participants. Surprisingly, although the underweighting of
the supply line was identified as the major reason of poor
performance in supply chain management, there is, to our
knowledge, still no good understanding of why this
underweighting occurs.
The Bullwhip Effect
The bullwhip effect is a real-world phenomenon that
involves oscillations of net inventory (i.e., inventory –
backorders) at each level of the supply chain and
amplification of those oscillations as one moves farther up
the chain (Croson and Donohue, 2002). The amplification

Experiment 1
Our experiment required playing the beer game for 20
trials, where each trial used the standard 52-week scenario.
The experiment, therefore, required a total of 1,040 ordering
decisions in contrast to the typical single-trial experiment
that requires a one-time run of 52 weeks and thus 52
ordering decisions.

Method
20 subjects were recruited from the Carnegie Mellon
University community. Subjects were paid $15 for their
participation.
To familiarize subjects with the system they played a
short 20-week training scenario with a constant demand
increase from 4 to 8 at week 5. The purpose of the training
scenario was to illustrate how to order from the factory and
how the inventory and backorder were calculated as they
progressed. All other questions are also answered during
this time. To stimulate active learning and to encourage
subjects to aim at reducing the total cost, subjects were
required to keep the inventory and backorder below 20, and
the total cost below 100. If subjects failed to meet any of

246

these criteria, they were asked to repeat the training scenario.
Subjects repeated the training scenario 3.4 times on average.
After finishing the training scenario, subjects played the
standard 52-week scenario for 20 trials. In a standard
scenario, the demand from the wholesaler started at 4,
increased to 8, back to 4, decreased to 2, and then went back
to 4 and stayed there until the end of the trial. The weeks at
which the demand change occurred were noisy, so that
across trials, subjects could not simply recall when the
changes would occur. Specifically, an integer was randomly
selected from the range from -2 to +2 and the selected
integer was added to the weeks when changes occurred.
To understand changes in performance with practice,
concurrent verbal protocols were collected from half of the
subjects during trial 1, 11, and 20. Subjects were asked to
“think aloud” when they were playing the games in these
trials. They were specifically told to mention all information
they were utilizing on the screen as well as in memory, all
mental calculations, and all reasoning that they used during
the task. All verbal utterances, the screen, and their actions
were recorded as “movie” files by a computer program.

Results
Figure 3 shows the mean net inventory of the subjects in
trial 1, 11, and 20. Subjects in trial 1 had large fluctuations
in their net inventory. The largest fluctuation was near week
20, where the demand was decreased from 8 to 4 for the first
time, and then further decreased to 2 in week 30. The
inventory peaked at approximately 30 in trial 1, but the peak
was reduced to approximately 10 in trial 11. In trial 20, the
peak was further reduced to below 5 throughout the weeks.
The mean total cost after 52 weeks was 372.35, 152.54, and
91.01 for trial 1, 11, and 20 respectively. A two-tailed
paired t-test shows that the differences were significant
(t(10)=6.24, p<0.001; t(10)=2.64, p<0.05), indicating
learning across trials. Since the cost for inventory was lower
than that for backorder, there was a bias towards keeping an
inventory, as shown in Figure 3.

Table 1. The mean frequencies of use of information for
each order to the factory in trial 1, 11, and 20.
Categories
Future planning
Demand_distributor
Supply Line
Demand_retailer
Inventory/Backorder
Total cost
Recent orders
Demand_others
Inventory_others

35
Experiment 1

30
trial 1
trial 11
trial 20
demand

Mean Net Inventory

25
20

10
5
0
6

11

16

21

26

31

36

41

46

Trial 1
0.5
17.9
2.1
0.6
16.9
1.1
2
0.8
2

Trial 11
4
13.5
5.2
4.3
9.8
0.2
0.4
0
0.2

Trial 20
7
8
6.6
5.2
5.3
0.1
0
0
0

With practice, we found it striking that subject started to
increasingly utilize the supply line and the demand to the
retailer, and they had also learned to have more future
planning, suggesting that they were adapting to the temporal
dynamics of the system. They had also reduced the
utilization of the demand from the wholesaler and the
inventories/backorders. The utilization of other “irrelevant”
information, such as the demand and inventories to others
(e.g., the wholesaler or factory), were also reduced. The
differences in future planning and inventory/backorder were
significant (t(10)=3.56, p<0.01; t(10)=2.12, p<0.05 and
t(10)=2.30, p<0.05; t(10)=0.05 respectively). Although the
other differences were not significant due to the small

15

1

The verbal protocols were transcribed and coded
according to what information was used to determine the
order to the factory. We found that they fell into 8
categories: Inventory/Backorder, recent order, total cost (of
distributor), supply line, demand for the distributor
(demand_distributor),
demand
for
the
retailer
(demand_retailer), demand for others (demand_others), and
inventory and backorder for others (inventory_others). We
also noted instances where subjects explicitly expressed
future planning or prediction. For example, as when subjects
expressed things of the kind “I know that the demand is
going to increase in a few weeks”. The coding results from
the verbal protocols are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 shows that in trial 1, subjects were mostly
utilizing the demand from the wholesaler (i.e.,
demand_distributor), and their own inventories and/or
backorders, and relatively under-utilized the supply line,
and the demand to the retailer. This is consistent with
previous findings (e.g., Sterman, 1989) that subjects tended
to ignore the temporal dynamics of the system and
attempted to find direct, immediate feedback between
actions and their effects. In this case, subjects almost
ignored the fact that to reduce the inventories/backorders,
the supply line was as important as the current demand and
the inventory/backorder. The fact that they under-utilized
the demand to the retailer suggested that they were not
looking ahead to how demand might have changed in the
near future. In fact, we believe the high fluctuations shown
in Figure 3 could be well explained by this lack of future
planning in the first trial.

51

-5
Trials
-10

Figure 3. The demand and the mean net inventory in trial 1,
11, and 20 in Experiment 1.
247

costs for trial 11 and 20 were 156.87 and 85.67 respectively.
The differences of total costs between the three trials were
significant (t(19)=2.46, p<0.05; t(19)=4.79, p<0.001),
indicating learning across trials.

number of subjects, the general pattern was consistent with
this interpretation.
The results from Experiment 1 showed that with extended
practice, subjects learned to improved performance
significantly, even when the demand changes were variable.
This finding supported the notion that subjects had learned
to generalize from experience and were able to anticipate
demand changes. Results from verbal protocols showed that
initially, subjects utilized information that was not critical
for their decisions and rarely engaged in future planning.
With practice, subjects learned to utilize most of the critical
information and ignored most of the “irrelevant”
information, and were engaged in future planning to
anticipate changes in external demand.

35

Mean Net Inventory

25

Experiment 2
Results from Experiment 1 suggest that subjects might have
misperceived the system dynamics by ignoring the temporal
dynamics and assuming immediate effects of actions. As a
result, they did not fully utilize information that was
important in controlling their own inventories/backorders.
With practice, subjects learned to utilize the important
information
and
ignore
“irrelevant”
information
(information that did not directly affect the decision on how
many to order from the factory). In Experiment 2, we
further tested the idea that poor performance in early trials
was caused by poor utilization of relevant information. In
Experiment 2, we removed most of the information that was
not critical for the calculation for the decision (i.e., the
demand, recent orders, costs, and inventories/backorders of
the retailers, the wholesaler, and the factory.) and just
provided subjects with the important information. Our
prediction was that providing only relevant information
would help subjects to focus on figuring out the temporal
dynamics of the system, resulting in better performance
(low oscillations).

Experiment 2

trial 1
trial 11
trial 20
demand

30

20
15
10
5
0
1

6

11

16

21

26

31

36

41

46

51

-5
Trials
-10

Figure 4. The demand and the mean net inventory in trial 1,
11, and 20 in Experiment 2.
Figure 5 shows the learning trends for both experiments.
We can clearly see the difference between the two
experiments in the first 10 trials. In Experiment 1, when
irrelevant information was available, subjects started out
with a much higher total cost, and slowly started to reduce
the total cost across trials. On the other hand, in Experiment
2, when only relevant information was available, subjects
started out with a much smaller total cost and learned across
trials to reduce it. At around trial 10, subjects in both
experiments reached roughly the same level, although they
kept improving at a similar rate from that point onwards.
As we showed in the analyses of the verbal protocols,
subjects in Experiment 1 started out utilizing their own
inventory/backorder and the demand from the wholesaler.
This was a clear indication that subjects were ignoring the
temporal dynamics and were assuming a “closed-loop”
system with static relationship between their actions and
their effects. The lack of understanding of the temporal
dynamics was also supported by their lack of anticipation of
the changes in customer demand, which eventually
propagated through the supply chain and affect the demand
from the wholesaler and their inventories.
The difference in the first 10 trials between the two
experiments suggests that the absence of irrelevant
information helps subjects to learn the temporal dynamics of
the system. In fact, it probably took subjects roughly 10
trials to figure out what information was important, and
perhaps after that they started to understand how the supply
line and customer demand may affect the temporal
dynamics of the system.

Method
20 subjects were recruited from the Carnegie Mellon
University community. Subjects were paid $15 for their
participation. The procedures were the same as those in
Experiment 1, except that only the demand from the
wholesaler, their own inventories/backorders, the supply
line, and the demand to the retailer were provided to the
subjects. All other information was not available on the
screen.

Results
Figure 4 shows the mean net inventories in trial 1, 11, and
20 in Experiment 2. Comparing it to the oscillations in
Figure 3, one can clearly see that the fluctuations in trial 1
were much lower. Indeed, after 52 weeks, the total cost for
trial 1 was 218.16. The difference in the first trial between
the two experiments was significant (t(19)=5.37, p < 0.001),
indicating that performance when only important
information was shown was better than when information
for all players was also provided in Experiment 1. The total
248

learning difficulties: people need to develop the strategies
needed to compensate for the delays. The development of
these compensation strategies require clear understanding of
the states of the systems which requires prolonged
experiences. Indeed, our results suggest that people often
have difficulty recognizing what information is relevant for
the temporal dynamics and how those information may help
them anticipate future changes in the system. We show that
by directing the focus on relevant information, learning can
be much more effective.

Total Cost

400
350

Experiment 1

300

Experiment 2

250
200
150
100

Acknowledgments

50

This research was partially supported by the Advanced
Decision Architectures Collaborative Technology Alliance
sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory
(DAAD19-01-2-0009) and the Multidisciplinary University
Research Initiative grant from the Army Research Office
(W911NF-05-1-0153). We thank Jack Lim for
programming the beer game simulation, Polina Vanyukov
for collecting and transcribing the verbal protocols, and
Aanand Radia for collecting part of the data in Experiment 1.

0
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

Trials

Figure 5. The total cost at the end of each of the 20 trials in
both experiments.

Discussions
Consistent with previous results (Steman, 1989), we found
that subjects had trouble dealing with the long time delays
between placing and receiving orders – the supply line. The
results show that initially, most subjects failed to account
for the supply line adequately, which has been considered a
major cause for poor performance. However, we found that,
with practice, subjects learned to utilize the supply line and
to anticipate the customer demand, and learned to ignore
other information, especially those that were not critical for
their decisions on how many to order from the factory.
The results reinforce and extend prior work in dynamic
decision-making (Brehmer, 1987; Hogarth, 1981, Sterman,
1989). A heuristic may produce stable behavior in one
setting and oscillation in another solely as a function of the
feedback structure in which it is embedded. In general, we
found that subjects had a strong tendency to assume a static
environment in which directional input-output (i.e., action
and its effect) exists. This is consistent with previous results
in which subjects were found to implicitly learn to perform
better (by simple input-output association) without explicit
awareness of the dynamics of the systems (e.g., Berry &
Broadbent, 1984). In our studies, we found that it took
subjects a long period of training to (1) utilize the right set
of information that are relevant to the temporal dynamics of
the system, and (2) anticipate future demand changes by
having sufficient future planning to incorporate their
understanding of the dynamics into the appropriate actions.
Our results show that the current approach is useful in
understanding complex dynamic systems. We found that the
change in utilization of information as a major factor for
poor learning, which had been neglected by previous
research using simple aggregate methods such as regression
and statistical techniques in operations research (e.g.,
Croson & Donohue, 2002). Our results show that
misperception of feedback is an incomplete explanation of

References
Berry, D.C. & Broadbent, D.E. (1984). On the relationship
between task performance and associated verbalized knowledge.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36, 209-231.
Brehmer, B. (1992). Dynamic decision making: Human control of
complex systems. Acta Psychologica, 81, 211- 241.
Brehmer, B., & Allard, R. (1991). Real-time, dynamic decision
making: The effects of complexity and feedback delays. In J.
Rasmussen, B Brehmer, & J. Leplat (Eds.), Distributed Decision
Making: Cognitive models of cooperative work. New York:
Wiley.
Croson, R. & Donohue, K. (2002). Experimental economics and
supply chain management. Interfaces, 32, 74-82.
Fu, W.-T. & Anderson, J. R. (2006a). From Recurrent Choice to
Skilled Learning: A Reinforcement Learning Model . Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 2.
Fu, W.-T., & Anderson, J. R. (2006b). Solving the creditassignment problem: The interaction of explicit and implicit
learning with internal and external state information. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Jensen, E., & Brehmer, B. (2003). Understanding and control of a
simple dynamic system. System Dynamics Review, 19, 119-137.
Kerstholt, J.H. & Raaijmakers J.G.W. (1997). Decision making in
dynamic task environments. In R. Ranyard, W.R. Crozier, & O.
Svenson (Eds.), Decision making: Cognitive models and
explanations. Ablex: Norwood, NJ.
Sterman, J. (1989). Misperceptions of feedback in dynamic
decision making. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 43(3), 301-335.
Sweeney, L.B., & Sterman, J.D. (2000). Bathtub dynamics: Initial
results of a systems thinking inventory. System Dynamics
Review, 16, 249-286.

249

