UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Abstract Relations Through Analogy to Concrete Exemplars

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9m46t98s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Love, Bradley C.
Tomlinson, Markus T.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Abstract Relations Through Analogy to Concrete Exemplars
Marc T. Tomlinson and Bradley C. Love
[mtomlinson,love]@love.psy.utexas.edu
University of Texas At Austin
1 University Station, A8000
Austin, TX 78712-0187 USA

Category Learning

Abstract

Proposals for category representation are diverse, ranging from exemplar-based (Medin & Schaffer, 1978) to
prototype-based (Smith & Minda, 1998) and include
proposals between these two extremes (Love, Medin, &
Gureckis, 2004).
In the present work, we focus on exemplar-based
proposals. Exemplar-models of category learning hold
that all abstraction or generalization occurs through
similarity-based activations of concrete examples. In exemplar models, each experienced instance is stored in
memory. When a new item is encountered, the similarity between the item and each exemplar in memory is
calculated. The stimulus is predicted to belong in the
category with the greatest sum of pairwise similarity.
Thus, exemplar models clearly link experienced events
to later generalization.
The model of relational learning that we will develop here, BRIDGES, is an extension of Kruschke’s
(1992) ALCOVE connectionist exemplar model of category learning. BRIDGES’s exemplar representation will
support the notion that analogy to stored experiences is
sufficient to appreciate abstract relationships. Furthermore, by incorporating ALCOVE’s attentional shifting
mechanisms into BRIDGES, we forward an explanation
of how perceived similarity can change over the course of
learning as more predictive stimulus properties are accentuated. Such attentional shifts will prove useful in
demonstrating how seemingly abstract understandings
can arise from concrete experiences.
Finally, ALCOVE has been a very successful model
of category learning and provides a strong foundation
for bridging the category learning and analogy literatures. By virtue of containing ALCOVE as a special
case, BRIDGES accounts for a wide variety of prior human learning studies examining how people acquire categories determined by featural regularities.

We present a model that bridges work in analogy
and category learning. The model, Building Relations through Instance Driven Gradient Error Shifting (BRIDGES), extends ALCOVE, an exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning (Kruschke,
1992). Unlike ALCOVE which is limited to featural or spatial representations, BRIDGES can appreciate analogical relationships between stimuli and stored
predicate representations of exemplars. Like ALCOVE,
BRIDGES learns to shift attention over the course of
learning to reduce error and, in the process, alters its
notion of similarity. A shift toward relational sources
of similarity allows BRIDGES to display what appears
to be an understanding of abstract domains, when in
fact performance is driven by similarity-based structural
alignment (i.e., analogy) to stored exemplars. Supportive simulations of animal, infant, and adult learning are
provided.

Introduction
We live in a world of concrete experiences, yet we appreciate seemingly abstract concepts. Category contrasts
like “same” or “different” and “predator” or “prey” are
not based on featural regularities. Instead, these concepts are relational in nature (e.g., two identical objects
of any size, color, or shape are the same). How do we
acquire concepts that are not based on featural regularities?
The category learning literature has focused on how we
acquire new concepts, but largely in domains in which
the regularities are defined by distributions of features
(e.g., red objects are in one category, whereas blue objects are in the other category). In contrast, the analogy
literature has considered how people appreciate regularities defined by common relational structures, but has not
leveraged work in category learning detailing how people
integrate knowledge across examples and shift attention.
Here, we extend an existing model of category learning
to include a more sophisticated notion of similarity that
is sensitive to both featural and relational match. We
propose that in many domains where performance appears to be governed by mental rules, it is actually driven
by similarity-based activation of stored exemplars. This
account is supported by simulations of how young infants
learn seemingly abstract grammars and how animals and
people learn the distinction between same and different.

Analogy

2269

Analogical comparison can reveal non-obvious similarities. For example, people can appreciate that the
Rutherford atom is similar to the solar system because
the planets revolve around the sun much like how the
electrons revolve around the atom’s nucleus (Gentner,
1983). The perceived similarity between the atom and
the solar system is not based on feature overlap, but on
common relational structure.

Attention on Relation
Preserves Parallel Connectivity
Left_of (

,

)

map

Left_of(

Attention on Features
Preserves Featural Match
,

Left_of(

)

,

)

map

Left_of(

,

)

Figure 1: Example of attention on mapping
Numerous accounts of how people detect these analogical similarities exist. Transformational accounts hold
that one analog is transformed over a series of steps until
it matches the other analog (Hahn, Chater & Richardson, 2003). The fewer the steps and the smaller their
cost, the higher the resulting similarity is. The dominant
account of detecting non-obvious similarities is structure
mapping theory (Gentner, 1983). Although BRIDGES
could utilize other frameworks to reach its ends, such
as transformational approaches, we adopt the structure
mapping account because of the broad support it enjoys
in the analogy literature.
Structure mapping holds that people encode
stimuli (e.g., objects, scenes, events) in terms
of predicate representations that capture relations among entities (e.g., Revolves(planets,sun)).
Relations can serve as arguments to other relations (e.g., Causes(GreaterMass(sun,planets), Revolves(planets,sun))). Structure mapping posits that
people align such structured representations to find
the most satisfying correspondences.
In the solar
system/atom example, this alignment would involve
placing the sun in correspondence with the nucleus
and the planets in correspondence with the electrons.
Sounder mappings lead to increased perceived similarity
(Gentner & Markman, 1997).
Factors that influence the soundness of a mapping include: 1) one-to-one correspondence 2) parallel connectivity and 3) systematicity. One-to-one correspondence
is a hard rule that cannot be violated. Corresponding
entities and relations can map to at most one node in
the other structure. Parallel connectivity is a preference
for mapping arguments playing the same role within corresponding predicates to one another. For example, parallel connectivity is preserved for the revolves relation in
the atom/solar system example because the two revolves
predicates correspond and the arguments of these two
relations also map to the appropriate argument in the
other predicate (i.e., mapping the sun to the electrons
would not preserve parallel connectivity). As Figure 1 illustrates with a simpler perceptual analogy, parallel connectivity can be at odds with featural similarity. Finally,
systamaticity is a preference for mappings that are complete and deep (i.e., contain embedded systems of relations). These principles have been successfully embodied
in the SME model of analogical alignment (Falkenheiner,
Forbus, & Gentner, 1989).
More recent models within the structure mapping
framework have demonstrated that systematicity can
fall out of a system that enforces one-to-one mappings

and prefers parallel connected mappings (Larkey & Love,
2003). Thus, BRIDGES’s approach to structural alignment will incorporate these two constraints on the analogical mapping process. As will be more fully discussed
below, BRIDGES factors in both relational and featural
matches when determining mappings. When these two
forces are at odds (as in Figure 1), learned attentional
weightings determine the preferred mapping.

Overview of BRIDGES
BRIDGES is an exemplar-based model of category learning that can utilize structure mapping to appreciate analogical similarities. For any given comparison between
a stimulus and a stored exemplar, BRIDGES considers
all possible one-to-one mappings. Models of analogical
alignment avoid this exhaustive search by using heuristics to guide the mapping process. BRIDGES could be
extended to incorporate these shortcuts, but we do not
do so here. Instead we focus on the basic ideas underlying BRIDGES.
Out of all permissible mappings, BRIDGES chooses
the mapping that minimizes a difference measure that
incorporates notions of featural and relational mismatch
(see Figure 1). A relational mismatch of 1 occurs when
a relation does not exhibit parallel connectivity (see the
right panel of Figure 1). A featural mismatch of 1 occurs when non-identical entities or entities containing
mismatching features are mapped to one another (see
the right panel of Figure 1).
Both types of mismatch are weighted by attention
weights and the sum of these attention weighted mismatches yields an overall differences measure that is inversely proportional to similarity. The mapping that
maximizes similarity (i.e., minimizes attention weighted
difference) is chosen. These exemplar similarity values
serve as exemplar unit activations and are passed across
association weights to category units (e.g., predator and
prey). The stimulus tends to be classified into the category whose unit has the greatest activation.
After feedback is provided, attention weights and association weights between exemplars and category units
are adjusted to reduce error. Changes in attentional
weights can lead to different future mappings.
When attention shifts away from features and toward
relations, parallel connectivity (i.e., analogical match) is
stressed over featural similarity and BRIDGES demonstrates abstract understanding of a domain. Conversely,
when featural matches lead to successful predictions, attention shifts toward features and BRIDGES is governed
by featural similarity. When relational information is

2270

not discriminative or present, BRIDGES reduces to the
standard ALCOVE model.

where λα is the learning rate for attention weights. The
parameter values used in the simulations reported here
are λα = .007, λ= .001, c = .03, and φ = 6.1. These
values were chosen to maximize R2 in the second simulation.

BRIDGES’s Formalism
BRIDGES is a three-layer feed forward artificial neural
network. The input to BRIDGES contains both featural
and relational information in predicate argument form.
Each possible feature or relation has an associated attention weight. The activation (i.e., similarity) of each
exemplar j by stimulus s is
X
hj = maxm∈m (exp[−c(
αi · M ismatch(si ))]) (1)

Modeling Infant Grammar Learning
Marcus, Vijayan, Bandi Rao and Vishton (1999) found
that infants could discriminate between abstract patterns or grammars of speech sounds. Importantly, this
discrimination could not be accomplished by any weighting of phonetic features. Because featural regularities
could not be leverage to discriminate between grammars,
Marcus et al. proposed that infants utilized variable
binding in conjunction with algebraic rules to master
such learning tasks.
In Marcus et al.’s (1999) study, seven-month-old infants were exposed to sentences that followed either an
AAB pattern or an ABB pattern. The sentences were
made up of simple monosyllable sounds (words) such as
“GA TI TI”. Each infant was trained for approximately
2 minutes on one of the grammars. The 2-minute session contained three repetitions of 16 unique sentences.
There was a 250 milliseconds pause between each word
in the sentences and a one second pause between each
sentence. The testing phase consisted of presentation
of 12 sentences containing novel words. Half of the 12
sentences were from the same grammar used in training
and the other half were from the contrasting grammar.
Fifteen of the 16 infants in the study had greater looking
times during the presentation of the sentences from the
novel grammar, indicating that the infants had habituated to the abstract pattern.

i

where m∈M is all possible one-to-one mappings between
nodes (i.e., features, entities, and relations) forming
stimulus s and exemplar j, i ranges over nodes in stimulus s, αi is the attention weight associated with node
type si , and c is the specificity parameter that determines the rate that similarity falls off with increasing
mismatch. Mismatch is defined to be 1 for features or
entities in stimulus s that map to non-identical nodes
in exemplar j, otherwise 0. For relations, Mismatch is
defined to be 1 for relations in stimulus s not exhibiting
parallel connectivity, otherwise 0.
Activation passes from exemplars to category unit ok :
X
ok =
wkj · hj
(2)
j

where wjk is the association weight between exemplar j
and category unit ok . The probability of selecting the
category corresponding to category unit r is
X
P r(r) = exp(φor )/
exp(φok )
(3)

BRIDGES’s Simulation BRIDGES was applied to
the Marcus et al. (1999) study. Each sentence (e.g., “GA
TI TI”) was represented as an exemplar. BRIDGES’s
exemplar representation for “GA TI TI” is shown in Table 1. Each syllable is represented as an entity. Each
syllable’s position in the speech stream is encoded by
a positional feature. These syllables have a number of
phonetic features that are not represented in these simulations. Not including such features simplifies the simulations (and follows Marcus et al.’s presumption that no
significant regularities exist across these features). More
importantly, not including these additional features provides a strong test of BRIDGES as there are no featural
regularities that BRIDGES can rely on to discriminate
between the grammars.

k

where φ is a decision parameter and k ranges over all
category units.
Learning is accomplished via gradient descent error
minimization. The target value for the category unit
corresponding to the correct category is set to 1 and
other category nodes are set to 0. A “humble teacher”
scheme is used so that category unit output values in
the correct direction greater that 1 or less than 0 are not
penalized. The error function E minimized is
E=

1X
(tk − ok )2
2

(4)

k

Table 1: BRIDGES’s representation of “GA TI TI.”

where tk is the target value for ok . The association
weight wkj from exemplar j to output unit k is adjusted
by
∆wkj = λk (tk − ok )hj
(5)
where λw is the learning rate for association weights.
Attention weights are updated by
XX
∆αi = −λα
[ (tk −ok )wkj ]hj ·c·M ismatch(si ) (6)
j

k

Entities
GA1
T I1
T I2

Features
P osition(GA1 ) = 1
P osition(T I 1 ) = 2
P osition(T I 2 ) = 3

Relations
T ypeOf (GA1 , GA)
T ypeOf (T I 1 , T I)
T ypeOf (T I 2 , T I)

Critically, relational information was included in
BRIDGES’s representations. BRIDGES makes a distinction between tokens and types. In effect, we assume

2271

be discriminated by analogical mapping (even in simple
domains in which only the type relation is present) are
more encompassing than same/different. The analogical
mapping process in these simulations aligned the current
stimulus to stored exemplars — BRIDGES did not label
words within sentences as same or different nor did it
shift attention to a same feature. Abstract responding
arose through analogy to stored exemplars and attention
shifting from concrete features to relations.

that infants in Marcus’s et al.’s study have developed
categories of speech sounds. These type relations allow
for abstract patterns to be uncovered through analogy
to stored exemplars as one type of sound can mapped to
another.
The training and test regimen followed the original
Marcus et al. (1999) study as closely as possible. Following Love et al. (2004), unsupervised learning was modeled by a network consisting of a single category output
unit with a target value of 1 for all stimuli. In effect, this
category unit is a familiarity detector. Association and
attention weights in the model were adjusted to uncover
the underlying regularities across the sentences to yield
consistently high familiarity (i.e., high output values for
the category unit). During habituation, the 16 unique
sentences were presented three times each to BRIDGES
and stored as exemplars. On each presentation, association and attention weights were updated. After training
BRIDGES correctly responded to novel items from the
old grammar as familiar (output activation = 1.3) and a
novel items from the new grammar as unfamiliar (output
activation = .95).
Though not critical, we assumed that the saliency of
positional features is sufficiently great to constrain the
mapping process (i.e., words in sentences align temporally). Besides position (which does not discriminate
between grammars), no regularities across features or
entities existed. However, parallel connectivity was perfect for members of the same grammar. For instance,
“GA TI TI” is isomorphic to “LI NA NA” in that all
token and types in the type relation (see Table 1) can
be mapped to one another and preserve parallel connectivity. This degree of perfect match caused BRIDGES
to shift attention to the type relation. This shift makes
BRIDGES sensitive to the underlying grammar, rendering novel sentences following the original grammar somewhat familiar. Sentences not following the learned grammar do not analogically match stored exemplars (parallel
connectivity is violated), making these items less familiar
and resulting in greater looking time as infants dishabituate.

Modeling Same-Different Learning

Discussion BRIDGES is able to discriminate between
abstract patterns on the basis of analogical similarity.
Storing concrete exemplars, shifting attention, and analogical match are sufficient to show generalization to
novel items. BRIDGES’s success calls into question Marcus et al.’s (1999) claim that algebraic rules underly infant performance. However, BRIDGES’s success is attributable to its ability to bind arguments to relations,
which supports Marcus et al.’s claim that infants bind
variables.
Marcus (1999) has criticized other accounts (e.g. Seidenberg & Elman 1999) of these results for including a same/different detector within a learning mechanism. The BRIDGES simulations do not explicitly label speech sounds as identical, rather the model assumes
that infants can categorize speech sounds (Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk, & Vigorito, 1971), as embodied by the
type/token distinction. BRIDGES’s solution does not
hinge on a same detector. In fact, the patterns that can

BRIDGES holds that the basis for understanding abstract relations is similarity-based and therefore inherently graded. The design of the Marcus et al. study
did not touch on this possibility because stimuli were
either grammatical or ungrammatical. According to
BRIDGES, learners can both respond abstractly (i.e.,
generalize to featurally novel stimuli) and show evidence
for the influence of past examples. If BRIDGES is correct, category membership in relationally defined categories is graded as it is in natural categories (Rosch, &
Mervis 1975).
To evaluate BRIDGES’s predictions, we will consider
results from a series of studies exploring how pigeons
and humans learn notions of same and different. To illustrate how BRIDGES learns the concepts same and different, we will apply BRIDGES to Young and Wasserman’s
(1997) study of same/different discriminaton learning in
pigeons. To foreshadow, Young and Wasserman’s results
indicate that pigeons can master a notion of same and
different that cannot be explained by featural similarity.
At the same time, the pigeons are sensitive to the particular examples they experienced during training and
display a graded notion of same and different. Although
fascinating, it would be easy to dismiss these results as
relevant to pigeon cognition, but not human cognition.
However, work by Young and Wasserman (2001) found
the same pattern of performance with human subjects.
Humans as a group are slightly more deterministic than
pigeons, but this group difference is within the range of
individual differences. The bottom and top 20% of humans clearly bracket the mean performance of pigeons.
In Young and Wasserman (1997), pigeons learned to
respond differentially to displays containing 16 identical
and 16 different icons. On each trial, the 16 icons were
randomly placed within a 5 X 5 grid. The pigeons were
reinforced for pushing a green button when presented
with a same stimulus and a red button when presented
with a different stimulus. Training consisted of blocks
of 16 same stimuli and 16 different stimuli in a random
order. An identical set of icons was used to form stimuli
for both the same and different items, making it impossible to correctly associate an icon or icon feature with a
response. Training continued until the pigeons reached
85% accuracy.
The test phase consisted of intermediate stimuli
that were somewhat similar to both the same and
different stimuli experienced in the training phase.
Examples of intermediate stimuli are shown in Figure 2.
These stimuli can be viewed as forming a continuum

2272

the pigeons, was trained to an 85% accuracy threshold
before initiating the test phase. BRIDGES reached this
level of performance by discovering analogical mappings
among presented stimuli and exemplars stored in memory. For instance, a same stimulus aligns perfectly with
same exemplars stored in memory. For example, consider aligning a stimulus containing 16 squares to another stimulus containing 16 triangles. Each triangle
entity is put into correspondence with a square entity.
This results in a perfect feature mismatch, but parallel
connectivity is preserved. Within each type relation, the
type triangle maps to the type square. This alignment
leads to attention shifting toward the type relation and
away from the entities. In contrast, only 1 out of 16 type
relations will exhibit parallel connectivity when aligning
a different stimulus with a same stimulus. Thus, it is
straightforward for BRIDGES to discriminate between
same and different stimuli in the absence of featural support. In this regard, BRIDGES’s solution for these simulations is the supervised learning analog to BRIDGE’s
discrimination of grammatical and ungrammatical sentences in the Marcus et al. (1999) simulations.
Strong support for BRIDGES’s similarity-based discovery of the same/different relation is found in its fit
of the test phase. BRIDGES correctly orders the intermediate conditions (see Figure 3). BRIDGES correctly
predicts the probability that pigeons respond “different”
in the intermediate conditions. Similarity-based activations are not all or none and these intermediate cases
activate stored examplars to varying degrees, leading to
the successful fit. For example, an intermediate stimulus containing 12 triangles and four squares is somewhat
analogous to a stimulus containing 16 circles — mapping
the triangle type to the circle type preserves parallel connectivity in 12 out of 16 relations. Along similar lines,
an item with two matching icons and 14 icons that are
all different from one another better matches a pure different exemplar than a pure same exemplar.

7-5-3-1

14-1-1

Figure 2: Two examples of intermediate stimuli are stimuli are shown. The numerical code below each stimulus
indicates its experimental condition and is explained in
the main text.
between the pure same stimuli (all 16 icons identical)
and the pure different stimuli (all 16 icons different)
used during the training phase. Eleven distinct conditions of intermediate stimuli were used. The 11
conditions can be characterized by their groupings of
identical icons. For example, in Figure 2, the right
most stimulus contains seven question marks, five
dominoes, three arrows, and one magnifying glass and
thus is an example of condition [7,5,3,1]. Adopting
this nomenclature, the eleven intermediate conditions
were [14,1,1], [8,8], [13,1,1,1], [12,1,1,1,1,1,1], [10,3,2,1],
[7,5,3,1], [4,4,4,4], [8,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1], [2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2],
[4,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1],
[2,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1].
The pigeon’s performance in these intermediate conditions, as well BRIDGES’s predictions, are shown in
Figure 3 (with the data points ordered left to right in
the order the conditions are introduced in the previous
sentence).
1

Average Pigeon
p(different)

0.9

Actual vs. Predicted

0.8

1.0
.8
.6
.4
.2

0.7
0.6
0.5

Discussion

0.4
0.3
0.2

0

0.1

.25

.75

.5

1.0

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

BRIDGES p(different)
Figure 3: The results from Young and Wasserman’s
(1997) studies and BRIDGES’s predictions are shown.
The 11 intermediate conditions, forming a continuum
between pure same and pure different stimuli, are described in the main text.
BRIDGE’s Simulation Like the Marcus et al.
(1999) simulations, we adopted a minimal approach to
stimulus representation. Each stimulus’s icon was represented as an entity. Each of the 16 entities participated
in a type relation as in the Marcus et al. simulations
(see Table 1).
The training regimen mimicked the procedure used in
the original study as closely as possible. BRIDGES, like

BRIDGES learned the same/different relation and
achieved an excellent fit (R2 = .95) of the test results
involving intermediate stimuli. The simulations demonstrate how abstract concepts can be acquired through
storage and analogy to concrete examples. BRIDGES’s
excellent fit of the intermediate conditions is a natural
consequence of similarity-based processing. Like natural
categories, BRIDGES predicts relational categories have
a graded structure.
Young and Wasserman (1997) offered an entropy explanation of their results. Pure different displays will
have maximum entropy (4 bits) whereas pure same displays have minimal entropy (0 bits). Like BRIDGES, the
entropy explanation provides an excellent fit of the test
results (R2 = .94). Advantages of BRIDGES’s account
lie within its generality and ability to model learning
data. BRIDGES can also predict additional phenomena that naturally follow from exemplar representations
of categories: 1) When pigeons are transferred to new
icons, performance remains above chance, but signifi-

2273

Eimas, P.D., Siqueland, E.R., Jusczyk, P., & Vigorito, J.
(1971). Infant Speech Perception. Science, 171(3968),
303-306
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., & Centner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gentner, D (1983). Structure mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170
Gentner, D; & Markman, A.B. (1997). Structure Mapping in Analogy and Similarity. American Psychologist, 52(1), 45-56
Hahn, U., Chater, N., & Richardson, L.B. (2003). Similarity as Transformation. Cognition. 87, 1-32
Kuehne, S.E.; Gentner, D.; and Forbus, K.D. (2003).
Modeling Infant Learning via Symbolic Structural
Alignment. Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kruschke, J.K. (1992) ALCOVE: An Exemplar-Based
Connectionist Model of Category Learning. Psychological Review 99(1), 22-44
Larkey, L.B.; & Love, B.C. (2003). CAB: Connectionist
Analogy Builder. Cognitive Science 27, 781-794
Love, B.C.; Medin, D.L.; Gureckis, T.M. (2004) SUSTAIN: A Network Model Of Category Learning. Psychological Review 111(2), 309-332
Marcus, G.F.; Vijayan, S.; Bandi Rao, S.; and Vishton, V.E. (1999) Rule Learning by Seven-Month-Old
Infants. Science 283,5398, 77-80
Marcus, G. F. (1999). Do infants learn grammar with algebra or statistics? Response to Seidenberg & Elman,
Eimas, and Negishi. Science. 284, 436-437.
Medin, D.L., & Schaffer, M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning.Psychological Review, 85, 207238
Rosch, E. & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family Resemblance:
Studies in the Internal Structure of Categories. Cognitive Psychology. 7, 573-605
Seidenberg, M.S.,& Elman, J.L. (1999). Do Infants
Learn Grammars with Algebra or Statistics? Science.
284, 5413, 433
Smith, J. D.,& Minda, J. P. (1998). Prototypes in the
mist: The early epochs of category learning.Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 24, 1411-1436.
Young, M.E., & Wasserman, E.A. (1997). Entropy detection by pigeons: Response to mixed visual displays
after same-different discrimination training.Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
23, 157-170
Young, M.E., & Wasserman, E.A. (2001). Entropy and
Variability Discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition. 27(1),
278-293

cantly declines, and 2) Increasing the discriminability of
stimuli improves overall performance (Young & Wasserman, 1997).

General Discussion
By combining insights from the category learning and
analogy literatures, BRIDGES provides an account of
how people and animals can gain abstract understandings of domains based solely on experience with concrete
instances. BRIDGES’s power arises from using a notion of similarity informed by work in both analogy and
category learning. Structural alignment processes allow
BRIDGES to appreciate analogical similarities, while attention shifting modifies BRIDGES notion of similarity
over the course of learning. Integrating these mechanisms allows BRIDGES to grasp abstract patterns by
shifting attention to relations which drive the alignment
process.
In the supportive simulations, BRIDGES offered an
explanation of how infants become sensitive to abstract
grammers and how people and pigeons develop the concepts of same and different irrespective of a stimulus’s
features. Consistent with BRIDGES’s stance that abstract concepts are similarity-based, the relational concepts same and different displayed graded membership
like natural categories.
BRIDGES is not the first model to use analogical
alignment to support category learning. SEQL can acquire category structures through a process of repeated
abstraction of a structured category representation and
has been successfully applied to the infant grammar
learning studies considered here (Kuehne, Gentner &
Forbus, 2003). While SEQL stresses building abstract
representations, abstraction in BRIDGES arises from activation of stored exemplars. More in depth comparisons
between SEQL and BRIDGES are likely to recapitulate
debates in the category learning literature comparing
prototype and exemplar models. Some relative strengths
of BRIDGES are that it extends an existing model of category learning (ALCOVE is a special case of BRIDGES)
and incorporates attentional mechanisms.
One challenge for BRIDGES is incorporating new
relational information into its exemplar representations. Although BRIDGES can learn relational concepts, BRIDGES is not yet able to incorporate acquired
relations directly into its exemplar representations (see
Doumas and Hummel, 2005, for an example of a predicate discovery system).

Acknowledgements
We thank Mike Young for providing access to his data.
This work was supported by AFOSR grant FA9550-041-0226 and NSF CAREER grant 0349101 to B. C. Love.

References
Doumas, L.A.A., & Hummel, J.E. (2005). A SymbolicConnectionist Model of Relational Discovery. Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

2274

