UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning New Words: Effects of Lexical Competition and Age of Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3q76z6sd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Gaskell, M. Gareth
Tamminen, Jakke

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning New Words: Effects of Lexical Competition and Age of Acquisition
Jakke Tamminen (jjt2@york.ac.uk)
M. Gareth Gaskell (mgg5@york.ac.uk)
University of York, Department of Psychology
York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom

(‘cathedruce’). However, directly after learning there was no
sign of slowing down of base word recognition. This
seemed to indicate that the novel words had not been fully
lexicalized yet, despite accurate performance in the explicit
recognition task.
To examine whether competition effects emerged over a
longer timescale, Gaskell and Dumay (2003) carried out
another experiment involving two sessions separated by a
week. A pause detection task (Mattys & Clark, 2002) was
used to measure lexical competition, and the data indicated
that no competition was evident on the first day. However, a
week later participants were slower to detect the pause if the
base word had a novel competitor. These results suggest that
it requires some considerable time for the representations of
the new words to become fully active members of the
lexicon. This may be caused by a need for the new
information to be integrated in memory.
The word learning in Gaskell and Dumay (2003) differed
from normal vocabulary acquisition in two key ways. First,
the words were learned in the absence of a referent or a
meaningful sentential context. Second, the effects of
learning were studied only in the short term. Dumay,
Gaskell and Feng (2004) addressed the first of these issues
by presenting novel words in a semantic context. This did
not affect the speed of lexicalization, suggesting that
exposure to just the phonological form is adequate for
lexicalization to take place.
The current study addresses the second key difference by
examining the implications of novel word learning over the
following months rather than weeks. If words learned in the
lab still have measurable effects on the recognition of
existing words after a period of months then we can be
confident that their representations are as robust as normal
word representations.
The existing data suggest that adults are good at learning
new words, even without extended training sessions. It
should thus be possible to create an artificial vocabulary to
address psycholinguistic questions. Many psycholinguistic
variables have been difficult to study due to confounding
effects of related variables. The age of acquisition (AoA)
variable has been particularly difficult to examine due to its
close association with word frequency. Words acquired
early in life are typically responded to more quickly than
later acquired words. However, early-acquired words tend to
be of high frequency, while late-acquired words tend to be
of low frequency (Morrison, Chappell, & Ellis, 1997).
Another challenge to AoA has been the theory of
cumulative frequency (e.g. Lewis, Gerhand, & Ellis, 2001).
Conventional frequency measures the number of times a

Abstract
Recognizing spoken words involves lexical competition. A
newly learned word will engage in competition with existing
words that share its onset (e.g. the novel word ‘cathedruke’
will compete with ‘cathedral’), as measured by increased
recognition times to the existing word (Gaskell & Dumay,
2003). We sought to replicate this finding in a longitudinal
design where the effects of lexical competition were followed
up over the course of eight months. Novel words were taught
at different points in time, allowing us to vary, on a small
scale, the age of acquisition (AoA) of the novel items. Robust
lexical representations emerged for the novel words, and
remained competitors to existing words throughout the study.
A dissociation in AoA effects between lexical competition
and naming also emerged.
Keywords: Psycholinguistics; speech; lexical competition

Introduction
While a great deal of research has focused on language
acquisition in children, less is known about these processes
in adults. One way to probe the acquisition of new words is
through lexical competition, which is central to many
theories of spoken word recognition. When the acoustic
information of a spoken word unfolds over time, the
incoming incomplete information activates matching word
candidates in the listener’s mental lexicon (see e.g. MarslenWilson, 1993). For example, the word ‘captain’ briefly
activates competitors such as ‘capsule’ and ‘captive’ before
acoustic information distinguishes it from its competitors. It
has also been shown that words are more difficult to
recognize if they have high frequency competitors (e.g.
Luce, Pisoni, & Goldinger, 1990), providing further
evidence for lexical competition.
Gaskell and Dumay (2003) chose real trisyllabic words
with early uniqueness points (the point at which a word
diverges from all its competitors), such as ‘cathedral’, as
base words. A “novel word” was created for each base word
by changing the ending of the base word so that the novel
word diverged from it at the final vowel (‘cathedruke’). The
purpose of this manipulation was to shift the uniqueness
point of the base word by introducing a new competitor in
the lexicon, which diverged from the base word at a late
point. If ‘cathedruke’ becomes a part of the lexicon and
engages in competition with ‘cathedral’, one should see a
slowing in the recognition time to the base word.
The results showed that direct recognition of the novel
words was good. The participants were accurate in judging
whether they had been exposed to ‘cathedruke’ or a foil

822

novel words were taught one week later, and the late novel
words about 17 weeks later. The stimulus triplets (base
word and two novel words) were randomly divided into four
lists of 17 triplets each, and rotated across the four
conditions (control, early, middle, late) so that each triplet
occurred in all conditions.

given word occurs in a large body of text or speech.
Cumulative frequency measures the number of times a
given word is encountered over time between first exposure
and the current time. While evidence suggests that AoA
predicts performance in linguistic tasks when conventional
frequency is controlled, proponents of cumulative frequency
have argued that such AoA effects are only cumulative
frequency effects in disguise (e.g. Lewis et al., 2001).
The advantage of working with novel words is that factors
like frequency can be controlled carefully. Thus a second
aim of the study reported here was to look for AoA effects
among novel words learnt at different points in time. Three
sets of novel words were learnt (early, middle, and late), and
direct AoA effects were measured by lexical decision and
naming latencies to the novel words. Also, if early novel
words turn out to be more robust competitors than late novel
words, base words with early acquired competitors will be
recognized more slowly than those with late acquired ones.
This would constitute evidence for a role for AoA in lexical
competition. It is equally possible that AoA effects will be
observed only in the tasks not directly reflecting
competition (i.e. tasks with a stronger output than input
component, such as naming), suggesting a different locus
for the effect.

Procedure Session 1. The purpose of the first session was
to teach participants the early-AoA group of novel words
and to assess the immediate effect of these items on their
lexical neighborhood. The session began with a
familiarization phase. This phase consisted of a phonememonitoring task and a word repetition task. Each novel word
occurred 15 times in both tasks.
Each phoneme-monitoring trial started with presentation
on screen of the target phoneme for 500 ms, followed by
auditory presentation of the novel word. The participant was
asked to indicate whether the target sound was present in the
novel word by pressing a key.
Word repetition trials involved simultaneous presentation
of the visual and auditory forms of the novel word. The
participant was asked to repeat the word aloud after hearing
and seeing it. The reason for the repetition task was to
familiarize the participants with the visual forms of the
words, in anticipation of a naming test at a later stage.
The lexicalization test then followed. A lexical decision
task was used here, with the participants making responses
to the base words, control words (base words without a new
competitor), and filler items. Each trial started with the
auditory presentation of an item. Responses were made, as
quickly and accurately as possible, using the keyboard.
The session ended with a forced-choice recognition test.
The novel words were presented auditorily, paired with their
corresponding foil. The participant was asked to indicate
which one of the two words had been heard in the
familiarization phase. The procedure of these tests was kept
identical in following sessions.
Session 2. The second session took place on average
seven days after Session 1 (range 6-9 days). This session
was used to teach the middle AoA novel words, and to test
for the lexicalization of the early and middle novel words. It
included a familiarization phase, a lexical decision task, and
a forced-choice recognition test.
Session 3. This session took place roughly seven days
(range 6-8 days) after Session 2. Its purpose was to test for
the lexicalization of the novel words learned in the first two
sessions. The session started with a lexical decision task,
including the base words of the early and middle novel
words, and control words. The test also included the novel
words taught in the previous two sessions. The reason for
the inclusion of these items was to compare the early and
middle AoA novel word groups in terms of simple
recognition speed. The data revealed that all participants
responded to them as nonwords.
Finally, the naming test included the novel words from
the early and middle sets. Each word was read aloud as
quickly and as accurately as possible. A trial started by the

Method
Participants Thirty-one participants from the University of
York were tested. All were native English speakers (mean
age of 20) without visual or auditory impairments. During
the course of the study some participants dropped out, and
the number was reduced to 24 by the last session.
Stimuli and Design Sixty-eight monomorphemic words
were chosen to act as the base words (e.g., ‘cathedral’).
Thirty-four of these were taken from Gaskell and Dumay
(2003), and the remaining words were selected using similar
criteria. All words were bi- or trisyllabic, the number of
phonemes ranging from 6 to 11 (M = 8.0). The frequencies,
as reported in the CELEX database (Baayen, Piepenbrock,
& van Rijn, 1993), ranged from 2 occurrences per million to
18 (M = 4.3). All base words had an early uniqueness point,
located before the final vowel.
Fictional “novel words” were then created for each base
word (e.g., ‘cathedruke’). These were constructed so that
they diverged from the base words at their final vowel, and
were presented to the participants during the learning phases
of the experiment. For each novel/base word pair a foil was
also created for use in an explicit recognition test (e.g.,
‘cathedruce’). This foil diverged from the novel word only
at the final phoneme.
Filler words and nonwords were chosen for the lexical
decision tasks. The properties of these items were similar to
those of the experimental items. Nonwords were created by
changing one phoneme of a real word to form a nonword.
The AoA variable was manipulated by teaching the novel
words at three different points in time. Novel words in the
early condition were taught in the first session. The middle

823

C ontrol

1060

novel word being presented on the screen. The participant
was given 2500 ms to read it aloud and the response was
recorded and timed.
Session 4. This session took place on average 116 days
after Session 3 (range 110-134 days). The session included a
familiarization phase in which the late novel words were
taught, as well as a lexical decision, naming, and explicit
recall tasks.
Session 5. This session took place on average eight days
after the fourth session (range 6-13 days), and its purpose
was to test the explicit recall, lexicalization, and naming
speed of all the novel words, and to compare these with the
performance of earlier sessions.
Session 6. The last session was held on average 92 days
after Session 5 (range 79-122 days). The session was
identical to Session 5.

E arly

Middle

Late

1050
1040

RT (ms)

1030
1020
1010
1000
990
980
970
960
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

Week
S1 S2 S3

S4 S5

S6

Figure 1: Mean RTs to base words across all sessions.
of the existing words is stable over the weeks and months
following exposure.
Lexicalization of middle AoA novel words. An ANOVA
revealed a significant main effect of word group, F(1, 20) =
39.79, p <.001, but this time no interaction between group
and session, suggesting that in this case the novel words
engaged in lexical competition immediately after the
familiarization. All of the planned comparisons reached
significance, indicating that lexicalization took place
immediately and that the novel words remained in the
lexicon in all sessions, F(1, 20) = 13.03, p <.05 for Session
2, F(1, 20) = 25.86, p < .001 for Session 3, F(1, 20) = 10.30,
p < .05 for Session 4, F(1, 20) = 12.40, p < .05 for Session
5, and F(1, 20) = 16.99, p = .001 for Session 6.
Lexicalization of late AoA novel words. As for the early
words, there was a main effect of word group F(1, 20) =
13.62, p = .001, and an interaction between word group and
session, F(2, 40) = 4.63, p < .05. Planned comparisons
showed that the RT difference between control and base
words for late novel words was not significant in Session 4,
immediately after exposure, whereas the effect was
significant in the last two sessions, F(1, 20) = 20.09, p <
.001 for Session 5, F(1, 20) = 12.41, p < .05 for Session 6.
Comparing the lexicalization effects between AoA
conditions. We compared RTs to base words across the
AoA conditions (excluding data from lexicalisation tests
immediately following familiarization of the novel
competitors, as no lexicalisation effects tend to be found
immediately). This was done to examine whether the AoA
of the novel words affected their ability to act as
competitors in the recognition of the existing words. If so,
one might expect slower RTs to base words with early AoA
novel words. ANOVAs showed no significant main effects
or interactions, suggesting that all three novel word groups
were equally strong competitors (all ps > .05).

Results and Discussion
Only the participants who completed all sessions were
included in the analyses. Following Raaijmakers,
Schrijnemakers, and Gremmen (1999), and Raaijmakers
(2003), only by-subject analyses were carried out, as byitems analyses are unnecessary in counterbalanced designs.
Also, in all analyses reported below, participant group was
included as a dummy variable to increase statistical power
(Pollatsek and Well, 1995). Main effects and interactions
involving this variable are not reported.
Lexicalisation Effects RTs to the base words in the lexical
decision tasks were analyzed to examine the extent to which
the learning of the novel words resulted in extended lexical
competition. All erroneous responses were discarded, as
well as responses slower than 3000 ms or faster than 300
ms. An inverse transformation was then carried out on the
data in order to reduce the effect of remaining outliers
(Ulrich & Miller, 1994). The means in Figure 1 have been
transformed back to harmonic means to aid interpretability.
Lexicalization of the early AoA novel words. An analysis
of variance (ANOVA), with word group (novel competitor
vs. control) and sessions (all six sessions) as variables was
carried out. This revealed a significant main effect of word
type, F(1, 20) = 46.01, p < .001, with RTs to base words
slower than to control words. An interaction between word
group and session was also found, F(5, 100) = 2.33, p < .05,
indicating that the effect was not similar across sessions.
Planned comparisons were then carried out to examine the
effects within each session. There was no significant main
effect of word group in the first session but in all subsequent
sessions the RTs to base words were significantly slower
than to control words, F(1, 20) = 4.92, p < .05 for Session 2,
F(1, 20) = 16.57, p = .001 for Session 3, F(1, 20) = 4.90, p <
.05 for Session 4, F(1, 20) = 14.72, p = .001 for Session 5,
and F(1, 20) = 14.03, p = .001 for Session 6. In other words,
like Gaskell and Dumay (2003), we found that lexical
competition effects emerged only after a delay, suggesting
some kind of consolidation process. The current results
demonstrate that this change in the competition environment

Explicit Recognition Data Error rates in the explicit
recognition task immediately after training were low (1.7%
for early AoA novel words, 3.3% for middle AoA novel
words, 6.6% for late AoA novel words). The forced-choice
recognition task was included in Sessions 5 and 6 in order to
compare performance across the three AoA conditions.
Session 5 revealed a main effect of word type, F(2, 40) =
824

16.99, p < .001. Further analyses indicated that the late
novel words attracted significantly more errors than early
novel words, F(1, 20) = 17.11, p = .001, or middle novel
words, F(1, 20) = 22.38, p < .001. There was no significant
difference between the early and middle novel words.
In Session 6 too a main effect of word type, F(2, 40) =
28.20, p < .001 was found. The late novel words again
attracted significantly more errors than either early novel
words, F(1, 20) = 28.00, p < .001, or middle novel words,
F(1, 20) = 37.23, p < .001. There was no significant
difference between the early and middle novel words.
Performance immediately after training was good for all
conditions, suggesting that all novel words were initially
learned well. Nonetheless, the data from the last two
sessions indicate that recall of late novel words was worse.
This effect is puzzling given that all novel words were
lexicalized. It may be that the participants were less
motivated to explicitly learn the novel words by the fourth
session where the late words were introduced.

Figure 2: Mean naming latencies to novel words.

General Discussion
The results reported above suggest that novel words learnt
at all three time points became lexicalized, as measured by
engagement in lexical competition with the base words from
which they were derived. RTs to the base words slowed
down after the novel words had been learned, as opposed to
base words for which no new competitors had been
introduced. This can be explained by a change in the base
word’s uniqueness point. In this respect these data replicate
the findings of Gaskell and Dumay (2003).
The time course of lexicalization found in the Gaskell and
Dumay (2003) study was replicated in the case of the early
and late-AoA novel words. In both cases the lexicalization
effect only emerged one week after the familiarization
phase. This pattern fits in well with theories of memory
consolidation (Alvarez & Squire, 1994; O’Reilly &
Norman, 2002), which suggest that transfer of information
from a short-term storage (e.g. medial temporal lobe) to a
long-term storage (e.g. neocortex) is a process that takes
some time. Dumay and Gaskell (in press) have suggested
that sleep may be a crucial factor in the consolidation
process. Participants who were trained in the evening and
tested in the morning, thus getting a night’s sleep between
the sessions, showed lexicalization effects. Participants who
had been trained in the morning and tested in the evening
showed no effects, although all participants showed the
effect at a later testing session 24 hours later.
The rather different pattern of lexicalization effects for the
middle-AoA words is somewhat surprising. Here the initial
test of lexicalization immediately after exposure showed a
significant lexical competition effect. It is feasible that this
is simply a type I error: in our earlier studies there have
been perhaps twenty similar comparisons of the immediate
effects of novel word learning on lexical competition.
Previously, one had shown a similar inhibitory effect and
one had shown a facilitatory effect, with the remainder
showing no differences. Another possibility is that the
middle words benefited from experience gained in the
previous session, possibly making the participants more
sensitive to learning new words a week later. Such an effect
would not be observed in the case of late words as the gap
between the middle and late teaching sessions was longer.,.
Another major finding deals with the longevity of the
lexicalization effect. Novel words learned in the first session

Direct Effects of AoA The lexical decision tests for
Sessions 3-6 included the novel words to test whether AoA
influenced their recognition. In fact, no RT difference
between any of the conditions was found, indicating that
participants were equally fast to recognize the early, middle,
and late AoA novel words (mean RTs to novel words across
sessions were 1085 ms to early AoA novel words, 1090 ms
to middle AoA novel words, and 1082 ms to late AoA novel
words).
Our second measure of AoA effects employed speeded
naming of the written form (see Figure 2). In Session 3
participants named the early AoA novel words significantly
faster than the middle AoA novel words, F(1, 20) = 13.67, p
< .05. This small effect, reflecting merely a week’s
difference in time of learning, disappeared by Session 4, and
remained non-significant in Sessions 5 and 6. However, the
late AoA novel words in these two last sessions had
significantly slower naming latencies then either the early
AoA novel words, F(1, 20) = 19.89, p < .001 for Session 5,
F(1, 20) = 29.49, p < .001 for Session 6, or the middle AoA
novel words, F(1, 20) = 19.09, p < .001 in Session 5, F(1,
20) = 47.33, p < .001 in Session 6.
It is possible that the slower naming times for late novel
words are a consequence of poorer learning of these items,
caused by e.g. motivational factors. Recall that the explicit
recognition performance was worse for late novel words. To
check if this might be a confound, we re-analyzed the
naming data of a sub-set of 10 participants. These were all
participants whose explicit recognition scores showed no or
little difference between the AoA groups. In this analysis,
the AoA effect observed in Session 5 was no longer
significant, but the effect in Session 6 remained reliable, late
vs. middle F(1, 6) = 6.67, p <.05, late vs. early F(1, 6) =
12.97, p < .05. There was also an advantage for middle
words over early words in Session 3, F(1, 6) = 7.11, p < .05.
These data suggest that the AoA effect in naming is not a
confound of poorer learning of the late words.

825

Wijnendaele & De Deyne, 2000; Belke, Brysbaert, Meyer &
Ghyselinck, 2005). Brysbaert et al. (2000) argued that AoA
effects arise because the meanings of late-acquired words
are built upon those of earlier acquired words, and that the
semantic representations of earlier acquired words are more
readily available. The novel words used here did not have a
semantic referent. This suggests that the semantic level
cannot be the sole locus of AoA effects. It should be noted
though, that while no explicit semantic content was attached
to the novel words, it is possible that participants created
some meaning for the new words. In fact, there was
anecdotal evidence from some of the participants that this
may be the case for some people.
The current results are also relevant to a connectionist
model reported by Ellis and Lambon Ralph (2000). These
authors trained their network by introducing sets of patterns
at different points in time and examined whether the
network learned the early-acquired sets better than later
acquired sets. This was found to be the case, but only when
training was cumulative. If one pattern was taught first, and
then replaced by another pattern without further
presentations of the first pattern, the network showed signs
of catastrophic interference, in that performance on the early
pattern got worse as the number of training epochs was
increased. In cumulative training on the other hand, the
training of the two sets is interleaved. This training regime
is closer to the way people learn new words in natural
conditions, and results in learning of both sets in the model,
but with an advantage to the earlier acquired set. This
finding is in contrast to the data acquired in the current
study, where the training was not cumulative. Despite this,
participants learned the novel words of all sets, as indicated
by both effects of lexicalization and performance on the
explicit recognition tests. This suggests that catastrophic
interference may not be a property of human learning. In
fact the overnight consolidation found in this paradigm by
Dumay and Gaskell (in press) may reflect part of the way in
which catastrophic interference effects are avoided.
Moore and Valentine (1999) found AoA effects in a task
involving reading celebrities’ names in a name familiarity
decision task, and in a face familiarity decision task.
Recognizing names and faces of “early-acquired” celebrities
was faster than for “late-acquired” celebrities. This led the
authors to suggest that temporal order of acquisition may be
more important than age. Moore and Valentine (1999) argue
that early-acquired information in all classes of stimuli may
have an advantage over information acquired later. An
initial encounter with an exemplar of a new stimulus sets up
a new stimulus class. All later acquired stimuli of this class
will be represented in a different manner from the early
stimuli, which were actively involved in setting up the class.
This would explain why AoA effects can be observed in
non-linguistic materials, and why they can arise in materials
learned in adulthood, such as the novel words used here.
Applied to the current study, this theory would require that
the novel words triggered the setting up of a new stimulus
class. This may well be possible if the participants in the

of the study were still competing with the base words 7.5
months after being introduced, with very little exposure in
between (just the level of exposure required during testing).
Furthermore, all three groups of words demonstrated
equivalent competition effects in Sessions 5 and 6, which
were separated by a period of three months with no
intervening exposure. It is also worth noting that these novel
words had no supplied semantic content, a factor that one
might assume would make them more difficult to learn.
Such long-term effects are in agreement with the results of
Salasoo, Shiffrin, and Feustel (1985) who exposed
participants to visual nonwords and found that, with
adequate repetition, participants were able to recognize the
nonwords from rapid presentations as reliably as real words.
Even a year after training recognition of the nonwords was
as reliable as real words, suggesting that a permanent
memory trace had been created.
Another aim of the study was to investigate effects of
AoA. No effects were found in the lexicalization data, or in
lexical decisions to the novel items, which are primarily
tests of recognition. However, the naming task, which has a
stronger output component, did reveal slower latencies to
late novel words than to early novel words.
Zevin and Seidenberg (2002, 2004) have argued that AoA
effects are based on frequency trajectory and cumulative
frequency. Frequency trajectory refers to the distribution of
the number of times a word has been encountered. Some
words are frequent in childhood but rare in adulthood (e.g.
‘potty’), and vice versa (e.g. ‘fax’). The claim is that this
pattern of exposure over the life span determines the speed
of learning. Words with a high-to-low frequency trajectory
(high frequency in childhood) are learned faster, and thus
earlier, than low-to-high trajectory words. Cumulative
frequency acts as a further influence on learning. Words
with a high cumulative frequency are processed faster than
words with a low cumulative frequency. In sum, frequency
trajectory determines the age when a word is learned, and
cumulative frequency affects the ease with which it is
processed in adulthood.
The AoA effects reported here are difficult to explain in
terms of cumulative frequency. Each novel word was
initially presented the same number of times in the
familiarization phase. While it is true that, due to the
repeated testing sessions, the participants had more
exposures to the early novel words than to the later novel
words across the study, this difference is too small to be a
likely account of the AoA effects observed in the end (at the
beginning of Session 6, early novel words had been
encountered 38 times, middle novel words 38 times, and
late novel words 34 times). Comparable studies (e.g.,
Dumay & Gaskell, in press) have demonstrated that these
small differences have little or no effect on the storage of
these items. This suggests that while cumulative frequency
may contribute to AoA effects when testing with real words,
it is unlikely to be the only source of AoA effects.
Another theory attempting to explain AoA findings places
the locus of the effect on a semantic level (Brysbaert, Van

826

Luce, P. A., Pisoni, D. B., & Goldinger, S. D. (1990).
Similarity neighborhoods of spoken words. In G. Altmann
(Ed.), Cognitive Models of Speech Processing:
Psycholinguistic and Computational Perspectives (pp.
122-147). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marslen-Wilson, W. (1993). Issues of process and
represenation in lexical access. In G. Altmann & R.
Shillcock (Eds.), Cognitive Models of Language
Processes: Second Sperlonga Meeting (pp. 187-210).
Hove: Erlbaum.
Mattys, S. L., & Clark, J. H. (2002). Lexical activity in
speech processing: evidence from pause detection.
Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 343-359.
Moore, V., & Valentine, T. (1999). The effects of age of
acquisition in processing famous faces and names:
exploring the locus and proposing a mechanism.
Proceedings of the XXI annual meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Vancouver 1999 (pp. 416-421). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Morrison, C. M., Chappell, T. D., & Ellis, A. W. (1997).
Age of acquisition norms for a large set of object names
and their relation to adult estimates and other variables.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A,
528-559.
O’Reilly, R. C., & Norman, K. A. (2002). Hippocampal and
neocortical contributions to memory: advances in the
complementary learning systems framework. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6, 505-510.
Pollatsek, A., & Well, A. D. (1995). On the use of
counterbalanced designs in cognitive research: a
suggestion for a better and more powerful analysis.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 785-794.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (2003). A further look at the
“language-as-fixed-effect fallacy”. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 57, 141-151.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., Schrijnemakers, J. M. C., &
Gremmen, F. (1999). How to deal with “the language-asfixed-effect fallacy”: common misconceptions and
alternative solutions. Journal of Memory and Language,
41, 416-426.
Salasoo, A., Shiffrin, R.M., & Feustel, T.C. (1985).
Building permanent memory codes: codification and
repetition effects in word recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 50-77.
Ulrich, R., & Miller, J. (1994). Effects of truncation on
reaction time analysis. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123, 34-80.
Zevin, J. D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2002). Age of acquisition
effects in word reading and other tasks. Journal of
Memory and Language, 47, 1-29.
Zevin, J. D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Age-ofacquisition effects in reading aloud: tests of cumulative
frequency and frequency trajectory. Memory & Cognition,
32, 31-38.

beginning of the study did not consider the novel words as
being real words.
While our data show that the lexicalization effects are
robust over time, a challenge for future work is to further
elucidate the timecourse of the process, especially with
respect to the delay in lexicalization. In this respect our data
are also informative for more general cognitive principles of
memory consolidation. The lexicalization delay can be seen
as evidence of a crucial process in memory of transferring
information from a short-term storage to a long-term
storage. Alvarez and Squire (1994) have suggested that such
a process is carried out between the medial temporal lobe
and the cortex, and that this transfer can take place without
repeated activation of the memory. This corresponds well
with our finding of lexicalization occurring during the time
between teaching and testing, with no exposure in between.
The mechanism underlying AoA effects also needs to be
addressed. Our data suggest that none of the proposed
mechanisms are adequate. The dissociation between
observing AoA effects in the naming task and not in lexical
competition will be informative for future theories.

References
Alvarez, P., & Squire, L. R. (1994). Memory consolidation
and the medial temporal lobe: a simple network model.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA,
91, 7041-7045.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The
CELEX Lexical Database [CR-ROM]. Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Belke, E., Brysbaert, M., Meyer, A. S., & Ghyselinck, M.
(2005). Age of acquisition in picture naming: evidence for
a lexical-semantic competition hypothesis. Cognition, 96,
B45-B54.
Brysbaert, M., Van Wijnendale, I., & De Deyne, S. (2000).
Age-of-acquisition effects in semantic processing tasks.
Acta Psychologica, 104, 215-226.
Dumay, N., Gaskell, M.G., & Feng, X. (2004). A day in the
life of a spoken word. Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. (pp.
339-344).. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dumay, N., & Gaskell, M.G. (in press). Sleep-associated
changes in the mental representation of spoken words.
Psychological Science.
Ellis, A. W., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2000). Age of
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect loss
of plasticity in maturing systems: insights from
connectionist networks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 11031123.
Gaskell, M. G., & Dumay N. (2003). Lexical competition
and the acquisition of novel words. Cognition, 89, 105132.
Lewis, M. B., Gerhand, S., & Ellis, H. D. (2001). Reevaluating age-of-acquisition effects: are they simply
cumulative-frequency effects? Cognition, 78, 189-205.

827

