UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory and Emotion in the Gambling Task: The Case for Dissociable Functions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/772822rk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Fum, Danilo
Stocco, Andrea

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory and Emotion in the Gambling Task: The Case for Dissociable Functions
Andrea Stocco (stocco@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Danilo Fum (fum@units.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Trieste
Via S. Anastasio 12, 34134 Trieste, Italy

One of the matters of disputation is the extent to which
Damasio’s proposed mechanism is implied in decision
making, and how much it is independent of other cognitive
processes. In this paper, we will deal with this topic, and
provide evidence that, while a certain degree of
independence is plausible, it should be smaller than
previously claimed.

Abstract
A recent matter of debate in the cognitive sciences concerns
the role played by emotions in decision making. Bechara et al.
(1998) and Turnbull et al. (2005) have argued that making
choices involves processes that can be double dissociated
from working memory and that are independent of executive
functions. These results have been interpreted on the basis of
Damasio’s (1994) Somatic Marker Hypothesis, which claims
that a special circuit involved in processing changes
happening in the somatic state is largely responsible for
orienting human behavior in the decision process. In this
paper, we examine the evidence in favor of this interpretation,
as well as of possible alternative accounts. We suggest that
interactions should occur between somatic markers and
working memory, and we propose an experiment using the
Gambling Task where a more appropriate dual task paradigm
is employed that exposes the allocation of cognitive resources
at different stages of the decision making process. Our results
show that executive resources are required for successful
decision making in the Gambling Task. We discuss our
findings both in the frame of the Somatic Marker Hypothesis
and of alternative views.

The Gambling Task

Introduction
Damasio (1994) convincingly argued that the role of
emotions in making decisions had been greatly overlooked.
Relying mainly on evidence from frontal patients, he put
forward his Somatic Marker Hypothesis, which describes a
plausible mechanism through which emotions arise,
crucially influence higher cognitive processes and, in turn,
determine behavior
The Somatic Marker Hypothesis is based on two principal
claims. The first is that emotions originate as perceived
changes in one’s somatic state, reflected in modifications in
the corresponding brain areas. The second claim is that
somatic representations, instead of being used only once, are
durably associated with the ensuing stimuli and actions—
therefore marking them with the corresponding bodily
states. Physiologically, this happens by conveying somatic
states to a convergence area in the frontal lobes, where
higher-level processing of stimuli and top-down control of
actions are known to take place.
As a result, somatic representations may be later recalled
associatively, causing a transient reenactment of the original
experience. This reliving, possibly implicit, is responsible
for guiding the decision making.

One of the motives for the Somatic Markers Hypothesis was
the necessity to account for neuropsychological evidence. It
is acknowledged that brain damages in the frontal lobe
could strongly affect one’s decision making capabilities, at
least in personal and social domains, and lead an individual
to an utterly inappropriate misconduct while, at the very
same time, leaving other cognitive functions and
intelligence unaffected (Saver & Damasio, 1991). Abnormal
behavior in frontal patients was later linked to their
pathological lack of emotional appraisal (Damasio, Tranel
& Damasio, 1991). These findings hinted at a possible role
for emotional functions in decision making.
Frontal patients’ misconduct was later captured in a
laboratory setting by developing a sequential decision
making task known as the (Iowa) Gambling Task
(henceforth: GT). The task consists in picking up a card at
the time from one of four decks. Participants soon discover
that card selections always result in a win which is small for
two decks, and twice as big for the remaining ones.
However, certain selections may lead, unpredictably, to a
monetary loss. Losses are presented immediately after wins,
have no fixed schedule or magnitude, and are arranged so
that the two decks which carry bigger wins also produce
losses so huge to result in an eventual failure. On the
contrary, losses in the other two decks do not overthrow the
smaller wins, resulting in a net gain. Therefore, the
advantageous strategy is to refrain from the bigger wins and
stick with the humbler ones.
In their pivotal study, Bechara, Damasio, Damasio and
Anderson (1994) found that, while control participants learn
to pick from advantageous decks avoiding the others, frontal
patients cannot refrain from making disadvantageous
selections. The authors later correlated the behavioral
changes in controls’ decision patterns to changes in the skin
conductance responses (Bechara, Tranel, Damasio &
Damasio, 1996), a physiological measure thought to reflect

2192

the ongoing activation of somatic memories. The lack of
such responses in patients hinted at a selective impairment
of the somatic marker circuit. Moreover, a subsequent
experiment by Bechara, Damasio, Tranel and Damasio
(1997) evidenced that the onset of both behavioral and
physiological changes anticipated conscious knowledge of
the winning strategy. This result seems to imply that the
somatic marker mechanism was exerting its long-term
beneficial effect implicitly, independently of conscious and
controlled cognitive evaluations.

Somatic Markers and Working Memory
The alleged implicitness of the somatic markers action was
later questioned by several studies (Tomb, Hauser, Deldin &
Caramazza, 2002; Maia & McClelland, 2004). This issue is
also related to the extent to which the somatic marker
mechanism is independent, or even substitutive, of other
cognitive processes usually thought to be responsible for the
decision procedure. The position held by Damasio and coworkers seems ambiguous. Sometimes they outline a milder
view where somatic markers are required to simply assist
the processing of different options (e.g. Bechara, Damasio,
Tranel & Damasio, 2005). On other occasions, they seem to
suggest that the somatic marker circuit could, by itself,
achieve long-term advantageous strategy evaluation
(Bechara et al., 1997).
Bechara, Damasio, Tranel and Anderson (1998) later
offered substantial evidence for this stronger position. In
their experiment, two groups of patients were compared on
two different tasks. One group comprised patients with
selective damage in the ventromedial area of the prefrontal
lobe. Lesions in the other patients were located in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The first region is the
convergence area implicated by the somatic marker
hypothesis, while the second one is known to be implied in
executive functions. The two tasks were the GT and a
working memory task. Ventromedial patients performed
badly in the GT, but normally in the memory test. On the
contrary, dorsolateral patients scored poorly in the memory
task, but resulted unpredictably unimpaired in the GT
paradigm. The resulting pattern was a double-dissociation
between the two groups, which suggested the independence,
both functional and anatomical, between decision making
and working memory (Bechara et al., 1998).
A more surprising result was put forward by Turnbull,
Evans, Bunce, Carzolio, and O’Connor (2005). They
presented a study where three groups interacted with the
GT. Two of these groups were required to perform a
concurrent secondary task, which could be considered as
either related (random number generation) or not (reciting
aloud the sequence of numbers from 1 to 9) to executive
functions. Surprisingly, performance in the GT remained the
same across the three conditions, supporting the view that
the processes underlying decision making in the GT are
dissociable from the executive functions.
The experimental results by Bechara et al. (1998) and
Turnbull at al (2005) imply that the action of somatic

markers is largely independent of central cognitive
resources.
This it is in sharp contrast with different results already
acquired in the decision making literature, where working
memory capacity is a bottleneck, and the use of simplifying
heuristics to reduce workload is widely described (e.g.
Payne, Bettman & Johnson, 1993).
Indeed, the GT is a paradigm much more unstructured
than the usual artificial decision making settings. Two-step
models of decision making have been proposed, where
cognitive evaluation is used in structured domains while
emotional appraisal is adopted when coping with uncertain
and unstructured paradigms (Kahneman, 2003). This latter
process seems akin to what Damasio propones.

Alternative Explanations
Although surprising, the results of Turnbull et al. (2005) and
Bechara et al. (1998) are not definitive. In the case of
Turnbull et al. (2005), we suspect that the lack of effect of
the secondary task lies in the interfering task they adopted.
Random number generation is a demanding task, but, when
carried out self-paced, it allows enough time to allocate
resource to the main task. In addition, the participants’
performance in Turnbull et al. (2005) was somewhat lower
when a secondary task was introduced—although not at a
significant level.
The double dissociation reported by Bechara et al. (1998)
seems
more
conclusive.
However,
there
is
neuropsychological evidence that the dissociation is not
perfect. For instance, half of the ventromedial patients in
that experiment also showed abnormal patterns in the
working memory tasks (Bechara et al., 1998). In addition,
Fellows & Farah (2005) found that dorsolateral frontal
patients can be impaired in the GT, and that, conversely,
ventromedial patients perform normally under a slightly
modified distribution of losses.
In any case, the GT does not constitute a highly
demanding task for working memory. Selective recollection
for the worst outcomes may be sufficient to hold patients
from choosing the riskier decks. As a demonstration,
Stocco, Fum & Zalla (2005) proposed a computational
model of the task where memory is indeed a component as
important as somatic representations in achieving good
performance. The model relied on the idea that somatic
representations are implicitly used for linking deck
selections and ensuing outcomes. Once acquired,
associations facilitate cued retrieval of aversive outcomes,
making it easier to detect the disadvantageous choices.
Although leaving room for a possible role for somatic
markers, the model requires central cognitive resources for
successful decision making, especially in the early stages
when the outcomes from previous choices need to be
focused and processed. On the contrary, later recollection
may be easier, and unaffected by a simulated reduction in
working memory. This allowed for a simulated replication
of the apparent dissociation (Stocco, Fum & Zalla, 2005).

2193

The Experiment
Our intuition was that working memory and executive
functions do indeed play a role in the GT. We were left to
find experimental evidence supporting our view.
As we already pointed out, the GT is rather an
unstructured task. This feature is essential for highlighting
behavioral disorders in frontal patients, but unfortunately
allows few possibilities for controlled manipulations.
However, despite its unrestrained formulation, the GT has
some obvious constraints. For our purposes, it is important
to observe that decision making occurs in discrete events,
and these events are clearly segmented by participants’
choices. Each selection is potentially independent from the
previous and the following ones. Participants cannot
anticipate when the task will terminate, and are clearly
informed that they could succeed if they stick to the
advantageous choices. The only feedback is given during
the small pauses between consecutive selections, when wins
and possible losses are presented.
It is clear, therefore, that at each decision cycle,
participants perform two operations. First, they must encode
and process the result of their previous action, progressively
learning the value of the decks. Second, they must ponder
the following move. We cannot distinguish easily between
the two processes, and probably they are interwoven within
the same time span. However, one can selectively suspend
feedback. This cancels the opportunity for encoding new
outcomes and learning from them. As a consequence, the
evaluation process alone remains the only activity between
two subsequent card selections.
We developed an experimental task that takes advantage
of this asymmetry to disentangle the two processes. In our
paradigm, participants have to perform an initial interaction
phase with the GT for the usual length of 100 trials. This
allows for a full replication of the GT experiments, at the
end of which the participants’ selection behavior should be
stable on the advantageous strategy.
This phase is followed by a second phase, during which
no feedback is conveyed. Before the beginning of this
second period, participants are informed that, although no
information is given on their selections, decks’
profitableness is unchanged. They are also instructed to
continue selecting from the decks they have learned to be
the safe ones.
Adding an interfering task to the first or the second phase
will result, respectively, in interfering with both learning
and deciding, or with the decision phase only (all the
learning having already occurred). A possible effect of the
secondary task on GT performance will reflect the
contribution of executive functions in one of these two
components—or in both.

The Interfering Task
To be appropriate, our interfering secondary task had to
conform to three criteria. First, the task had not to be selfpaced, so that participants could not learn to interleave them
in an optimal way. For similar reasons, we needed each trial

of our task to be independent of the previous one, to avoid
potential effects of learning and anticipation that could
alleviate the cognitive workload. Finally, we needed a task
that made no use of the same motor or perceptual resources,
so that the interference would be limited to the central
cognitive resources.
In the end, we opted for a sequential parity discrimination
task. Participants were acoustically presented with a series
of numbers in the range between 1 and 10. For each number,
participants were to indicate whether it was even or odd by
pressing one of two buttons.

Possible Results
Given our two-by-two design, there are four possible results
of our experiment.
The secondary task has no effect in the first or in the
second phase. Such a result implies a complete
independence of the activity of somatic markers from
attentional resources and, consequently, from high-level,
conscious cognitive processes, which are known to be
resource-demanding. This would be a strong confirmation
of what previously claimed by Turnbull et al. (2005), and by
Bechara et al. (1998).
The secondary task affects performance in the first
phase, but not in the second one. Associations with
experienced somatic states may help aversive results to be
recalled during the selection phase, thus orienting one’s
decision without the need for cognitive resources. However,
the learning of such association may require some initial
attentive step. For instance, one may need to attend and
process the stimuli for a sufficient time for the association to
take place, or may need to explicitly perceive one’s own
change in the somatic state to make it enter the associative
process.
The secondary task has no effect in the first phase, but
affects performance in the second one. This perspective is
the exact opposite of the previous one. It implies that
learning in the GT may occur without any contribution of
executive functions, but they are needed during the selection
phase. Somatic markers would be needed for encoding and
processing monetary results, but not in the stage where
options are evaluated and a final decision is made. We do
not know of any researcher currently endorsing this view.
The secondary task affects performance on both the first
and the second phase. This position implies that, in effect,
no automatic mechanism exists at all in the GT, and
achieving successful performance is possible only by means
of resource consuming cognitive elaboration. This would
strikingly be at odd with previous experimental results by
Bechara et al. (1998) and Turnbull et al. (2005). Although
this may be the case for some unemotional and analytic
participants (which indeed we encountered in this, as well as
in other studies), we think it is not generally the case.

2194

Method
Participants
Participants were 155 students (82 females) from the
University of Trieste, aged 19 to 51 (M = 22, SD = 4.3).
Each of them had been previously randomly assigned to one
of the four possible conditions obtained by applying the
secondary task in the first phase, in the second phase, in
none of them, or in both. Data from two participants were
lost during a data transfer operation.
Procedure
The GT was performed on a specially developed computer
application. The software was a custom-made replica of the
original program developed by Bechara, Tranel, and
Damasio (2000). Decks were visually presented on a 15”
LCD screen, and participants used a mouse device to point
and select the deck they had chosen. Wins and losses were
presented visually in the upper half of the screen,
immediately following each card selection. The running
total of money was always visible in the uppermost part of
the screen.
The same application was designed to run also the
secondary task. Auditory stimuli were presented through a
pair of wireless earphones. Participants could respond by
pressing two keys on a USB numeric pad placed on the side
of the non-dominant hand. They were trained before the
beginning of the experimental session. The ten stimuli had
been previously recorded from an Italian native speaker
female voice, and stored into separate WAV files. The lag
between two the onsets of two consequent stimuli was fixed
to two or three seconds1. Stimuli were randomly selected,
with the only constraint that the same stimulus could not
occur twice in a row.
The experimental sessions were held individually. The
instructions were an Italian translation of the original ones
(Bechara et al., 1994), and were presented in written form to
all participants. After reading the instructions, participants
underwent a first phase of interaction with the computer
version of the GT. Participants sat in front of a 15’ LCD
monitor, and were given a mouse to select the decks on the
screen with their dominant hand. When required to complete
the secondary task, participants were also given the
earphones and the numeric keypad.
Upon completion of the first phase, the application
prompted each participant to call the experimenter for
further instructions. The experimenter delivered new written
instructions, and remained available to answer possible
questions.
The chosen payoff matrix for the IGT was the so-called
A’B’C’D’ version described by Bechara, Tranel, and
1

Initially, the interval between stimuli was one of the factors
manipulated in the experiment. Subsequent analysis, however,
showed that both conditions were sufficiently demanding, and that
the different time lag had no effect on GT performance (F(1,138) =
1.32) nor interacted with any of the other factors. For clarity’s
sake, we decided to pool together participants and re-run all the
analysis without considering this factor.

Damasio (2000). In this version, losses increase over time.
We opted for that payoff schedule because it seems to favor
both healthy participants and frontal patients, therefore
providing a stricter test for our hypothesis.

Results
We discarded data from seven of our participants, due to
their outlying performance in the first phase (more than 2
SDs above or below the mean). As it is usual in the GT, we
measured performance as the difference between good and
bad choices over blocks of 20 consecutive selections.
Specifically, we were interested in the performance in the
last 20 trails at the end of the first phase, and the 20
selections that made the second one.

Effects of the Secondary Task on Performance
First, we checked the correlation between performance at
the end of the first phase and performance in the second
phase. They turned out to be significantly positively
correlated (Spearman r = 0.51, p < 0.001), confirming our
assumption that performance in the blind period reliably
reflected the knowledge acquired during the first series of
interactions. To examine the effect of the interfering
secondary task, we compared the participants’ performance
in the last 20 trials of the first phase with performance in the
second phase. We run a mixed-design ANOVA using the
secondary task in first phase (present vs. absent) and in the
second phase (present vs. absent) as between factors, and
the phase (first vs. second) as a within factor. Participants’
performance was the dependent variable.
The analysis uncovered a significant effect of the
secondary task in the first phase (F(1,149) = 10.31,
p=0.002). In fact, in both the first and the second period, the
two groups that went through the secondary task in the very
first phase performed worse than the other two. On the
contrary, performance in the second period was unaffected
by the presence of the additional task (F(1,149) = 2.11).
Also, we did not find any effect of the phase (first vs.
second) at all (F(1,149) = 2.61), implying that group
performances in the second part were not significantly
different from those recorded at the end of the first phase.
Finally, none the two-way interactions was significant
(secondary task in the first x in the second phase: F(1,149) =
0.01; secondary task in the first phase x phase: F(1,149) =
0.24), and neither the three-way interaction reached
significance (secondary task in the first phase x in the
second phase x phase: F(1,149) = 0.31).
These results are summarized in Figure 1. Here, the left
panel exhibits the performance of the four groups across the
first phase, while the right part depicts their performances at
the end of the first phase and during the second one.
As a confirmation, we also run a factorial ANOVA, where
only the performance in the second phase was used as a
dependent variable.

2195

Figure 1: (left) Performance of the four groups through the
first phase. (right) Performance of the four groups at the
end of the first phase and during the second phase. Points
represent means, bars represent either +SEM (for the groups
that did not undergo the dual task condition in the first
phase) or –SEM (for the groups who did).
This second analysis replicated our previous results, finding
no significant effect but the presence of the secondary task
in the first period (F(1,142) = 5.69, p = 0.02).
Such a pattern of results seems to imply that cognitive
resources are required to process adequately the results of
card selections, and that an early impediment in this phase
precludes subsequent successful decision making.
Therefore, we conclude that somatic markers are either
irrelevant for decision making (as proposed by Maia and
McClelland, 2004), or that their role is dominant only in a
later stage, provided that other central cognitive process
were involved during the learning process.
As we already pointed out, this may be odds with
Bechara’s et al. (1998) interpretation of their own data, but
it is not inconsistent with their findings: our model can
account for both patterns.

What Participants Knew: An Analysis of Latencies
At this point, it is interesting to investigate which kind of
knowledge was acquired by participants during the periods
when learning occurred. Assuming that the relevant
knowledge was not simply the sum of perceived somatic
changes, we remain with a fistful of possible alternative
solutions.
A first candidate explanation is that participants, during
the second phase, relied on procedural selections rules
acquired during the first series of interaction. Although
plausible, this possibility is ruled out by neuropsychological
evidence. In fact, we know that patients with Parkinson’s
disease are impaired in tasks requiring habit learning and
procedural skills (Knowlton, Mangels & Squire, 1996).
Nonetheless, Stout, Rodawalt and Siemers (2001) showed
that they are unimpaired in the GT.
A second option is that participants understood
completely the underlying strategy. Once the payoff rule
was discovered, following it in the second phase may well
be done in spite of a secondary task, explaining its lack of

efficacy. Such an explanation is suggested by the analysis
of the participants’ reports in Bechara et al. (1997) and
especially in Maia and McClelland (2004), where
performance turned out to be always correlated with explicit
knowledge of the underlying rules. However, we suspect
that, in both studies, the use of questionnaires during the
task may have driven participants to a more elaborate
understanding of the underlying rules, leading to an
overestimation of the amount of explicit rule-like
knowledge they could rely on. In addition, the behavior of
our participants does not suggest any rule-following pattern.
Even during the second phase, where they could clearly not
benefit from exploration, they display a fuzzy series of
selections, persevering in sampling from disadvantageous
decks more than we would expect if they were really taking
advantage of explicit representations of the task.
There is a third, possible view, which is the one we
endorsed and implemented in our model. This hypothesis is
that participants’ selections are guided by memory of
previously experienced outcomes, and the evaluation phase
is performed mainly by memory sampling.
The second and the third hypothesis may be distinguished
by looking at the average latencies in decisions. In
particular, we can compare the average latencies in the
second phase for participants who did or did not have the
secondary task in the preceding period. If participants make
their decisions relying on an explicit representation of the
task, their selection latencies should be faster, or not
significantly slower, when they had the opportunity to learn
than when they did not. On the contrary, if participant’s
decision is based on the outcomes they can recall from the
previous phase, then a better encoding should result in
larger sampling from memory, requiring longer time for
evaluation and, therefore, larger latencies before selecting a
deck.
To test this prediction, we analyzed the effect of the
interfering task in the first phase on the average decision
latency in the subsequent phase. This comparison was
limited to those two subgroups that were not in the dual task
condition in the second period. To adjust for possible nonnormal distribution of response times, the analysis was
performed on the square root of the latencies. Participants
who did not experience the secondary task in the previous
phase (M=36.75, SD = 11.98) were significantly slower than
those who did (M = 30.87, SD = 5.00: t(69) = 2.74, p <
0.01). The corresponding results in milliseconds are
reported in Figure 2.

Conclusions
Our results question a stronger formulation of the Somatic
Marker Hypothesis, and the purported double dissociation
that has been claimed by Bechara et al. (1998) and Turnbull
et al. (2005). We think that in both the experiments there
were possible alternative explanations for the results, and
we showed that a more careful experiment can indeed
highlight a role for central cognitive processes.

2196

2000

Mean latency (ms)

1490.16
1500
977.22
1000

500

0
Absent

Present

Secondary task in the first phase

Figure 2: Mean latencies in the second phase for the
participants who did or did not experience the secondary
task in the first phase. Bars represent mean values +SEM.
Our results are not incompatible with Damasio’
hypothesis: in fact, they are consistent with a milder version
of the theory where somatic representations are one of the
possible signals that a central executive may need to
evaluate the consequences of previous decisions.
We do not deny that executive functions and emotions
may rely on different circuits. What we find unrealistic is
the hypothesis that one of those functions alone is
responsible for human decision making. Selecting the
appropriate alternative, like any complex activity, requires a
successful integration of both sources in order to be
achieved. Different settings may make one component more
important than another, but we find it difficult to conceive a
decision making task that is achieved entirely by somatic
marker circuits.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to our students, Gennj Roia and Elisa
Benvenuto, for their support during experiment design and
data collection, and to Lara Tagliapietra, for her aid in
recording and editing the auditory stimuli.

References
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., & Damasio, H., (2000).
Characterization of the decision-making deficit of patients
with ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions. Brain, 123,
2189–2202.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S.
W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50, 7–15.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Anderson, S. W.
(1998). Dissociation of working memory from decision
making within the human prefrontal cortex. Journal of
Neuroscience, 18, 428–437.

Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R.
(1997). Deciding advantageously before knowing the
advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293–1295.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R.
(2005). The Iowa Gambling Task and the somatic marker
hypothesis: some questions and answers. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9, 159-162.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R.
(1996). Failure to respond autonomically to anticipated
future outcomes following damage to prefrontal cortex.
Cerebral Cortex, 6, 215-225
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error. New York, NY:
Gosset/Putnam Press.
Damasio, A. R., Tranel, D. & Damasio, H. (1991). Somatic
markers and the guidance of behavior: Theory and
preliminary testing. In H. S. Levin, H. M. Eisenberg & A.
L. Benton (Eds), Frontal lobe function and dysfunction.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Fellows, L. K., & Farah, M. J. (2005). Different underlying
impairments in decision-making following ventromedial
and dorsolateral frontal lobe damage in humans. Cerebral
cortex, 15, 58-63.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A Perspective on judgment and
choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American
Psychologist, 58, 697–720.
Maia, T. V., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). A reexamination
of the evidence for the somatic marker hypothesis: What
participants really know in the Iowa Gambling Task.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101,
16075-16080.
Knowlton, B. J., Mangels, J. A., & Squire, L. R. (1996). A
neostriatal habit learning system in humans. Science, 273,
1399-1402.
Payne J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The
adaptive decision maker. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Saver, J. L., Damasio, A. R. (1991). Preserved access and
processing of social knowledge in a patient with acquired
sociopathy due to ventromedial frontal damage.
Neuropsychologia, 29, 1241-1249.
Stocco, A., Fum, D., & Zalla, T. (2005). Revising the role of
somatic markers in the Gambling Task: A computational
account for neuropsychological impairments. In B. Bara,
L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the
27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2074-2079.
Stout, J. C., Rodawalt, W. C., & Siemers, E. R. (2001).
Risky decision making in Huntington’s disease. Journal
of the International Neuropsychological Society, 7, 92–
101.
Tomb, I., Hauser, M., Deldin, P., & Caramazza, A. (2002).
Do somatic markers mediate decisions on the gambling
task? Nature Neuroscience, 5, 1103–1104.
Turnbull, O. H., Evans, C. E. Y, Bunce, A., Carzolio, B., &
O’Connor, J. (2005). Emotion-based learning and central
executive resources: An investigation of intuition and the
Iowa Gambling Task. Brain & Cognition, 57, 244-247.

2197

