UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multimodal Communication in Computer-Mediated Map Task Scenarios

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3707z7hz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Hoque, Mohammed E.
Jeuniaux, Patrick
Lewis, Gwenyth
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multimodal Communication in Computer-Mediated Map Task Scenarios
Max M. Louwerse (mlouwerse@ memphis.edu)a
Patrick Jeuniaux (pjeuniau@memphis.edu)a
Mohammed E. Hoque (mhoque@memphis.edu)c
Jie Wu (wjie@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)b
Gwyneth Lewis (glewis@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)a
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systemsa
Department of Computer Science / Institute for Intelligent Systemsb
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering / Institute for Intelligent Systemsc
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
Multimodal communication involves the co-occurrence of
different communicative channels, including speech, eye gaze
and facial expressions. The questions addressed in this study
are how these modalities correlate and how they are aligned to
the discourse structure. The study focuses on a map task
scenario whereby participants coordinate a route on a map,
while their speech, eye gaze, face and torso are recorded.
Results show that eye gaze, facial expression and pauses
correlate at certain points in the discourse and that these
points can be identified by the speaker’s intentions behind the
dialog moves. This study thereby sheds light on multimodal
communication in humans and gives guidelines for
implementation in animated conversational agents.

Introduction
Most communicative processes require multiple channels,
both linguistic and paralinguistic (Clark, 1996). For
instance, we talk on the phone while gesturing, we seek eye
contact when we want to speak, we maintain eye contact to
ensure that the dialog participant comprehends us, and we
express our emotional and cognitive states through facial
expressions. These different communicative channels play
an important role in the interpretation of an utterance by the
dialog partner. For instance, the interpretation of “Are you
hungry?” depends on the context (e.g. just before going to a
restaurant, during dinner), depends on eye gaze (staring
somebody in the eyes or looking away), depends on prosody
(e.g. stress on ‘you’ or ‘hungry’), facial expressions (e.g.
surprised look, disgusted look) and gestures (e.g. rubbing
stomach, pointing at a restaurant). While multimodal
communication is easy to comprehend for dialog
participants, it is hard to monitor and analyze for
researchers.
Despite the fact that we know linguistic modalities (e.g.
dialog move, intonation, pause) and paralinguistic
modalities (e.g. facial expressions, eye gaze, gestures) cooccur in communication, the exact nature of their interaction
remains unclear (Louwerse, Bard, Steedman, Graesser &
Hu, 2004). There are two primary reasons why an insight in
the interaction of modalities in the communicative process
is beneficial.

First, from a psychological point of view it helps us
understand how communicative processes take shape in the
minds of dialog participants. Under what psychological
conditions are different channels aligned? Does a channel
add information to the communicative process or does it
merely co-occur with other channels? Research in
psychology has shed light on the interaction of modalities,
for instance comparing eye gaze (Argyle & Cook, 1976;
Doherty-Sneddon, et al. 1997), gestures (Goldin-Meadow,
2003; Louwerse & Bangerter, 2005; McNeill, 1992) and
facial expressions (Ekman, 1979) but many questions
regarding multiple – i.e., more than pairs of – channels and
their alignment remain unanswered.
Second, insight in multimodal communication is
beneficial from a computational point of view, for instance
in the development of animated conversational agents
(Louwerse, Graesser, Lu, & Mitchell, 2004). The
naturalness of the human-computer interaction can be
maximized by the use of animated conversational agents,
because of the availability of both linguistic (semantics,
syntax) and paralinguistic (pragmatic, sociological) features.
These animated agents have anthropomorphic, automated,
talking heads with facial features and gestures that are
coordinated with text-to-speech-engines (Cassell &
Thórisson, 1999; Massaro & Cohen, 1994; Picard, 1997).
Examples of these agents are Baldi (Massaro & Cohen,
1994), COSMO (Lester, Stone & Stelling, 1999), STEVE
(Rickel & Johnson, 1999), Herman the Bug (Lester, Stone,
Stelling, 1999) and AutoTutor (Graesser, Person, et al.,
2001). Though the naturalness of these agents is
progressively changing, there is room for improvement.
Current agents for instance incessantly stare at the dialog
partner, use limited facial features rather randomly, or
produce bursts of unpaused speech. Both psycholinguistics
and computational linguistics would thus benefit from
answers to questions regarding the interaction of
multimodal channels.
A specific and related question concerns the mapping of
these channels onto the discourse structure. Research has
shown that the structure of the dialog can often predict these
modalities. For instance, Taylor, King, Isard, & Wright
(1998) and Hastie-Wright, Poesio, and Isard (2002) have

1717

shown that speech recognition can be improved by taking
into account the sequence of dialogue moves (for example,
answers following questions) and Flecha-Garcia (2002) has
shown that eye brow movements can partly be explained by
linguistic communicative functions related to dialogue
structure.
In this exploratory study, we investigate the mappings of
modalities onto the dialog structure as well as their
correlations. The current paper reports on some initial
findings of a study investigating these questions in computer
mediated discourse between two dialog participants. The
study reported here is part of a series conducted in a project
investigating multimodal communication in humans and
agents.

Method
Two dialog partners collaborated in a Map Task scenario
whereby their communication was recorded with
camcorders, speech recorders and eye trackers. The analysis
reported below focuses on the alignment of cognitive states
as expressed through facial expressions, the eye gaze and
pauses to the dialog structure.

Participants
Eight undergraduate students at the University of Memphis
participated in this study, six females and two males. The
participants received extra credit in an undergraduate course
for participating in this study.

Materials

Intelligent Map Task Agent

Four different maps were created based on the maps used in
the HCRC Map Task corpus (Anderson, et al., 1991). The
maps used different types of objects (cars, churches, houses,
trees, lakes) and different colors in order to elicit dialog
with various contrasts. The average number of object types
was 7.8 (SD = 3.98) and 53 (SD = 5.79) object tokens. For
the analysis reported below, the four maps were considered
random variables.

In an ongoing project on multimodal communication in
humans and agents, we are investigating the interaction
between linguistic modalities, like prosody and dialog
structure, and non-linguistic modalities, like eye gaze and
facial expressions. The project aims to determine how these
modalities are aligned, whether, and if so, when these
modalities are observed by the interlocutor and whether the
correct use of these channels actually aids the interlocutor’s
comprehension. Answers to these questions should provide
a better understanding of the use of communicative
resources in discourse and can subsequently aid the
development of more effective animated conversational
agents.
With so many variables in multimodal communication,
it is desirable to control for genre, topic, and goals of
unscripted dialogs. We therefore used the Map Task
scenario (Anderson, et al., 1991). The Map Task is a
restricted-domain route-communication task which makes
clear to experimenters exactly what each participant knows
at any given time. The Instruction Giver (Giver) coaches the
Instruction Follower (Follower) through a route on the map.
By way of instructions, participants are told that they and
their interlocutors have maps of the same location but drawn
by different explorers and so potentially different in detail.
They are not told where or how the maps differ. The maps
are of fictional locations and participants have only three
sources of knowledge in their initial encounter with a map:
1) the instructions, 2) what appears on his/her map (cartoon
landmarks, their labels, an in the case of the giver, the
location of the route) and 3) what has been expressed during
the map task dialogue, in terms of language, speech, eye
contact, facial expressions, gestures. The route on the
Giver’s map is designed, however, to maintain not only the
alternation of matching and mismatching landmarks, but
also an ‘easy stages’ rule: the next landmark critical to the
route will almost always be one of the landmarks closest to
the current landmark.

Apparatus
Participants’ communication was recorded by five
Panasonic camcorders, two capturing the faces of each
dialog participant (PV-GS31), two capturing the upper
torsos of each participant (PV-GS150) and one capturing
both participants from a bird’s eye view (PV-GS150). Eye
gaze was recorded for the Giver only using an SMI iView
RED remote eye tracker. Speech was recorded using a
Marantz PMD670 recorder whereby Giver and Follower
were recorded on two separate (left and right) channels
using two AKG C420 headset microphones.

Procedure

1718

Participants were seated adjacent to each other, separated by
a divider to ensure that they could not see each other. They
communicated through microphones and headphones, while
they could see the upper torso of the dialog partner and the
map both on a computer monitor in front of them.
Participants were randomly assigned to a Giver or Follower
role.
Before the conversation started, all equipment was
calibrated. The five camcorders were positioned and
focused in order to best capture facial expressions and upper
torso. The eye gaze of the Information Giver was calibrated
using nine calibration points on the screen. To avoid
interruption of the dialog, calibration only occurred once per
map. If calibration was lost in the experiment, unbeknownst
to the participant recording of eye tracking data was
discontinued. The experiment started with a flash of light, in
order to ensure alignment of the different channels for the
data analysis.

All modalities were aligned at 250 milliseconds accurate
time stamp. Two types of analyses were conducted: 1) a
correlation analysis between the different modalities of
cognitive state, eye gaze, eye blinks and pause; 2) an
analysis of difference between dialog moves for each of the
modalities variables.

Dialog moves
Three students in the Institute for Intelligent Systems
transcribed the audio of the interactions between
Information Giver and Information Follower. Next they
classified and time-stamped (250ms intervals) these
utterances in the 12 conversational game moves described
by Carletta et al. (1997). An overview of these dialog moves
is presented in Table 1. Kappas between the coders were
acceptable at .53, higher than Kappa scores of .39 between
human coders obtained in a different study (Louwerse &
Crossley, 2006).

Eye gaze
Two dependent measures were recorded for the Giver’s eye
gaze. Total fixation times were computed for the two areas
of interest, the Follower and the Giver’s map. In addition,
number of blinks was computed.

Pause
Figure 1. Example of map
The Giver was presented with a map in color similar to the
one presented in Figure 1, with a route drawn on it. The
Follower had a slightly different map without the route
drawn on it. Followers were able to draw a route on the map
using a stylus or a mouse.

Results and Discussion
The average duration of the four dialogs was 354.5 seconds
(SD = 81.51). These durations are comparable with the
average duration of Map Task dialogs, 407.75 seconds
(Branigan, Lickley, & McKelvie, 1999).

Pause was analyzed using the upper intensity limit and
duration. In measurement of intensity, minimum pitch
specifies the minimum periodicity frequency in any signal.
In our case, 100 Hz for minimum pitch yielded a sharp
contour for the intensity. Audio frames with intensity values
consistently less than 50 dB and for the duration of longer
than .5 seconds were classified as pauses. The 50 dB for
intensity threshold was chosen to be the optimal value based
on experimentation to capture all the utterances while
rejecting the absolute silence during the interaction. The
speech processing software Praat (Boersma & Weenink,
2006) was used to perform all the calculations to identify
the pause regions.

Table 1. The 12 move types used in the Map Task, their frequency in percentages, a description and an example
Note: ‘IG’ and ‘IF’ refer to the frequency of dialog moves in Givers and Followers.
Dialog
IG
IF
Description
Example
Act
INSTRUCT
Commands partner to carry out action
Start at the top and go down between the
38
0
blue and the red car.
EXPLAIN
States information not directly elicited by partner
Ok I went the wrong way.
28
8
CHECK
Requests partner to confirm information
So, between the black and the grey one?
9
12
ALIGN
Checks attention, readiness, agreement of partner
Ok, do you see those two blue cars?
15
3
QUERY-YN 4
Yes/no question that is not CHECK or ALIGN
Do you see that?
8
QUERY-W
Any query not covered by the other categories
If I'm at the red car what do I do there?
7
17
ACKNOWL
Verbal response minimally showing understanding
Uh huh.
14
7
REPLY-Y
Yeah, start at the top.
11
107 Reply to any yes/no query with yes-response
REPLY-N
Reply to any yes/no query with no-response
No, go like above the puddle.
4
24
REPLY-W
Reply to any type of query other than ‘yes or ‘no’
It goes below.
2
1
CLARIFY
Reply to question over and above what was asked
So you'll be between the blue and red car.
13
3
READY
Preparing conversation for new dialog game
Alright. We're going to move to the left.
28
8
1719

Table 3. Correlations modalities Giver
Notes: **p < .01; *p < .05

Cognitive states
Cognitive states were coded by three judges using the facial
expression video footage. Standard emotion coding
schemes, like Ekman, Friesen, Wallace and Hager’s (2002)
facial action coding scheme are problematic for Map Task
scenarios, because negative cognitive states like disgust,
anger or sadness do not occur in these interactions. Instead,
we used a coding scheme inspired by Craig, Graesser,
Sullins, and Gholson’s (2004) and Kort, Reilly and Picard’s
(2001) schemes for affect in learning. Nine cognitive states
were distinguished (Table 2). To account for degrees of
these cognitive states, the average monothetic ratings of the
cognitive states were used in the analysis.

Looking
Away
Distracted
Uncertain
Confused
Confident
Engaged
Encouraged
Interested
Bored
Pause

Table 2. Cognitive states determined by facial expressions
Cognitive
state
Distracted
Uncertain
Confused
Frustrated
Confident
Engaged
Encouraged
Interested
Bored

-.065
.338**
.172*
-.143*
.163*
.172*
-.081
-.026
.413*

Fixation
on
person
-.071
.249*
.086
-.067
.314**
-.034
.006
.212**
.447**

Fixation
on map

Blink

Pause

-.083
.168*
-.027
-.112
.438**
.006
-.020
.062
.659**

-.075
.712**
.538**
-.103
.893**
.258**
-.028
.023
.819**

-.078
.703**
.443**
-.155*
.676**
.147*
-.097
-.003

Table 4. Correlations modalities Follower
Notes: **p < .01; *p < .05

Description
Directing attention away from the task;
broken concentration
Hesitation or doubt; lack of assurance
Lack of understanding
Annoyance or irritation
Expression of assurance and certainty
Heavy and uninterrupted involvement in
activity
Inspiration and motivation
Expression of attention
Lack of interest in the activity

Distracted
Uncertain
Confused
Confident
Engaged
Encouraged
Interested
Bored
Pause

Correlations between modalities
Cognitive states, eye gaze and pauses were compared within
both Giver and Follower, except for eye gaze, which was
only recorded for the Giver.
Correlations between these modalities are presented in
Table 3 (Giver) and 4 (Follower). The Givers’ eye gaze on
the Follower correlated significantly with the cognitive
states of Engagement, Uncertainty and Boredom. In fact,
Engagement and Uncertainty also correlated with the
fixations on the map. Givers heavily involved in the task
seemed to pay more attention to both the dialog partner and
the map in front of them, either because they are absorbed in
the task or because they are uncertain about an aspect of that
task. The same patterns can also be found for the Follower.
Though the Follower’s eye gaze was not recorded, the
coding for the Follower moving their eyes away from the
map gives an adequate approximation of fixation on the
Giver. Again, Uncertainty and Engagement are the cognitive
states during which this happens most frequently.
Blinks co-occur with many of the cognitive states. It is
noteworthy that, in addition to cognitive states like
Engagement and Uncertainty, they correlate with the
cognitive state of Confusion. On the contrary, when Givers
feel confident, they pause less and look less at Follower, as
suggested by the significant negative correlations.

Looking
away
-.037
.153*
.151*
-.050
.229**
.129
-.038
.336
.025

Pause
-.059
-.086
.091
.079
.095
.146
.134
-.139

While the correlations for looking away and cognitive states
are similar between Giver and Follower, correlations
between pause and cognitive states differ considerably. The
most likely explanation for this is the difference in average
length of an utterance between Givers and Followers. A
Giver’s turn is on average 5.87 seconds, while for Followers
the average lies at .88 seconds. It is therefore important to
normalize the utterances for length. This is what was done
in the next analysis.

Differences between dialog moves
To allow for a comparison between dialog moves, the
duration of the move must be taken into account. For
instance, the INSTRUCT move that describes an action to the
dialog partner necessarily takes more time than a REPLY-Y
move that simply states “yes”. The likelihoods of pausing in
speech, of changing eye gaze or to express cognitive states
are therefore necessarily more frequent in longer moves.
The dependent variables were therefore normalized by the
duration of the dialog move.
Main effects for dialog move were found in eye gaze of
the Giver on the Follower, a 500 ms. pause as well as the
cognitive states for Confused, Engaged, Encouraged and
Distracted for the Giver and Confused, Confident,
Distracted and Interested for the Follower. No effects were
found between dialog moves for the cognitive states for
Bored or Uncertain.

1720

Table 5. Main effects for dialog move.
Notes: **p < .01; *p < .05
Dependent
variable
Gaze on follower
2500 ms Pause
Confident
Confused
Confused
Distracted
Distracted
Encouraged
Engaged
Interested

Role

F

MSe

Salient dialog move

Giver
Giver
Follower
Giver
Follower
Giver
Follower
Giver
Giver
Follower

1.89*
1.83*
2.39**
13.62**
3.26**
3.65**
1.98**
2.93**
2.89**
2.70**

.02
.01
.02
.01
.02
.01
.01
.02
.02
.01

REPLY-Y, ALIGN
ACKNOWLEDGE
CHECK, QUERY-YN, REPLY-Y
QUERY-W
REPLY-W
QUERY-W
READY
INSTRUCT
INSTRUCT
CHECK, QUERY-YN

An overview of these main effects is given in Table 5, as
well as the salient dialog moves significant from the other
dialog moves in a Bonferroni post-hoc test. These post-hoc
tests revealed the exact nature of the differences between the
dialog moves. The differences for Giver’s eye gaze on the
follower were primarily due to the REPLY-Y and the ALIGN
move. Apparently Givers look more at the Followers when
they confirm a YN-QUESTION or – not surprisingly – when
they check the attention, readiness and agreement of the
dialog partner.
The expression of Distraction in the Giver’s cognitive
states can particularly be found in QUERY-W. This may be
explained by the Giver moving attention away from the
conversation to formulate a question. The QUERY-W move
differed from the other dialog moves in that it had higher
frequencies of the cognitive state Confusion. This effect was
both found in Givers and Followers. In a QUERY-W move
the speaker asks for information that goes beyond a request
for a confirmation from the dialog partner. It is therefore not
surprising that the QUERY-W move is frequent in a
cognitive state of confusion. On the other hand, where the
speaker has the information to provide to the dialog partner,
as is the case in the INSTRUCT dialog move, the opposite is
true: the Giver expresses cognitive states of Encouragement
and Engagement. Similarly, the Follower merely needs a
confirmation of information the speaker has and expresses
cognitive states of Confidence in dialog moves like CHECK,
QUERY-YN, or confirms this information as in REPLY-Y.
Finally, ACKNOWLEDGMENT moves likely mark the higher
frequency of pauses in the speaker in the line of the partial
acknowledgement, whereby the speaker has some
hesitations, as described in Louwerse and Mitchell (2004).

What are the effects of modalities not discussed here, like
eye brow movement, intonation contours or gestures? What
are the best coding schemes for the various modalities in
specific tasks, like the Map Task? What are the differences
in our findings between computer-mediated interaction and
direct face-to-face interaction?
Although studies investigating multimodal communication
generate many research questions and are far from easy to
conduct, they also provide a wealth of information on how
humans communicate. The present study has provided an
insight into how eye gaze, facial expression and pauses
correlate with each other at certain points in the discourse
and that these points can be identified by dialog moves.
From a psycholinguistic perspective, using dialog moves as
the unit of analysis helps to align the various modalities
across various channels. From a computational linguistic
perspective, using dialog moves helps to generate these
modalities, which can in turn be studied for their alignment
with discourse structure. Interdisciplinary research will
bring us progressively closer to answers to questions that
dialog participants generally do not consider, because for
them multimodal communication is so natural and
seemingly easy.

Acknowledgments

Conclusion

This research was supported by grant NSF-IIS-0416128.
Any
opinions,
findings,
and
conclusions
or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
funding institution. We would like to thank Ellen Bard and
Markus Guhe for the creation of the maps and their help in
setting up the study, and Dominique Crocitto, Fatema Julia,
Fang Yang and Megan Zirnstein for their help in the data
collection and analyses.

The study reported in this paper is the first in a series
investigating multimodal communication in humans and
agents. This study is very much exploratory in nature, but it
allows us to have a closer look at the complex interplay
between different modalities in conversation. Studies like
this elicit many research questions. For instance, what is the
effect of the map on multimodal communication? What role
do individual differences (personalities, sex, culture) play?
1721

References
Anderson, A., Bader, M., Bard, E., Boyle, E., Doherty, G.
M., Garrod, S., Isard, S., Kowtko, J., McAllister, J.,
Miller, J., Sotillo, C., Thompson, H. S. & Weinert, R.
(1991). The HCRC Map Task Corpus. Language and
Speech, 34, pp. 351-366.
Argyle, M., & Cook, M. (1976). Gaze and mutual gaze.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2006). Praat: doing phonetics
by computer (Version 4.4.06) [Computer program].
Retrieved January 30, 2006, from http://www.praat.org/
Branigan, H. Lickley, R., & McKelvie, D. (1999). NonLinguistic Influences on Rates of Disfluency in
Spontaneous Speech. Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference of Phonetic Sciences, pp. 387–
390.
Carletta, J., Isard, A., Isard, S., Kowtko, J., DohertySneddon, G., & Anderson, A. (1997). The reliability of a
dialogue structure coding scheme. Computational
Linguistics, 23, 13-31.
Cassell, J. & Thórisson, K. R. (1999). The power of a nod
and a glance: Envelope vs. emotional feedback in
animated conversational agents. Applied Artificial
Intelligence, 13, 519-538.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Craig, S. D., Graesser, A. C., Sullins, J., & Gholson, B.
(2004). Affect and learning: An exploratory look into the
role of affect in learning with AutoTutor. Journal of
Educational Media, 29, 241-250.
Doherty-Sneddon, G., Anderson, A. H., O'Malley, C.,
Langton, S., Garrod, S., & Bruce, V. (1997). Face-to-face
and video-mediated communication: A comparison of
dialogue structure and task performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3, 105-125.
Ekman, P. (1979). About brows: Emotional and
conversational signals. In M. von Cranach, K. Froppa,
W. Lepenies, & D. Ploog (Eds.), Human ethology: Claims
and limits of a new discipline: Contributions to the
colloquium (pp. 169-248). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ekman, P., Friesen, Wallace V., & Hager, J.C. (2002).
Facial Action Coding System (FACS). CD-ROM.
Flecha-Garcia, M.L. (2002). Eyebrow raising and
communication in map task dialogues. Gesture: The
Living Medium. University of Texas at Austin.
Graesser, A., Person, N., Harter D., & the Tutoring
Research Group. (2001). Teaching tactics and dialog in
AutoTutor. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
in Education, 12, 23-39.

Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Hearing gesture: How our
hands help us think. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press
Hastie-Wright, H., Poesio, M., & Isard, S. (2002).
Automatically predicting dialogue structure using
prosodic features. Speech-Communication, 36, 63-79.
Kort, B., Reilly, R., & Picard, R.W. (2001). An Affective
Model of Interplay Between Emotions and Learning:
Reengineering
Educational
Pedagogy-Building
a
Learning Companion. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT
2001), Madison Wisconsin, August 2001.
Lester, J., Stone, B., & Stelling, G. (1999). Lifelike
pedagogical agents for mixed initiative problem solving
in constructive learning environments. User Modeling
User-Adapted Interaction, 9, 1-44.
Louwerse, M.M., Bangerter, A. (2005). Focusing attention
with deictic gestures and linguistic expressions.
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Louwerse, M.M., Bard, E.G., Steedman, M., Hu, X., &
Graesser,
A.C.
(2004).
Tracking
multimodal
communication in humans and agents. Technical report,
Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis,
Memphis, TN.
Louwerse, M.M. & Crossley, S. (2006). Dialog act
classification using n-gram algorithms. In Proceedings of
the Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society
International Conference (FLAIRS). Menlo Park, CA:
AAAI Press.
Louwerse, M.M., Graesser, A.C., Lu, S., Mitchell, H. H.
(2005). Social cues in animated conversational agents.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-12.
Louwerse, M.M., & Mitchell, H.H. (2003). Towards a
taxonomy of a set of discourse markers in dialog: a
theoretical and computational linguistic account.
Discourse Processes, 35, 199-239.
Massaro, D. W., & Cohen, M. M. (1994). Visual,
orthographic, phonological, and lexical influences in
reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 20, 1107- 1128.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal
about Thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Picard, R. (1997). Affective computing. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Rickel,J. & Johnson, W.L. (1999). Animated agents for
procedural training in virtual reality: Perception,
cognition, and motor control. Applied Artificial
Intelligence, 13, 343-382.
Taylor, P., King, S., Isard, S., & Wright, H. (1998).
Intonation and dialogue context as constraints for speech
recognition. Language and Speech, 41, 493-512.

1722

