UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object Substitution Masking: When does Mask Preview work?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fj155cc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Kee, Chua Fook
Lim, Stephen W.H.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object Substitution Masking: When does Mask Preview work?
Stephen W. H. Lim (psylwhs@nus.edu.sg)
Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore,
Block AS6, 11 Law Link, Singapore 117570

Chua Fook Kee (psycfk@nus.edu.sg)
Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore,
Block AS6, 11 Law Link, Singapore 117570
Abstract
When a target is surrounded by a four-dot mask pattern that
persists after the target disappears, target identification is
worse than when the mask terminates with the target. This
masking effect has been attributed to Object Substitution
Masking (OSM). Previewing the four-dot mask attenuated
OSM. This study investigated specific situations in which
mask preview was (or was not) effective in attenuating
masking. In Experiment 1, the interstimulus interval (ISI)
between previewed mask offset and target presentation was
manipulated. The basic preview effect was replicated; neither
ISI nor preview duration influenced target discrimination
performance. In Experiment 2, mask configurations were
manipulated. When the configuration of the mask at preview
matched the configuration at target presentation, the preview
effect was replicated. New evidence of ineffective mask
preview was found: when the two configurations did not
match, performance declined. Yet, when the ISI between
previewed mask offset and target presentation was removed,
such that the mask underwent apparent motion, preview was
effective despite the configuration mismatch. The object-token
interpretation provides an excellent account to this data. This
study enabled a new understanding of when preview exactly
attenuates OSM.
Keywords: object substitution masking; mask preview; ISI;
mask configuration; object token

Introduction
Visual backward masking refers to the reduction in visibility
of an earlier stimulus (the target) by a later stimulus (the
mask) that is presented within close spatial and temporal
proximity of the target. Traditionally, these masking
situations investigated low-level mechanisms (Breitmeyer,
1984). Di Lollo, Enns and Rensink (2000; Enns & Di Lollo,
1997) recently reported a hitherto unrecognized form of
visual backward masking, called object substitution masking
(OSM), that appears to involve high-level attentional and
object-recognition mechanisms. In a typical OSM task, the
observer is presented with a brief visual display of geometric
shapes. An object (the target) is flanked by four dots (the
mask) that corresponded to the corners of an imaginary
square surrounding the target. The observer is to report the
shape of the target as accurately as possible. The dots appear
simultaneously with the target. If their offset is also
simultaneous with the target (simultaneous-offset condition),
there is little impairment of target visibility. However, if their
offset is delayed relative to the target offset (delayed-offset
condition), target visibility is significantly impaired.

1687

Di Lollo, Enns and Rensink (2000) emphasized a causal
role of reentrant processes to explain OSM. The target and
mask information is initially processed at feature-level when
the target and mask appear. At the early stages, only partial
information about the target and mask is routed to higher
levels of the visual system which initiate object recognition.
However, the specification of the object is incomplete from
the initial information. Thus, the visual system needs to
sample the input again to obtain more information. This
process of sampling, construction and resampling proceeds
in cycles.
Consider the scenario where the target is removed, but the
mask persists. When the visual system continues to sample
information from the display which now contains only the
mask, the durable representation that is eventually
established is that of the mask and not the
target. As a result, target information is unrepresented (or at
least under-represented). Under this view, OSM occurs only
when the target disappears before a durable representation of
it has been established, or some visual information such as
the mask alone persists in the display after the target
terminates.
Neill, Hutchison and Graves (2002) argued that OSM
involves relatively high-level attentional mechanisms. More
recently, Tata and Giaschi (2004) proposed that OSM occurs
when attention is selectively deployed to the masking object.
The visual system fundamentally assigns priority tags to
objects in a scene (Yantis & Jonides, 1984), and attention is
selectively deployed to high-priority objects (new items in
the display) before low-priority objects (older items) (Yantis
& Johnson, 1990). Under this view, OSM occurs when the
novel masking object appears simultaneously with the target.
Since both the target and the mask are high-priority objects,
they compete to capture attention and the representation of
the target is possibly disrupted. Logically, previewing the
mask, such that it is made no longer “new”, may prevent
such attentional capture and thus perceptual interference.
Extant literature appears to suggest that in an OSM
paradigm, so long as the mask is previewed, the masking
effect is always attenuated. However, such a hypothesis has
not been directly tested. Of particular interest is that
previewing the mask might be ineffective under certain
scenarios, where, for instance, the mask remains novel
despite the preview. These scenarios can shed light onto the
underlying visual cognitive processes which determine
whether a visual object is “old” or “new” and therefore its
capacity to capture attention.

Experiment 1
Previewing the mask pattern attenuated OSM (e.g., Neill,
Hutchison & Graves, 2002), and the duration, per se, of mask
preview was in fact not critical in influencing preview
effectiveness (Tata & Giaschi, 2004; Neill, Hutchison &
Graves, 2002). Masking was reduced so long as the masks
were briefly (133 ms) previewed.
Lleras and Moore (2003) argued that two different
components must contribute to the total interference in OSM:
low-level backward masking and interference at higher-,
object-level representations. A critical differentiation
between a lower-level and a higher-level representation is
whether the representation is tied to a specific location: the
exact location will not be crucial if the underlying
mechanisms are high-level. For instance, the object could
move to a new location. They considered this higher
representation an “object token” (p. 107).
To test whether interference actually takes place at this
object-token level of representation in OSM, Lleras and
Moore (2003) manipulated the location of the mask and
created object-token representations with apparent motion.
The task was to identify and report the black target among
the seven other grey distractors (see Figure 1). In the two
critical conditions, the masks terminated with the target and
distractors, thus supposedly appearing to be simultaneousoffset conditions. However, at a variable interstimulus
interval (ISI) later, identical versions of the masks were
presented at positions slightly removed from the original
positions, on the circumference of a larger imaginary circle.
In the condition where the ISI was short (17 – 34 ms), the
masks were perceived to move from their original locations
to their new locations. In terms of object tokens, this
condition constitutes a delayed-offset condition rather than a
simultaneous-offset condition. If object tokens are the
relevant level of representation for some component of OSM,
OSM should occur. The control was a long ISI (216 – 233
ms) so that the masks would be perceived as terminating at
their original locations, and a set of new objects would seem
to appear at the new locations (i.e., no apparent motion). This
condition constitutes a simultaneous-offset condition. If
object tokens are the relevant level of representation, OSM
should not occur.
Indeed, masking was observed only in the short-ISI
condition. The researchers proposed that the apparent motion
in this condition maintained the original object-token
representation from the target location to the final mask
location, which interfered with target report. This
interpretation asserts that at least some mechanisms
underlying OSM must be object-token-level representations
(i.e., the masking is not purely “sensory”).
The ISI variable modulates the nature of the object-token
representation in visual short term memory (cf. Lleras &
Moore, 2003), which in turn determines whether an object is
perceived by the visual system as “new” or “old”. By
manipulating the duration of the ISI between previewed
mask offset and target-with-mask onset, the original objecttoken representation of the mask may or may not be
maintained: when the ISI is zero or very short, the mask
representation can possibly be maintained in visual short
term memory, and OSM in all likelihood would be
attenuated. On the other hand, if ISI is long, the object-token
1688

Fixation

+

Target display

+

Zero (delayed-offset
condition), short (perceived as
delayed-offset) or long ISI
(perceived as simultaneousoffset)

+

Blank (simultaneousoffset) or Postmask
+

Figure 1: Schematic of the sequence in Experiment 2 of
Lleras and Moore (2003).
of the mask established during its preview may degrade over
time. When the mask appears again simultaneously with the
target, the representation of the previewed mask may no
longer remain in visual short term memory. As such, this
later mask cannot be associated with the previewed version,
and is perceived as a new instantiation (new object) that is
capable of interfering with target identification.
Experiment 1 had three goals. The first and second were to
replicate the basic findings that previewing the masks
attenuates OSM, and that duration, per se, of mask preview
does not influence its effectiveness to attenuate OSM (Tata
& Giaschi, 2004; Neill, Hutchison & Graves, 2002). The
third was to influence the nature of representation in visual
short term memory with ISI. The critical hypothesis was that,
to the extent that the delay between previewed mask offset
and final mask onset affects its representation, ISI should
modulate performance (e.g., if ISI is long, target
identification would be poor).

Method
Participants Participants were 27 undergraduates (15
females and 12 males) from the National University of
Singapore who participated to fulfill an experiment
requirement for an introductory psychology course. All
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity.
Apparatus and setting Each participant undertook the
experiment in a designated cubicle. The participant sat in
front of a 19-in. (48-cm) colour monitor controlled by a
Macintosh G4 computer. Viewing distance between the eyes
and the monitor screen was set at approximately 50 cm.

Responses were gathered on a standard keyboard.
Throughout the experiment, the monitor provided the only
source of luminance.
Stimuli The visual display comprised a background light
grey in colour (luminance = 80 cd/m2). All other stimuli
presented were of a darker shade of grey (luminance = 40
cd/m2). A fixation cross (subtending 0.6° x 0.6°of visual
angle) was presented, followed by four identical masks (see
Figure 2). Each mask comprised four circular dots (each 0.5°
of visual angle in diameter) presented on the four corners of
an imaginary square (subtending 3.4° of visual angle),
surrounding either a distractor or the target. These distractors
or the target were Landolt C stimuli (each 1.6° of visual angle
in diameter), evenly distributed in a circular array (8° of
visual angle in radius) which surrounded the fixation cross.
Each of the four Landolt C stimuli had a small gap (0.2° of
visual angle in width) which faced north, south, east, or west.
On each trial, all four Landolt C’s were presented. One
would be designated the target, so that guess rate was 25%.
The target was indicated by an arrow stimulus (subtending
1.6° of visual angle) which appeared at the fixation position
simultaneously with the target and distractors, replacing the
fixation cross. The arrow stimulus could point to any one of
the four possible target locations. The target was presented
equally often on all four locations on the search array.
Task The task was to report the orientation of the target
stimulus’ gap. Participants used the arrow keys of a standard
keyboard to respond; the up-, down-, right- and left- arrows
were used to report gaps facing north, south, east, and west
respectively.
Design A single factor, within-subject design was used. The
independent variable was preview condition with five levels:
(1) no preview, (2) long preview (1000 ms) with ISI = 0 ms,
(3) long preview (980 ms) with short ISI (20 ms), (4) short
preview (100 ms) with long ISI (900 ms), and (5) short
preview (100 ms) with short ISI (20 ms). ISI was defined to
be the period between the offset of the previewed masks, and
the simultaneous onset of the Landolt C stimuli (i.e., target
and distractors) and masks.
The target or each distractor could appear randomly at any
of the four possible locations in the circular array. The
dependent variable was response accuracy, measured in
terms of proportion of correct responses. Each participant
completed six experimental blocks of 20 trials each. All five
types of preview conditions occurred equally often, resulting
in a total of 24 observations for each type of preview
condition in the six blocks. The duration of each trial,
defined as the point of onset of the fixation cross to the final
offset of the mask patterns (postmasks), was held constant
(1620 ms) across all five conditions to control for total trial
duration, per se, as a possible cause of interference with
target discrimination performance.
Procedure Each participant engaged in a 25-min-long
session. The participants were first shown an illustration of
the standard visual display of the experiment. They
completed one 20-trial practice block followed by the six
experimental blocks. The trials were self-paced, allowing the

1689

participants to rest in between trials whenever they deemed it
necessary.
The sequence of trial events is illustrated in Figure 2. Each
trial began with the presentation of the fixation cross, which
stayed on the display until the arrow stimulus replaced it. In
the no preview condition, the target and distractors appeared
simultaneously with the mask patterns 1000 ms after the
fixation cross onset. In the long preview, ISI = 0 ms
condition, the mask patterns appeared simultaneously with
the fixation and stayed on the display throughout the trial;
the target and distractors appeared 1000 ms later following
the masks.
In the long preview, short ISI condition, the mask patterns
appeared with the fixation cross and extinguished after 980
ms; the same mask patterns appeared simultaneously with
the target and distractors after an ISI of 20 ms. In the short
preview, long ISI condition, the mask patterns appeared with
the fixation cross and extinguished after 100 ms; 900 ms
later, the same mask patterns appeared simultaneously with
the target and distractors. In the short preview, short ISI
condition, the mask patterns appeared 880 ms after fixation
cross onset and extinguished after 100 ms; the same mask
patterns appeared simultaneously with the target and
distractors after an ISI of 20 ms.
NO PREVIEW

PREVIEW
Fixation

Fixation

+

+

Target
display

Short or
long mask
preview

+

Postmask

Zero, short
or long ISI

+

Target
display

Postmask

Figure 2: Schematic of the sequence in Experiment 1 of
the present study.

Proportion Correct

0.75

Across all five conditions, the arrow stimulus appeared
simultaneously with the target and distractors. The target and
distractors were shown for 20 ms, following which they
terminated simultaneously with the arrow stimulus; the mask
patterns persisted for another 600 ms on the display
(delayed-offset).

0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
No preview

Results
Data were collapsed across target locations. Figure 3 shows
the proportion of correct responses as a function of preview
condition. The proportion of correct responses in each
condition was calculated for each participant and submitted
to a one-way repeated measures ANOVA. There was a
significant main effect of preview condition, F(4, 104) =
5.04, MSe = 0.008, p < .005, ŋ2 = 0.16. To determine whether
preview, per se, enhanced performance, the no preview
condition was compared with the long preview, ISI = 0 ms
condition: when the mask was previewed (M = .66, SD =
.16), performance was significantly better than where the
mask was not previewed (M = .57, SD = .13), F(1, 26) =
14.95, MSe = 0.008, p < .005, ŋ2 = 0.37. Previewing the
mask enhanced performance.
To determine whether duration of mask preview
influenced performance, the long preview, short ISI
condition and short preview, short ISI condition were
compared: performance in the long preview, short ISI
condition (M = .65, SD = .15) was not reliably different from
performance in the short preview, short ISI condition (M =
.64, SD = .17), F < 1. Mask preview duration did not
influence performance, replicating Neill, Hutchison and
Graves’ (2002) finding. To determine whether ISI modulated
performance, the short preview, long ISI condition and short
preview, short ISI condition were compared: performance in
the short preview, long ISI condition (M = .66, SD = .14) did
not differ reliably from performance in the short preview,
short ISI condition (M = .64, SD = .17), F < 1. ISI did not
modulate performance.

Discussion
The present experiment replicated the basic findings that
previewing the masks attenuates masking, and duration of
preview did not influence target discrimination performance.
Most important, ISI did not seem to modulate target
discrimination performance. It would appear that the visual
system could effectively maintain the object-token
representation of the mask, even when it was absent for as
long as 900 ms.
When the same object was presented at two different
instances in time, so long as the original object-token
representation was effectively maintained across this
temporal lag and associated with the later instance, these two
instances would be perceived by the visual system as a single
instantiation of the same object. The object would then be
considered “old” during its later presentation, attenuating
masking.
The fundamental motivation behind this study was to
determine if previewing the mask could sometimes be
ineffective in reducing masking. In order for OSM to occur
despite a preview of the mask, the mask pattern during target
onset must be considered by the visual system as a new
1690

Long
preview, zero
ISI

Long
preview,
short ISI

Short
preview, long
ISI

Short
preview,
short ISI

Preview Condition

Figure 3: Proportion of correct responses in Experiment
1 of the present study as a function of preview condition.
Error bars indicate standard errors.
instantiation. Experiment 2 was designed to test the
distinction between an “old” and “new” object.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, the configuration of the four-dot mask was
manipulated. In the critical (configuration change)
conditions, each previewed mask (e.g., square configuration)
underwent a 45° rotation, so that the mask during target
presentation was a different (diamond) configuration. The
diamond configuration should be perceived as “novel”, and
previewing the mask should not help attenuate masking.
Yet, where there was no ISI between the previewed mask
offset and the target presentation, the dots would likely be
perceived by the visual system to have “rotated” from a
square configuration to a diamond configuration at the same
location. Through this apparent motion, the mask, configured
as diamond, would not be perceived as a new instantiation
from the previewed (square) mask. The later mask would
therefore be perceived by the visual system as “old” and
incapable of capturing attention.

Method
Participants were 23 undergraduates (13 females and 10
males) from the National University of Singapore who
participated to fulfill an experiment requirement for an
introductory psychology course. All participants had normal
or corrected-to-normal visual acuity. None had participated
in Experiment 1.
Apparatus, setting, task, and stimuli The apparatus,
setting, task, and stimuli were the same as in Experiment 1,
except for the following: each mask comprised four dots
presented on the four corners of either an imaginary square
or an imaginary diamond shape.
Design A 4 x 2 within-subjects design was used. The
independent variable (IV) of primary interest was preview
condition. This variable involved four levels: (1) no preview,
(2) preview, with no change in configuration of mask pattern
and an ISI (900 ms), (3) preview, with a change in
configuration of mask pattern and a (long) ISI (900 ms), and
(4) preview, with a change in configuration and no ISI. ISI,
as in Experiment 1, was defined as the period between
previewed mask offset and target-with-mask onset.
The second IV was the mask configuration at preview: (1)
the diamond configuration was shown first, or (2) the square
configuration was shown first.

Procedure The procedure was largely the same as in
Experiment 1, except for the following: each participant
completed one 16-trial practice block followed by the four
32-trial experimental blocks. The sequence of trial events is
illustrated in Figure 4. In the no preview condition, the target
and distractors appeared simultaneously with the mask
patterns (either square or diamond configurations) 1200 ms
after the fixation cross onset. In the preview, no
configuration change, ISI condition, the mask patterns
appeared simultaneously with the fixation and terminated
after 300 ms; 900 ms later, the same mask patterns (in the
same configurations) appeared simultaneously with the target
and distractors. The sequence of the preview, configuration
change, ISI condition was the same as that of the preview, no
configuration change, ISI condition, except that the mask
configuration during target presentation now differed from
the previewed mask configuration. In the preview,
configuration change, ISI = 0 ms condition, the mask
patterns appeared 900 ms after fixation cross onset and
NO CONFIGURATION CHANGE

CONFIGURATION CHANGE

Fixation

Fixation

+

+

Mask
preview
(square):
absent or
present

+

Mask
preview
(diamond)

ISI
present

+

ISI
present or
absent

+

+

Target
display

Postmask
(square)

Target
display

Postmask
(square)

0.65
Proportion Correct

All eight types of preview conditions occurred equally
often, resulting in a total of 16 observations for each type of
preview condition in the four blocks. The total duration of
each trial was held constant at 1820 ms across all eight
conditions.

0.6

0.55

0.5
No preview

No change, ISI

Change, ISI

Change, zero ISI

Preview Condition

Figure 5: Proportion of correct responses in Experiment
2 of the present study as a function of preview condition.
Error bars indicate standard errors.
persisted for 300 ms, after which the target and distractors
appeared together with the altered mask configurations.

Results
Data were collapsed across target locations. Figure 5 shows
the proportion of correct responses as a function of preview
condition. The proportion of correct responses in each
condition was calculated for each participant and submitted
to a 4 (preview condition) x 2 (order of previewed mask
configuration) repeated measures ANOVA. There was a
significant main effect of preview condition, F(3, 66) = 3.36,
MSe = 0.009, p < .05, ŋ2 = 0.12. Neither the main effect of
order of previewed mask configuration nor the interaction
between order of previewed mask configuration and preview
condition was significant, F < 1.
To determine whether preview, per se, enhanced
performance, the no preview condition was compared with
the preview, no configuration change, ISI condition: when
the mask was previewed (M = .60, SD = .14), performance
was significantly better than where the mask was not
previewed, (M = .52, SD = .15), F(1, 22) = 5.90, MSe =
0.001, p < .05, ŋ2 = 0.28. Previewing the mask enhanced
performance. To determine the effects of configuration
change, per se, on performance, the preview, no
configuration change, ISI condition and the preview,
configuration change, ISI condition were compared: where
there was configuration change (M = .53, SD = .12),
performance was significantly impaired compared to where
there was no change (M = .60, SD = .14), F(1, 22) = 7.78,
MSe = 0.007, p < .05, ŋ2 = 0.29. A change in mask
configuration, with a delay of 900 ms between previewed
mask offset and target presentation, impeded target
discrimination performance. To investigate the effects of the
ISI variable on performance, the preview, configuration
change, ISI condition and the preview, configuration change,
ISI = 0 ms condition were compared: given a change in mask
configuration, performance was significantly better when ISI
= 0 ms (M = .59, SD = .14) than when the ISI was present (M
= .53, SD = .12), F(1, 22) = 4.64, MSe = 0.008, p < .05, ŋ2 =
0.26. Apparent motion nullified the effects of configuration
change.

Discussion

Figure 4: Schematic of the sequence in Experiment 2 of
the present study.
1691

Findings supported all predictions. The basic preview effect
in Experiment 1 was replicated. When the same mask
configuration was used throughout, previewing the mask
attenuated masking despite a long ISI of 900 ms. The
important finding was that given the same ISI, previewing a

mask that had a configuration that was different from the
configuration at test did not attenuate masking. Yet, where
the ISI in this particular case was removed, masking was
attenuated.
When a diamond configuration was previewed, an objecttoken of this diamond mask was represented in visual short
term memory. However, when the mask appeared with the
target in a square configuration (cf. preview, configuration
change, ISI condition), the original (diamond) object-token
representation, albeit maintained (recall from Experiment 1
that an object token can be maintained in visual short term
memory for as long as 900 ms), was not effectively
associated with this new configuration. Represented as a
separate object-token, the square mask was therefore
perceived as a novel stimulus that could capture selective
attention, resulting in OSM.
Yet, where ISI = 0 ms, an apparent motion effect was
attained which nullified the effects of mask configuration
change. The visual system perceived the mask to have moved
(rotated) directly from its original (diamond) orientation into
its final (square) orientation at the same location. The mask
in its (new) square orientation was therefore represented as a
mere extension of the “old” stimulus which cannot capture
attention. OSM is therefore attenuated.

General Discussion
The present study showed that previewing the mask pattern
effectively attenuated masking and enhanced target
discrimination performance under most situations; neither
preview duration nor ISI, per se, modulated performance
(Experiment 1). Consider where the previewed mask
configuration (e.g., diamond) differed from the mask
configuration during target presentation (e.g., square). When
there was a delay of 900 ms between previewed mask offset
and target presentation, previewing was found to be
ineffective. Yet, when this delay was removed (i.e., ISI = 0
ms), preview attenuated masking.
Taken together, these findings seem to converge on one
critical point: how the masks are represented in visual short
term memory, and whether these initial representations are
maintained and associated with the masks during target onset
later determine whether preview is effective in attenuating
substitution. An account based on object-token
representations seems to provide an excellent fit to the data.
Durable representations of the target and mask occur at the
object-token level. By previewing the mask, an object-token
representation of the mask can be established, as it is the only
object during preview. This representation is maintained in
visual short term memory even after the mask disappears
from view. By the time the same mask appears again (with
the target), the specification of the mask is already completed
(during the preview stage). At this point, the original objecttoken is effectively associated with the (same) mask that
reappears, which marks it as an “old” stimulus. The visual
system continues to sample information from the display
which now also includes the new target object. As the only
new stimulus in the display, the target gets processed. After
several cycles of information sampling, an object-token-level
representation of the target is established. As this is the most
recent object-token representation to be established and
maintained in visual short term memory, the target can be
represented in a form for later report.
1692

When the configuration of the previewed mask (e.g., a
diamond configuration) differs from that of the mask during
target presentation (a square configuration) (Experiment 2),
the diamond mask may be fully specified at preview, its
cycles and object-token representation established. But when
the configuration during target presentation is different
(square), the latter would yield a separate object-token
representation, making it “new”. Presented simultaneously
with the target, this square configuration would be processed
concurrently with the target. The specification of the target
may be incomplete due to competition from the square mask
for selective attention. As the target terminates first while the
square mask persists (delayed-offset), the visual system
continues to sample information from the mask. As a result,
the mask “object substitutes” the target. An object-token of
the mask is established and last represented in visual short
term memory. Target report is hampered and OSM occurs as
if there has been no previewing of the mask.

Conclusion
We report new evidence of ineffective mask preview under
the scenario where the original object-token representation,
albeit maintained, cannot be effectively associated with the
mask that reinstates, after a temporal lag, during target
presentation. This later mask is perceived by the visual
system as “new” and is capable of capturing attention and
causing OSM. A new understanding of when mask preview
can exactly attenuate substitution masking is initiated.

References
Breitmeyer, B. G. (1984). Visual Masking: An integrative
approach. New York: Oxford University Press.
Di Lollo, V., Enns, J. T. & Rensink, R. A. (2000).
Competition for consciousness among visual events: The
psychophysics of reentrant visual processes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 481-507.
Enns, J. T., & Di Lollo, V. (1997). Object substitution: A
new form of masking in unattended locations.
Psychological Science, 8, 135-139.
Lleras, A., & Moore, C. M. (2003). When the target becomes
the mask: Using apparent motion to isolate object-level
component of object substitution masking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 29, 106-120.
Neill, W. T., Hutchison, K. A., & Graves, D. F. (2002).
Masking by object substitution: Dissociation of masking
and cuing effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 28, 682-694.
Tata, M. S., & Giaschi, D. E. (2004). Warning: Attending to
a mask may be hazardous to your perception. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 11, 262-268.
Yantis, S., & Johnson, D. N. (1990). Mechanisms of
attentional priority. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 16, 812-825.
Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1984). Abrupt visual onsets and
selective attention: Evidence from visual search. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 10, 601-620.

