UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Order Bias and the Suppositional Disjunction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82w2p7w0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Elqayam, Shira
Evans, Jonathan St.B.T.
Ohm, Eyvind
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Order Bias and the Suppositional Disjunction
Shira Elqayam (selqayam@plymouth.ac.uk)
Jonathan St.B.T. Evans (jevans@plymouth.ac.uk)
Centre for Thinking and Language, University of Plymouth
Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK

David E. Over (david.over@sunderland.ac.uk)
Business School, University of Sunderland
Sunderland, SR6 0DD, UK

Eyvind Ohm (eohm@plymouth.ac.uk)
Centre for Thinking and Language, University of Plymouth
Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK
previous disparate efforts in deductive reasoning, decisionmaking and inductive inference. This involves
generalisation of the suppositional theory of the conditionals
(Evans & Over, 2004) to disjunctive as well as conditional
statements.
The heuristic-analytic theory of reasoning postulates three
basic principles (Evans, 2005; Evans, Over, & Handley,
2003): singularity, relevance, and satisficing. The heuristic
system (also known as system 1) operates preconsciously to
generate representations of possibilities, or mental models,
which are relevant in the current context (relevance
principle). By default these will be the most plausible or
believable possibilities. Only one model is generated for
consideration at a time (singularity principle). These models
are then assessed by the analytic system – slow, sequential
conscious reasoning which is related to working memory
capacity and IQ, also known as system 2. This is the system
involved in hypothetical and consequential thinking.
Finally, according to the satisficing principle models are
accepted as the basis for inference and decisions if they
satisfy with respect to the current goals of the reasoner. If
not, another model is generated for consideration.
We propose that conditionals are suppositional in that
they stimulate hypothetical thought about a particular
hypothesis specified by the antecedent. The suppositional
theory proposes that people evaluate a conditional statement
by use of the extended Ramsey test (see Evans & Over,
2004). That is, they conduct a thought experiment or mental
simulation in which p hypothetically holds, making the least
possible change needed to accommodate it. The conditional
is then believable to the extent that q is probable in this
mental simulation. A number of recent studies have
provided evidence that in general people do assign the
conditional probability P(q|p) when asked to judge the
probability of a conditional (Evans, Handley, & Over, 2003;
Hadjichristidis et al., 2001; Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2003;
Over, Hadjichristidis, Evans, Handley, & Sloman, 2005).
We suggest that disjunctions, p or q, are also
suppositional in that they invite the listener to consider two
alternative hypotheses. However, since people only consider
one at a time (singularity principle) evaluation of
disjunctions is more complex. We need mentally to simulate
the p disjunct, store the result, and then simulate the q

Abstract
We present a suppositional theory of disjunctive reasoning
that proposes that ‘either-or’, like ‘if’, triggers hypothetical
thinking. However, disjunctions are more complex as they
require the reasoner to consider two hypotheses, violating the
singularity principle. Hence one of the disjuncts becomes
focal – the first one in the absence of conversational cues. As
predicted, participants presented with disjunctive statements
and asked to fill in a 6x6 grid with verifying combinations,
tended to overrepresent TF cases. The results are discussed in
terms of dual processing theories of reasoning and decision
making.
Keywords: reasoning; disjunctions; conditionals; focal vs.
residual hypothesis; suppositional

Introduction
Disjunctions, the ‘either-or’ logical connective, are
ubiquitous in life. Choices are by nature disjunctive: you
can either vote or not vote, you can’t do both. We can
promise or threat with disjunctions: ‘Either come to work on
time or you’ll be fired’. We can regulate and set rules:
‘members must have either a PhD or ten years experience’.
Though useful, ‘or’, that small innocuous-seeming word,
also lies at the root of many a fallacy, illusion and paradox
of reasoning and decision-making. It is much more difficult
to learn disjunctive concepts and definitions (Bruner,
Goodnow, & Austin, 1956; Wason & Brooks, 1979);
reasoners are at a loss to make decisions when they face
disjunctive events (Tversky & Shafir, 1992); and
probabilities of disjunctive statements add up to too much or
too little (Tversky & Koehler, 1994). Many notoriously
difficult inferences have disjunctive structure: model
theory’s illusory inferences (Johnson-Laird & Savary,
1999); hypothetical thinking theory’s collapse illusion
(Elqayam, 2005); paradoxes of decision theory (Allais,
1953; Ellsberg, 1961). All are acknowledged, partiallyacknowledged, or unacknowledged disjunctions (See also
Shafir, 1994).
The research reported in this paper is part of a project
designed to launch a new research programme to study the
nature of disjunctive thinking and decision-making. We
propose a theoretical framework that brings together

196

and non-red non-triangles (not-p not-q). When asked to
represent a true conditional, people include some
counterexample (p not-q) cases thus setting P(q|p) to be high
but less than 1. When asked to represent a false conditional,
people included many such cases thus setting P(q|p) to be
low. This suggests probabilistic representation, since
logically there should be no ‘p not-q’ cases for a true
conditional and simply one or more for a false conditional.
The Evans et al. (1996) task is a sensitive measure of
probabilities, enabling us to test for relative frequency of
either disjunct and hence for order bias. Thus, with
disjunction of the form ‘either p or q’, p should be more
often represented than q. For instance, if we ask our
participants to construct an array representing the
disjunction ‘there is either a D or a 3’, we would expect
them to insert in their representation more cards with D than
cards with 3. If we compare this with the conditional that
corresponds to it in standard extensional logic, ‘if there is
not a D then there is a 3’, however, our suppositional
account makes precisely the reverse prediction. Here we
expect not D and 3 cases to be more commonly represented
since they constitutes a clear confirmation of the
conditional, and D and not 3 cases to be much less frequent,
as D cards are ‘irrelevant’ to the suppositional conditional
(see Evans & Over, 2004).
We also included in this study exclusive disjunctives, e.g.
‘there is either a D or else a 3’. These are equivalent in
standard logic to a biconditional, ‘if and only if there is not
a D then there is a 3’. Although we did not expect these
forms to be evaluated in the same way as inclusive
disjunctives and conditionals, the same relative tendencies
apply to both (see Table 1 for a full set of sentences and
predictions). Of the four forms, exclusive and inclusive
disjunctions, and conditionals and biconditionals, only
conditionals have previously been studied in this paradigm.
Participants were presented with 8 tasks (ordered
randomly) involving each of the linguistic forms shown in
Table 1, in a mixed design. In each case they were asked to
fill a grid of 36 squares with a mixture of symbols
representing the pq, p not-q, not-pq and not-p not-q
possibilities in order to make the statement true.
The predictions were:
Order bias hypothesis: we expected the first-named
disjunct to be represented more frequently than the secondnamed disjunct for both kinds of disjunctive statements; and
for true antecedent cases to be represented more frequently
than false antecedent cases for both kinds of conditionals,
leading to the specific set of predictions shown in Table 1.
The auxiliary prediction, initial response hypothesis, was
that order bias would be stronger for initial or first responses
and disappear, or nearly so, for later responses.
Probabilistic representation hypothesis: for data taken from
the whole grid, we expected some inclusion of cases which
would logically falsify the statements. This would
generalise the results of Evans et al. (1996) to several new
linguistic forms. These cases are as follows: Conditional
statements: TF; biconditional statements: TF, FT; inclusive

disjunct and compare the results. Limitations in processing
capacity are likely to bias this process in ways we propose
below. We expect that disjunctions like conditionals will be
probabilistic in the sense that they are believable to some
degree. This must be to some extent a function of the
believability of its disjuncts but little previous research has
addressed this relationship.
How, then, do we deal with disjunctions? One possibility
is that reasoners allocate asymmetric weights to the
competing hypotheses. Support theory (Tversky & Koehler,
1994) distinguishes between focal hypotheses, which have
greater ‘support value’ – i.e., strength of evidence in its
favour – and alternative or residual hypotheses, whose
support value is lower. With disjunctions in everyday life,
which contain conversational cues, we are generally adept at
picking out the focal disjunct, using our knowledge of
context, the speaker, and our beliefs, goals and preferences.
With abstract materials, our surmise is that the default
focal hypothesis, in the absence of conversational cues,
would normally be the first disjunct. There is some evidence
for this hypothesis from previous research (Evans, Legrenzi,
& Girotto, 1999): when asked to choose cases that would
verify a disjunctive rule of the type ‘either p or q’ (e.g.,
‘either D or 3’), participants tended to choose TF (TrueFalse) cases more than FT (False-True) cases (e.g., more D4
cases than G3 cases). The effect was even more pronounced
when participants had to construct the cases themselves:
33% constructed TF cases, whereas only 8% constructed FT
cases (Evans et al., 1999, experiments 3 and 2 respectively).
This systematic bias towards the first disjunct is distinctly
non-logical: there is no logical reason to prefer either
disjunct.
However, focusing attention on one disjunct is a product
of the heuristic, rapid, automatic system. Order bias, then,
may be restricted to early representation, with reasoners
later on drawing on the analytic system to construct equiprobable representation of both disjuncts. There are some
indications for this in the literature. In a similar truth-table
construction task (Evans & Newstead, 1980, Experiment 1),
an inspection of the data reveals clear order bias in the
letter-number pairs participants constructed in their first
response, but when participants proceed to construct more
pairs, the bias disappears. However, the attempt to engage
the analytic system and re-construct representation of both
disjuncts may not always meet with success, the result being
the sub-additivity and super-additivity of disjunctive
probabilities noted by support theory (Rottenstreich &
Tversky, 1997; Sloman, Rottenstreich, Wisniewski,
Hadjichristidis, & Fox, 2004; Tversky et al., 1994).
The experiment reported in this paper compares the
subjective probability of abstract disjunctions and
conditionals. In this experiment, we adopt the task of Evans,
Ellis and Newstead (1996), who asked participants either to
construct or evaluate arrays of coloured shapes with respect
to conditionals such as ‘if it is a triangle then it is red’. The
symbols represented all logical possibilities: red triangle
(pq), non-red triangle (p not-q), red non-triangles (not-p q)

197

Table 1: Order bias predictions
Comparison 1
Inclusive disjunctions vs.
conditionals
p or q
if not-p then q
not-p or q
if p then q

disjunction
conditional
disjunction
conditional

Comparison 2
Exclusive disjunctions vs.
biconditionals
p or-else q
If-and-only-if not-p then q
not-p or-else q
If-and-only-if p then q

disjunctives: FF; exclusive disjunctives: TT; FF.
Disjunctive format hypothesis: We expected more TT cases
to be represented for inclusive disjunctions (either p or q)
than for exclusive disjunctions (either p or else q).
Conditional format hypothesis: We expected conditionals
(‘if p then q’) to be represented according to the ‘defective
conditional’ pattern (see Evans & Over, 2004), that is, we
expected TT cases to be evaluated as T, TF to be evaluated
as F, and both false antecedent cases to be evaluated as
irrelevant, or I (abbreviated as TFII). The biconditionals (‘if
and only if p then q’) we to be represented in line with the
‘defective biconditional’ pattern, TFFI. However, the
method used in our study cannot distinguish between this
and the defective conditional pattern, TFII, since if FT cases
are not generated this may be because they are considered
false or because they are not considered relevant. Therefore,
we left this as an exploratory question to see whether any
differences would come up.

Predicted case
frequencies
p not-q > not-p q
p not-q < not-p q
not-p not-q > p q
not-p not-q < p q

consisted of a statement and a 6x6 grid. Participants were
instructed to fill in the grid with letter-number pairs to make
the statement ‘true with respect to the appearance of the
grid’. They were told that they were free to use any pair as
often or as little as they wished, as long as the grid was
completely filled in. A practice trial with a negated
conjunction preceded the actual test materials. Participants
were given the trials in two blocks of eight statements
consisting of the different linguistic forms in Table 1.
Design. We used a 2x2x4 mixed design, with within
participants variables of linguistic forms (exclusive and
inclusive disjunctions, conditionals and biconditionals), and
affirmative vs. negated first term. We also had letter-number
vs. number-letter as a between participants variable: a
random half of the participants were presented with
statements such as ‘Either K or 4’, and the other half with
statements such as ‘Either 9 or B’. This controlled for a
possible confound of preference to letter-number over
number-letter combinations.

METHOD

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Participants. 39 students of the University of Plymouth
participated on a paid volunteer basis and were tested in
small groups. All participants were native speakers of
English and none of them had had formal training in logic.

Since there were no significant differences in preference
patterns between the letter-number / number-letter
conditions, data from these conditions were pooled.
Initial response data
Table 2 presents response frequencies for initial
responses, i.e., responses in the topmost left-hand cell of the
grid. As can be seen, our order bias hypothesis was strongly
supported: all disjunctions display marked preference to TF

Materials and Procedure. We used the number-letter
combinations in the eight linguistic forms shown in Table 1,
twice for each cell, a total of 16 trials, in one of eight
different random orders, presented in a booklet. Each page

Table 2: % of Initial responses (top left cell). Logical case in parenthesis. Examples in italics.
Cells corresponding to order bias hypothesis in bold (for disjunction: TF>FT; for conditionals: TT>FF)
TT

TF

FT

FF

Disjunctions
p or q
D or 3
p or else q
B or else 6
not-p or q
not-K or 2
not-p or else q
not-F or 9
Total

TT

TF

FT

FF

Conditionals
0 (pq)
D3
1 (pq)
B6
19 (¬pq)
L2
42 (¬pq)
E9
16

74 (p¬q)
D5
79 (p¬q)
B8
51 (¬p¬q)
L3
27 (¬p¬q)
E4
58

19 (¬pq)
E3
19 (¬pq)
C6
1 (pq)
K2
6 (pq)
F9
12

6 (¬p¬q)
E5
0 (¬p¬q)
C8
28 (p¬q)
K3
25 (p¬q)
F4
15

if not-p then q
if not- D then 3
iff not-p then q
iff no- B then 6
if p then q
If K then 2
iff p then q
Iff F then 9
Total

198

60 (¬pq)
E3
55 (¬pq)
C6
65 (pq)
K2
69 (pq)
F9
62

3 (¬p¬q)
E5
8 (¬p¬q)
C8
1 (p¬q)
K3
0 (p¬q)
F4
3

1 (pq)
D3
6 (pq)
B6
3 (¬pq)
L2
0 (¬pq)
E9
3

36 (p¬q)
D5
31 (p¬q)
B8
31 (¬p¬q)
L3
31 (¬p¬q)
E4
32

Table 3: Mean % of whole-grid responses. Logical case in parenthesis.
Cells corresponding to order bias hypothesis in bold (for disjunction: TF>FT; for conditionals: TT>FF)
TT

TF

FT

FF

TT

Disjunctions
p or q
p or else q
not-p or q
not-p or else q
Total

TF

FT

FF

Conditionals

1 (pq)
0 (pq)
25 (¬pq)
37 (¬pq)
16

48 (p¬q)
49 (p¬q)
55 (¬p¬q)
33 (¬p¬q)
46

43 (¬pq)
44 (¬pq)
1 (pq)
4 (pq)
23

8 (¬p¬q) if not-p then q

51 (¬pq)

9 (¬p¬q)

2 (pq)

38 (p¬q)

iff not-p then q

51 (¬pq)

14 (¬p¬q)

2 (pq)

32 (p¬q)

19 (p¬q)

if p then q

32 (pq)

1 (p¬q)

6 (¬pq)

61 (¬p¬q)

25 (p¬q)

iff p then q

29 (pq)

3 (p¬q)

2 (¬pq)

65 (¬p¬q)

15

Total

41

7

3

49

6 (¬p¬q)

over FT cases. If we compare that to the conditionals that
are logically equivalent according to standard propositional
logic, the parallel logical cases have the reverse preference,
with TT cases preferred over FF cases (also see general
discussion). 1
To test the significance of these results, we have
calculated an order bias index for each linguistic form. For
disjunctions, we added 1 for each response that favoured the
first disjunct (i.e., TF responses), and deducted one for each
response that favoured the second disjunct (i.e., FT
responses). A one-sample Wilcoxon Signed Rank test
revealed that the median index for each of the disjunctive
forms was significantly above zero (p<.01).
To compare order bias between disjunctions and
conditionals, we computed order bias for the conditionals
based on the same logical cases, FF and TT respectively.
We added 1 for each FF response and deducted 1 for each
TT response. A Sign test conducted for order bias index for
all four comparisons revealed a significant result in each
case (|z|>3.5, p≤.001).
It is also worth noting that we seem to get a very strong
exclusive reading for most disjunctions – there are hardly
any TT cases, in particular for the non-negated disjunctions.
The disjunctions with a negated first term elicit more
inclusive readings, in particular – paradoxically – the ‘orelse’ form. Also, there is a moderate biconditional reading
of all conditionals, with about 30% FF responses. Actual
linguistic format seems to have had very little effect – there
seem to be no differences between ‘if’ and ‘if and only if’
formats. Thus, our disjunctive and conditional format
hypotheses were not supported.
Lastly, there seems to be an effect of negation dropping in
the disjunctions (Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993). This is
a known and robust effect, in which participants tend to
ignore the negation and treat, for instance, ‘Either not-B or
3’ as if it were ‘Either B or 3’. If the negation is dropped
what is intended as a TF case comes out as an FF case. This
explains the high rate of FF cases found in both negated
disjunction forms. Taken in this light, some TT responses

for negated disjunctions may not indicate an inclusive
reading, but simply FT responses.
Whole grid data
Data calculated for the whole grid are presented in Table 3.
(Note that the data are not entirely independent from the
initial response data but we felt that the overlap, 1/36, was
narrow enough to justify the separate treatment. Also note
that these are mean percentages of whole-grid distributions,
rather than the one-cell percentages presented for initial
responses.)
The most important observation is that, in line with our
auxiliary prediction, the initial response hypothesis, order
bias seems to have disappeared from some of the
disjunctions. Specifically, it was only preserved for
disjunctions with negated first term. To test this observation,
we computed again a bias index along the same lines we
computed the index for initial responses. For the
disjunctions, we added a point for each response favouring
the first disjunct (TF responses), and deducted a point for
each response favouring the second disjunct (FT responses).
To compensate for missing data the index was converted to
proportions. These we tested again using one sample
Wilcoxon Signed Rank test against a median of 0. Neither
affirmative disjunction differed significantly from zero
(p>.1), although both negated disjunctions did (p<.0001).
Even for the negated disjunctions, we would be hard put
to claim order bias, since they did not differ reliably from
the equivalent conditionals. For the conditional order bias
index, we added a point for FF responses and deducted a
point for TT responses, again converting to proportions. We
contrasted the negated disjunctions with the non-negated
conditionals, using related samples Wilcoxon Signed Rank
tests. The results of these tests were equivocal: ‘not-p or q’
differed from ‘if p then q’ marginally, or significantly only
in one-tail, z=-1.7, p=.087; ‘not-p or else q’ did not reliably
differ from ‘iff p then q’, p>.1. Hence, there is no reliable,
consistent data to support order bias in the whole grid
responses, as we predicted in our initial response
hypothesis.
Several other effects are worth noting. One is the striking
biconditional reading in this dataset, especially for the nonnegated forms, where it is so strong that there are actually
more FF responses than TT responses. As in the initial

1
All data reported, here and elsewhere in this study, is aggregated.
Although we recognise the importance of individual analyses for
this dataset, it is beyond the scope of the present paper.

199

responses, the linguistic format, ‘if’ vs. ‘if and only if’,
seems to have had very little effect, giving little support to
our conditional format hypothesis. Secondly, the strong
exclusive interpretation we have observed in the initial
responses is preserved in the whole grid data, again
mitigated somewhat for the negated forms, with the same
paradoxical effect of the or-else format, lending little
support to our disjunctive format hypothesis. So for this
dataset too, neither of our format hypotheses was supported,
an interesting finding by itself.
We should also point out the same negation dropping
trend we have already noted for the initial responses, with a
large proportion of FF responses in the negated disjunctions.
Lastly, our probabilistic representation hypothesis was
clearly supported, with quite a few TF cases for
conditionals, and many FF cases for disjunctions. We shall
return to this effect in the general discussion.

reasoning, mental model theory (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991; 2002). The idea that initial representations differ from
later ones has deep roots in model theory’s account of
‘fleshing out’ representations (Johnson-Laird et al., 1991),
although not with a dual-process account. In mental model
theory, the initial mental model of a disjunction, ‘p or q’,
looks like this:
p
q
where each line denotes a separate mental model. This
initial partial representation is later ‘fleshed out’ – made
more explicit – either as inclusive disjunction (‘p or q’)
p
q
p
¬q
¬p
q
or exclusive (‘p or else q’)
p
¬q
¬p
q
Either way, model theory postulates symmetry between
the disjuncts, which our findings do not support.
One possible way to keep order bias as compatible with
model theory might be to supplement model theory with an
adaptation of the principle of minimal completion (e.g.,
Ormerod, 2000; Ormerod & Richardson, 2003), which
introduces the notion of partially represented models. When
reasoners rephrase linguistic forms, they first create an
initial model set (which corresponds to the initial set
suggested by model theory), then use it to generate the first
component of the rephrasing, only then completing the
initial model set, and that only to the point of representing a
second possible component of the rephrasing (Ormerod,
2000, p. 137). The partial representation minimal
completion postulates only pertains to the second phase,
when reasoners begin paraphrasing. However, an adapted
version, in which the principle is extended to first
representations, could account for some of our findings,
both the initial order bias and its subsequent mitigation.
Although this is a possibility, there are several cautions to
bear in mind. One is that the adaptation required would be
quite fundamental. Initial representations in mental model
theory are conceptualised as true literals within true
possibilities (Johnson-Laird et al., 1999p. 194); the idea that
some of these true literals may be left out of the first
representation is a radical departure from this basic
principle, and one, furthermore, that has not been originally
suggested by minimal completion.
Secondly, although a modified version of minimal
completion may account for our findings concerning order
bias, it cannot account for the whole pattern. In particular, it
cannot account for the probabilistic representation and the
inclusion of falsifying cases when asked to generate
confirmatory ones. This is diametrically opposed to the
model theory’s principle of truth, which maintains that only
true possibilities are represented (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
2001; Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1999).
The research we have presented in this paper is a first step
in a research programme into the suppositional disjunction.

General Discussion
In this paper we present a new theory of disjunctive
reasoning that proposes that disjunctions, like conditionals,
are suppositional, and that ‘either-or’, like ‘if’, triggers
hypothetical thinking. However, disjunctions are more
complex as they require the reasoner to consider two
hypotheses, violating the singularity principle (Evans, 2005;
Evans et al., 2003). Hence one of the disjuncts becomes
focal (Tversky & Koehler, 1994) and overrepresented. In
the absence of conversational cues, this would be the first
disjunct. Our theory is that the heuristic, rapid system first
focuses on one disjunct, which is the first one when abstract
disjunctions are involved. When reasoners are allowed more
time, they engage the analytic system to attempt fill in
representation of the residual disjunct – the second one in
case of abstract disjunctions. This attempt may or may not
succeed, depending on the complexity of the disjunctive
representation.
To test this we have presented our participants with
abstract disjunctive and conditional statements such as
‘there is either a T or a 6’, and 6x6 grids which we asked
them to fill with combinations that would make the
statements true. Our main prediction was for an order bias
effect for disjunctions, in particular for initial responses,
defined as the topmost left cell in the grid. We predicted that
for disjunctions, TF cases would be represented more than
FT cases, whereas for the equivalent logical cases of
conditionals the opposite would be true. We also predicted
that the effect would be attenuated for whole-grid
representations. These predictions were fully supported: we
have found strong order bias for initial responses, which all
but disappeared for whole-grid data. The marginal order
bias effects that remained for whole-grid data were
restricted to disjunctions with negated first term, which are
more complex. This supports our theoretical analysis that
filling in representation of the residual disjunct necessitates
an involvement of the analytic system.
Our account would not be complete without reflecting on
possible alternative explanations by the popular theory of

200

Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D. E., & Handley, S. H.
(2003). A theory of hypothetical thinking. In D.Hardman &
L. Maachi (Eds.), Thinking: Psychological perspectives on
reasoning, judgement and decision making (pp. 3-22).
Chichester: Wiley.
Hadjichristidis, C., Stevenson, R. J., Over, D. E.,
Sloman, S. A., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Feeney, A. (2001). On
the evaluation of If p then q conditionals. In Proceedings of
the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (
Edinburgh.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991).
Deduction. Hove & London: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: a theory of meaning, pragmatics and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Savary, F. (1999). Illusory
inferences: a novel class of erroneous deductions.
Cognition, 71, 191-299.
Oberauer, K. & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The
meaning(s) of conditionals: Conditional probabilities,
mental models and personal utlities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 29, 680-693.
Ormerod, T. C. (2000). Mechanisms and strategies
for rephrasing. In W.Schaeken, G. de Vooght, A.
Vandierendonck, & G. d'Ydewalle (Eds.), Deductive
reasoning and strategies (pp. 131-152). Hove, UK:
Erlbaum.
Ormerod, T. C. & Richardson, H. (2003). On the
generation and evaluation of inferences from single
premises. Memory and Cognition, 31, 467-478.
Over, D. E., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J. St. B. T.,
Handley, S. H., & Sloman, S. A. (2005). The probability of
ordinary indicative conditionals. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Sunderland, UK..
Rottenstreich, Y. & Tversky, A. (1997).
Unpacking, repacking, and anchoring: Advances in support
theory. Psychological Review, 104, 406-415.
Shafir, E. (1994). Uncertainty and the difficulty of
thinking through disjunctions. Cognition, 50, 403-430.
Sloman, S., Rottenstreich, Y., Wisniewski, E.,
Hadjichristidis, C., & Fox, C. R. (2004). Typical Versus
Atypical Unpacking and Superadditive Probability
Judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 30, 573-582.
Tversky, A. & Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support
theory: A nonextensional representation of subjective
probability. Psychological Review, 101, 547-567.
Tversky, A. & Shafir, E. (1992). The disjunction
effect in choice under uncertainty. Psychological Science, 3,
305-309.
Wason, P. C. & Brooks, P. G. (1979). THOG: the
anatomy of a problem. Psychological Research, 41, 79-90.

We still have to extend our enquiry, firstly into more aspects
of abstract disjunctions. For example, if our dual-process
account is correct, we would expect TF combinations to
have lower latencies than FT combinations, when reasoners
are presented with an evaluation task. More importantly, we
need to study disjunctions in conversational context, and
find out more on the pragmatic implicatures that guide
speakers and listeners when they pick out a focal disjunct.
Although disjunctives are ubiquitous in everyday
discourse, the amount of effort dedicated to them in the
reasoning literature is paltry in comparison to the amount of
research on conditionals. However, such effort is well worth
the price as disjunctions can teach us further about the way
in which heuristic and analytic processes interact. In this
paper we have made a first step in this direction.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ESRC grant 000-22-1432. We
thank Tom Ormerod for suggesting minimal completion
theory and four anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.
Reference List
Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de l'homme
rationnel devant le risque: critique des postulates et axioms
de l'école américaine. Econometrica, 21, 503-546.
Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A.
(1956). A Study of Thinking. New York: Wiley.
Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, uncertainty, and the
Savage axioms. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75, 643669.
Elqayam, S. (2005). The collapse illusion effect: a
pragmatic-semantic illusion of truth and paradox. Thinking
and Reasoning.
Evans, J. St. B. T. The heuristic-analytic theory of
reasoning: Extension and evaluation. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, (in press).
Evans, J. St. B. T., Ellis, C. E., & Newstead, S. E.
(1996). On the mental representation of conditional
sentences. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
49A, 1086-1114.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. H., & Over, D. E.
(2003). Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 29, 321-355.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Legrenzi, P., & Girotto, V.
(1999). The influence of linguistic form on reasoning: the
case of matching bias. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 52A, 185-216.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Newstead, S. E. (1980). A
study of disjunctive reasoning. Psychological Research, 41,
373-388.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R.
M. J. (1993). Human Reasoning: The Psychology of
Deduction. Hove & London: Erlbaum.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Over, D. E. (2004). If.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

201

