UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Out of the Mouths of Babes: The effect of source on 20-month-olds' Use of Mutual
Exclusivity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14c78366

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Brojde, Chandra L.
Colunga, Eliana

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Out of the Mouths of Babes: The effect of source
on 20-month-olds’ Use of Mutual Exclusivity
Chandra L. Brojde (chandrab@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology, CB345
Boulder, CO 80309 USA

Eliana Colunga (colunga@psych.colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology, CB345
Boulder, CO 80309 USA

Abstract
One account of word learning suggests that children learn that
words are unique as labels among perceptual signals because
of the way they tend to systematically co-occur with categories of objects. Twenty-month-old’s use of mutual exclusivity
with different types of labels emanating from different
sources was investigated in order to evaluate this account.
Specifically, words and animal sounds were investigated. Results showed that children applied mutual exclusivity to both
words and animal sounds produced by mouths, but not to
words or animal sounds produced by noisemakers. This suggests the importance of including the regularities of social
context and pragmatics to the associationist account of word
learning.

Introduction
By the time children are two years old, most have gained a
large vocabulary of words, mostly made up of nouns that
refer to objects in their world (Goldin-Meadow, Seligman,
& Gelman, 1976). But how they do this is still somewhat of
a mystery. In order for children to learn a novel word for a
novel object they must first recognize the signal as a linguistic signal (word) rather than an arbitrary non-linguistic signal (sounds and hand gestures). For instance, when a parent points to a dog while at the same time naming it as a
dog, and maybe imitating a barking sound, how does the
child know that the word is what the parent means to use to
label the dog? How does the child know that the nonlinguistic signals (pointing gesture and animal sound) are
not referring to the dog? In this paper, we address this question by asking in which situations children treat different
types of signals produced by different sources as labels for
categories; in particular animal categories.

Development of Word Form Associations
The special status of auditory signals may begin early in
development. Robinson and Sloutsky (2004) found that
auditory signals overshadow visual information in 8-montholds. A distinction between linguistic and non-linguistic
sounds and their effect on attention to objects emerges at
around that time too. Although both linguistic and nonlinguistic sounds, seem to encourage 9-month-old infants to
attend to objects, only linguistic, but not non-linguistic

1050

sounds, facilitate categorization (Balaban & Waxman, 1997)
and individuation of objects at this age (Xu, 2002).
The preference for linguistic sounds as labels for object
categories appears later in development. Early on in language acquisition, children will accept both linguistic and
non-linguistic signals as labels for novel objects that they
encounter (Namy, 2001; Namy & Waxman, 1998, 2002;
Woodward & Hoyne, 1999). But as children get older they
begin to accept only words as possible labels for categories.
In one study, Woodward and Hoyne (1999) tested
whether 13-month-olds would accept linguistic sounds
(words) produced by the experimenter and non-linguistic
sounds (squeaks and beeps) produced by a noisemaker as
labels for objects in a forced-choice task. Both a training
session and a test procedure were included during which
children were presented with novel objects and novel words
and sounds in a joint-attention setting. Throughout the training procedure, children were shown a novel target object
that was paired with either a novel word or a novel sound.
A second distracter object was also presented but not labeled. The test trials consisted of asking the children to
“Get the <label>”, the label being the original novel word or
sound presented during the training session, and giving
them the target object and the distracter object to choose
from. In a separate control condition children were simply
asked to “get one.” Results showed that the 13-month-olds
chose the target object more often than chance for both the
sound and word conditions but not the control condition.
Thus, at 13-months of age children accepted both words
produced by an experimenter and sounds coming from a
noisemaker as labels for objects.
Similar studies by Namy and Waxman (1998, 2002) have
also shown that at 18-months of age children will accept
gestures in addition to words as labels for objects. Furthermore, it has been suggested that at this very young age children’s word learning encompasses many different types of
signals including not only words, sounds and gestures, but
possibly even pictograms (Namy, 2001).
Later on in development, the type of signals that are accepted as labels for object categories becomes more constrained. In a separate condition conducted by Woodward
and Hoyne (1999), 20-month-old children accepted words
but not non-linguistic sounds as labels. Likewise, in a simi-

lar study, by 26-months of age children preferred words
over gestures as labels for objects (Namy & Waxman,
1998). Thus, it seems that sometime between 13-months of
age and 20-months of age children begin to accept only
words as labels and reject other non-linguistic sounds and
gestures as referring to objects.

The Associational Account
Yet the same question still remains. How do children
learn that words are privileged as labels for objects? As
suggested by the evidence reviewed, children’s understanding that words are unique among perceptual signals is not
necessarily present before word learning begins. It may
instead all be part of the same learning process. One explanation holds that as children begin to learn words for categories of objects in their environment, they begin to attend
to the properties of objects that make up coherent categories
(Smith et al., 2002). For example, children might learn that
all small round objects are called balls. This in turn trains up
their attentional mechanism to focus on shape as a way of
categorizing objects. Thus, word learning influences what
children attend to and, in return, this attentional mechanism
allows children to acquire novel words for objects by focusing on the salient properties of objects (i.e. shape). Whatever signals tend to co-occur with categories in a systematic
way will most likely be taken as labels for those categories.
In other words, simply attending to the perceptual features
that define categories and attending to what co-occurs with
those categories allows children to learn which types of signals tend to be good as labels for objects.
During the word learning process, words seem to be
unique in two aspects. First, words tend to point to objects
in the world in a systematic way (Colunga & Smith, 2002).
For example, the word “ball” seems to only co-occur with
objects that are of a similarly round shape. On the contrary,
“ball” does not occur with long thin objects, which tend to
alternately co-occur with the label “bat”. In this way, children learn that words, and not non-linguistic sounds, occur
in a systematic fashion with objects. They also learn that the
relationship between objects and words tends to be based on
shape; that objects with the same shape tend to be called by
the same name (Smith, Jones, Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe, &
Samuelson, 2002). What makes words unique is that they
can carve up the world in a systematic fashion and make the
world more predictable. Because of words, children focus
their attention on certain aspects of the environment like
shape.
Second, because words focus children’s attention on specific aspects of objects, words become especially good at
facilitating categorization of objects and facilitating the individuation of objects. In a study by Xu, Cote, and Baker
(2005) children were shown a box while an experimenter
pretended to label either one or two objects inside the box.
After one object was removed from the box, the children
were then allowed to search in the box. There was significantly more searching for the two-word trials than the oneword trials owing, presumably, to the fact that children,

1051

upon hearing two different labels, expected there to be two
different objects in the box. On the other hand, hearing only
one label would signify that only one object was in the box.
In this way words facilitate the individuation of objects into
separate and discrete entities.
In order to investigate this perceptual or associational account of word learning, we asked in what situations children
will accept different types of linguistic situations as labels.
The associational account suggests that as they age children
begin to accept anything that systematically co-occurs with
object categories. Therefore, because words are spoken and
are almost always produced by the mouth, children should
come to associate the property of being produced by the
mouth as an important property of a label. In addition, children should expect signals produced by other sources, such
as a small noisemaker, to not be good as a label. Accordingly, when children are presented with animal toys from
animal categories and given words or animal sounds as possible labels, they should take animal sounds, as well as
words, as labels for the animal toys.
In contrast, children should accept words as labels only
when they are produced by the mouth, but not when they
come from the noisemaker, as words coming from noisemakers are not consistent with the way things correlate in
the environment. However, animal sounds may still be taken
as labels for objects, even when coming from a noisemaker,
as animal sounds tend not to specifically correlate with
things produced by the mouth.
Colunga and Smith (2002) tested this prediction by asking
20- to 26-month old children to choose between a distracter
and a target object; the target being a novel animal toy that
was previously paired with a novel word, animal sound, or
arbitrary sound that emanated from the mouth or a noisemaker (Colunga & Smith, 2002). Results showed that anything, word or sound, emanating from the mouth was considered a label for the novel animal toy. In addition, the
animal sounds, which are often associated with animals,
were always taken as labels regardless of the source of the
sound. Both of these results fit with the predictions laid out
by the associational account. In particular, the signals that
were mapped to the novel animal toys fit well with the way
the world is organized. Animal sounds, which are highly
correlated with animal categories in everyday life, were
always taken as labels. Words, on the other hand, which
only correlate with animal categories when produced by a
mouth, were only taken as labels when produced by the experimenter.
Colunga and Smith’s results suggest that linguistic and
non-linguistic sounds will be accepted as labels for different
kinds of categories insofar as they correlate with the different kinds of categories. One question that remains, however,
is whether for children this age the relationship between
words and animal categories is qualitatively just like the
relationship between animal sounds and animal categories?
It is possible that in this task children are taking the words
as referring to categories, but the animal sounds are merely

associated with the animals and not really bearing any symbolic status.

Design

Study Overview
One way to figure this out is to see if these non-linguistic
signals behave like words do in other tasks. The current
study asked whether children would continue to treat animal
sounds like words in a mutual exclusivity task. Mutual exclusivity refers to the fact that children seem to assume that
each object is given only one label (Markman & Wachtel,
1988). This assumption comes in handy when trying to learn
a novel word. For example, if there is a cup and an unknown
gadget on a table, and mom points in the general direction
of the table and tells the child “There’s your blicket”, the
child can infer that since the cup is called “cup”, the unlabeled gadget must be the wicket. In that sense, the mutual
exclusivity task appears to be a more inferential task, and
thus, perhaps a more stringent test of the referential status of
a label. To test mutual exclusivity we used a task previously
shown to work with infants as young as 16 months of age.
In this task, in each trial the infant is presented with a choice
of a familiar object and a bucket, which has previously been
shown to contain an object unseen by the child. There are
three kinds of trials. In familiar trials, children are asked to
get the familiar object; in the baseline trials, children are
asked to “get one”; in novel trials, children are asked to get
the novel toy hidden in the bucket and whose name the child
has never heard before. Children are said to be applying
mutual exclusivity if they choose the bucket more often in
the novel trials than in the baseline trials, and the familiar
outside toy more often in the familiar trials than in the baseline trials.
Thus, in the current study a mutual exclusivity task was
conducted with 20-month-old children, an age at which
children have shown to apply the mutual exclusivity constraint to words (Markman, Wasow, & Hansen, 2003), and
to associate both animal sounds and words to animal categories in a novel word learning task (Colunga & Smith, 2002).
Infants were tested with two kinds of labels – words and
animal sounds. The stimuli used all consisted of familiar
and unfamiliar realistic toy animals, and the labels used
were their real names or recordings of the sounds the animals made. If, as suggested by Colunga and Smith (2002)
animal names and animal sounds work equally well as labels for animal categories for children at this age, then we
would expect children to use mutual exclusivity with either
kind of label. However, if animal sounds are just associations, children might do mutual exclusivity with the animal
names but not the animal sounds. Additionally, the two
kinds of labels were produced by one of two sources – spoken by the experimenter or produced by a mini-recorder.

Method
Subjects
Forty-eight 20-month-old children, including 22 females
and 26 males, with a mean age of 20.54 months (Range =
18.69 months to 22.82 months) participated in the project.
1052

A mixed design with two between subject variables and one
within subject variable was used. The within subject variable consisted of three different trial types (familiar, novel,
and no label) and tested the child’s use of mutual exclusivity. The two between subjects variables created four conditions which varied by source (mouth versus noisemaker)
and type of label (words versus animal sounds). Children
were randomly placed into one of the four conditions to
avoid effects due to vocabulary or language ability differences.
In each of nine trials children were presented with two
animals, one on the inside of an opaque bucket and the other
on the outside of the bucket. In the familiar trials, the animal on the outside of the bucket was familiar to the child as
reported by the parent. The children were then asked to
“get” this familiar animal with the specific label for the
animal being the name of the animal (word) or the sound the
animal made (animal sound). The label was produced either
by the experimenter in the mouth condition, or by a small
hand-held playback recorder in the noisemaker condition.
The second trial type, the novel trials, consisted of a familiar
animal on the outside of the bucket and a novel animal on
the inside of the bucket. The child was then asked, to “get”
the novel animal on the inside of the bucket. Again, according to which condition they were in, the label used to ask for
this animal was either a word or an animal sound and was
either produced by the mouth or a noisemaker. Finally, the
third trial type, the no label trials, consisted of simply asking
the child to “get one” or to “pick one” as a baseline condition.

Stimuli
Materials consisted of small familiar and novel animal toys
(e.g. a dog and cat for familiar animal toys and a Pterenadon
and jellyfish as novel animal toys), a small opaque bucket
and a vocabulary form that was used to ask parents to report
which of the animal toys were familiar and novel to the
child and for which animals the child knew the sounds that
the animals make. Some animals do not make obvious
noises, and thus, these animals were simply skipped over on
the form. Parents were also asked whether children had any
alternative names for any of the animals such as “doggie”
instead of “dog.” The parents’ answers on this form were
used to determine which animals were used in each of the
previously mentioned trial types.
The experiment was set up according to the children’s
previous knowledge and was different for each child. It was
expected that this would make the task easier for the children as they did not have to learn any new labels to complete the task. For each child, six clearly familiar animals,
three clearly novel animals and nine distracter (novel or
familiar) animals were used. There were also several animals that were not used due to the surplus of animals on
hand to ensure that enough familiar and novel animals
would be available for each child. The words used in the
experiment were simply the names of the animals. The
animal noises used were the animal noises normally associ-

Procedure
After children and parents were welcomed into the lab waiting room, parents completed consent forms and the vocabulary form. During this time the experimenter played with
the child in order to make them more comfortable with their
surroundings and, hopefully, make them more relaxed with
the experimenter.
Following this, the children, with their parents, were escorted to a plain lab room consisting of a table with one
chair on one side and two chairs on the other side. A video
camera was also present and set up behind the table in order
to videotape the entire procedure in case questions arose.
The children either sat on their parents’ lap across the table
from the experimenter or in their own chair with their parents next to them.
There were two phases to the experiment; the familiarization phase and the testing phase. The familiarization phase
was to orient the child to the task and get them accustomed
to pointing to and choosing objects that were hidden inside a
bucket. There were four familiarization trials in which the
child saw the experimenter place a ball, a large paperclip, a
crayon, and a small kaleidoscope toy inside the bucket. The
experimenter then shook the bucket to further indicate that
there was something inside. The experimenter asked the
child to retrieve the toy by asking them to “find the” object
or “get the” object. All toys were simply referred to by their
names. If after the four trials the child was still reluctant to
point to or retrieve the objects the four trials were repeated.
In addition, parents were allowed to comment and help their
child during this phase.
Every attempt was made to use the same intonation of
quality of voice across conditions and trial types. Each type
of label was used with a sentence and was used in such a
way that the sentence flowed naturally. In addition, experimenters looked directly at the child when asking for an
object so as not to indicate either object, possibly biasing
the child’s choice.
Throughout the testing phase one animal was placed in
the bucket out of sight of the child. Both the bucket with
the animal inside and a separate animal outside the bucket

1053

were then presented to the child. Again, the experimenter
shook the bucket so that it was obvious that a toy was hidden inside. The bucket and animal were placed on the table
near the experimenter so that each was equally distant from
the child and each was on a separate side of the child. The
sides that the bucket and lone animal were placed on were
random with the added conditions that they could not be
placed on the same side more than three times in a row and
that they could not be placed on the same side more than
five out of the nine trials.
Once the experimenter had the child’s attention, the child
was asked to “get the <label>?” according to the condition
that they were in. Only the last word of this phrase was different. The beginning of each phrase was always the same
and presented as words produced by the mouth. If the child
did not readily choose an animal, the bucket and the lone
animal were pushed forward toward the child and the child
was then asked “Can you get the <label>?” While several
children required that we progress to this stage, it was rare
that they did not respond at this point

Results
The number of times each child choose the bucket for each
of the three trial types was recorded and submitted to a 2
(source) X 2 (label) X 3 (trial type) ANOVA, as shown in
Figure 1. Only instances in which the child clearly chose
one of the two animals was analyzed. There was a significant main effect of trial type (F(1,88) = 8.83, p<.001) such
that, according to subsequent planned comparisons, there
were significantly fewer bucket picks in the familiar condition (M=.44, SE=.12) than in the novel condition (M=.79,
SE=.14) (p<.001) and the no label condition (M=1.08,
SE=.17) (p=.02). No other main effects were significant.
3

2.5
Number of Bucket Choices

ated with the animals. Animals for which there was no specific sound available were simply used as distracters.
For the mouth conditions, the experimenter produced the
word and animal noises. Every attempt was made for the
animal noises to sound like real animal noises that could be
made by a real animal rather than sounds that were more
like words such as “bark.”
For the noisemaker conditions, the words and animal
noises were recorded onto small 10-second recorders (here
called noisemakers) that played back the words and sounds
with one button press. In order to be less distracting, the
noisemakers were put into small black cloth holders. The
words recorded onto the noisemakers were simply spoken
by the experimenters whereas the animal noises recorded
onto the noisemakers were real animal noises obtained on
the internet.

Word
Noise

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
Familiar

No Label

Novel

Figure 1: Mean number of times the children chose the
bucket over the outside animal according to type of source
and trial type.

3

Discussion
Number of Bucket Choices

2.5

Mouth
Noisemaker

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
Familiar

No Label

Novel

Figure 2: Mean number of times the children chose the
bucket over the outside animal according to type of label
and trial type.
However, when looking at only the mouth conditions,
where subsequent analyses show that most of the effect occurred, the novel and no label conditions were significantly
different (t(23)=2.66, p=.01). There was also a significant
two-way interaction between source and trial type (as shown
in Figure 2) (F(2,88) = 5.14, p<.01). Children chose the
bucket significantly more often in the mouth condition than
the recorder condition for the novel trial type only. There
were no other significant interactions.
A chi-square analysis was also run to investigate any
differences in the number of children that used the mutual
exclusivity constraint between conditions. Children whose
difference score was a two or three (meaning that they chose
the bucket two or three times more in the novel condition
than the familiar condition) were considered as having adhered to the mutual exclusivity constraint. Those whose
difference score was a zero or one (meaning that they only
chose the bucket in the novel condition one time more than
the familiar condition or that there was no preference for the
bucket in the novel condition at all) were considered as having not adhered to mutual exclusivity. A chi-square comparing the number of kids who adhered to mutual exclusivity in the word versus noise conditions showed no difference (x2 = 0.137, p=0.712). However, there was a significant difference between the number of kids adhering to mutual exclusivity in the mouth versus the recorder conditions
(x2 = 11.077, p<.01), such that more children in the mouth
condition were doing ME (n=9) than in the recorder condition (n=0). Thus, there was an effect of source, but no effect
of label. These results are consistent with the results of the
ANOVA test.
Overall, these results suggest that children will treat both
words and animal sounds in the mouth condition as labels
for animal categories, but not words or animal sounds coming from noisemakers as labels for the same category. Another way of looking at this is that words and animal sounds
were only treated as labels when produced by a mouth.

1054

Previous research has shown that, at least in some situations, words and animal sounds are treated similarly as labels (Colunga & Smith, 2002). Specifically, in the previously mentioned association task, 20- to 26-month-old children took both words and animal sounds produced by the
mouth as labels for novel animal categories. In addition,
animal sounds, but not words, were taken as labels when
coming from noisemakers. However, similar behavior does
not necessarily imply similar mechanism. Although children appear to be treating anything produced by the mouth
as labels and anything associated with a category as a label,
what is the underlying mechanism that relates these signals
to the category of objects?
The question proposed at the outset of this study was
whether or not the relationship between words and animal
categories is the same as the relationship between animal
sounds and animal categories. That is, for 20-month-olds,
are both words and animal sounds referring to animal categories? Or are these two relationships both based on association? Or is one type of label taken as referential and the
other as associational?
Results from the current study begin to answer this question. Words and animal sounds are indeed treated similarly.
Therefore, words do not appear to be special. Children apply the mutual exclusivity principle to both types of labels
when they are produced by the experimenter’s mouth, but
fail to do so when either type of label is produced by a
noisemaker. Thus, so far the evidence suggest that the kind
of link formed between words and animal categories and
between animal sounds and animal categories is of the same
kind – both types of labels are readily associated with categories and children readily apply the mutual exclusivity
constraint to both types of labels. Furthermore, the evidence
presented here suggests that at least by this age, it is not
words that are special, but mouths. In other words, the type
of label does not seem to matter; what seems to matter is the
source – that the source is a person. There seems to be
something inherently special about people when it comes to
determining what types of signals can be used as a label.
Previous research is consistent with the trend for children
to treat anything produced by the mouth, and nothing produced by a noisemaker, as a label. In one preferentiallooking paradigm study, labeling novel objects with words
lead 15-month-olds to only categorize the objects when the
source was the mouth and not a noisemaker (Fulkerson &
Haaf, 2003). Results from the current study, while with
slightly older children, are clearly consistent with these results. In both cases, children treated words and labels as
objects only when produced by the mouth.
So why do infants fail to apply the mutual exclusivity
constraint to either words or animal sounds when the labels
are produced by the noisemaker? One explanation is that the
presence of an extra unfamiliar but interesting object during
the task is distracting or disturbing for young children, thus
children perform poorly in the task. It is possible that given
this strange scenario, children prefer the go with the familiar

toy and avoid the bucket. However, it is important to note
that children did not pick the familiar toy more often in the
familiar and no label trials in the noisemaker than in the
mouth condition, but rather the main difference is in the
novel trial. Another possibility is that children fail to apply
the mutual exclusivity constraint in the noisemaker condition because naming situations require a person to do the
naming. This constraint could come from learning that people are the ones doing the naming, or it could be based on an
earlier and more basic preference to attend to people’s actions.
Indeed, previous research has suggested that social context and pragmatics are important when it comes to determining what types of signals are good as labels. Through a
forced-choice task, Namy and Waxman (2000) showed that
gestures were taken as labels by 17-month-olds regardless
of whether they were presented within a naming phrase or
alone. However, words were only taken as labels when presented within a labeling phrase. Again, this is further support for the idea that there is something inherent in the social or pragmatic situation that focuses children on signals
produced by the mouth as labels for objects. Research with
3-year-olds has also shown the importance of pragmatics in
the application of the mutual exclusivity constraint (Diesendruck & Markson, 2001).

Conclusion
The current data show that 20-month-old children will treat
anything systematically co-occurring with a particular category and produced by the mouth as a label. Specifically,
20-month-old children applied the mutual exclusivity constraint to both words and animal sounds produced by the
mouth for animal categories. On the contrary, nothing produced by a noisemaker was treated as a label. These results
are consistent with an associative learning account of word
learning, but importantly highlight the necessity of including the correlations of social context and pragmatics into the
associationist account.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants? Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. (2002). Word learning is
'smart': Evidence that conceptual information affects preschoolers' extension of novel words. Cognition, 84, B11B22.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L. B. (2002). What makes a word?
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.

1055

Diesendruck, G. & Markson, L. (2001). Children's avoidance of lexical overlap: A pragmatic account. Developmental Psychology, 37(5), 630-641.
Fulkerson, A. L., & Haaf, R. A. (2003). The influence of
labels, non-labeling sounds, and source of auditory input
on 9- and 15-month-olds' object categorization. Infancy,
4, 349-369.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Seligman, M., & Gelman, R. (1976).
Language in the two-year old. Cognition, 4, 189-202.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children's use of
mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121-157.
Markman, E. M., Wasow, J. L., & Hansen, M. B. (2003).
Use of the mutual exclusivity assumption by young word
learners. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 241-275.
Namy, L. L. (2001). What's in a name it isn't a word? 17month-olds' mapping of nonverbal symbols to object
categories. Infancy, 2, 73-86.
Namy, L. L., & Waxman, S. R. (1998). Words and gestures:
Infants' interpretations of different forms of symbolic reference. Child Development, 69, 295-308.
Namy, L. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2000). Naming and exclaiming: Infants' sensitivity to naming contexts. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 1, 405-428.
Namy, L. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Patterns of spontaneous production of novel words and gestures within an
experimental setting in children ages 1;6 and 2;2. Journal
of Child Language, 29, 911-921.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75(5), 1387-1401.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name learning provides
on-the-job training for attention. Psychological Science,
13, 13-19.
Woodward, A. L., & Hoyne, K. L. (1999). Infants' learning
about words and sounds in relation to objects. Child Development, 70, 65-77.
Xu, F. (2005). Categories, kinds, and object individuation in
infancy. In L. Gershkoff-Stowe & D. Rakison (Eds.),
Building object categories in developmental time: Papers
from the 32nd Carnegie symposium on cognition (pp. 6389). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Xu, F., Cote, M., & Baker, A. (2005). Labeling guides object individuation in 12-month-old infants. psychological
Science, 16, 372-377.

