UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perception of Linguistic and Affective Prosody in Younger and Older Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jm5c93g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Taler, Vanessa
Baum, Shari
Saumier, Daniel

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perception of Linguistic and Affective Prosody in Younger and Older Adults
Vanessa Taler (vtaler@alcor.concordia.ca)
Bloomfield Centre for Research in Aging, McGill University
3999 Cote St. Catherine Road, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2

Shari Baum (shari.baum@mcgill.ca)
School of Communication Sciences & Disorders, McGill University
1266 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Que., Canada H3G 1A8

Daniel Saumier (daniel.saumier@mail.mcgill.ca)
Bloomfield Centre for Research in Aging, McGill University
3999 Cote St. Catherine Road, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2
Abstract
Previous research has suggested that older adults display
deficits in affective-prosodic processing, while grammaticalprosodic processing remains intact. In the present study, groups
of younger and older adults took part in a series of experiments
assessing their comprehension of prosodic information at the
affective, grammatical and perceptual levels. It was found that
older and younger adults performed similarly on perceptual
tasks. However, deficits were seen in older adults across a
number of tasks: affective-prosodic processing, the use of
temporal information to parse syntactic structure, and the use of
lexical stress to distinguish adjective-noun pairs from
compound nouns. These findings suggest a generalized
prosodic deficit in older adults which cannot be ascribed to a
primary auditory deficit.

Introduction
Prosody plays an important role in spoken language,
signaling both emotional and grammatical content. It is often
only prosodic information that allows a listener to distinguish
between different sentence modalities, such as whether a
speaker is asking a question or making a statement. Likewise,
good comprehension of prosodic information is vital in
determining a speaker’s emotional state. As such, accurate
comprehension of prosodic information is essential in
psychosocial interactions and relationship well-being (Carton,
Kessler & Pape, 1999). Given the crucial role of prosodic
information in everyday communicative situations, it is of
interest to investigate how processing of this information may
be altered in healthy aging.
While language processing is typically found to be
unaffected in healthy older adults, a number of studies have
suggested that deficits are seen in processing affective (i.e.,
emotional) prosody in these individuals (Brosgole &
Weisman, 1995; Cohen & Brosgole, 1988; Kiss & Ennis,
2001; Ross, Orbelo, Testa & Beatty, 2000; Orbelo, Grim,
Talbot & Ross, 2005). Processing of grammatical prosody in
older adults, on the other hand, has been the object of less
study. However, research to date suggests that such
processing is relatively spared in healthy older adults in terms
of syntactic parsing (Kjelgaard, Titone & Wingfield, 1999;

Wingfield, Lahar & Stine, 1989), stress perception, and other
features (Cohen & Faulkner, 1986; Wingfield, Lindfield &
Goodglass, 2000; Wingfield, Wayland & Stine, 1992).
Prosodic information may be conveyed by means of three
acoustic parameters: fundamental frequency (F0), duration
and amplitude (Lehiste, 1970). In terms of speech production,
most current models treat prosody either as its own module,
separate from the rest of the speech production system, or as a
subcomponent of the phonological system (Garrett, 1980;
Levelt, 1989). A separate prosodic tier specifying metrical
structure is postulated in recent phonological models (Levelt
1989, Liberman and Prince 1977, Selkirk 1984). As such,
deficits in prosody may be expected to dissociate from other
linguistic deficits.
There are thus two ways in which our cognitive system
may organize prosodic information. It may be the case that
affective and grammatical prosody constitute separate
cognitive modules, and as such may be differentially
impaired. On the other hand, a distinction between affectiveand grammatical-prosodic processing may not be reflected in
our cognitive system; rather, the use of different prosodic
cues (i.e., F0, duration and amplitude) could subsume
modular processing.
The present study addresses these issues by examining
comprehension of prosodic information in older adults across
a variety of domains. We used a battery of tasks designed to
tap prosody processing at the perceptual, affective and
grammatical levels. Comprehension of affective prosody was
assessed in a task examining detection of emotional valence
at the sentence level, both in the presence and in the absence
of semantic information. Given the multiple roles of prosody
in signaling grammatical information, we investigated use of
grammatical-prosodic information at both the syntactic and
lexical levels. First, we examined older adults’ capacity to
utilize prosody to determine sentence modality (interrogative,
declarative or imperative). As in the affective-prosodic task,
stimuli included sentences containing semantic information
and sentences that did not contain such information. Second,
we looked at older adults’ use of prosodic information to
assign syntactic structure in otherwise ambiguous sentences.
Third, we investigated their use of lexical stress in word
recognition. At the perceptual level, we examined older and

2216

younger adults’ use of pitch and keyword and pause duration
in two categorization tasks.
It was hypothesized that older adults would exhibit deficits
in comprehension of affective prosody, but that their
performance in the tasks assessing prosody processing at the
perceptual and grammatical levels should parallel that of
younger adults. Such a result would support the claim that
grammatical and affective prosody are represented separately
in our cognitive system.

Methods and Participants
Participants
Ten older adults (average age = 79.1 years ± 6.8; average
education: 13.1 years ± 3.3) and 8 younger adults (average
age = 24.6 years ± 4.4; average education: 15.3 years ± 1.3)
took part in the study. All subjects were native speakers of
English with no history of neurological or psychiatric illness.
Older adults were recruited from the Memory Clinic of the
Jewish General Hospital of Montreal, a tertiary referral
centre, and underwent a complete neuropsychological battery
to exclude dementia. Undergraduate students in psychology
and linguistics were recruited to serve as a younger control
group. In order to confirm that participants’ hearing
thresholds were adequate to perceive the stimuli, they were
each required to repeat a series of five sentences played
through computer speakers. All participants successfully
completed this hearing screen.

Methods
The study comprised seven subtests, and took approximately
two hours to complete. Testing was completed in a single
session, unless the participant requested that testing be split
into two sessions. In each subtest, stimuli were recorded by a
native speaker of English, and were played to participants on
a computer with an external speaker. Stimuli were repeated as
many times as necessary upon participant request.
Perceptual categorization of phrases varying along the
statement-question continuum. In order to assess the
establishment of category boundaries between prosodic
categories, a natural declarative statement (“He wants to leave
now.”) was acoustically manipulated by linearly increasing
the fundamental frequency contour of the sentence’s final
word to a level that is equivalent to the F0 level of the final
word of its question counterpart (“He wants to leave now?”)
This resulted in a series of eight sentences between the two
endpoints in which the F0 of the final word differed by equal
11% steps. An identical procedure was applied to transform
the natural question counterpart (“He wants to leave now?”)
into a statement. Participants heard each of the resultant 20
sentences twice and were asked to categorize each as either a
statement or a question.
Sentence prosody: linguistic prosody processing. This task
aimed to assess participants’ ability to detect grammatical
modality using prosodic cues, both in the presence and in the
absence of semantic information. In this task, participants

were required to identify intonation meaning from a set of
sentences varying in linguistic modality. Sentences were
either interrogative (e.g., “Has your daughter begun school
yet?”), declarative (e.g., “The doctor examined the patient”),
or imperative (e.g., “Run to the store for some bread and
milk.”).
The first set of sentences was in English (n=8 in each
modality for a total of 24 sentences); semantic information
was thus available in this condition. Each sentence was then
low-pass filtered at 500Hz to remove all intelligible linguistic
information, while conserving intonational variations across
the utterances; thus, semantic information was not available
in this set of stimuli. Finally, a set of sentences was recorded
using nonsense words, where prosodic information indicated
an interrogative, declarative or imperative intonation (n=8 of
each). Again, these sentences conveyed no semantic
information, meaning that judgments had to be made on the
basis of prosodic information alone.
Nine sentence categories, each comprising 8 stimuli, were
thus included in the experiment: statement- English (S-E),
statement-nonsense words (S-NE), statement-low-pass
filtered (S-F), command-English (C-E), command-nonsense
words (C-NE), command-low-pass filtered (C-F), questionEnglish (Q-E), question-nonsense words (Q-NE), and
question-low-pass filtered (Q-F). The resultant 72 sentences
were recorded by a female native speaker of English and
presented in a pseudo-random order. Participants were asked
to decide for each sentence whether they had heard a
question, a statement or a command.
Sentence prosody: affective prosody processing. This task
was identical to that described above, except that, rather than
grammatical function, participants were required to identify
affective tone. In this task, affective tone was either happy (H;
e.g., “It was so nice to see you again”), sad (S; e.g., “We were
not chosen for the team”), or angry (A; e.g., “She will never
clean up her mess!”). Again, 72 stimuli in total were included
in the task, 24 in English, the same 24 stimuli low-pass
filtered at 500Hz, and 24 stimuli with happy, sad or angry
intonation, but using nonsense words.
Lexical-stress perception. Lexical-stress perception was
assessed using a task in which participants were required to
differentiate between 12 compound words (e.g.,
'greenhouse) and their matched noun phrases (e.g., green
'house) in a word-picture matching task. For each stimulus,
participants were shown an array of three pictures
representing the referent of the stimulus, its matched
adjective-noun phrase or compound, and an unrelated foil.
For example, participants heard the compound noun
'greenhouse, and were asked to select from among a picture
of a greenhouse, a picture of a house painted green, and a
picture of a chair. Both compound and adjective-noun
stimuli were presented, for a total of 24 items.
Temporal cues marking phrasal boundaries I. This test
aimed to assess participants’ use of temporal information,
specifically keyword and pause duration, in assigning phrasal
boundaries. In this test, the phrase “pink and black and green”

2217

o ld er-S

was manipulated by inserting a temporal boundary after
“pink” or “black”, and varying the pre-boundary word
durations or pause durations at the boundary in a step-wise
manner (Aasland & Baum, 2003; Baum, Pell, Leonard &
Gordon, 1997). The duration of the keyword “pink” ranged
from 286ms to 446ms in five 40ms steps; likewise, the
duration of the keyword “black” ranged from 284ms to
448ms. That is, for the pink series, pause length was set to
286ms (step 1), 326ms (step 2), 366ms (step 3), 406ms (step
4), or 446ms (step 5); for the black series, pause length was
set to 284ms (step 1), 324ms (step 2), 364ms (step 3), 404ms
(step 4), or 444ms (step 5). For both series, boundary pauses
ranged from 0ms to 160ms in five 40ms steps (i.e., 0ms,
40ms, 80ms, 120ms, 160ms). Subjects listened to each
stimulus and reported whether they had heard [[pink and
black] and green] or [pink and [black and green]], either
verbally or by spatially manipulating three coloured paper
squares to place the pink and black or the black and green
squares together.

o ld er-Q
y o u n g er-S

100

y o u n g er-Q
90
80

% statem en t

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

1

2

0

Temporal cues marking phrasal boundaries II. Stimuli in
this task comprised 14 pairs of sentences, each of which
differed only in the presence of a pause changing the phrase
structure of the sentence (e.g., “Madam, Flower is the name
of my cat” vs. “Madam Flower is the name of my cat”).
Participants heard each sentence and were then asked
comprehension questions in order to verify how the sentence
was parsed. Two types of ambiguous sentences were
presented. A set of seven sentences were designed in which
either the first two or final two words were names. These
could either constitute a compound name signaling the agent
or theme of the sentence (e.g., “I am going to see Billy Jean”)
or two separate names signaling the agent/theme of the
sentence and the addressee (e.g., “I am going to see Billy,
Jean”). A second set of seven sentences was constructed
which could be interpreted as containing either a parenthetical
(e.g., “Tom, my boyfriend, is out of town) or an addressee
(e.g., “Tom, my boyfriend is out of town”; n=7). Sentences
were presented in pseudo-random order.

F ig u re 1: R esu lts, p ercep tu al categ o rizatio n
younger
older
8

average # correct

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Q-E

Q-NE

Q-F

S-E

S-NE

S-F

C-E

C-F

Perceptual categorization of phrases varying along the
statement-question continuum. Results are shown in Figure
1; percentage of statement responses is depicted on the y-axis,
and step is depicted on the x-axis, with “1” being the most
statement-like exemplar and “10” the most question-like. A
repeated-measures ANOVA with Origin (statement vs.
question) and Step (1-10) as within-subject variables and
Group (older vs. younger) as a between-subject variable
revealed significant main effects of Origin (F(1,1)=4.48,
p<0.05) and Step (F(1,10)=151.796, p<0.001). No main effect
of Group was found, suggesting that younger and older adults
perform this task in a similar fashion. However, an Origin X
Step X Group interaction was seen (F(1,9) = 3.227, p<0.01),
reflecting the fact that older adults exhibit more variability
when responding to statements which have been altered to
sound like questions.

C-NE

0

Results

Figure 2: Results, linguistic prosody processing

Sentence prosody: linguistic prosody processing. Results
of this task are shown in Figure 2 below. Again, older and
younger adults performed similarly on almost all stimulus
categories (chi-square, p>0.05 for C-NE, C-E, S-F, S-NE, SE, Q-F, Q-NE, Q-E). Older adults did, however, manifest
impaired performance in the C-F condition. That is, in the
low-pass filtered condition, they were significantly more
likely to misidentify a command as a statement (chi square =
11.43, p<0.001).
Sentence prosody: affective prosody processing. In this
task, the younger and older adults’ performance did not differ
in the E (English) condition, where semantic information was

2218

interactions indicate that stimulus has an effect. No
interactions with group and any other variable were seen,
indicating that older and younger adults interpret durational
cues in a similar fashion. Results are presented by keyword
duration in Figure 5a, and by pause duration in Figure 5b
below. The percentage of responses in which participants
selected the reading [pink and [black and green]] is depicted
on the y-axis; duration (from shortest to longest) is depicted
on the x-axis. In Figure 5a, “B-series” refers to the duration of
the keyword “black”, and “P-series” refers to the duration of
the keyword “pink”. In Figure 5b, “B-series” refers to the
duration of the pause following the keyword “black”, and “Pseries” refers to the duration of the pause following the
keyword “pink”.

younger
older

8

average # correct

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

younger

12

S-E

older

10
average # correct

S-NE

S-F

H-E

H-NE

H-F

A-E

A-NE

A-F

0

Figure 3: Results, sentence prosody: affective
prosody processing

available. However, significantly lower performance was
seen in the nonsense (NE) condition, both for happy (H; chisquare=15.6, p<0.001) and angry (A; chi-square = 6.56,
p<0.05) stimuli. Likewise, older adults were significantly less
likely to identify happy and angry sentences in the low-pass
filtered (F) condition (H: chi-square = 12.43, p<0.001; A: chisquare = 8.30, p<0.01).
Lexical-stress perception. Older adults’ performance on this
task differed significantly from that of younger adults overall
(chi-square = 8.98, p<0.01). Separate analyses of
performance on adjective-noun stimuli (e.g., green 'house)
and compound nouns (‘greenhouse) revealed that, when
hearing a compound noun, older and younger adults were
equally likely to select the picture depicting the correct
referent (chi-square = 0.66, p>0.05). However, older adults
were significantly more likely to select the picture
corresponding to the compound reading when hearing an
adjective-noun combination (chi-square = 11.58, p<0.001).
Results are presented in Figure 4.

8
6
4
2
0
adj-noun

compound

Figure 4: Results, lexical stress perception
Temporal cues marking phrasal boundaries II. This task
assessed participants’ use of temporal cues to determine the
syntactic structure of a sentence. Results are shown in Figure
6. Older adults performed significantly worse on this task
than did younger adults, interpreting an average of 22.5 of 28
sentences correctly, versus younger adults’ 25.9 (chi-square,
p<0.001). This difference was significant both for the
appositive condition (p<0.01) and for the compound
condition (p<0.025).

Temporal cues marking phrasal boundaries I. A repeatedmeasures ANOVA was conducted on the data, with series
(black vs. pink), pause duration (0ms, 40ms, 80ms, 120ms,
160ms) and keyword duration (five durations between 286ms
and 446ms for the keyword “pink”; five durations between
284ms and 444ms for the keyword “black”) as within-subject
variables and group as a between-subject variable. This
analysis revealed a main effect of series (F(1,1) = 1124.672,
p<0.001) as well as interactions between series and keyword
duration (F(1,4) = 3.581, p<0.01) and between series and
pause duration (F(1,4) = 2.687, p<0.04). A three-way
interaction between series, keyword and pause was also
observed (F(1,16) = 2.231, p<0.005). The main effects and

Discussion

2219

Overall, differences were seen in older and younger adults’
processing of prosodic information across a number of tasks.
As predicted, older adults’ performance on the task assessing
affective-prosodic processing revealed a deficit in the
capacity of these individuals to determine sentence modality
on the basis of prosodic information. While they exhibited no
difficulty in determining sentence modality when semantic
information was available (i.e., when the sentences were in
English), their performance declined sharply when semantic
information was unavailable, either due to its removal via
low-pass filtering of the original English sentence, or when
the stimulus was recorded using nonsense stimuli. This result

is consistent with the finding reported in the literature that
older adults exhibit deficits in affective-prosodic processing
(Brosgole & Weisman, 1995; Cohen & Brosgole, 1988; Kiss
& Ennis, 2001; Ross et al., 2000).
With respect to the tasks assessing grammatical-prosodic
processing, variability was observed across tasks. In the first
task, in which participants used prosodic information to
determine sentence modality, older adults manifested a
deficit in only one condition: low-pass filtered commands,
which they were significantly more likely to misclassify as
statements. However, no deficit was seen in distinguishing
statements from questions; furthermore, younger and older
adults exhibited equal difficulty in identifying commands in
the NE (nonsense stimuli) condition. Thus, we postulate that
younger adults’ superior performance in the low-pass
filtered condition may in fact be due not to a difference in
prosody processing itself, but rather to their ability to extract
some linguistic (i.e., semantic) information from the lowpass filtered sentences.
younger - B-series

older - B-series

younger - P-series

older - P-series

100

% p_bg

80
60
40
20
0
1

2

3

4

5

Figure 5a: Results, phrasal boundaries:
effect of keyword duration
younger - B-series

older - B-series

younger - P-series

older - P-series

100

% p_bg

80
60
40
20
0
0

40

80

120

160

Figure 5b: Results, phrasal boundaries:
effect of pause duration

older

100

younger

90
80
% correct

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
appositive

compound

Figure 6: Results, phrasal structure: syntactic parsing
In the second task, in which participants were required to
use lexical stress to distinguish adjective-noun pairs from
matched compound nouns in a word-picture matching task,
older adults exhibited an impairment relative to the younger
adults. Specifically, no difference was seen across the two
groups in their classification of compound nouns, but older
adults were more likely to incorrectly select the picture
depicting the referent of the compound noun when hearing
an adjective-noun combination (35% error rate in the older
adult group, versus a 14.6% error rate in the younger adults.
For example, when hearing “light 'house”, they were more
likely than younger adults to select a picture of a lighthouse
rather than a picture of a house floating in the air. One
possible account for this finding is that older adults’
responses were driven by referent plausibility, rather than
purely by phonological information. For example, when
older adults hear the stimulus “light 'house”, they are more
likely to select a picture with greater real-world plausibility
(a lighthouse) rather than the implausible entity (a floating
house), even if the prosodic information indicates that this is
the correct referent.
Finally, in the third grammatical task, in which
participants heard sentences whose syntactic structure was
disambiguated by prosodic information, older adults
exhibited significantly lower performance than younger
adults. This was seen both in the condition in which
participants were required to use prosodic information to
distinguish appositive constructions from addressee + SVO
structures, and in the condition in which prosodic
information signaled a compound name or agent/theme +
addressee.
The possibility that this result may be due to differences
between the two groups in perceptual prosodic processing is
belied by the finding that similar performances were seen on
the two tasks assessing processing at the perceptual level.
Minimal differences were seen in the two participant
groups’ use of sentence-final F0 to categorize sentences as
statements vs. questions; only in statements altered to sound
like questions did older adults display slightly more

2220

variability than younger adults. In terms of the use of
keyword and pause duration to determine stimulus
grouping, no difference was seen between the two groups.
This suggests that any differences seen in the remaining
tasks are not the result of a primary auditory-perceptual
deficit.
In contrast to previous findings, the present results point
to a impairment in processing of grammatical-prosodic
information in healthy older adults. This deficit does not
appear to affect the ability to detect sentence modality,
which remains relatively spared. However, surprisingly, the
use of prosody to parse syntactic structure appears affected,
as does the use of lexical stress to distinguish between
minimal pairs of adjective-noun combinations and nounnoun compounds. It should be noted, however, that in
performing the latter task older adults may have relied on
semantic or pragmatic information, such as judgments of
real-world plausibility, more heavily than did younger
adults. This reliance on semantic/pragmatic information
may possibly reflect a compensatory strategy on the part of
older adults to compensate for prosodic processing
difficulties. Further research is clearly required to address
this possibility; moreover, more robust perceptual testing
may be required to fully discount the possible role of a
perceptual impairment in the processing of grammaticalprosodic information.
We thus argue, on the basis of a series of well-controlled
tasks assessing various aspects of prosodic processing, that
older and younger adults differ in their processing of
prosodic information at both the affective and the
grammatical levels. This is in contrast to previous studies
which have suggested that the prosodic impairment seen in
older adults is specific to affective processing. Rather, our
results suggest that older adults may exhibit a generalized
deficit in comprehension of prosodic information. The
present findings do not support the hypothesis that affective
and grammatical prosody constitute separate cognitive
modules. We suggest that prosody may best be viewed as a
centralized module, possibly subdivided by acoustic cue
rather than function. This is consistent with recent
neuroimaging research (Gandour, Tong, Wong, Talavage et
al., 2004) suggesting that processing of prosodic
information is not localizable to a single neural region, but
rather solicits a large network of cortical regions distributed
across the two cerebral hemispheres.

Acknowledgments
The current research was supported by a grant from the
Centre for Research on Language, Mind and Brain
(CRLMB) to Shari Baum, Howard Chertkow and Daniel
Saumier. We wish to thank the medical staff and support
staff of the JGH/McGill Memory clinic for their assistance,
particularly Dr. Howard Chertkow, Shelley Solomon, Renée
Kaminski, and Chris Hosein.

References
Aasland, W.A., & Baum, S.R. (2003) Temporal parameters as
cues to phrasal boundaries: a comparison of processing by leftand right-hemisphere brain-damaged individuals. Brain and
Language, 87, 385-99.
Baum, S.R., & Pell, M.D. (1999). The neural bases of prosody:
Insights from lesion studies and neuroimaging. Aphasiology,
13, 581-608.
Baum, S.R., Pell, M.D., Leonard, C.L., & Gordon, J.K. (1997).
The ability of right- and left-hemisphere-damaged individuals
to produce and interpret prosodic cues marking phrasal
boundaries. Language and Speech, 40, 313-30.
Brosgole, L., & Weisman, J. (1995). Mood recognition across
the ages. International Journal of Neuroscience, 82, 169–189.
Carton, J.S., Kessler, E.A., & Pape, C.L. (1999). Nonverbal
decoding skills and relationship well-being in adults. Journal
of Nonverbal Behavior, 23, 91-100.
Cohen, E., & Brosgole, L. (1988) Visual and auditory affect
recognition in senile and normal elderly persons. International
Journal of Neuroscience, 43, 89–101.
Cohen, E., & Faulkner, D. (1986). Does “elderspeak” work? The
effect of intonation and stress on comprehension and recall of
spoken discourse in old age. Language and Communication, 6,
91-98.
Gandour, J., Tong, Y., Wong, D., Talavage, T., Dzemidzic, M.,
Xu, Y., Li, X., & Lowe, M. (2004). Hemispheric roles in the
perception of speech prosody. Neuroimage, 23, 344-357.
Garrett, M. (1980). Levels of processing in sentence production.
In B. Butterworth (Ed.) Language Production. (London:
Academic Press).
Kiss, I. & Ennis, T. (2001). Age-related decline in perception of
prosodic affect. Applied Neuropsychology, 8, 251-254.
Kjelgaard, M.M., Titone, D.A., & Wingfield, A. (1999). The
influence of prosodic structure on the interpretation of
temporary syntactic ambiguity by young and elderly listeners.
Experimental Aging Research, 25, 187-207.
Lehiste, I. (1970). Suprasegmentals. (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press).
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From Intention to Articulation
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Orbelo, D.M., Grim, M.A., Talbott, R.E., & Ross, E.D. (2005).
Impaired comprehension of affective prosody in elderly
subjects is not predicted by age-related hearing loss or agerelated cognitive decline. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and
Neurology, 18, 25–32.
Ross, E.D., Orbelo, D.M., Testa, J., & Beatty, W. (2000) Agerelated changes in processing affective prosody. Neurology,
54(suppl 3), A418–A419.
Wingfield, A., Lahar, C.J., & Stine, E.A.L. (1989). Age and
decision strategies in running memory for speech. Journal of
Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 44, 106-113.
Wingfield, A., Wayland, S.C., & Stine, E.A.L. (1992). Adult age
differences in the use of prosody for syntactic parsing and
recall of spoken sentences. Journal of Gerontology:
Psychological Sciences, 47, 350-356.

2221

