UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonological Neighborhood Density in Native and Non-Native Word Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34w8w6mp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Blumenfeld, Henrike K.
Marian, Viorica

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonological Neighborhood Density in Native and Non-Native Word Production
Henrike K. Blumenfeld (k-blumenfeld@northwestern.edu)
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2240 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Viorica Marian (v-marian@northwestern.edu)
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2240 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

in lexical access during language production in native and
non-native speakers.

Abstract
The role of phonological neighborhood density in
lexical access was examined during native- and nonnative language production. German-English and
English-German bilinguals named pictures of
German words with high- and low-density
neighborhoods. Results revealed that accuracy of
picture naming was influenced by phonological
neighborhood, with high-density neighborhoods
facilitating lexical access in both the native and the
non-native languages. However, latency of picture
naming was facilitated by high-density phonological
neighborhoods only in the non-native, but not the
native, language. This suggests that native / nonnative language status mediates the effect of
phonological neighborhood on the speed of lexical
access. Implications for native and non-native
language processing dynamics are discussed.

Neighborhood Density in Word Production
In monolingual language production, activation of
phonological representations similar to the target has been
found to facilitate word access. For example,
phonologically similar words have been found to facilitate
naming during picture-word interference tasks (e.g., Costa
& Sebastian-Galles, 1998). In studies focusing on tip-ofthe-tongue (TOT) states, Meyer and Bock (1992) showed
that priming with a phonologically similar word
facilitated correct retrieval. Correspondingly, when
phonological similarity was manipulated by varying
neighborhood density, high-neighborhood targets have
been found to produce fewer TOTs than lowneighborhood targets (e.g., Vitevitch & Sommers, 2003).
Similar error patterns have also been observed in
naturally-produced speech (Vitevitch, 1997). In picture
naming tasks, targets with dense phonological
neighborhoods have been found to be retrieved faster than
targets with sparse phonological neighborhoods (e.g.,
Vitevitch, 2002). In sum, phonological similarity has
consistently been found to facilitate monolingual lexical
access across language production tasks (e.g., picture
naming, picture-word interference, TOT-elicitation,
naturally-produced speech).
Neighborhood facilitation during word production
has been ascribed to interactive feedback between lexical
and phonological processing levels. Gordon and Dell
(2001) simulated behavioral findings of neighborhood
effects within the framework of an Interactive Spreading
Activation Model of production (Dell, 1986). The model
was based on three stages of language production: a
semantic stage where word-meaning is chosen, a lemma
stage where other lexical characteristics are identified,
and a phonological stage where the word form is
accessed. Simulations suggested that neighborhood
facilitation in production is due to feedback between the
lemma level and the phonological level during word
selection.
The
lemma
activates
phonological
representations, which in turn activate similar-sounding
lemmas (i.e., the phonological neighborhood) that feed
back onto the target’s phonological representations and
increase their activation levels, facilitating their selection.

Keywords: Language Processing; Bilingualism

Introduction
How alike are the mechanisms underlying native and nonnative language processing? This question was examined
by manipulating word similarity during native and nonnative naming. Similarity and difference among words
can be examined at the phonological, orthographic,
lexical, and semantic levels. For example, the size of a
word’s semantic network influences how fast the word
can be accessed, with words that have larger semantic
similarity neighborhoods processed faster than words with
smaller semantic neighborhoods (e.g., Locker, Simpson,
& Yates, 2003). In the same way, the size of a word’s
phonological or orthographic neighborhood influences
word access. A phonological neighbor is a word that
differs from the target word by a single phoneme
(Grainger, Muneaux, Farioli, & Ziegler, 2005; Yates,
Locker, & Simpson, 2004). A word’s neighborhood size,
also referred to as its neighborhood density, is the number
of items that are highly similar to it. While phonology,
orthography, and semantics are all subject to
neighborhood density effects, with implications for
lexical activation, the objective of the present study was
to examine the role of phonological neighborhood density

71

the other hand, findings from TOT studies with adult
native speakers suggest that facilitation of dense
neighborhoods is more pronounced for low-frequency
words than for high-frequency words (Vitevitch &
Sommers, 2003). Thus, high-frequency words may be
easier to access overall, and therefore may be less
susceptible to neighborhood effects. In a native language,
more extensive practice with and previous exposure to a
language may give a word an “often used” status and
produce effects similar to those of high-frequency words.
In a non-native language, limited exposure to a word and
rare instances of previous use may give a word a “rarely
used” status and produce effects similar to those of lowfrequency words. As a result, a non-native language may
be more susceptible to neighborhood effects than a native
language, a hypothesis supported by studies of
orthographic neighborhood density (De Groot et al.,
2002). If that were the case, then bilingual speakers
should be more sensitive to phonological neighborhood
effects in the non-native language compared to the native
language.

For bilingual language production, a study looking at
the role of orthographic neighborhoods in native and nonnative naming (De Groot, Borgwaldt, Bos, & van den
Eijnde, 2002) found that high-density neighborhoods
facilitated naming and resulted in shorter response
latencies in both languages. This neighborhood effect was
facilitative across languages as well as within languages.
Moreover, when delayed naming was partialled-out from
immediate naming latencies (in order to detect the
recognition component of naming) a difference between
native and non-native languages was found. Non-native
latencies were found to be more dependent on targetlanguage orthographic neighborhood than native
latencies, suggesting that production in a non-native
language may be more sensitive to orthographic
neighborhood effects.
Further insight into bilingual neighborhood effects
can be gained from cross-linguistic research with
monolinguals. Initial evidence from cross-linguistic
research suggests that neighborhood effects in production
may depend on structural characteristics of the tested
language (Vitevitch & Rodriguez, 2005; Vitevitch &
Stamer, in press). For instance, while high-density
neighborhoods typically facilitate production in English,
high-density neighborhoods have been found to inhibit
production in Spanish (Vitevitch & Stamer, in press).
These differences were explained in terms of Spanish
language characteristics. Spanish is a language that is
morphologically richer than English, so that clusters of
phonological neighbors also contain morphological
neighbors (e.g., niño, niña). These morphological clusters
inhibit production, since one word-form needs to be
chosen from many semantically-consistent candidates. To
avoid any differences across linguistic structures, the
target language was kept constant in the present study.

The Present Study
The question underlying the current research is how
phonological neighborhood influences lexical access in
bilingual language production. Do effects of phonological
neighborhood
parallel
those
of
orthographic
neighborhood, and are they similar across native and nonnative languages? To answer these questions, the present
study examined the role of phonological neighborhood
density during native and non-native picture naming. We
manipulated whether the target language was native or
non-native by testing two groups of bilinguals, one where
the target language was the native language and one
where the target language was the non-native language. In
other words, two groups of bilinguals were tested in the
same language, as opposed to testing one group of
bilinguals in both of their languages. As a result, any
differences observed could be attributed to native/nonnative language status rather than to differences in
language structure. During a German picture naming task,
German-English and English-German bilinguals were
asked to produce targets with either high-density or lowdensity phonological neighborhoods. Thus, German was
always the target language. The present study followed a
two-by-two design, with two independent variables,
neighborhood size and language status. Neighborhood
size was a within-group variable and consisted of two
levels, high-density phonological neighborhood words
and low-density phonological neighborhood words.
Language status was a between-group variable and also
consisted of two levels, native German speakers and nonnative German speakers.
We expected that results in the native language
would replicate those of previous studies with
monolinguals, and produce higher accuracy and shorter
latency rates for words with dense phonological

Developmental Patterns in Neighborhood Density
One way to understand differences between neighborhood
effects in native and non-native language processing is by
examining the developmental path of neighborhood
density effects. It has been found that while toddlers
prefer to listen to high-neighborhood words (Jusczyk,
Luce, & Charles-Luce, 1994), children in fact do worse at
naming high-neighborhood targets compared to lowneighborhood targets (Arnold, Conture, & Ohde, 2005;
Newman & German, 2002). This suggests that facilitated
naming of high-neighborhood targets may be the end of a
developmental path that requires maturation of the
language system. The presence of a developmental path
raises questions about the role of language status in
sensitivity to neighborhood density. On the one hand,
non-native speakers may show patterns similar to those of
children who are native speakers, due to lower
proficiency and a less entrenched language network. If
that were the case, then bilingual speakers would be more
sensitive to phonological neighborhood density in the
native language compared to the non-native language. On

72

neighborhoods than for words with sparse phonological
neighborhoods. In addition, we aimed to extend the
paradigm to production in a non-native language. The
lower proficiency levels in the non-native language were
predicted to influence the pattern of results. On the one
hand, if sensitivity to phonological neighborhood density
emerged with language proficiency, then neighborhood
effects should be more apparent in native naming than in
non-native naming. On the other hand, if lower
proficiency levels conferred ‘low frequency status’ onto
all words in that language, then sensitivity to
phonological neighborhood density should be more
apparent in non-native naming than in native naming. In
general, participants were predicted to be faster and more
accurate when the neighborhood was large than when it
was small, and the magnitude of the effect was predicted
to differ across native and non-native languages.

[hoz], and Habe, [hab]. (Note that the ideal scenario
would be to also manipulate the phonological
neighborhood density of English, in order to gauge the
separate effect of non-target language phonological
neighborhood, as well as the cumulative effect of
phonological neighborhoods across both languages.
However, that was not possible because differences in
phonetic features between German and English precluded
meaningful computations of cross-linguistic phonological
neighborhoods in English.)
Stimuli were grouped into two conditions, where one
condition included words with large phonological
neighborhoods (3 or more phonological neighbors in
German), and the other condition included words with
small phonological neighborhoods (2 or fewer
phonological neighbors in German). The largeneighborhood condition consisted of 31 German words,
with a mean neighborhood size of 5.8 words (SE = 0.4).
The small-neighborhood condition consisted of 26
German words, with a mean neighborhood size of 1.2
words (SE = 0.2). The neighborhood sizes for the two
conditions were significantly different from each other t
(55) = 8.8, p < .001. The rationale for choosing a small
(albeit significant) difference between dense and sparse
neighborhood conditions was to specifically examine the
sensitivity to relatively small changes in neighborhood
density across native and non-native languages. Words in
the two conditions were balanced for word length (in
phonemes), spoken word frequencies of German and of
English
translation
equivalents,
orthographic
neighborhood size in German and English, and number of
synonyms available in German. There were no significant
differences for these measures between the low-density
and high-density neighborhood conditions (p > .05).

Methods
Participants Twenty-nine bilingual speakers of German
and English were tested. Of these, 14 were EnglishGerman bilinguals (native language = English; 5 females),
and 15 were German-English bilinguals (native language
= German; 7 females). All bilinguals reported being
native-language dominant. English-German bilinguals
started learning German at the age of 11.8 years (SD =
8.6) and became fluent at 17.4 years (SD =10.0). GermanEnglish bilinguals started learning English at the age of
10.7 years (SD = 3.3) and became fluent at 18.8 years (SD
= 7.6). The mean age at the time of testing was 25.6 years
(SD = 8.9) for the English-German bilinguals and 28.7
years (SD = 12.9) for the German-English bilinguals, with
no significant difference between the two, t (27) = 0.8, p
> .1. At the time of study, German-English bilinguals had
more exposure (in terms of % time) to German (M =
23.1%, SD = 16.3) than English-German bilinguals (M =
11.1%, SD = 6.8), t (27) = 2.6, p < .05. All participants
were administered a German translation of the English
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT-III, Dunn &
Dunn, 1997), where German-English bilinguals (M =
193.9, SD = 7.6) performed better than English-German
bilinguals (M = 178.6, SD = 18.2), t (27) = 2.9, p < .01.

Procedure The experimenter was a native speaker of
German, and conversed with participants in German prior
to the experimental session to ensure a German language
mode during testing. Participants sat in front of a
computer and named pictures that appeared on the screen.
Responses were recorded using a Logitech microphone.
The experiment was self-paced, and each response
triggered a 500 msec inter-stimulus-interval. Pictures
were presented in a random sequence generated by Super
Lab experimental software. Finally, a Language
Experience and Proficiency Questionnaire (Marian,
Blumenfeld, & Kaushanskaya, submitted) was
administered to assess participants’ linguistic profiles.

Materials Fifty-seven pictures corresponding to target
German words were used. Picture stimuli were black line
drawings with gray shadings, and were selected from the
IMSI Master Clips electronic database and the Alta Vista
search engine or were hand-drawn. To identify
phonological neighbors of each target word, the German
corpus of the CELEX lexical database (Baayen,
Piepenbrock, & Van Rijn, 1995) was used, with an item
coded as a phonological neighbor if it differed from the
target by only one phoneme, and had the same number of
phonemes in the same positions (Grainger et al., 2005;
Yates et al., 2004). For example, the phonological
neighborhood
of
the
German
word
Hase,
[haz], includes such words as Vase, [vaz], Hose,

Coding and Analyses Accuracy and latency of responses
were measured. For accuracy, the percentage of pictures
named correctly was computed. For latency, the duration
of time from onset of picture presentation to onset of
word production was measured in milliseconds using the
experimental software. Naming accuracy and naming
latency (for correct responses only) were analyzed for
large-neighborhood and small-neighborhood conditions
across the two bilingual groups, using two-way analyses

73

of variance with neighborhood as a within-subject
variable, and group as a between-subject variable. In bysubject analyses, participants’ number of years of
education was entered as a covariate, in order to factor out
the confounding influence of academic experience, which
is known to correlate highly with IQ scores, speed of
processing, and familiarity with de-contextualized tasks
(see Brody, 1992; Ceci, 1996 for reviews).

Since neighborhood size is a continuous variable, followup regression analyses were conducted, where
neighborhood size (independent variable) was regressed
on naming accuracy. A significant relationship between
neighborhood size and accuracy was found across both
groups (R = 0.2, p < .05).
Naming Latency Two-way analyses of variance were
performed, with phonological neighborhood size (large,
small) and group (native, non-native) as independent
variables in both by-subject and by-item analyses, and
with participants’ number of years of education as a
covariate in the by-subject analyses. Results (see Figure
2) revealed a main effect of neighborhood size, with faster
naming when the phonological neighborhood was larger
(M = 2,608.9 msec, SE = 214.6 msec) than when it was
smaller (M = 3,719.9 msec, SE = 388.1 msec), F1 (1, 27)
= 8.4, p < .01, F2 (1, 55) = 5.2, p < .05. Moreover, a main
effect of group revealed that native speakers named
pictures faster (M = 2,285.9 msec, SE = 271.3 msec) than
non-native speakers (M = 4,042.9 msec, SE = 289.3
msec), F1 (1, 27) = 9.2, p < .01, F2 (1, 55) = 19.6, p <
.001. The interaction between neighborhood size and
group was significant by items, F2 (1, 55) = 4.6, p < .05,
but the by-subject analysis did not reach significance, p >
.05. Follow-up t-tests revealed that non-native speakers
named pictures faster with large-neighborhood targets (M
= 2,964.3 msec, SE = 313.0 msec) than with smallneighborhood targets (M = 5,121.4 msec, SE = 566.1
msec), t (55) = 3.1, p < .005. For native speakers, the
difference was not significant (large neighborhoods: M =
2253.4 msec, SE = 548.6; small neighborhoods: M =
2318.4 msec, SE = 303.3), p > .05. When neighborhood
size was regressed on naming latency across items, the
relationship between the two was not significant for either
native speakers or non-native speakers, p > .05.

Results
Of the 1,653 responses produced, 62.5% (1033 cases)
were coded as correct and 37.5% (620 cases) were coded
as incorrect.
Naming Accuracy Two-way analyses of variance, with
phonological neighborhood size (large, small) as a withinsubject variable and group (native, non-native) as a
between-subject variable in both by-subject (F1) and byitem (F2) analyses, and with number of years of education
as a covariate in by-subject analyses, were performed.
Results revealed a main effect of neighborhood
size, F1 (1, 27) = 9.2, p < .01, F2 (1, 55) = 5.6, p < .05,
and a main effect of group, F1 (1, 27) = 42.2, p < .001, F2
(1, 55) = 36.4, p < .001 (see Figure 1). Naming accuracy
was higher for target words with large phonological
neighborhoods (M = 68.5%, SE = 3.7%) than for target
words with small phonological neighborhoods (M =
54.8%, SE = 3.9%) and was also higher for native
speakers (M = 76.4%, SE = 3.5%) than for non-native
speakers (M = 46.9%, SE = 3.5%). No interaction was
found between neighborhood size and group, F1 (1, 27) =
3.5, p > .05, F2 (1,55) = 0.03, p > .05, suggesting that
phonological neighborhood size influenced naming
accuracy similarly across both groups, regardless of
native / non-native language status.

100

Small Neighborhood

Large Neighborhood

Naming Latencies (msec)

Naming Accuracy (%)

Large Neighborhood

**
*

80
60

*p < .05
**p < .001

*
40
20
0

Non-Native

6000

**

5000
4000

Figure 1: Naming accuracy for high-neighborhood and
low-neighborhood words in English-German bilinguals
and German-English bilinguals.

*p < .01
**p < .001

*

3000
2000
1000
0

Non-Native

Native

Small Neighborhood

Native

Figure 2: Naming latencies for high-neighborhood and
low-neighborhood words in English-German bilinguals
and German-English bilinguals.

74

between dense- and sparse phonological neighborhoods in
non-native speakers were more robust than in native
speakers. Therefore, neighborhood density effects appear
to manifest themselves differently during the course of
first and second language learning. Once a native
language has been acquired, neighborhood density effects
may follow different patterns with the development of
subsequent languages.
In the current study, the absence of latency
differences between high- and low-density neighborhoods
in the native language may be explained by the small
contrast between high- and low-density conditions
compared to other studies (e.g., in Garlock et al. 2001,
Vitevitch, 2002, Yates et al., 2004). The fact that we
found a phonological neighborhood effect on naming
accuracy in the current dataset speaks to the robustness of
the phenomenon. The fact that we did not find a
phonological neighborhood effect on naming latency in a
native language suggests that speed of access may be less
sensitive to small variations in neighborhood density. It is
possible then, that accuracy is more sensitive to even
slight variations in neighborhood density, while latency
differences are triggered by more dramatic changes, at
least in a highly proficient language.
In conclusion, the present study confirmed that
phonological neighborhood density influences bilingual
lexical access, and extended this finding to non-native
language production. Cross-linguistic orthographic
neighbors have been found to facilitate lexical access
(e.g., De Groot et al., 2002) and our results report the
same pattern for phonological neighbors. Although
phonological neighborhood density effects were apparent
in both the native and the non-native languages, latency
results indicated that they were more marked in the nonnative language. This confirms the hypothesis that
native/non-native language status modulates the effect of
neighborhood density on language production. The
facilitative effects of phonological neighborhood density
on lexical access during language production have applied
implications. For instance, in second language instruction,
the knowledge that dense neighborhood words are
associated with better performance might guide the choice
of words in vocabulary learning activities to provide
additional support for low-neighborhood items. The
present research suggests that the native and non-native
languages are subject to similar processing dynamics.
Proficiency-based differences between native and nonnative language processing can be accounted for by
similar mechanisms within an Interactive Activation
Model (McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981). Further,
preliminary results suggest that the cognitive
representations underlying neighborhood effects may
develop differently in native and non-native languages,
with further experimental and computational work
necessary to explore this hypothesis.

Discussion
The present experiment extended the study of
phonological neighborhood effects during native language
production to non-native language production. Similar to
accuracy rates in native language naming, accuracy rates
in non-native language naming were better with highdensity
neighborhoods
than
with
low-density
neighborhoods. However, latency results varied across
native and non-native languages. While high-density
neighborhoods facilitated naming latency in the nonnative language, no differences between high- and lowdensity neighborhoods were found in the native language.
This pattern suggests that retrieval difficulties for sparseneighborhood words may be more marked in non-native
speakers, supporting the prediction that language status
influences sensitivity to neighborhood density. These
findings have implications for mechanisms underlying
non-native language processing. For native language
processing, previous simulations within an Interactive
Spreading Activation Model suggest that neighborhood
effects are driven by bi-directional feedback between
phonological and lexical levels (Gordon & Dell, 2001).
Since current findings for non-native naming closely
mirror findings for native naming, it is likely that nonnative naming also relies on bi-directional feedback
between processing levels. Therefore, late acquisition of a
language may not influence the nature of processing
dynamics during naming.
Findings that efficiency of naming sparseneighborhood words was lower in the non-native
language than in the native language may be due to
differences in proficiency levels. Lower proficiency in a
non-native language may have conferred overall ‘lowfrequency status’ onto non-native words, rendering nonnative naming more sensitive to phonological
neighborhood density. Within connectionist models, word
frequency has been linked to resting activation levels of
word representations (Dell, 1988). Lower resting levels of
non-native words may require more activation to accrue
before a word can be accessed, therefore reducing
efficiency of word retrieval. This reduced efficiency in
non-native word retrieval may be especially apparent for
words with sparse neighborhoods, where facilitative
feedback from neighbors is absent. In sum, results suggest
that the role of neighborhood density in processing of a
late-acquired language can be explained by mechanisms
within the framework of adult native language processing.
This account indicates that neighborhood effects are more
marked during learning of a non-native language than
during learning of a native language. Recall that in
children, neighborhood effects are negligible during
language learning and increase as language development
progresses (Arnold et al., 2005; Newman & German,
2002). This might suggest that neighborhood effects are
stronger in a native and highly proficient language than in
a non-native and less-proficient language. However, that
was not the case in the current study, as the differences
75

neighbourhood density interact in visual word
recognition. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58A (6), 981-998.
Gordon, J.K. (2002). Phonological neighborhood effects
in aphasic speech errors: Spontaneous and structural
contexts. Brain and Language, 82, 113-145.
Gordon, J.K., & Dell, G.S. (2001). Phonological
neighborhood effects. Brain and Language, 79, 21-23.
Jusczyk, P.W., Luce, P.A., & Charles-Luce, J. (1994).
Infants’ sensitivity to phonotactic patterns in the native
language. J Memory and Language, 33, 630-645.
Locker, L., Simpson, G.B., & Yates, M. (2003). Semantic
neighborhood effects on the recognition of ambiguous
words. Memory and Cognition, 31, 505-515.
McClelland, J.L., & Rumelhart, D.E. (1981). An
interactive activation model of contet effects in letter
perception: Part 1. An account of basic findings.
Psychological Review, 88, 375-407.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M.
(submitted). The Language Experience and Proficiency
Questionnaire: Assessing Language Profiles in
Bilinguals and Multilinguals. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research.
Meyer, A.S., & Bock, J.K. (1992). The tip-of-the-tongue
phenomenon: Blocking or partial activation? Memory &
Cognition, 20, 715-726.
Newman, R.S., & German, D.J. (2002). Effects of lexical
factors on lexical access among typical languagelearning children and children with word-finding
difficulties. Language and Speech, 45, 285-317.
Van Heuven, W.J.B., Dijkstra,T., & Grainger, J. (1998).
Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingual word
recognition. J Memory and Language, 39, 458-483.
Vitevitch, M.S. (1997). The neighborhood characteristics
of malapropisms. Language and Speech, 40, 211-228.
Vitevitch, M.S. (2002). The influence of phonological
similarity neighborhoods on speech production. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 28(4), 735-747.
Vitevitch, M.S., & Rodríguez, E. (2005). Neighborhood
density effects in spoken word recognition in Spanish. J
Multilingual Communication Disorders, 3, 64-73.
Vitevitch, M.S., & Sommers, M.S. (2003). The
facilitative influence of phonological similarity and
neighborhood frequency in speech production in
younger and older adults. Memory and Cognition,
31(4), 491-504.
Vitevitch, M.S. & Stamer, M.K. (in press). The curious
case of competition in Spanish speech production.
Language & Cognitive Processes.
Yates, M., Locker, L., Simpson, G. (2004).Influence of
phonological neighborhood on visual word perception.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11, 452-457.
Ziegler, J.C., Muneaux, M., & Grainger, J. (2003).
Neighborhood effects in auditory word recognition:
Phonological competition and orthographic facilitation.
Journal of Memory and Language, 48(4), 779-793.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by Grants NICHD
1R03HD046952-01A1 and NSF BCS-0418495 to the
second author and a Northwestern Graduate Research
Grant to the first author. The authors thank Laura
Guengerich for assistance with data coding and Margarita
Kaushanskaya, Roberto Heredia, Ludmilla Isurin, Olga
Boukrina, Nadia Cone, Avital Rabin, as well as three
anonymous reviewers, for helpful comments on earlier
drafts of this paper.

References
Andrews, S. (1992). Frequency and neighborhood effects
on lexical access: Activation or search? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18, 234-254.
Arnold, H.S., Conture, E.G., & Ohde, R.N. (2005).
Phonological neighborhood density in the picture
naming of young children who stutter: Preliminary
study. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 30, 125-148.
Baayen, H., Piepenbrock, R., & Van Rijn, H. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database [CD-ROM]. Philadelphia, PA:
U Pennsylvania Linguistic Data Consortium.
Brody, N. (1992) Intelligence (2nd Edition, pp168-214).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ceci, S.J., (1996). On Intelligence: A Bioecological
Treatise on Intellectual Development (pp 69-90).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Costa, A., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (1998). Abstract
phonological structure in language production:
Evidence from Spanish. J Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory , and Cognition, 24, 866-903.
De Groot, A.M.B., Borgwaldt, S., Bos, M., & Van den
Eijnden, E. (2002). Lexical decision and word naming
in bilinguals: Language effects and task effects. Journal
of Memory and Language, 47, 91-124.
Dell, G.S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of
retrieval in sentence production. Psychological Review,
93, 283-321.
Dell, G.S. (1988). The retrieval of phonological forms in
production: Tests of predictions for a connectionist
model. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 124-142.
Dijkstra, T., Moscoso del Prado Martín, F., Schulpen, B.,
Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R.H. (2005). A roommate in
cream: Morphological family size effects on
interlingual homograph recognition. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 20(1/2), 7-41.
Dunn, L.M. & Dunn, L.M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (3rd ed., PPVT-III). American
Guidance Service, Circle Pines, MN.
Garlock, V.M., Walley, A.C., & Metsala, J.L. (2001). Age
of acquisition, word frequency, and neighborhood
density in spoken word recognition by children and
adults. Journal of Memory and Language, 45, 468-492.
Grainger, J., Muneaux, M., Farioli, F., & Ziegler, J.C.
(2005). Effects of phonological and orthographic
76

