UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Planning, Evaluation, and Cognition: Exploring the Structure and Mechanisms of Expert
Performance in a Representative Dynamic Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2fk7t0ps

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Eccles, David W.
Ericsson, K. Anders
Harris, Kevin R.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Planning, Evaluation, and Cognition: Exploring the Structure and Mechanisms of
Expert Performance in a Representative Dynamic Task
Kevin R. Harris (harris@psy.fsu.edu)
Human Performance Laboratory, Learning Systems Institute
Florida State University, 2010 Levy Ave., Suite 254
Tallahassee, FL 32309 USA

Lauren Tashman (lst03@fsu.edu)
Human Performance Laboratory, Learning Systems Institute
Florida State University, 2010 Levy Ave., Suite 254
Tallahassee, FL 32309 USA

Paul Ward (pward@lsi.fsu.edu)
Human Performance Laboratory, Learning Systems Institute
Florida State University, 2010 Levy Ave., Suite 254
Tallahassee, FL 32309 USA

K. Anders Ericsson (ericsson@psy.fsu.edu)
Human Performance Laboratory, Learning Systems Institute
Florida State University, 2010 Levy Ave., Suite 254
Tallahassee, FL 32309 USA

David W. Eccles (deccles@lsi.fsu.edu)
Human Performance Laboratory, Learning Systems Institute
Florida State University, 2010 Levy Ave., Suite 254
Tallahassee, FL 32309 USA

A. Mark Williams (m.williams@livjm.ac.uk)
Liverpool John Moores University, Henry Cotton, Campus, 15-21 Webster St.
Liverpool, L3 2ET, United Kingdom, UK

Jason Ramrattan (jcr03c@fsu.edu)
Human Performance Laboratory, Learning Systems Institute
Florida State University, 2010 Levy Ave., Suite 254
Tallahassee, FL 32309 USA

Laura Hassler Lang (lhassler@lsi.fsu.edu)
Learning Systems Institute, Florida State University, C4600 University Center
Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA

Abstract

Introduction

A novel approach to protocol analysis designed for dynamic
tasks is introduced and applied to the domain of law
enforcement. This Task Analysis Period (TAP) methodology
is designed to allow exploration of the structural mechanisms
of expert performance in a task not traditionally investigated
via protocol analysis methods. Preliminary evidence supports
the view that Long Term Working Memory enables
construction of an on-line dynamic situation model and
supplementary memory support that skilled performers use
for planning, evaluation, and monitoring during task
performance.

The study of experts and expert performance has become a
prominent research topic in cognitive psychology and other
fields. In their original expertise approach, Chase and Simon
(1973) focused upon skill-based differences in the ability to
encode and recall briefly presented chess positions. A host
of studies on expertise followed that were designed to
examine the superior memory and recall of experts in a
given domain (e.g., Allard & Starkes, 1980; Allard,
Graham, & Parsaalu, 1980). Rather than assume that expert
performance was based upon superior memory recall,

327

memory (Charness 1976; Glanzer et al., 1981, 1984).
Consequently, LTWM theory advocates an alternative and
more eloquent, explanation of expert performance (Ericsson
& Kintsch, 1995). In our view, individual performance on
challenging, stressful tasks, and time-sensitive, critical tasks
within a particular domain of expertise should be viewed
within a comprehension framework (see Ericsson &
Kintsch, 1995; Kintsch, 1998), In other words, rather than a
cue triggering an automatic response, direct access to
information required to anticipate future events and their
consequences is provided by LTWM representations
through the on-line, dynamic situation model construction
process and supplementary memory support for
performance that allows planning, evaluation, and
monitoring to take place when time permits. Thus, the
expert performer may appear to be acting automatically due
to the rapidity of their actions, but selective access is
provided to highly indexed and organized information
stored in memory which facilitates and constrains action
planning and selection (see also Ward, et al., 2006). The
domain of law enforcement was chosen for the present
experiment. Representative tasks in this domain are
extremely dynamic and typically involve responding to a
critical event, often under time pressure. An officer may be
required to write a speeding ticket at one moment and be
engaged in an exchange of gunfire the next. Furthermore,
the tasks involved in law enforcement can be a matter of life
and death. The potential for life or death situations inherent
in law enforcement make it fruitful domain for investigating
dynamic, time-constrained, and stressful situations.
In order to assess the processes and mechanisms
responsible for superior expert performance in the domain
of law enforcement, a new methodology for analysis was
developed (for a more detailed explanation, see Ward,
Eccles, et al., 2006). We predict that the retrospective verbal
reports (see Ericsson & Simon, 1980; 1993) will provide
evidence that skilled officers engage in more active
planning (i.e., predictions and intentions), evaluation, and
cognitions compared to novice police officers. Furthermore,
evidence will be provided that experts make predictive
inferences and anticipate future events beyond information
available in the scenario by building an on-line situation
model. We also predict that this process will constrain
expert performers (i.e., skilled officers) to engage in more
target-directed actions and verbalizations than novice police
officers.
Prior to analyzing the data, trials were categorized on the
basis of their outcome being either consistent or inconsistent
with the rest of the scenario. In other words, consistent trials
were those in which preceding events were predictive of the
outcome, whereas inconsistent trials were those on which
preceding events were not informative as to the potential
outcome. We predicted that skilled officers would
outperform novice participants primarily on consistent trials
only.

Ericsson and Smith (1991) proposed an approach that
identified activities on which experts could consistently
demonstrate superior performance. Once identified,
Ericsson and Smith (1991) recommended that representative
tasks be created in the laboratory such that performance
could be examined under controlled conditions, and the
mechanisms for superior performance could be investigated
using process tracing methods and experimental
manipulations.
Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) extended earlier work on
skilled memory (Chase & Ericsson, 1982) by proposing that
experts acquired the skills to index information at encoding
in such a way that allowed information stored in long term
memory (LTM) to remain accessible via the use of retrieval
cues in short term memory. These skills, and the underlying
representation, were termed Long-term Working Memory
(LTWM). In their original paper, Ericsson and Kintsch
(1995) suggested that LTWM has a dual function. These
representations not only provide memory support for
performance, in the form of planning, monitoring and
evaluations, but also permit retrieval structures to be built
on-the-fly (i.e., situation models, see Kintsch, 1988). These
retrieval structures allow experts to predict the occurrence
and the consequence of future events and anticipate future
retrieval demands. In many real-world, dynamic, and
complex domains, the challenges and time pressures posed
by the task require that individuals are able to process
relevant, often partial, information in an efficient and
meaningful way, whilst still retaining the ability to engage
in necessary reasoning processes. We contend that the dual
function of LTWM supports such activity and, in particular,
construction of, and updates to the situation model permit
direct access to information needed to make the predictive
inferences that result in a response that constrains the
situation in an appropriate and effective manner (Ward,
Eccles, et al., 2006; Ward, Ericsson, & Williams, 2006; see
also Ward, 2002). Long-term working memory has been
successfully demonstrated in domains such as typing and
text comprehension (see Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995). In the
present experiment, LTWM is explored in domains
characterized by dynamic tasks for which performance is
often undertaken under time pressure and stressful
circumstances.
Existing literature discussing performance under these
types of situations often proposes performance as either a
recognition (e.g., Recognition Primed Decision-making; see
Klein, Calderwood, & MacGregor, 1989; Gobet & Simon,
1996), intuitive (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986) or automatic
process (see Schneider & Chen, 2003). Moreover, many of
these views are based upon stimulus activation-type models
in which an expert would primarily rely upon transient
storage in working memory (WM) as opposed to LTM, as
proposed by LTWM theory. Research involving text
comprehension and chess suggests that when skilled
individuals are interrupted during task performance using an
interpolation task (e.g., reading an unrelated sentence, or
memorizing a 2nd chess board configuration), there is no
effect on comprehension or performance other than a delay
in processing time (e.g., 400 ms) to reinstate appropriate
access to LTM via retrieval cues in short term working
328

were presented with a blank screen and an audio message
giving a brief description of the context to which they would
be required to respond and then the simulation video began.
Three practice trials in the STE allowed participants to
respond to the simulated scenarios and to give a
retrospective report with additional feedback where
necessary. Participants undertook 20 test trials.
Approximately, half of the trials (n = 9) were “no-shoot”
trials (i.e., the perpetrator(s) gave up peacefully or the event
did not require a lethal force response) and the other half (n
= 11) were “shoot” trials (e.g., a perpetrator drew, and
eventually fired, a lethal weapon). The preceding events on
4 of the shoot trials were consistent with the outcome. If the
participant fired the weapon, the video simulation was
occluded upon gunshot and the screen went blank to avoid
any further feedback. Three of the clips were two-event
trials, which continued until the second event. Two-event
trials were occluded upon response (i.e., gun shot) to the
second event.
Participants were instructed to give a retrospective verbal
report immediately after performance on seven of the shoot,
and three of the no-shoot scenarios. Retrospective reports
were elicited in random order, except for two trials that
always occurred at position 9 and 19 in the serial order.
These were independently rated a priori by five researchers
as the two most stressful trials. Pearson’s product moment
correlations (r) between individual and mean stress ratings
for all trials ranged from 0.75 to 0.91. The mean rating (out
of 10) for the most stressful trial (trial 19, inconsistent;
entitled “domestic assault with baby”) was 9.8 (SD = 0.45),
and for the next most stressful (trial 9, consistent; entitled
”school hostage”) was 9.4 (SD = 0.89). The practice and
test trails took approximately one hour to complete.

Methods
Participants
Two groups of male, right-hand dominant law enforcement
officers (skilled and novice) were recruited as participants.
Skilled officers (n = 14) had a mean total of 15.4 years (SD
= 6.5) of service as a law enforcement officer, and had
completed the required training for, special weapons and
tactics (SWAT) or an equivalent branch of law enforcement
(i.e., Tactical Command; TAC). The mean age of the skilled
officers was 38.7 years (SD = 6.3). Novice officers (n = 14)
were academy trainees and on average, had undertaken
approximately four weeks of mandatory initial training.
Their mean age was 24.7 years (SD = 4.4; excluding two
participants for whom age was not provided). A rigorous
process was implemented to ensure participant anonymity.
Informed consent was obtained from participants prior to
participation and American Psychological Association
ethical guidelines were followed throughout.

Materials and Apparatus
A simulated task environment (STE) was developed to
assess participant performance on representative tasks. The
STE was driven by LabVIEW and allowed participants to
interact with near life-size, video simulations digitally
projected on to a 9 ft (2.73 m) x 12 ft (3.64 m) screen.
Custom-made video simulations provided scenarios that
were representative of law enforcement ranging from
domestic disputes to a terrorist attack. Each scenario was
shot from a first person perspective allowing meaningful
interaction with the actors.
The response interface was a modified, blank firing F-92
Beretta handgun (Netlink Enterprises Inc, Fredericksburg,
VA). The handgun included trigger sensors and a precisionmounted laser sight (Lasermax, Rochester, NY) allowing
aim point data and time the handgun was fired to be
recorded. Three additional digital video cameras (Panasonic
AV-DVX100A), an audio microcassette recorder, and
miniature lapel microphone were used to capture verbal and
behavioral responses.

Data Analysis
Performance Data
For the shoot trials only, measures included time (in
milliseconds; ms) taken to respond by firing a first shot. If
the officer did not fire the weapon, the end-point of the
scenario served as shot reaction time. Group means for the
two most stressful trials were computed to determine
differences on shot reaction time between skilled and novice
participants. Performance data for all trials is presented
elsewhere (see Tashman, et al., 2006; Ward, Eccles, et al.,
2006)

Simulation Trials
Participants were given an overview of the experiment, a
demonstration of the STE, and completed a biographical
information sheet. Participants were given directions
adapted from Ericsson and Simon (1993, pp. 375-379) for
giving a retrospective verbal report. Participants practiced
giving verbal reports with feedback by solving generic
problems for approximately 20 minutes to ensure that the
criteria for omitting type III reports had been met (see
Ericsson & Simon, 1993).
For each trial, participants were informed that a simulated
law enforcement scenario was about to be presented and
were asked to respond to the scenario just as they would in
the real world (e.g., calm the suspect down, un-holster their
weapon). If the situation did not necessitate any action or
response from the participant, the participant was asked to
act accordingly. Following these instructions, participants

Verbal Reports
Transcriptions of retrospective reports were segmented
using natural speech and other syntactical markers. The data
were first encoded using a predicate–argument scheme (e.g.,
relation [argument 1, argument 2]) using various taskspecific relations (e.g., move, shoot, pick up). Subjects,
objects or elements specified the arguments to which the
relation referred (e.g., perpetrator, gun, or door) (Ericsson &
Simon, 1993; Ward, et al., 2006).

329

situation as a series of events such that an a priori task
analysis could then be applied to each event in series.
The verbal report data corresponding to each TAP were
then analyzed by looking for intermediate products (i.e.,
reports, behaviors) that were consistent with one or more a
priori specified models relative to the target behavior for
each TAP. In addition, where skill groups’ verbal reports
satisfied the same model, a subsequent analysis was
performed to identify the time at which model satisfaction
took place. In the future, prior model satisfaction (e.g.,
model X from TAP 2) will be examined to determine
whether it is predictive of, or influences subsequent model
satisfaction (e.g., model Y in TAP 1) and, ultimately,
performance outcome.

The verbal reports were categorically coded based on a
structure developed to highlight statements made about
planning, cognitions, and evaluations. Planning statements
were divided into two sub-categories. First, predictions
were coded as options (referring to conditional statements or
alternatives for future states, e.g., “could”) or anticipations
(referring to statements made about the expectation of future
events, e.g., “would” or “will”). Second, intentions were
coded as goals (referring to statements about the goaldirected future states feasibly under control of the officer,
e.g., “I want to”) or desires (referring to statements made
about desired future states for others, e.g., “I want him to”).
Cognition statements were subdivided into codes of actions,
state, or speech (referring to statements about themselves)
and perception of speech, perception of animate
information, or perception of inanimate information
(referring to statements made about others). Evaluations
were subdivided into questions (statements questioning a
state or action), assessments (positive or negative
evaluations), or comparisons (comparative positive or
negative evaluations).

Results
Performance Data
The mean and standard deviation for the reaction time data
corresponding to when participants shot at the perpetrator
are presented in Table 1. The skilled officers were
significantly faster on the consistent trial (School Hostage, p
< .05, d = 1.62), but not the inconsistent trial (Domestic
Assault with Baby, p > .05, d = .30).

Task Analysis Period (TAP) Model Satisfaction
Verbal reports previously recorded for dynamic tasks (e.g.,
flying an unmanned air vehicle), have generally been
analyzed using content as opposed to protocol analysis
methods (e.g., Purtee, Krusmark, Gluck, Kotte, & Lefebvre,
2003). Moreover, tasks performed in a relatively static or
self-paced environment (e.g., chess, radiological diagnosis;
for examples, see Newell & Simon, 1972) or environments
not requiring one to deviate from a desired course of action
have primarily been analyzed using process-based analyses.
However, for many tasks, environmental changes require
deviations in performance, which becomes highly dependent
upon appropriate responses to the dynamic context. Thus, in
many dynamic real-world tasks (e.g., law enforcement),
specifying alternative courses of action for the whole task is
difficult. Alternatives often become available or redundant
at various points and the dynamic nature of events
themselves
frequently determines
availability or
redundancy.
A novel approach to analyzing data from dynamic
situations was developed that was consistent with protocol
analyses methods described in Ericsson and Simon (1993).
A series of task analysis periods (TAPs) was defined by
working backwards from the end of the critical period (e.g.,
the point at which the perpetrator shoots their weapon) in
order to identify each subsequent and prior discrete event
(e.g., the point at which the perpetrator pulls out his
weapon) that would require an alternative course of action
(i.e., different target behavior used by the participant to
constrain the perpetrator). Based upon the situational
demand of each TAP, a desired target behavior was
identified. Two or more alternative models were specified a
priori using a categorical scheme that denotes the ways in
which participants could potentially constrain the situation.
This scheme consists of target-directed actions (TDA),
target-directed verbalizations (TDV), non-target directed
actions (NTDA), and non-target directed verbalizations
(NTDV). Therefore, this approach treated a dynamic

Table 1: Performance (SD) and verbal report data (%).
Domestic Assault
with Baby
Performance Data
Reaction Time
Verbal Reports
PerceptionA
Assessment
Goal
School Hostage
Performance Data
Reaction Time
Verbal Reports
Assessment
Action
PerceptionA

Experts

Novices

61.3s (.4)

61.5s (.5)

185/786 (23.5%)
132/786 (16.8%)
109/786 (13.9%)

114/570 (20.0%)
72/570 (12.6%)
107/570 (18.8%)

39.1s (1.0)

40.3s (.5)

111/495 (22.4%)
91/495 (18.4%)
78/495 (15.8%)

11/196 (5.6%)
42/196 (21.4%)
44/196 (22.4%)

Verbal Reports
The frequency with which the categorical codes (e.g.,
evaluations) occurred for each of the two trials was assessed
for each participant group. The most prevalent statements
for each skill group are presented as a percentage of all
statements in Table 1. For the “domestic assault with baby”
scenario, the preliminary findings indicate that the two most
prevalent codes for the skilled officers were perceptions of
animate information (PerceptionA) and assessments,
whereas the novice officers more frequently reported
perception of animate information and goal statements. The
skilled officers reported statements coded as assessments for
132 out of 786 total statements (16.8%) compared to the
330

1 (the final identified TAP from scenario onset), the novice
officers overwhelmingly failed to resolve the situation (i.e.,
the gunman entered the school) with one exception from
each participant group. Additionally, the skilled officers
primarily reported assessment followed by action
statements, supporting the skilled officers’ successful rapid
resolutions of the scenario. The actions of the skilled
officers are also indicative of target directed actions (TDA),
which constrain the scenario. This constraining behavior
allows the skilled officers to resolve the scenario more
rapidly than novice officers. Conversely, the perception of
animate information followed by action statements of the
novices primarily reflected un-holstering their weapon after
seeing the gunman, but without firing (i.e., a failure to
resolve the situation).

novice officers who reported assessment statements for 72
out of 570 total statements (12.6%). The skilled officers
reported goal statements for 109 out of 786 total statements
(13.9%), whereas the novice officers reported these
statements for 107 out 570 total statements (18.8%). For the
perception of animate information statements, the skilled
officers reported 185 out of 786 total statements (23.5%)
compared to the novice officers who reported 114 out of
570 total statements (20.0%).
For the “school hostage” scenario, the preliminary
findings indicate that the two most prevalent codes for the
skilled officers were assessments and actions whereas the
novice officers more frequently reported perceptions of
animate information and actions. The skilled officers
reported action statements for 91 out of 495 total statements
(18.4%) compared to the novice officers who reported these
statements for 42 out of 196 statements (21.4%). For
perception of animate information statements, the skilled
officers reported 78 out of 495 total statements (15.8%)
compared to the novice officers who reported 44 out of 196
total statements (22.4%). The skilled officers reported
assessment statements for 111 out of 495 statements
(22.4%), whereas the novice officers reported these
statements for 11 out of 196 total statements (5.6%).
Odds ratios were calculated to determine the relative
likelihood that participants would provide a statement coded
as a given categorical code. The most prevalent code for
each scenario, as determined by participant group, was
compared. The results indicated that for the “domestic
assault with baby” scenario, a skilled participant was 1.18
times more likely to make a statement about perception of
animate information than a novice participant. For the
“school hostage” scenario, a skilled participant was 3.99
times more likely to make an assessment statement than a
novice participant.

Discussion
Although preliminary, the current findings indicate that
skilled officers engage in more evaluation (i.e., assessments)
and monitoring (i.e., perceiving animate events) than novice
officers that result in anticipating the outcome, particularly
on consistent trials. This process allows them to either more
effectively satisfy the demands identified within the TAPs
or successfully resolve the presented scenarios than the
novice officers.
For the “school hostage” scenario (consistent trial),
skilled officers primarily reported assessment statements
and action statements (e.g., “So, I fired a shot- or two at
him”) came in second. These statements are indicative of
skilled officers integrating contextual information into
meaningful representations that allowed them to anticipate
the outcome and then intervene in a proactive manner. This
finding is consistent with the assumption that experts can
generate an on-line situation model from which predictive
inferences can be made. Novice officers, on the other hand,
failed to stop (i.e., did not shoot) the perpetrator prior to
entering the school indicating their inability to rapidly
generate an online situation model that would allow
sufficient predictive inferences to be made. The TAP
methodology supports these claims indicating that experts
typically satisfy the current model earlier than their novice
counterparts, frequently make reference back to prior TAPs,
and use current information to predict outcome and inform
their actions. These findings are inconsistent with stimulusactivation and recognition-type models that do not require
storage in LTM and integration of information over time.
As predicted, the inconsistent trial, “domestic assault with
baby”, did not afford an expert advantage. Information
integrated over time in this trial was presumably only
minimally relevant for predicting the outcome and an
effective resolution, irrespective of skill level. However,
despite a lack of significant performance difference, a small
to moderate effect size was observed. Even when situations
do not lend themselves to anticipating the exact nature of
the outcome, experts appear to be able to still glean a small
advantage that may be all that is necessary in the real-world
Additional analyses are underway to further explore the
structure and mechanisms of expert performance in these
types of dynamic, and often stressful, situations. The present
results are indicative of storage of information in LTM (as

Task Analysis Period (TAP) Model Satisfaction
For both scenarios, TAPs were identified based upon
evolving alternative courses of action and associated
preferred target behaviors. The point at which participants
terminated the scenario by firing the weapon served to
identify the TAP in which the officer resolved (successfully
or unsuccessfully) the situation. Preliminary analysis of the
“domestic assault with baby” scenario (7 TAPs) indicated
that skilled officers resolved the situation somewhat earlier
(albeit slightly) during the same TAP as the novice officers.
The skilled officers reported assessment statements often
related to prior TAPs (e.g., “I could see something in his
waistband in the back, there was some bulge…I felt like he
was a threat to me…so I immediately drew.”). Statistically,
this did not lead to superior outcome by experts. However,
the effect size, suggests that experts benefit from making
prior assessments about preceding events even for
inconsistent trials.
Preliminary analysis of the “school hostage” scenario (3
TAPs) indicated that skilled officers resolved the situation
(i.e., stopped the gunman from entering the school) in a
grossly different manner from the novice officers. Skilled
officers overwhelmingly resolved the situation during TAP

331

predicted by LTWM; Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995) as opposed
to transient storage as suggested in theories proposing
recognition (Klein, Calderwood, & MacGregor, 1989;
Gobet & Simon, 1996), intuitive (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986)
or automatic (Schneider & Chen, 2003) explanations of
performance. By using the TAPs methodology to apply
protocol analysis to these types of situations, more evidence
can be found that LTM representations allow on-line,
dynamic situation model construction and subsequent
memory support for performance. Additional measures of
performance and behavioral data as well as verbal reports
from all participants are anticipated to buttress this
hypothesis.
The implications of this research extend beyond the
domain of law enforcement. Ideally, the TAPs methodology
will become as ubiquitous as alternative content and
protocol analysis techniques currently used for less dynamic
tasks. Furthermore, by extending the methodologies
traditionally used to study expert performance to dynamic
tasks, additional domains can be explored to better
understand the structural mechanisms of expert
performance.

Hoffman, R. R., Crandall, B., & Shadbolt, N. (1998). Use of
the critical decision method to elicit expert knowledge: A
case study in the methodology of cognitive task analysis.
Human Factors, 40, 254-276.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The use of knowledge in discourse
processing:
A
construction-integration
model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Klein, G. A., Calderwood, R., & MacGregor, D. (1989).
Critical decision method for eliciting knowledge. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19, 462472.
Newell, A., & Simon, H.A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Miller, G.A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Nisbett, R.E., & Wilson, T.D. (1977). Telling more than we
can know: Verbal reports on mental processes.
Psychological Review, 84, 231-259.
Purtee, M. D. Krusmark, M. A., Gluck, K. A., Kotte, S. A.,
& Lefebvre, A. T. (2003). Verbal protocol analysis for
validation of UAV operator model. Proceedings of the
25th Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and
Education Conference, 1741-1750.
Orlando, FL:
National Defense Industrial Association.
Richman, H.B., Staszewski, J.J., & Simon, H.A. (1995).
Simulation of expert memory using EPAM IV.
Psychological Review, 102, 305-330.
Richman, H.B., Gobet, F., Staszewski, J.J., & Simon, H.A.
(1996). Perceptual and memory processes in the
acquisition of expert performance: The EPAM model. In
K.A. Ericsson (Ed.), The road to excellence: The
acquisition of expert performance in the arts and
sciences, sports and games. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Simon, H.A., & Chase, W. (1973). Skill in chess. American
Scientist, 61, 394-403.
Tashman, L.S., Harris, K.R., Ward, P., Ramrattan, J.,
Eccles, D.W., & Ericsson, K.A. (2006). Expert
performance in law enforcement: Are skilled performers
more effectively constraining the situation to resolve
representative dynamic tasks than novices? Paper to be
presented at the 50th Annual Meeting of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, San Francisco, CA.
Ward, P. (2002). The development of perceptual-cognitive
expertise. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Liverpool
John Moores University, UK.
Ward, P., Eccles, D.W., Ericsson, K.A., Harris, K.R.,
Williams, A.M., Tashman, L.S., & Ramrattan, J. (2006).
Cognitive mechanisms supporting superior expert
performance in a dynamic representative task: An
example from law enforcement. Manuscript in
preparation.
Ward, P., Ericsson, K.A., & Williams, A.M. (2006).
Identifying mechanisms of perceptual-cognitive expertise
in an applied domain using think aloud reports.
Manuscript submitted for publication.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of the Office of
Naval Research and the FSU Learning Systems Institute for
grant and other support during this research.

References
Ericsson, K.A., & Delaney, P. (1999). Long-term working
memory as an alternative to capacity models of working
memory in everyday skilled performance. In A. Miyake
& P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory:
Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control
(pp.257-297). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245
Ericsson, K.A., & Lehmann, A.C. (1996). Expert and
exceptional performance: Evidence of maximal
adaptation to task constraints. Annual Review of
Psychology, 47, 273-305.
Ericsson, K.A., & Smith, J. (1991). Toward a general
theory of expertise: Prospects and limits. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K.A., & Simon, H.A. (1980). Verbal reports as
data. Psychological Review, 87, 215-251.
Ericsson, K.A., & Simon, H.A (1984). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ericsson, K.A., & Simon, H.A (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (Rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
de Groot, A.D. (1946/1978). Thought and choice in chess.
The Hague. Mouton.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H.A. (1996). Templates in chess: A
mechanism for recalling several boards. Cognitive
Psychology, 31, 1-40.

332

