UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Proper Names in Slovene: Implications for defaults in inflectional morphology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6941h5kg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Stemberger, Joseph Paul

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Proper Names in Slovene:
Implications for defaults in inflectional morphology
Joseph Paul Stemberger (stemberg@interchange.ubc.ca)
Department of Linguistics, E270-1866 Main Mall, UBC
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z1 Canada

Abstract
Inflectional systems generally contain default patterns, such
as pl. –s in English, which are used in the absence of a reason
to use a nondefault pattern. Contentious points include
whether there can be more than one default pattern, whether
proper names must follow the default pattern, and whether
default patterns cover all words in the language. In Slovene,
nouns are inflected for 6 cases and 3 numbers, and may be of
3 genders. Masculine gender appears to be the general default,
showing the most widespread generalization, while feminine
inflections generalize only to nouns that end in –a, including
proper names. Female proper names that do not end in –a
receive no overt inflections, with differences between
surnames and personal names. Proper names do not have to
follow default patterns, and may be ineligible for any
inflectional rule at all. While standard linguistic and
connectionist approaches can deal with the facts, the MarcusClahsen-Pinker approach finds the data challenging.

Introduction
In linguistic theories, sentences have traditionally been
analyzed as strings of symbols (morphemes) that link
meaning to sound. Information such as number (e.g. plural),
case (e.g. locative) and gender (e.g. masculine, feminine,
animate, etc.) is often encoded in an inflectional affix that
attaches to a base and expresses a portion of the word’s
meaning (such as the –s of the English plural form dogs and
the –ed of the past-tense form walked); attachment to the
base is accomplished via rules or constraints. Some of these
affixes are “regular” and constitute default patterns that are
used when there is no reason to use any other pattern, while
other affixes are “irregular” and are used only in a lexicallyidiosyncratic fashion (as with the –en of the English plural
oxen, or the vowel change in the English past-tense form
sang, cf. infinitive sing). Traditional linguistic theories
allow multiple defaults of two types. First, there can be two
or more classes of words, said to be of different genders; the
classes can be defined semantically or may be fully or
partially arbitrary (so that e.g. the “same” word may be
masculine in one language but feminine in another). Second,
the classes may be conditioned by phonological factors (e.g.
whether the base has one syllable or two), so that different
affixes are default in words with different phonological
properties. Depending on the nature of the defaults, some
bases may not be covered by any pattern, and so cannot be
inflected to express a given piece of inflectional meaning;
such forms are referred to as indeclinable, either in general
or with respect to a given inflectional category. While
languages with limited inflectional systems (such as English

and German) might be limited to a single affix on nouns
(e.g. plural), languages with richer inflectional systems may
have many noun inflectional affixes, which may be quite
different for different lexical classes; affixes are grouped
into paradigms, and a typical word of a given class
systematically takes all affixes for that class; it is not the
case that each inflectional affix is assigned separately.
Indeclinable nouns can be exceptional to the whole
paradigm, or just to individual categories within it.
Over the past 10 years, one theoretical approach to
language development has proposed restrictions, such that
default affixes have a narrower range of properties than has
traditionally been held in linguistic theory. Marcus et al.
(1995) and Clahsen (1999) argued that there can be only one
default affix (possibly allowing for some lexical classes) and
that default affixes must be used for an odd assortment of
nouns, including: foreign words, acronyms, nominalizations
of closed-class lexical items, and proper names. This odd
assortment of nouns, they maintain, reflect noncanonical
words which do not have lexical entries in the usual sense
and so cannot have any idiosyncracies, including irregular
morphology. They do not explain in detail what such words
do have; presumably they are stored in a location separate
from the main noun lexicon (so they cannot be subject to
analogy with irregular common nouns). No arguments were
put forward as to why defaults should have this narrowed
set of properties, nor was there any attempt to explore the
ramifications of these proposals for a wider set of human
languages or for a wider set of noun inflections than plural.
Responses to these claims have centred around whether
they are strictly accurate even for German and English
plurals. Some (e.g. Penke & Krause, 2002) have argued that
German feminine nouns ending in schwa (all of which take
the plural affix –en) act like defaults in addition to the
putative default –s that Marcus et al. argue for. Others have
shown that German surnames do take the –s plural in an
almost monolithic fashion, while personal names are quite
variable, with particular personal names preferring different
plural affixes (e.g., Hahn & Nakisa, 2000). Surnames can be
treated as having a special default (-s), even if –s can also
appear to a lesser degree for other classes of nouns.
In this paper, I will provide details about inflection in
Slovene, a South Slavic language spoken in Slovenia and
adjacent parts of Italy, Austria, Hungary, and Croatia.
Slovene has a much richer noun inflectional system than
English or German, with six cases (nominative, genitive,
dative, locative, accusative, and instrumental), three
numbers (singular, dual, and plural), and three genders

2186

(masculine, feminine, & neuter), organized paradigmatically
into four declensions (one masculine, two feminine, and one
neuter, with several subpatterns and lexical idiosyncracies).
The masculine gender and associated declension generalizes
to most words, except for words that end in /a/ in the
nominate singular, to which one of the feminine declensions
(and feminine gender) generalizes in a uniform fashion.
Proper names are interesting, because names that refer to
female human beings but do not end in /a/ receive no
inflections at all; and surnames and personal names do not
behave in a parallel fashion. Even feminine surnames that
end in /a/ (and so can be inflected for case) show some
behaviour that is quite distinct from masculine surnames.
These data have interesting implications for theories of
human language. Standard linguistic theories are able to
deal with the facts in a straight-forward fashion, and
connectionist models are also likely to be able to deal with
them. The Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker approach, in contrast, has
difficulty with the facts at a basic level. It is not clear that
there exists a variant of their theory in which the facts can
be dealt with, without a radical re-evaluation of the way that
proper names are treated. Proper names are not
automatically subject to default rules, there can be special
defaults for proper names, and the full set of default rules
can in fact fail to cover some proper names at all.
This paper uses standard linguistic methodology to
explore the facts of Slovene. The patterns reported here are
discussed in the standard reference grammars of Slovene
(Toporišič, 2000; Herrity, 2000). Doleschal (2000) has
demonstrated these patterns experimentally. The patterns are
also true of casual speech, and are easily observable in
printed materials such as books, magazines, and
newspapers. Here I focus on names and on case inflections,
which, unlike plural, are entirely natural and common even
for personal names; while names such as Mary and Joe are
rarely used in the plural, there is nothing unnatural about
e.g. Dative case (for Mary, to Joe), and indeed caseinflected forms for names make up a sizable percentage of
tokens of all words in Slovene, including proper names.

The genders and declensions of Slovene
Slovene has three genders making up four declensions.
The singular suffixes are listed in the following table.
Gender is additionally marked via suffixes on adjectives and
on predicates. Where two suffixes are listed, the choice is
conditioned by the phonological characteristics of the base
(which is beyond the scope of this paper).
SINGULAR

Masc

Nominative
Genitive
Dative
Locative
Accusative
Instrumental

---a
-u
-u
-a
-om/-em

Fem
(reg)
-a
-e
-i
-i
-o
-o

Fem
(irreg)
---i
-i
-i
---jo/-ijo

Neut

Default status
Masculine gender has the highest type and token
frequency, and generalizes most broadly. The regular
feminine declension in –a is also very frequent, and
generalizes automatically to words ending in /a/. Neuter
gender is least common in type and token frequency,
occurring with only a few hundred monomorphemic nouns,
and does not generalize to new words. Masculine gender
appears to be the general default, but feminine –a is a
secondary default.
MASCULINE NOUNS
Almost all native masculine nouns end in a consonant in
the nominative singular form. Masculine gender and
suffixes occur with the odd assortment of words that Marcus
et al. (1995) proposed as a sign of default status, including
the following (with the locative suffix highlighted):
(1) common nouns
nos:
o nosu ‘about the nose’
(2) personal names
Jože:
pri Jožetu
(3) surnames
Štemberger:

pri Štembergerju 'at Stemberger's'

(4) nominalized uses of closed class lexical items
ampak 'but (conj.)':
o takšnem ampaku
‘about this sort of but'
(5) acronyms
RTV (Radiotelevizija): zakon o RTV-ju
'the law about RTV'
(/erteveju/)
(6) (unassimilated) foreign words
na mojem computerju 'on my computer'
That this is not simply generalization to similar words is
demonstrated by the fact that masculine gender is
generalized to most vowel-final forms, while very few
masculine native common nouns end in vowels. Acronyms
(5 above) and loanwords that end in any vowel other than
/a/ receive masculine gender. For all vowels other than /o/, a
/j/ is inserted between the base and the affix. This is true for
common nouns (7), masculine personal names (8), and
masculine surnames (9), even though these words do not
closely resemble any native words.
(7) tabu:

-o/-e
-a
-u
-u
-o/-e
-om/-em

'at Joe's'

na tamkajšnjem tabuju 'in the tabu there'

(8) pri Toniju

'at Toni's'

(9) pri Mussoliniju

'at Mussolini's'

For native proper names that end in /o/, there are two
observed patterns. In the standard pattern, the /o/ disappears
in all inflected forms, and the affixes are added as usual
2187

(20) place names
Novo mesto

(10), but in colloquial speech, the /o/ is often retained, and a
/t/ is inserted between the /o/ and the affix. Loanwords that
end in /o/ always lose the /o/ (11).
(10) Vilko:
(11) avto:

pri Vilku 'at Vilko's'
pri Vilkotu
pri avtu

'by the car'

FEMININE NOUNS
Slovene has two declensional classes for feminine
common nouns. There is a small set of feminine forms that
end in a consonant; this is not a productive class, and no
loanwords are ever assimilated into this class.
(12) miš:

pri miši

'at the mouse's house'

There is a very large set of nouns that end in –a and are a
member of this class. Many names belong to this class, as
do assimilated and unassimilated foreign words and words
that are (or were originally) acronyms, all signs of default
status according to Marcus et al. (1995).
(13) common nouns
mačka: o mački
(14) personal names
Marija: pri Mariji
(15) surnames
Iskra:

Neuter gender is not productive (Dressler & MakovecČerne, 1995). As shown in (11) above, loanwords that end
in /o/ are not borrowed with neuter gender, but take default
masculine. (This is itself an interesting fact with
implications for cognitive models of morphology, but it is
beyond the scope of this paper.) That place names based on
common nouns such as mesto ‘town’ retain neuter gender,
even though neuter gender is not generalized to loanwords,
suggests that the Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker view of proper
names is at best an oversimplification.
Grammatical gender & natural gender
There are many nouns that refer to non-gendered things in
the world and which arbitrarily take masculine or feminine
gender. However, the labels “masculine” and “feminine” are
used because human referents with natural gender (such as
‘man’ and ‘woman’, as well as ‘Frank’ and ‘Mary’) show
the appropriate grammatical gender. Such words generally
occur in two forms: a masculine form (which may be
monomorphemic or derived) and a feminine form (which
often, but not always, contains a derivational affix):

'about the cat'

(21)a. 'neighbour': sosed (masc.),
b. 'friend':
prijatelj (masc.),
c. 'journalist': novinar (masc.),

'at Mary's'

(22)a. oseba (fem.) 'person' (male or female)
b. otrok (masc.) ‘child’ (male or female)

'on the pizza'

In addition, there are a few words that end in –a that can
refer to both men and women, and that take masculine
agreement with men and feminine agreement with women,
even when the inflected forms are overtly feminine in form:

(17) unassimilated foreign names
Joanna: pri Joanni 'at Joanna's'
Florida: na Floridi
‘in Florida’

(23)a. masc.:

(18) acronyms pronounced as a word (rather than string of
letters) note: accusative case
a. velik uspeh za Naso
‘big success for NASA'
b. Cheney hotel izjemo za Cio
'Cheney wanted an exception for the CIA.'

b. fem:

NEUTER NOUNS
Neuter nouns end either in /o/ or /e/ (with the vowel
conditioned by the preceding consonant). Note that neuter
nouns occur as place names, with no tendency to change to
masculine gender. Case endings in the singular are identical
with the masculine; neuters are primarily distinguished by
the plural nom./acc. suffix –a (cf. masc. –i/-e) and by neuter
agreement with adjectival and verbal forms.
(19) common noun
jabolko ‘apple’: jabolka (pl.)

soseda (fem.)
prijateljica (fem.)
novinarka (fem.)

Nonetheless, there are some words that appear in only one
form and do not respect natural gender:

pri Mariji Iskri 'at Mary Iskra's house'

(16) loanwords
pica:
na pici

(“new town”)

dober vodja 'good leader' (nom.)
dobrega vodje 'of a good leader' (gen.)
dobra vodja 'good leader' (nom.)
dobre vodje 'of a good leader' (gen.)

The almost-obligatory association of grammatical gender
with the natural gender may possibly play a role in
accounting for the inflection of feminine proper names in
some theories.
WHAT ARE THE DEFAULTS?
Standard analyses would assume two default patterns: (1)
masculine gender and associated suffixes, which generalize
to consonant-final forms (which resemble many masculine
nouns) and to vowel-final forms (which do not); (2)
feminine gender, which generalizes to all forms that end in
/a/ in the nominative singular (though a small number of
masculine nouns also take feminine suffixes). The
masculine declension appears to be a general default, while

2188

(2000) proposed that the surname occupies an adjunct
position in the syntax, such as is commonly observed with
phrases such as ‘the Union Hotel’, where the word ‘hotel’ is
inflected, but the name of the hotel can optionally remain
uninflected:

feminine is restricted to nouns that end in /a/. Neuter gender
is not a default, and does not generalize to loan words that
end in /o/.
The feminine declension in –a acts like a default. There is
no reason to treat it as unproductive or irregular in any way,
despite being restricted to a specific phonological
environment: words that end in /a/ in the nominative
singular. The Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker approach would
recognize two genders, each with default affixation rules,
where feminine (but not masculine) gender is restricted to a
particular region in phonetic space. Why neuter –o is
nonproductive is less clear; the small number of words
involved should not be relevant to the Marcus-ClahsenPinker approach or to standard linguistic approaches. Only
simulations will reveal whether connectionist models can
account for the lack of productivity for neuter –o.

(29) v Hotelu Union ~ v Hotelu Unionu
‘in the Union Hotel’
One difference is that uninflected feminine surnames
obligatorily go into this adjunct position, whereas other
nouns can optionally be in the adjunct position (and hence
uninflected) or in a regular syntactic position (and hence in
the appropriate case). Interestingly, feminine surnames that
end in /a/, and which can be inflected, vary between
inflected and uninflected forms in this position:
(30) pri Mariji Iskri ~ pri Mariji Iskra
’at Marija Iskra’s house’

Lack of inflection on feminine proper names
Not all feminine proper names are inflected, however. All
feminine proper names that end in any phoneme other than
/a/ are indeclinable (i.e., appear with a single form in all
uses, regardless of case).
There is a class of feminine personal names that end in /i/,
which cannot be overtly declined (24), but adjectives and
verb forms do take feminine gender via agreement (25).
(24) Mici:

za Mici

While indeclinable surnames are forced into the adjunct
position, any feminine surname can go into that position
optionally, like common nouns in constructions such as
Hotel Union.
In contrast, a masculine surname cannot appear
uninflected even in these larger constructions:

'for Mici' (*za Mico/Micija)

(31) za Kevina Costnerja (*za Kevina Costner)
’for Kevin Costner’

(25) Mici je prišla. ‘Mici arrived (fem.).’
(cf. masc. Jože je prišel. ‘Joe arrived.’)
Although these hypocoristics (nicknames) are old enough to
be thought of as “native”, the pattern was most likely
borrowed from German. These names occur in all syntactic
positions, but without overt case marking. Unassimilated
foreign feminine personal names that do not end in /a/
follow this same pattern:
(26)a. pri Bridget ‘at Bridget’s’ (*pri Bridgeti)
b. pri Sue
‘at Sue’s’
(*pri Sueji)
(27) Bridget je prišla. ‘Bridget arrived (fem.).’
The situation is very different for feminine surnames that
do not end in /a/. Feminine surnames rarely occur
independently in a sentence. Whereas uninflected personal
names are acceptable and common in Slovene sentences,
uninflected feminine surnames are not possible by
themselves. Uninflected surnames are nonetheless common
as part of a larger construction, such as personalname+surname or title+surname.

Masculine surnames are excluded even with surnames such
as Janša that end in /a/ and take feminine case suffixes:
(32)a. z Janezom Janšo ~ z Janezom Janšem
b. * z Janezom Janša
It is not the case that surnames in general are allowed in this
adjunct position, but feminine surnames are: obligatorily
when they have no overt case marking, optionally even
when they can show overt case marking. The syntax clearly
treats masculine and feminine surnames in a non-parallel
fashion.
USE OF DERIVED STEMS FOR NAMES
It is possible for feminine surnames to appear in any
syntactic position, but they require a derivational suffix
before they can receive case inflections. The derivational
suffix –ov- (with the variants –ev- and –jev- in predictable
phonological environments) can be added, with appropriate
suffixes, and the name can then appear in any syntactic
position:

(28)a. za Britney Spears
‘for Britney Spears’
b. pri Pameli Anderson ‘at Pamela Anderson’s house’
c. Gospi Štemberger
‘for Mrs. Stemberger’

(33)a. Spearsova ni noseča.
'Spears is not pregnant.'
b. pri Spearsovi
‘at Spears’s house
c. za Spearsovo
‘ for Spears’

To explain the contrast between the free occurrence of
uninflected feminine surnames in these larger constructions,
vs. the absence of such surnames by themselves, Doleschal

Such usage is statistically uncommon, accounting for less
than 10% of uses of feminine surnames.

2189

This derivational suffix (historically a form of the
possessive adjective) can also appear optionally for plurals:
(34) Štembergerjevi ~ Štembergerji

‘the Stembergers’

Such plurals contradict the Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker claim
that plurals of surnames must strictly follow default patterns
for the language. While the derivational suffix is neither
needed nor available for singular masculine surnames, it
constitutes the sole mechanism for feminine surnames that
do not end in /a/ to receive case marking and thus to appear
in independent case-marked syntactic positions.

The problem of the indeclinable feminine names
Slovene is a highly inflected language, and forms which
systematically receive no overt inflections are startling. That
feminine suffixes such as nom. –a and loc. –i do not
generalize to foreign names such as Bridget and to native
surnames such as Zajc reinforces the conclusion based on
productivity above, that the regular feminine declension is
restricted to one region of phonetic space, with /a/ at the end
of the base. (This presupposes that the final /a/ is actually
part of the base, rather than a suffix marking nominative
singular, as most linguistic theories would assume; the
details need to be worked out for this new sort of analysis.)
A more interesting question is why such words do not
appear with default masculine suffixes. If the masculine
declension supplies default suffixes for common nouns that
do not end in /a/, why shouldn’t it do so for names referring
to females? The Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker view of the default
as an emergency measure for supplying affixes predicts that
the (masculine) defaults should appear with these words,
especially since their approach requires that proper names
must in principle show default inflectional patterns. Why is
it that non-/a/-final proper names referring to female
humans do not take any default affxes at all?
Solution 1: Feminine natural gender blocks grammatical
masculine gender. A single noun cannot be both masculine
and feminine at the same time. Whether a noun is masculine
vs. feminine clearly will depend on the nature of the
procedures that assign gender. The key observation here is
that Slovene almost always respects the natural gender of
humans, leading to a large number of pairs of words, one set
applied to males and the other applied to females. It is
reasonable to assume a procedure that assigns feminine
grammatical gender to words that refer to female humans,
including names. This would conflict with (and take
precedence over) any procedure that would assign (default)
masculine gender to nouns. Thus, female personal names
and surnames such as Bridget and Štemberger cannot take
masculine gender and hence cannot take the suffixes of the
associated masculine declension. However, since they do
not end in /a/, they also cannot take the suffixes of the
regular feminine declension. These names fall through the
cracks: they in principle cannot be subject to either set of
default inflectional patterns in the language. They surface
without overt inflectional suffixes.

The Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker approach incurs a cost with
this analysis: a modification of the view that default affixes
are last-resort emergency ways to create inflected forms.
There would instead be circumstances in which even these
“emergency” measures fail. The result is a form without
overt inflectional suffixes. But names such as Mici and
Bridget can be used in any syntactic position, suggesting
that they are in fact treated as forms that carry case and
gender (even though they show no overt marking of case or
gender). The forms thus “have” e.g. locative case in some
sense, but have what is known as “zero-marking” in the
acquisition and adult processing literatures (e.g. Stemberger
& MacWhinney, 1986). While this is a part of some
approaches (e.g., Stemberger, 2002), Marcus et al. (1992)
make clear that it is not compatible with their approach.
This solution requires a significant modification of the
Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker approach: in the horse-race between
defaults and irregulars, the uninflected base is always one of
the competitors and can win under some conditions. This
modification calls into question the places in which Pinker
and Prince (1988) criticize the Rumelhart and McClelland
(1986) connectionist model for failing to output overtly
inflected forms under some circumstances. Until we have an
empirically derived list of circumstances under which
default rules can fail, no model can be criticized for failing
under some circumstances.
Interestingly, for feminine surnames, even a zero-marked
form is unavailable. Instead, the name must receive a
derivational suffix first. This implies that derivational and
inflectional affixes are part of the same competition. This
can be stated in some linguistic approaches (e.g. Optimality
Theory: McCarthy & Prince, 1993), and is likely to be
learnable in connectionist models on the basis of input, but
is not predicted by the Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker approach.
Solution 2: Indeclinable feminine proper names as
special inflection classes. We can take zero-marked
(indeclinable) feminine personal names as a special
inflectional class, where zero is the default for this
semantically-defined class. Because these personal names
are inflected for case (though not overtly so), they can
appear freely in all syntactic positions where personal
names can appear; as feminine nouns, they trigger feminine
agreement under the appropriate syntactic circumstances. A
second class contains surnames, which are not assigned
overt case and so are restricted to syntactic adjunct positions
within noun phrases, unless they undergo a derivational rule
(-ov-) which allows them to take inflections. Note that
neither class can be fully semantically defined, because
proper names that end in -a are not members of either class.
Pinker and Prince (1988) severely criticized connectionist
models for outputting forms without overt inflectional
endings, with phonological conditioning. Positing two
classes, defined partly in terms of semantics and partly in
terms of form, is most definitely not in the spirit of their
approach. Nor is positing special inflectional classes for
proper names, within a theory that requires proper names to
take default inflectional patterns.

2190

Conclusion
Slovene proper names present a complex set of data that
is challenging for some cognitive models of morphology. In
an attempt to differentiate their models from connectionist
models, Pinker and Prince (1988), Marcus et al. (1992,
1995), Clahsen (1999), and Pinker and Ullman (2002),
among others, have proposed some very specific properties
that differentiate default morphological patterns from
irregular patterns. One key point is a restriction on proper
names, such that they are required to take default affixation.
Slovene feminine names that do not end in /a/ are
problematic for this approach, because they are simply
undeclined (zero-marked), with no affixes at all, default or
irregular. On the surface, the Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker
approach does not appear to be able to handle the facts.
The only workable solutions are (a) to posit one or two
inflectional classes that are specifically made up of feminine
proper nouns that do not end in -a, with different classes for
personal names and for surnames, or (b) to posit that default
rules may fail to apply to some forms, and that the true
emergency measure for inflections is zero-marking (i.e. no
overt inflection). The surface patterns can probably be
learned on the basis of the frequency of undeclined feminine
surnames, and of the frequency of hypocoristics ending in /i/
(such as Mici). While such analyses are available to
standard linguistic approaches that put few restrictions on
proper names, and quite plausibly could be learned by
statistically-driven models such as connectionist models,
they are not conceptually compatible with the MarcusClahsen-Pinker approach to inflection. With either solution,
there is no need to posit that proper names are not listed in
the lexicon: they simply constitute a special class of nouns,
along with count vs. mass nouns, masculine vs. feminine vs.
neuter nouns, animate vs. inanimate nouns, etc.
Proper names, as well as defaults, do not have some of the
characteristics posited in the Marcus-Clahsen-Pinker
approach, which consequently means that proper names do
not have the implications for models of cognition that they
claim.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an individual research grant from
NSERC. I would like to thank Vilko Maček for helpful discussions
about the facts of Slovene.

References
Badecker, W., and F. Kuminiak. (1999). The role of the
lexical item in processing agreement: Evidence from
Slovak gender concord. Unpublished manuscript, Johns
Hopkins University.
Clahsen, H. (1999). Lexical entries and rules of language: A
multidisciplinary study of German inflection. Brain and
Behavior Science, 22, 991–1060.

Doleschal, Ursula (2000) Das Phänomen der
Unflektierbarkeit in den slawischen Sprachen. Unveröff.
Habilitationsschrift, Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien.
Dressler, W., & Makovec-Černe, J. (1995). Die ersten
Stufen des Erwerbs der slowenischen Flexion: Eine
Fallstudie. Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague,
N.S. 1, 249-260.
Hahn, U., & Nakisa, L.C. (2000). German Inflection: Single
Route or Dual Route? Cognitive Psychology, 41, 313–
360.
Herrity, P. (2000). Slovene: A comprehensive grammar.
New York: Routledge.
Marcus, G. F., Brinkmann, U., Clahsen, H., Wiese, R.,
Woest, A., & Pinker, S. (1995). German inflection: The
exception that proves the rule. Cognitive Psychology, 29,
189-256.
Marcus, G. F., Pinker, S., Ullman, M., Hollander, M.,
Rosen, T. J., & Xu, F. (1992). Overregularization in
language acquisition. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 57, whole no. 4.
McCarthy, J. J., & Prince, A. S. (1993). Prosodic
morphology I: Constraint interaction and satisfaction.
(Rutgers University Cognitive Sciences Center Technical
Report-3). Piscataway, New Jersey.
Penke, M., & Krause, M. (2002). German Noun Plurals: A
Challenge to the Dual-Mechanism Model. Brain &
Language, 81, 303-311.
Pinker, S., & Prince, A. (1988). On language and
connectionism: Analysis of a Parallel Distributed
Processing model of language acquisition. Cognition, 28,
73-194.
Pinker, S, & Ullman, M.T. (2002). The past and future of
the past tense. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 456-463.
Prasada, S., & Pinker, S. (1993). Generalization of regular
and irregular morphological patterns. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 8, 1-56.
Rumelhart, D., & McClelland, J.L. (1986). On learning the
past tenses of English verbs. In D. Rumelhart & J.
McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 1
(pp. 216-271). Cambridge, MA: Bransford Books.
Stemberger, J.P. (2002). Phonology and morphology occur
in parallel in child language production. Paper presented
at the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Kansas City, Nov. 2002.
Stemberger, J. P., & MacWhinney, B. (1986). Frequency
and the lexical storage of regularly inflected forms.
Memory and Cognition, 14, 17-26.
Toporišič, J. (2000). Slovenska slovnica (2nd edition).
Maribor: Založba Obzorja.

2191

