UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reasoning with Internal and External Representations: A Case Study with Expert Architects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h99k6w2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bilda, Zafer
Gero, John S.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reasoning with Internal and External Representations:
A Case Study with Expert Architects
Zafer Bilda (zafer@arch.usyd.edu.au)
Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition
Wilkinson Building G04, University of Sydney, 2006 NSW, Australia

John S. Gero (john@arch.usyd.edu.au)
Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition
Wilkinson Building G04, University of Sydney, 2006 NSW, Australia

Abstract
Sketching in a design context serves not only as a visual aid to
store and retrieve conceptualizations but also as a medium to
facilitate more ideas, and to revise and refine them. We
examine whether designing is possible without sketching by
conducting a protocol analysis study with six expert
architects. Each architect is required to think aloud and design
in two different conditions: one where s/he has access to
sketching and one where s/he is blindfolded (and not allowed
to sketch). At the end of the blindfold condition the architects
were required to quickly sketch what they held in their minds.
The resulting sketches were assessed by judges and were
found to have no significant differences in overall quality.
The analysis of the design protocols did not demonstrate any
differences in the quantity of cognitive actions in perceptual,
conceptual, functional and evaluative categories. The results
imply that expert designers could design without the use of
external representations.
Keywords: Sketching, protocol analysis, imagery, conceptual
design

Introduction
External representations such as diagrams, graphs, sketches,
and memos not only serve as a memory aid but as a
facilitator in problem solving. There is evidence in a design
context that sketching facilitates ideas and design concepts
(Goel, 1995; Goldschmidt, 1991; Do et al. 2001; Suwa &
Tversky, 1997; Purcell & Gero, 1998). The importance of
external representations has been emphasized in other
problem solving domains (Larkin & Simon, 1987; Bauer &
Johnson-Laird, 1993; Hegarty, 1992) for facilitating
cognitive mechanisms.
The drawings used by designers are distinct from the
drawings used to represent reality; they are used as a tool for
thinking. Tversky (1999) states, “Drawings provide insights
into conceptualizations not just imaginings” (p.94). The
concepts and ideas are depicted on paper such that when the
designer inspects the depiction potentially to retrieve the
previously encoded information re-interpretation of the
visual information can occur. In this way designers refine
and revise their design ideas and the representations
(Goldschmidt, 1991; Suwa & Tversky, 1997; Purcell &
Gero, 1998). The draw-inspect-revise cycle has been
emphasized in various design contexts (Goldschmidt, 1991;
Goel, 1995; Lawson, 1990) often referred to as a reflective
conversation (Schön & Wiggins, 1992).

Athavankar (1997) conducted an experiment where an
industrial designer was required to design a product in his
imagery without access to sketching and the visual feedback
it provides. The study showed that the designer was able to
evolve the shape of the object, manipulate it, evaluate
alternative modifications, and add details and color as well.
The results of this study led us to question whether expert
designers may be able to use only imagery in the conceptual
design phase, before externalizing their design thoughts.
In cognitive psychology research a link has been made
between the use of imagery and the ability to rotate images
(Shepard & Metzler, 1971), to generate-inspect-transform
images (Kosslyn, 1980; 1994), to mentally synthesize
images (Finke & Slayton, 1988) and make novel discoveries
from visual mental images (Chambers & Reisberg, 1985;
Finke et al., 1992). Design research also questioned whether
re-interpretation of images is possible with or without
externalization (Verstijnen et al. 1998; Pearson et al., 2001;
Kokotovich & Purcell 2001).
The imagery related experiments in cognitive psychology
literature do not deal with an ill-structured problem solving
process (Simon, 1973) which is the nature of design
problems, and the requirement to come up with a unique
solution at the end of this process. How designers use their
imagery alone during designing is distinctive in two ways:
they construct and transform internal representations by
synthesizing information stored in long term memory for
extended periods of time, and they aim at developing a
unique solution. As Pylyshyn (2003) puts it; “there is a
difference between “imagining X” and “imagining that X is
the case”. In other words imagining seeing X or considering
the implications of X being the case. Clearly the latter is for
planning or creative invention”. The use of imagery in
design has this characteristic.

Method
The six architects who participated in the study (2 female
and 4 male) have each been practicing for more than 15
years and were all award winners who either ran their own
offices or were senior members of an office.

Design of the case study

1020

The first group of the three architects is initially engaged in
a design process where they are not allowed to sketch. In
this condition we used a similar approach to that taken by
Athavankar (1997); we had the designers engage in the
design process while wearing a blindfold. This phase is

called the BF or experiment condition where they receive
design brief 01. Design brief 01 requires designing a house
for two artists: a painter and a dancer. The house is to have
two studios, an observatory, a sculpture garden and living,
eating, sleeping areas.
At least one month after the experiment condition the
same three architects engage in a design process where they
are allowed to sketch. This phase is called the SK or control
condition where they receive design brief 02. Design brief
02 requires designing a house on the same site as design
brief 01 this time for a couple with 5 children aged from 3 to
17, that would accommodate children and parent sleeping
areas, family space, study, guest house, eating and outdoor
playing spaces.
The second group of three architects is first engaged in
the sketching (control condition) session, where they receive
the design brief 02. Then after one month they engage in the
process where they are not allowed to sketch (experiment
condition) and are required to work on design brief 01.
Figure 1 shows frames from the videos from each of the
conditions.
The procedure for the BF condition is as follows
1. The experimenter reads the instructions to the participant
explaining that s/he is required to engage in a design activity but
that s/he does it while wearing a blindfold and that the blindfolded
session will last for 45 minutes.
2. The participant is engaged in a think-aloud exercise
3. The participant is given the written design brief 01, shown the
site layout, and a collage of the photographs of the site and the
surrounding neighborhood. S/he is allowed to examine them and
ask questions if necessary.
4. The participant is asked to read the brief and then recite it
without reference to the written document. This process was
repeated until they could recite the brief without mistakes. The aim
of this procedure was to ensure that they would have similar access
to the brief as an architect who could consult a written brief during
the design process.
5. The participant is instructed that s/he is required to come up
with an initial sketch design to show the clients with the following
criteria: the design should fit the given dimensions of the site,
accommodate the space requirements and allow an effective use
based on the clients’ requirements.
6. The participant is instructed that s/he can put on the blindfold
and start thinking aloud and is free to ask specific aspects of the
design brief when s/he requires. If participant may chose to
communicate with the experimenter then experimenter gives brief
and neutral replies. If the participant pauses thinking aloud for
more than 15 seconds, s/he was reminded to continue thinking
aloud.
7. Five minutes before the end of the session, the participant is
reminded that this is the amount of time remaining.
8. At the end of the session, the participant is asked to take off the
blindfold, and is required to sketch quickly what s/he held in
her/his mind’s eye. The participant is asked to represent the design
by drawing it as rapidly as possible and without any changes being
permitted. This period could extend to 5 minutes.
9. The participant is allowed to elaborate the sketch only after
externalizing the layout as in his/her mind’s eye in the 5 minute
period.
10. After the externalization period, the participant is interviewed.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Blindfolded session followed by quick
sketching, (b) sketching session
The procedure for the control condition was similar to the
first 5 steps in the procedure for the experiment condition.
The three architects were asked to memorize the design
brief and were given the training session on the think-aloud
method. The participants received the written design brief
02 and, were shown the site layout and the site photographs.
After the first 5 steps the procedure is as follows:
1. Each participant was given the site plan and tracing paper to
proceed with a series of sketches. They were asked to number each
sheet of tracing paper sequentially every time they start to use a
new sheet.
2. The participant is asked to think aloud and commence sketching
directly (Figure 1(b)).
3. Five minutes before the end of the session, s/he is reminded that
this is the amount of time remaining.
4. After the completion of sketches, the participant is asked to
summarize her/his design briefly so that s/he verbalizes the
important concepts/ considerations in his/her design.

Set up of the study
The set-up of the study for both BF and SK conditions has a
digital video recorder with built-in and lapel microphones,
directed to the designer. The room the designers are located
in during both SK and BF sessions has no windows and the
walls are blank, i.e. there is no reference to any visual
material. In both conditions, the designers are provided with
pen and tracing paper, scaled site layout, and a ruler on the
table. The experimenter sits with the participant during the
sessions, without intervening except as indicated.

Interviews

1021

Group 1 participants (who were engaged in the BF condition
first) were interviewed after the BF session. The Group 2
participants (who were engaged in SK condition first) were
also interviewed after the BF session. The interview
questions were open ended, and the participants were
encouraged to talk about their experience of the blindfolded
design process. There was no specified duration for
interviews; they varied from 15 minutes to 1 hour.

Protocol Analysis

Gapa

The protocols collected in the SK and BF conditions were
segmented using the same approach as for segmenting
sketching protocols i.e. by inspecting designer’s intentions
(Suwa & Tversky, 1997; Suwa et al., 1998). In the
segmentation of sketch protocols, verbalizations and video
recordings of the sketching activity support decisions to flag
the start and end of a segment.
In the BF condition information about the internal design
representation state is extracted from the description of the
current image or scene the architect talks about. Details of
the segmentation and coding of the BF protocols can be
found in Bilda and Gero (2004).

Rpc
Rperc
Rbf

Create, or attend to a new relation
Mention, or revisit a relation

Functional Actions
Fn
Frei
Fnp
Fo
Fmt

Associate a design image/ boundary/part with a
new function
Reinterpretation of a function
Conceiving of a new meaning
Mention, or revisit a function
Attend to metric information

Conceptual Actions (Goals)
G1
G2
G4

Goals to set up a new function
Goals to set up a concept/form
Repeated goals from previous segments

aesthetics,

mention

Retrieve knowledge about previous cases
Recall tacit knowledge
Retrieve the design brief/requirements

Coding
Coding was carried out by one individual. The process
included a first, a second run and an arbitration phases with
at least one month between each phase.

Sketch Assessment
Three judges blind-judged the sketches produced at the end
of BF and SK sessions by the six architects. Each judge is
an expert architect in practice and in teaching with at least
20 years of experience. The judges were provided with the
two versions of the design briefs, the collage of photos of
the site, and the scaled site layout. The scanned images of
the sketches were printed on A4 size paper so that all design
outcomes were similarly scaled. The judges had access to
every sheet of drawing produced at the end of the sessions
and annotations for each drawn design element. The
sketches did not have any indication of which condition they
belonged to (SK or BF). The judges were unaware that half
of the designs had been produced by blindfolded designers.
The criteria for the assessment of sketches were: 1. how
well the sketches satisfy the brief, 2. how innovative is the
design solution, and 3. practicality. Each criterion was
graded out of 10.

Table 1 : Perceptual, Functional, Conceptual, Evaluative,
Recall Actions

Prn
Por

about

Recall Actions

Imagery and Sketching Coding Schemes
The coding scheme is based on a cognitive framework
which models design thinking as physical, perceptual,
functional and conceptual actions progressing in parallel
(Suwa et al., 1998). Physical actions refer to drawing and
looking, perceptual actions refer to interpretation of visual
information, functional actions refer to attaching meanings
to things, and conceptual actions refer to the planning of the
actions and initiating actions for design decisions (Table 1).
The imagery coding scheme consists of six action
categories: visuo-spatial actions (VS), perceptual actions,
functional actions, conceptual actions, evaluative actions
and recall actions (Table 1). Codes and results related to VS
category in imagery coding scheme and physical actions
category in SK condition are not presented in this paper.

Perceptual Actions
Pfn
Attend to the visual feature (geometry/shape/ size/
material/color/thickness etc) of a design element
Pof
Attend to an old visual feature

Make judgments
preferences

Results
Differences and similarities in cognitive activity
Table 2 shows the occurrence percentages of each action
category as a percentage of the total number of actions. The
last column in Table 2 shows the total number of actions in
each session1. The relatively different percentages of
occurrence of each action category are shaded. Comparing
BF and SK conditions for each architect, one significant
difference is that they all recalled more information in their
BF conditions.
The rate of perceptual activity was similar in BF and SK
conditions for 4 participants (A1, A2, A4 and A6), and
different for two of them (A3 and A5). The rate of
functional activity was similar for the 6 architects’ BF and
SK conditions. Conceptual and evaluative activity rates
were similar except for some slight differences highlighted
for A1, A2, A4 and A5. The average values of occurrence
percentages are not significantly different in perceptual,
functional, conceptual and evaluative action categories.

Evaluative Actions
Gdf
Gfs
Ged

Make judgments about the outcomes of a function
Generate a functional solution / resolve a conflict
Question/mention emerging design issues/conflicts

Gap

Make judgments about form

1

Total number of actions include Visuo-Spatial action category in
BF and Physical action category in SK conditions

1022

8.9
14.1
10.7
9.6
9.3
8.3
10.1
14.5
11.9
12.4
11.1
14.2
10.3
12.2

13.6
12.4
14.0
20.6
17.0
14.7
12.9
13.1
18.6
12.2
15.4
14.9
15.3
14.7

10.6
4.9
8.5
3.6
6.2
2.3
5.0
2.0
4.0
1.3
6.7
3.5
6.8
2.9

investigated the differences in cognitive activity rates for
further evidence.
The last column in Table 2 showed that the total number
of actions in BF sessions was higher than in the SK sessions
of A1, 2, 3 and 4. Only A5 and A6 performed fewer actions
in BF sessions. Thus the second group of architects
performed at different rates of cognitive activity; A4’s
cognitive actions (1344) was significantly higher compared
to A5 and A6’s (880, 712) under the BF conditions.
We argued that when the second group of architects were
exposed to the same site with a similar problem in the BF
session, it is possible that the design synthesis and
evaluation processes might have become easier for them,
even without the access to drawing. This might explain the
lower rate of cognitive activity for A5 and A6, however A4
did not demonstrate the same tendency. The different
tendencies make it hard to determine whether the reason for
this variation is the effect of familiarity or other factors
related to cognitive styles and ability.

Total # of
actions

Recall
(Rec) %

39.6
37.7
40.7
40.5
44.0
43.5
40.8
39.4
40.3
39.6
46.9
45.1
42.1
41.0

Evaluative
(Eval) %

27.2
30.8
26.1
25.7
23.6
31.2
31.3
31.0
25.1
34.5
19.8
22.3
25.5
29.3

Conceptual
(Con) %

Functional
(Func) %

BF01
SK01
BF02
SK02
BF03
SK03
BF04
SK04
BF05
SK05
BF06
SK06
BF av
SK av

Perceptual
(Per) %

Table 2. Occurrence percentages of action categories

1121
892
1208
1069
1120
747
1344
1061
880
921
712
1007

Comparison of the design outcomes

Interview results

The six architects were able to satisfy the space and client
requirements in both experiment and control conditions,
Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show typical example. Table 3 shows
the results of the assessment of the sketches by the three
judges. The grades in Table 3 are the average grades of the
three judges’ assessments. The final columns in each
condition shows the architects’ average grade for each
criterion. Table 3 also shows that the average grades for the
BF condition are higher than the average grades in SK
condition for two of the three critera.

The interview results present the way architects interpreted
their experience when they were blindfolded. The first
group’s comments implied “frustration” in general. A2 and
A3 during their BF sessions reported that they could not
hold/maintain the image (the complete geometry of the
layout) in their minds. They also reported that synthesizing
the parts was difficult, since they could not retain the parts
of the design together at once. The interviews with the first
group pointed to a single conclusion, that they would not be
designing anything if they were not allowed to sketch. The
common view was that if they were to put their ideas on
paper, they would have seen the problem quickly and that
would actually divert their thinking to a different path. This
view is in accord with the claim that sketching is a medium
for a reflective conversation.
The second group’s comments were quite different. They
were more satisfied with their design solutions and they
stated that the blindfolded exercise was another way of
designing for them. A4 commented that architects in general
do not rely on what is in the mind, but it is a skill they need
to develop. A5 and A6 commented that thinking through the
design issues without drawing gave them a clearer
expression of the design solution.

Familiarity with the design context

Sketching (SK)

Blindfolded (BF)

Table 3: Sketch assessment scores

The interview results showed a difference between the first
and second group’s attitude towards the blindfolded
exercise. This could be due to second group’s increased
familiarity with the problem space under their BF
conditions. They were more familiar with the design site,
the environmental factors, and the sizes of the boundaries
and the geometry of the layout, which in turn could have
made their BF design process more manageable. We

A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
BF
av
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
SK
av

Innovative

Satisfying
Des Brief

Practical

Av

4.0
4.3
6.0
5.0
6.3
4.3
5.0

7.7
6.3
7.7
7.5
8.0
5.7
7.1

7.7
7.0
7.0
6.7
7.7
5.0
6.8

6.1
6.0
6.9
6.1
7.1
4.9

4.3
5.3
6.7
4.3
6.0
4.0
5.1

6.3
6.3
6.3
5.0
7.0
5.3
6.0

6.0
5.7
5.3
3.7
7.0
5.7
5.6

5.4
5.9
6.5
4.3
6.4
4.9

1023

The first group’s (A1, 2, 3) scores on innovativeness are
higher in their SK conditions and second group’s (A 4, 5, 6)
scores on innovativeness are higher in their BF conditions.
This difference in scores could be due to the change in the

order which the architects performed the BF or SK
conditions. The scores for satisfying the design brief and
practicality are higher in BF in general (one exception is
A6’s practicality score).
Figure 2 shows A5’s perspective drawings as design
outcomes for the SK (Figure 2(a) and BF (Figure 2(b))
conditions. A5’s BF outcome was scored higher in each
criterion compared to the SK outcome scores.

implication goes against most of the work in design thinking
research where sketching is central.
It might be argued that the BF design outcome is more a
product of the reflective conversation which might occur
during the quick sketching period, rather than it can be an
internal construct. However quick sketching period was
partly controlled by the experimenter such that s/he was able
to intervene and remind them that they are not allowed to
make significant changes to the layout.

Benefits of external representations

(a)

(b)

The current case study shows that the architects were able to
produce reasonable and satisfactory design solutions by
using their imagery alone. If this case study were replicated
with a sample size large enough to show statistical
significance supporting the similarity of the two conditions,
then we would propose that sketching may not be the only
way to design visually.
This case study showed that the six expert architects were
able to benefit from both their external and internal
representations. The question of how experts benefit from
their diagrams was discussed by Larkin and Simon (1987).
When the expert architects in our study were not allowed to
use their vision, they might have utilized perceptual
elements which carry equivalent information to the ones in
drawings. These perceptual units might allow them to
reason about the specific problem at hand. This possibility
also suggest that the expert architects’ skills of reading
visuo-spatial information would not be solely dependent on
drawings. They could create perceptual elements for each
conceptualization. Then the designers might have their
reflective conversation with the conceptualizations rather
than the drawings.

Figure 2. Sketches of A5 (a) SK condition, and (b) BF
condition

Coding consistency and segment durations
The reliability of the coding process was measured by
calculating the agreement percentages between the three
phases of coding. They changed from 65% to 81% between
the 1st and 2nd coding phases, 78% to 92% between the 1st
and arbitrated coding phases and 85% to 93% between the
2nd and arbitrated coding phases.
The average length of the time interval for each segment
ranged from 17 seconds to 26 seconds. The average
durations of segments were similar under BF (20.4 sec) and
SK conditions (21.5 sec) with standard deviations of 11.5
and 12.4 seconds. The average Kurtosis values in BF versus
SK design sessions were also similar (-1.2 and -1.2) which
means the distributions in time intervals were flat and
similar.

Skilled imagery

Discussion

Studies of expert chess players identified a skilled imagery
(Simon & Chase, 1973; Saarilouma, 1998; Ericsson and
Kintsch, 1995) which shows evidence of the use of imagery
for longer periods and with higher cognitive loads. The
theory states that the experts develop specific ways for
chunking visuo-spatial information that enable them to
rapidly retrieve and use it in a new context (Simon &Chase,
1973). In chess, it is clear how the pieces are initially
arranged and the range of final arrangements that could win,
therefore the problem and solution spaces are well defined.
In architectural design, problem definition is incomplete
because the design requirements have to be interpreted to
reach an initial problem definition. In the same vein the final
solution is never certain because there are many solutions
that would satisfy the desired solution state.
According to the skilled imagery theory, architects in the
current study relied on retrieving and using the visual and
spatial information from their LTM. Similar to expert chess
players, expert designers could have used pre-existing
dynamic chunks of visual features or spatial relations
encoded with their past experiences. The theory suggests
that the previously learned visuo-spatial chunks would be
distributed throughout the working memory subsystems
which could result in a quick development of design

This case study showed that there are more similarities than
differences between SK and BF conditions of the six
architects, in terms of the percentage distribution of
cognitive action categories and overall quality of design
products. When the six expert architects did not have access
to sketching, they were able to handle the cognitive
processes required to produce a reasonable design solution.
Due to the small scale of the experiment, the results cannot
be generalized. The results cannot be generalized to other
design disciplines since the use of mental imagery may be
constrained when complex types of design transformations
are involved in the process where drawing is not sufficient
to visually reason about them.
The results of this study pose questions to the view that
sketching is the only efficient medium for developing
concepts/ideas, and testing them. If the expert architects can
do this without being able to sketch, then the benefits of
design externalizations become questionable. This

1024

solutions through the use of imagery. It is less likely that the
architects were using pre-existing chunks, since they rerepresent of their problem space for each new design
problem and re-interpret the visuo-spatial information. This
argument remains for further investigations of the study.

Conclusion
In this case study of six expert architects we compared two
conditions of designing: BF condition where they were
required to create a unique design solution via thinking
aloud with a blindfold on and SK condition where they
continuously sketch over the timeline of the design activity.
The first group of three architects underwent the BF
condition first and the second group underwent the SK
condition first.
The design drawings produced at the end of the BF and
SK sessions were judged and found to be not significantly
different in overall quality. Analysis of the design protocols
revealed that the cognitive activity in perceptual, functional,
conceptual, and evaluative categories did not change
significantly in quantity. This implies that these expert
architects were able to produce design concepts/ideas and
carry on a reflective conversation with them when they used
their imagery alone. We conclude that design reasoning via
constructing internal representations may be as efficient as
reasoning via constructing external representations for
expert architects, in the limited period of the conceptual
design phase.

References
Athavankar, U. A. (1997). Mental imagery as a design tool.
Cybernetics and Systems, 28, 25-47.
Bauer, M. I. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1993) How diagrams
can improve reasoning? Psychological Science, 4, 372–
378.
Bilda, Z & Gero, J. S. (2004). Analysis of a blindfolded
architect’s design session, in JS Gero, B Tversky and T
Knight (Eds.), Visual and Spatial Reasoning in Design
III, (pp. 121-136) Key Centre of Design Computing and
Cognition, University of Sydney, Australia.
Chambers, D. & Reisberg, D. (1985). Can mental images be
ambiguous? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 11, 317-328.
Do E. Yi-L Gross, M. D., Neiman, B. & Zimring, C. (2000).
Intentions in and relations among design drawings.
Design Studies, 21, 483-503.
Ericsson, K. A. & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 221-245.
Finke, R. A. & Slayton, K. (1988). Explorations of creative
visual synthesis in mental imagery. Memory and
Cognition, 16, 252-257.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B. & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
Cognition: Theory, Research and Applications.
Cambridge Mass: MIT Press.

Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of Thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Goldschmidt, G. (1991). The dialectics of sketching.
Creativity Research Journal, 4, 123-143.
Hegarty, M. (1992). Mental animation: Inferring motion
from static displays of mechanical systems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Language, Memory and
Cognition, 18, 1084–1102.
Kokotovich, V. & Purcell A. T. (2000). Mental synthesis
and creativity in design: an experimental examination.
Design Studies, 21, 437-449.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1980). Image and Mind. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and Brain: The Resolution of
the Imagery Debate. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Larkin, J. H. & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65–100.
Lawson, B. (1990). How Designers Think? (2nd ed).
London: Butterworth Architecture.
Pearson, D. G., Alexander, C. & Webster, R. (2001).
Working memory and expertise differences in design. In
J.S. Gero, B. Tversky and T. Purcell (Eds.) Visual and
Spatial Reasoning in Design II, (pp. 237-251), University
of Sydney, Australia: Key Centre of Design Computing
and Cognition.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (2003). Seeing and Visualizing: It's Not
What You Think. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Purcell, A. T. & Gero, J. S. (1998) Drawings and the design
process. Design Studies, 19, 389-430.
Saariluoma, P. (1998). Adversary problem solving and
working memory. In R. H. Logie and K. J. Gilhooly
(Eds.) Working Memory and Thinking (pp. 115-138).
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Schon, D. A. & Wiggins G. (1992). Kinds of seeing and
their functions in designing. Design Studies, 13, 135-156.
Simon, H.A. (1973). The structure of ill-structured
problems. Artificial Intelligence, 4, 181-202.
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Simon, H. A. & Chase, W. G. (1973). Skill in chess.
American Scientist, l, 394-403.
Suwa, M. & Tversky, B. (1997). What do architects and
students perceive in their design sketches? A protocol
analysis. Design Studies, 18, 385-403.
Suwa, M., Gero, J. S. & Purcell A. T. (1998). Macroscopic
analysis of design processes based on a scheme for coding
designers’ cognitive actions. Design Studies, 19, 455-483.
Tversky, B. (1999) What does drawing reveal about
thinking? In J.S. Gero, B. Tversky and T. Purcell (Eds.)
Visual and Spatial Reasoning in Design II, (pp. 93-101),
University of Sydney, Australia: Key Centre of Design
Computing and Cognition.
Verstijnen, I. M., Hennessey J. M., Leeuwen C. Van,
Hamel, R & Goldschmidt, G. (1998). Sketching and
creative discovery. Design Studies, 19, 519-546.

1025

