UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rich and Famous: Recognition-based judgment in the Sunday Times Rich List

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8j59p0x2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Beaman, C. Philip
Goddard, Kate
McCloy, Rachel

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rich and Famous: Recognition-based judgment in the Sunday Times Rich List
Rachel McCloy (r.a.mccloy@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL UK

C. Philip Beaman (c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL UK

Kate Goddard (k.goddard@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL UK

limited range of choice tasks. Even studies critical of the
special status of recognition in decision-making (e.g.,
McCloy & Beaman, 2004; Newell & Shanks, 2004;
Oppenheimer, 2003) have employed, to a large extent, the
same basic task. Goldstein and Gigerenzer’s (1996)
“drosophila” environment for recognition-based choice is a
two-alternative forced choice task (2AFC) where people are
presented with the names of two cities and asked to judge
which of the two is the larger. Both the 2AFC task and the
city choice domain have been used almost exclusively in
studies exploring Goldstein and Gigerenzer’s recognition
heuristic (e.g., McCloy & Beaman, 2004; Oppenheimer,
2003; Reimer & Katsikopoulos, 2004). One aim of the
current paper is to further consider the generality of
recognition heuristic by extending its consideration to a new
and potentially fruitful domain - that of the Sunday Times
Rich List. Theoretically, the recognition heuristic should
generalize across all domains of magnitude judgment.
However, some domains seem intuitively more likely to
encourage such heuristic-based inference than others.

Abstract
Recognition as a cue to judgment in a novel, multi-option
domain (the Sunday Times Rich List) is explored. As in
previous studies, participants were found to make use of
name recognition as a cue to the presumed wealth of
individuals. Names that were recognized were judged to be
the richest name from amongst the set presented at above
chance levels. This effect persisted across situations in which
more than one name was recognized; recognition was used as
an inclusion criterion for the sub-set of names to be
considered the richest of the set presented. However, when
the question was reversed, and a “poorest” judgment was
required, use of recognition as an exclusion criterion was
observed only when a single name was recognized. Reaction
times when making these judgments also show a distinction
between “richest” and “poorest” questions with recognition of
none of the options taking the longest time to judge in the
“richest” question condition and full recognition of all the
names presented taking longest to judge in the “poorest”
question condition. Implications for decision-making using
simple heuristics are discussed.

Rich and Famous

Introduction

People who are well-known or famous, as a general rule,
tend to be wealthier than people who are not famous. If
asked which of two people is the wealthier, it may therefore
be rational to choose recognized names over unrecognized
names, i.e., to apply a recognition heuristic. The area of
fame and wealth should be an interesting domain in which
to study recognition-based choice. Each year, the Sunday
Times newspaper in the United Kingdom prints an ordered
list of the 1000 richest people in the country, alongside
several additional lists (e.g., 100 richest people under 30
year old). As the wealth of the people on this list comes
from a wide range of sources (e.g., business, inheritance,
entertainment) there is scope for wide variation in
recognition, not only across the people named, but also
across participants in any experiment (depending on their
areas of interest). This makes it a very rich domain in which
to study the impact that recognition has on judgments of
magnitude - in this case the relative wealth of the people
under consideration. In addition to checking whether the

Recognition-based choice has been argued to be a
fundamental component of “fast and frugal” decisionmaking (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999; 2002). In situations
where the probability of recognition correlates well with the
criterion of interest (e.g., judgments of city size), people
who have the opportunity to base their judgments purely on
recognition - those who recognize some, but not all, of the
names presented to them - have been shown to be at an
advantage relative to those who recognize all the names.
This latter, ostensibly well-informed group must rely on
some other criterion for judgment (Borges, Goldstein,
Ortmann & Gigerenzer, 1999; Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
1999). Recognition guided judgments are said to employ a
“recognition heuristic” wherein, in the absence of other
cues, recognition is used as the basis for inferences of size
or magnitude.
Such recognition-based judgments have, however, only
been studied in a limited number of domains, and using a
1801

application of the recognition heuristic generalizes to a
novel domain, we will also examine some new choice
situations (multiple option choices, alterations in question
framing) and new dependent measures (time taken to make
a decision), which may reflect the processes underlying
choice.

Multiple Alternatives
Even studies of recognition-based judgments that have
moved outside of the standard “cities” domain (e.g., Newell
& Shanks, 2004 - choices between stocks) and have tried to
broaden the methodologies used, have limited their scope to
what is essentially the same basic two-alternative forced
choice task. Goldstein & Gigerenzer (1999) suggest that
looking at choices between 2 alternatives is a valid task for
capturing everyday choice behavior, as it “is an elementary
case to which many problems of greater complexity
(multiple choice, for instance) are reducible” (p. 41).
However, this may not necessarily be the case. People’s
behavior in n-alternative choices may not be as
straightforward as Goldstein and Gigerenzer suggest.
What happens if we increase the number of options that
people must chose between? Take the example of the cities
task, and imagine that, instead of being presented with two
cities as in the traditional version, we present participants
with three names and ask them to choose the largest. Where
participants recognize none of the names, their accuracy
should be at chance levels (1/3), as they guess between the
three options presented. Where participants recognize one
option out of three, the recognition heuristic states that they
should choose this option - so their accuracy should reflect
their recognition validity (RV) for the domain. Where
participants recognize two out of the three names presented,
they should be able to use the recognition heuristic to
exclude the name that they do not recognize. They will then
need to use their knowledge to decide between the
remaining two options - so their accuracy should reflect
both their recognition validity and their knowledge validity
for the domain (RV x KV). Where participants recognize all
three options, they cannot use the recognition heuristic to
guide their choices, so must rely on knowledge, and their
accuracy should therefore reflect knowledge validity alone
(KV).

when we consider situations with choices between more
than two options. If we present participants in the cities task
with three names and ask them to choose instead the
smallest of the three names, we would predict a difference
in the role played by recognition. Where participants
recognize none of the names, we would again predict that
their accuracy should be at chance levels (1/3), as they still
must guess between the three options presented. Where
participants recognize one option out of three, participants
should be able to use the recognition heuristic to exclude the
recognized option, and then should guess between the
remaining two unrecognized names - so their accuracy
should reflect both recognition validity and chance (RV x
1/2). Where participants recognize two out of the three
names presented, they should be able to use the recognition
heuristic to exclude the two recognized names, and therefore
choose the unrecognized name - so their accuracy should
only reflect their recognition validity and for the domain
(RV) - this should be equivalent to the case when one out of
three is recognized with the “largest” question. Where
participants recognize all three options, they again cannot
use the recognition heuristic to guide their choices, so must
rely on knowledge, and their accuracy should therefore
reflect knowledge validity alone (KV), as is the case for the
“largest” question.

Reaction Times

Framing

Finally, if processing progresses as described above, one
place where we would additionally expect to see differences
as a result of question framing is in the time it takes people
to make their choices. This is due to the different steps
involved in applying the heuristic depending on the question
being asked. As noted earlier, recognition-driven inference
is considered a fundamental component of other decisionmaking heuristics. One such heuristic is “take-the-best”
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1999), which makes judgments on
the best cue available. In circumstances where not all of the
options under consideration are known, the best cue is
frequently recognition. Other “fast and frugal” heuristics
(e.g., “minimalist”, “take-the-last”; Gigerenzer & Goldstein,
1999) take the same general form, including the use of
recognition, and differ only in terms of the type of search
carried out at “step 1” (see below). The steps along which
the take-the-best heuristic proceeds are as follows:

Varying the options available is not the only possible
innovation that might shed light on when and why
recognition-based inference is used. McCloy and Beaman
(2004) showed with the 2AFC cities task that changing the
question, from “which is larger?” to “which is smaller?”,
could alter adherence to the recognition heuristic. People
use the recognition heuristic less often for the smaller
question than for the larger question, despite recognition
being as valid a criterion for choice in both cases (as a
criterion for inclusion for the larger question, and exclusion
for the smaller question). The effect of altering the framing
of the question may have more pronounced consequences
1802

Step 0: If only one object is recognized, predict that
it has the higher value on the criterion. If neither is
recognized, then guess. If both are recognized, go to
step one.
Step 1: Ordered search. Choose the cue with the
highest validity that has not yet been tried. Look up
the cue values of the two objects.
Step 2: If one object has a positive cue value and the
other has not, go to step three. If not, go to step one.
Step 3: Predict that the object with the positive cue
has the higher value on the criterion.

This series of sequential steps entails some predictions
about relative speed to respond depending on the options
presented.
Where none of the options presented is recognized, and
participants are hypothesized to guess for both question
framings, we would predict no difference in the time taken
to choose when we change the question asked from largest
to smallest (both Step 0). If pure guesswork is involved,
choice should also be relatively fast. For the larger question,
when 1 out of the 3 options is recognized, choice should
also be relatively fast, as people can apply the recognition
heuristic and select the recognized option (also Step 0). For
the smaller question, when 1 out of 3 options is recognized,
choice should be slower, as an additional step is required.
People should use the recognition heuristic to exclude the
recognized option and then guess between the remaining
two unrecognized options.
For the larger question, when 2 out of 3 options are
recognized choice should be slower than it is when only 1
out of 3 is recognized. In this case, the recognition heuristic
rules out only 1 of the 3 options, and participants must use
knowledge to decide between the remaining 2. If we assume
that using knowledge is relatively more effortful than
guessing, then choice in this case should also be slower than
with the smaller question when 1 out of 3 is recognized. For
the smaller question, when 2 out of 3 are recognized, choice
should, in contrast, be relatively fast. People can use the
recognition heuristic to exclude the two recognized options
and hence choose the one unrecognized option.
Finally, when all 3 options are recognized, people must use
their knowledge to make a choice, regardless of the question
asked. Choice should, therefore, be relatively slow for both
question framings. However, differences could still be
found here depending on whether or not the cues used to
guide choice beyond recognition are the same for both
question framings.

Aims
The analyses presented above of the steps involved in
choice in 3AFC were originally taken from the cities task,
but are domain-independent and should apply equally to
versions of the cities task and to materials taken from the
Sunday Times Rich List. With regards to the framing of
questions, asking “who is richest?” should correspond
directly to the “largest” question in the cities task, and
asking “who is poorest?” should correspond directly with
the “smallest” question. By broadening our scope to
consider situations with multiple options and by looking at
alternative question frames we should additionally be able
to address questions concerning the generality of
recognition-based judgment.

Experiment
Method
35 Adult volunteers took part in the experiment. The triplets
of names used in the experiment were made up of names

taken from the 2005 Sunday Times Rich List. These
materials had previously been shown to elicit strong
recognition heuristic usage in a 2AFC task (McCloy,
Beaman, Goddard & Smith, 2006). The experiment was
presented to participants on a PC laptop running Windows
XP, using a dedicated Visual Basic computer package.
Participants were presented with 200 triplets of names. Each
triplet was paired with one of two questions: either “who is
the richest of these people?” or “who is the poorest of these
people?”. Participants indicated their responses by pressing
a button. The program recorded both the choice that
participants made, and the time they took to make their
choice (in hundredths of a second). When participants had
completed the choice phase of the experiment they were
then presented with a list of all of the names that they had
seen in the experiment, and were asked to indicate (by
ticking a box next to the name) which of the names they
recognized from before the experiment. The program also
recorded this information. The design of the experiment was
therefore wholly within-participants. The independent
variables were the frame of the question (richest / poorest)
and the number of names recognized in each triplet (0, 1, 2
or 3). The dependent variables were the option chosen by
participants (recognized / unrecognized) and the time taken
to make the choice.

Results
Choices What happens if we consider participants choices
for the situations in which they could use the recognition
heuristic (i.e., when they recognized 1 or 2 out of 3 in a
triplet), as in previous experiments? For the richest question,
when participants recognized 1 out of 3 names they chose
the recognized option significantly more often than at
chance (t(34) = 12.60, p < 0.001). When they recognized 2
out of 3 names, they also choose a recognized name
significantly more often than chance (t(34) = 10.13, p <
0.001). For the poorest question, when participants
recognized 1 out of 3 names, they chose the recognized
option significantly less often than chance (t(34) = -12.19, p
< 0.001). When they recognized 2 out of 3 names, however,
they failed to choose a recognized option significantly less
often than chance (t(34) = 1.59, p < 0.122).
Comparing like with like, if we compare participants
choices when recognition heuristic use alone should account
for their choices (where 1 out of 3 is recognized for the
richest question, and where 2 out of 3 are recognized for the
poorest question) we can see that the proportion of
recognition heuristic usage is significantly higher for the
richest question (RH use = choose recognized), than for the
poorest question (RH use = choose unrecognized; t(34) =
3.15, p < 0.003). This is in line with previous findings
(McCloy & Beaman, 2004), which show a framing effect in
recognition-based judgment in the original domain of 2AFC
city judgment tasks.
Reaction Times Figure 1 shows participants’ mean reaction
times by the number of names they recognized. A repeated-

1803

measures ANOVA shows that overall there is no significant
effect of the framing of the question on reaction time (F(1,
34) = 3.012, MSE = 204, η2 = .081, p < 0.092). There is a
significant main effect of the number of names recognized
(F(3, 102) = 4.795, MSE = 138.3, η2 = .124, p < 0.004).
There is also a significant interaction between question
frame and reaction time (F(3, 102) = 9.573, MSE = 234.6, η2
= .220, p < 0.001). From Figure 1 you can see that, for the
poorest frame, participants choices get slower with the
number of names recognized in each triplet (Means: recog.
0 = 1.92s, recog. 1 = 1.98s, recog. 2 = 2.02s, recog. 3 =
2.11s). For the richest frame, participants’ choices are
slowest when no names are recognized (mean 2.04s), but do
not differ significantly once at least one name is recognized
(Means: recog. 1 = 1.95s, recog. 2 = 1.97s, recog. 3 =
1.96s).

Reaction Time
(seconds)

2.2
2.1
Richest

2

Poorest

1.9
1.8
0

1

2

3

Number Recognized

Figure 1: Mean reactions times by question frame and
number of options recognized.
If we again compare like with like, and look at situations
where participants could base their judgments on
recognition alone (where 1 out of 3 is recognized for the
richest question, and where 2 out of 3 are recognized for the
poorest question), we can see that participants’ choices were
significantly slower in the poorer frame (mean 2.02 seconds,
s.d. = 0.26) than in the richer frame (mean 1.95 seconds, s.d.
= 0.22; t(34) = 2.341, p < 0.025).

General Discussion
When people are shown three names and are asked to judge
which of the three is the richest they use recognition to
guide their choices if it is a discriminating cue. This occurs
not only when people recognize one name out of three, but
also when they recognize two out of three names. This
suggests that recognized options are not chosen purely
because they are salient, and therefore provides some further
evidence for the use of a recognition heuristic in magnitude
judgments.
When one out of three names presented is recognized, an
people are instead asked to judge which of the three names
is the poorest, we again find evidence for the usage of a
recognition heuristic, as participants choose an
unrecognized option significantly more often than would be

expected by chance. However, when two out of three
options are recognized, people answering the poorest
question did not show evidence of using a recognition
heuristic - despite the salience of the “to-be-chosen”
(unrecognized) option. Recognition-based judgment appears
to operate in a different manner when the magnitude
judgment at hand is a lesser or least judgment than when it
is a greater or greatest judgment. This is most obvious when
we compare the situations in which recognition alone can
guide choice (i.e., recognize 1 for richest and recognize 2
for poorest). People are significantly less likely to use
recognition to guide their choices when they are asked who
is poorest than when they are asked who is richest. In this
study we have therefore replicated the framing effect in
recognition-based judgment first observed by McCloy and
Beaman (2004) in a novel domain and with multiple
options.
We had hoped that by extending the dependent measures
that we used in our study to include reaction times, that we
would gain some insight into the processes underlying
recognition-based judgment. The predictions that we had
made on the basis of an assumption of “take-the-best” style
sequential processing were not supported by the data. The
pattern that we observe in people’s choice times is not just
an artifact of the domain we have used, as an identical
pattern of results is found if the same experimental design is
used within a cities choice domain (McCloy et al., 2006).
We did not find an overall effect of the framing of the
question asked on people’s choice times. People are not
slower overall to make one kind of judgment than the other.
However, there was a clear interaction in our data between
the framing of the question asked and the number of options
recognized, such that the reaction time data for the poorest
question is an approximate mirror image of the reaction time
data for the richest question.
When looked at more closely, for the richest question there
appears to be an advantage of some knowledge over no
knowledge, but the exact extent of the knowledge does not
appear to be important. For the poorest question, there is an
increasing decrement in speed of choice with the number of
items recognized. These results are clearly inconsistent with
the kind of sequential processes outlined by Gigerenzer and
Goldstein (1999). Thus, although we were able to confirm in
a novel, multi-option domain the outcome of recognition
heuristic type judgments, we are unable to confirm that the
processes involved operate in the manner suggested by the
analysis of Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1999). If decisionmaking is not carried out in this sequential, stepwise
fashion, then many of the advantages claimed for singlereason, non-compensatory heuristics may no be warranted.
People clearly do use recognition to guide their judgments
and choices, but the circumstances in which they do so
remain to be fully explored.

Acknowledgments

1804

This research was supported in part by the Leverhulme
Trust, grant no. F/00 239/U awarded to the first two authors.
We are grateful to Gaëlle Villejoubert for the suggestion of

fame as a domain for magnitude judgment. We are also
grateful to Andy Fitzsimmons for his programming work on
these experiments.

References
Borges, B, Goldstein, D. G., Ortmann, A., & Gigerenzer, G.
(1999). Can ignorance beat the stock market? In G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd and the ABC Research Group.
Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D.G. (1999). Betting on one
good reason: The take the best heuristic. In G. Gigerenzer,
P. M. Todd and the ABC Research Group. Simple
heuristics that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Goldstein, D. G. & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The recognition
heuristic: How ignorance makes us smart. In G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd and the ABC Research Group.

Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Goldstein, D. G. & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of
ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109, 75-90.
McCloy, R. & Beaman, C. P. (2004). The recognition
heuristic: Fast and frugal but not as simple as it seems. In:
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp 933-937). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McCloy, R., Beaman, C.P., Goddard, K. & Smith, P.T.
(2006). Recognition-based judgment. Manuscript in
preparation.
Newell, B. R. & Schanks, D. R. (2004). On the role of
recognition in decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30, 923935.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so
frugal!): Rethinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition,
90, B1-B9.
Reimer, T. & Katsikopoulos, K.V. (2004). The use of
recognition in group decision-making. Cognitive
Science,28, 1009-1029.

1805

