UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shaping Time: Conceptualizations of Time through Shape Metaphors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8x97q2h9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Chrysikou, Evangelia G.
Ramey, Christopher H.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shaping Time: Conceptualizations of Time through Shape Metaphors
Evangelia G. Chrysikou (lila@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, Temple University
1701 N. 13th St., Weiss Hall 6th Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19122-6085 USA

Christopher H. Ramey (cramey@flsouthern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Florida Southern College
111 Lake Hollingsworth Drive, Lakeland, FL 33801 USA

Abstract
Previous research has shown that people represent the abstract
concept of time by constructing metaphoric mappings from
the more concrete domain of space. Earlier studies have
revealed that different spatial metaphorical mapping systems
are employed when people think about time (e.g., front/back,
ego-moving/time-moving). However, it is possible that the
abstract concept of time is also represented by means of shape
metaphors. Two experiments investigated this possibility. The
results extend previous findings and suggest that the use of
shape metaphors in language influences participants’
representations of the abstract concept of time.
Keywords: conceptual metaphors; time metaphors; language
and thought; embodiment.

Spatial Metaphors and the Concept of Time
Recent research on the acquisition of abstract concepts has
shown that people construct such concepts through
metaphorical mappings from domains grounded in the
individual’s experience (Boroditsky, 2000; Gentner, 2001;
Gentner & Grudin, 1985; Pecher & Zwaan, 2005; see also,
Barsalou & Weimer-Hastings, 2005; Glenberg & Kaschak,
2002; Whitrow, 1972). A series of studies on the perception
of the abstract domain of time has shown that the concept of
time acquires its structure through metaphorical mappings in
language from the domain of space. Gentner and Imai
(1992), for example, investigated the psychological status of
two putatively critical space → time metaphorical mapping
systems, namely the ego-moving metaphor and the timemoving metaphor (see Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). In the first
system the observer is perceived to move through time
toward the future. In contrast, in the second system time is
conceived as an array of events that the observer witnesses
moving from the future to the past. Gentner and Imai
explored the different aspects of spatial (e.g., front/back)
metaphors that people employ to represent time within the
two systems. Their experiments confirmed the
psychological reality of these metaphors and suggested that
spatial metaphoric language may provide a platform for
situating the abstract concept of time.
In accordance with these findings, Boroditsky (2001)
provided evidence that differences in space → time
metaphors between different languages (e.g., the future lies

ahead of us, we left the bad times behind us) reflect
differences in the perception of time that depend on the type
of language used. Specifically, English speakers conceive
time as placed on a horizontal axis, whereas Mandarin
speakers conceive time as placed on a vertical axis, a
distinction that is evident in the words that members of each
of the two linguistic communities use to talk about time
concepts.
Furthermore, Gentner, Imai, and Boroditsky (2002) found
that, consistent with the ego-moving versus time-moving
metaphor distinction, people employ these two metaphors
when making judgments about time, both in experimental
and naturalistic settings (e.g., a busy airport). Boroditsky
and Ramscar (2002; see also Matlock, Ramscar, &
Boroditsky, 2005) extended those findings by showing that
people’s experience of space may alter the time metaphor
that they employ and subsequently influence their
judgments about abstract time questions. For instance, if
people were waiting in a lunch line for several minutes (and,
thus, moving through space toward a destination), they were
more likely to employ the ego-moving time metaphor.
When subsequently asked the ambiguous question “Next
Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward two days.
What day is the meeting now that it has been rescheduled?”
they were more likely to say that the meeting had been
moved to Friday than Monday. Conversely, people who
were waiting for someone to arrive at the airport (and, thus,
were standing still in space while someone was moving
toward them) were more likely to employ the time-moving
metaphor and respond Monday to the same question.
So far, research on the acquisition of the abstract concept
of time has focused on the differences in representation
dependent on the activation of either the ego-moving or the
time-moving metaphorical mapping systems. If, as the
earlier studies suggest, the hypothesis holds true that the
abstract domain of time draws upon the more concrete
domain of space, it could be the case that other types of
visuo-spatial metaphorical systems that are situated in the
individual’s experience are involved in the representation of
the abstract domain of time. Specifically, the present paper
offers the possibility that certain aspects of the concept of
time may be represented through shape metaphors. In
particular, two experiments aimed to investigate whether the
use of metaphorical language that employs shape-related

1121

information to describe time concepts would influence
participants’ active representations of those concepts. It was
hypothesized that, if the abstract concept of time is
grounded on more concrete domains of experience, then
different shape metaphors should bias participants’
representation of time concepts toward the type of shape
employed by a given metaphor. Furthermore, research
focused on the grounding of cognition in action (e.g.,
Barsalou, 1999; Barsalou & Weimer-Hastings, 2005; Pecher
& Zwaan, 2005; Zwaan, 1999a, 1999b; Zwaan, Stanfield, &
Yaxley, 2002) suggests that when people represent concepts
they perceptually simulate those concepts based on their
experience. If time is indeed structured through the domain
of shape, one would expect individuals to experience time
by mentally simulating the shapes of objects dependent on
the shape metaphors used in language.

1995). Given that the nature of the filler tasks was unrelated
to that of the experimental task, none of the filler tasks was
expected to impose any contextual effects on the
performance of participants on the experimental task.
Table 1: Target task for Experiment 1 by condition
Condition
1. Linear time metaphor
2. Circular time metaphor

Procedure The questionnaires, including consent forms and
the target task – which was randomly presented among the
four filler tasks – were distributed to participants during
regular lecture time. Participants were asked to read the
instructions carefully before they started working on the
tasks. Participants were also asked to work on the tasks on
their own and not to discuss information related to the tasks
with their classmates during the experimental session. Once
any questions were answered, participants had 15 minutes to
complete the tasks. After the 15 minutes had elapsed the
experimenter collected the questionnaires and debriefed the
class regarding the purposes of the study.

Experiment 1
The aim of Experiment 1 was to investigate whether people
conceptualize and spontaneously represent time by
employing either linear or circular shapes, dependent on the
use of linear or circular shape metaphors in language. It was
hypothesized that participants who were primed with a
linear metaphor to describe the time concept of a year would
tend to depict this concept predominantly linearly in their
pictorial representations, relative to participants who were
primed with a circular metaphor to describe the same time
concept and who were expected to depict this concept
predominantly circularly.

Method
Participants Sixty (N = 60) Temple University
undergraduates (17 males, mean age 20.87 yrs) participated
in this study for course credit. Participants were randomly
assigned in one of two experimental conditions: (1) Linear
time metaphor (n = 31) and (2) Circular time metaphor (n =
29).
Materials A target task incorporated in a brief
questionnaire among a variety of filler tasks was used. In the
target task, participants are given a sentence referring to the
duration of an event by using either a linear time metaphor
or a circular time metaphor. In this task, participants are
asked to describe the sentence to someone who does not
speak English by drawing a picture (see Table 1).
Participants are also asked to indicate which word of the
sentence corresponds to which part of the picture that they
will draw. The target task was randomly presented among
four filler tasks: (a) an alternative uses generation task
(modified from Christensen & Guilford, 1958; see
Chrysikou, in press) in which participants were asked to
provide three alternative uses for three items (shoe, button,
key); (b) a variation of the Wason Selection Task (Griggs &
Cox, 1982); (c) a free word association task (modified from
Christensen & Guilford, 1958; see Chrysikou, in press); and
(d) an analytical problem (the Socks problem, Weisberg,

Sentence
Jack is playing tennis
all year long.
Jack is playing tennis
all year round.

Results and Discussion
Coding Participants’ responses on the target task were
collected and coded for the presence of prevailing linear or
circular representations of the time concept of a year. The
responses of two participants, both from the linear time
metaphor condition, were excluded from any analyses as a
result of participants’ failure to comply with the
experimental instructions; this resulted in a total of 58
participants (29 per condition). The pictures participants
drew for the target task were scanned and converted in
black-and-white JPEG format and any identifying features
of each participant’s condition (i.e., the presence of the
words long or round) were eliminated to allow for blind
coding. Two independent raters then coded all pictures on
five measures intended to capture whether the participant
used a prevailing linear or circular representation for the
time concept of a year. Given that a year can be represented
either in terms of months or in terms of seasons, the pictures
were also coded for the presence of the calendar or for the
presence of the four seasons. The measures were as follows:
1. Linear representation prevailing
2. Circular representation prevailing
3. Combined linear and circular representation
prevailing
4. Presence of a calendar
5. Presence of the four seasons1
The representation of months in a calendar follows a
predominantly linear pattern (e.g., the written names of the
1

1122

Measures 1, 2, and 3 are mutually exclusive and exhaustive
categories.

months in a year follow the rules of written language from
left to right). As a result, the presence of a calendar was
considered as indicative of a linear representation of the
concept of the year. However, the four seasons can be
represented either linearly or circularly (e.g., a cycle of
depicted seasons) or with a combination of linear and
circular representations. Consequently, to be able to code
participants’ pictures as conveying a linear or circular
patterns (for participants who represented the year by using
the four seasons), responses were also coded on the
following measures:
1. Circular representation of seasons
2. Z-shaped representation of seasons2
3. Linear representation of seasons
Inter-rater reliability (Pearson’s r) ranged from r = .70 to r =
.85. Any differences between the two raters were resolved in
conference. The agreed combination of the coding of both
raters was used for further statistical analysis.

Table 2: Percent of participants’ representations of the time
concept of a year by condition for Experiment 1

Analysis A series of chi-square comparisons was employed
to examine differences between the two groups. It was
hypothesized that if people represent time through the
concrete domain of shape participants in the linear time
metaphor condition would be influenced by the sentence all
year long and consequently represent the concept of a year
by employing more linear than circular representations. In
contrast, participants in the circular time metaphor condition
were expected to be influenced by the sentence all year
round and represent the concept of the year by employing
more circular than linear representations in their designs.
According to the results of Experiment 1 (see Table 2)
participants in the linear time metaphor condition used
significantly more linear representations for the concept of a
year relative to participants in the circular time metaphor
condition (χ2[1, N = 58] = 4.55, p = .03, φ = .28). In
contrast, participants in the circular time metaphor condition
used more circular representations for the concept of a year
relative to participants in the linear time metaphor condition,
however, this difference was marginally significant (χ2[1, N
= 58] = 3.84, p = .05, φ = .26). There was no difference
between the two conditions regarding the number of
participants who employed a combined linear and circular
representation, (χ2[1, N = 58] = .22, p = .64, φ = .06).
Finally, there was no difference between the two conditions
regarding the presence of a calendar (χ2[1, N = 58] = .32, p
= .57, φ = .07) or the presence of the four seasons (χ2[1, N =
58] = .29, p = .59, φ = .07) in participants’ designs.

Among participants who employed the four seasons in
their responses to represent the concept of the year there
were no differences with respect to the circular, Z-shaped,
or linear representation of the seasons between the two
conditions (χ2[1, N = 35] < 2.50, p > .12, φ = .27).
It should be noted that participants within the linear time
metaphor condition were more likely to represent the year
with linear relative to any other type of shape
representations (p = .02, two-tailed binomial test) and less
likely overall to employ circular representations in their
designs (p < .01, two-tailed binomial test). In contrast,
participants within the circular time metaphor condition
were equally likely to employ circular or other types of
shape representations (p = .71, two-tailed binomial test).
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that, in accordance
with the experimental hypothesis, participants were indeed
influenced by the type of shape metaphor used in language
when thinking about the abstract concept of time.
Specifically, between two sentences that are used similarly
in language to refer to the duration of a year participants
were more likely to represent the concept of the year
linearly than circularly when primed with the linear time
metaphor (i.e., all year long). Furthermore, even though the
differences were marginally significant, the results suggest
that participants tend to represent the concept of the year
circularly than linearly when faced with the circular time
metaphor (i.e., all year round). Finally, from the types of
representations employed among participants within each
condition, the results of Experiment 1 suggest that linear
shape metaphors may have stronger effects with respect to
influencing participants’ representations of time, relative to
circular shape metaphors.

Measures
Linear
representation
prevailing
Circular
representation
prevailing
Combined linear
and circular
representation
Presence of a
calendar
Presence of the
four seasons

Condition 1:
Linear time
metaphor
.72

Condition 2:
Circular time
metaphor
.45

.21

.45

.07

.10

.35

.28

.59

.66

Experiment 2
The aim of Experiment 2 was to extend the findings of
Experiment 1 regarding the use of shape metaphors in the
representation of time concepts. Specifically, Experiment 2

2

The Z-shaped representation of seasons was considered as
indicative of a linear pattern.
1123

examined whether people conceptualize and spontaneously
represent the time concept of a year by employing two
different metaphors, namely either whole or partial shapes,
dependent on the use of corresponding shape-related
metaphors in language.
It was hypothesized that participants who were primed
with a partial metaphor to describe the time concept of a
year would depict this concept by dividing either linear or
circular shapes in their pictorial representations; there was
no reason to expect that participants would be biased toward
either a linear or circular representation of time based on the
type of metaphor used. In contrast, relative to participants
who were primed with a partial metaphor, participants in the
holistic metaphor condition were expected to be influenced
in their representations toward circular shapes and depict the
same time concept predominantly circularly. Furthermore, it
was possible that participants in both conditions would
employ mathematical symbols to depict half a year (e.g., ½)
or the whole year (e.g., 365). Accordingly, Experiment 2
investigated the presence of any differences between the
two conditions regarding the use of such abstract symbols to
represent time, dependent on the type of metaphor used.

Method
Participants Seventy one (N = 71) Temple University
undergraduates (18 males, mean age 22.57 yrs) participated
in this study for course credit. Participants were randomly
assigned in one of two experimental conditions: (1) Partial
time metaphor (n = 36) and (2) Holistic time metaphor (n =
35).
Materials A target task incorporated in a brief
questionnaire among a variety of filler tasks was used. The
filler tasks were the same as in Experiment 1. In the target
task, participants are given a sentence referring to the
duration of an event using either a holistic shape metaphor
or a partial shape metaphor. Participants are asked to
describe the sentence to someone who does not speak
English by drawing a picture (see Table 3). Participants are
also asked to indicate which word of the sentence
corresponds to which part of the picture that they will draw.
Table 3: Target task for Experiment 2 by condition
Condition
1. Partial time metaphor
2. Holistic time metaphor

Sentence
Jack is playing tennis
half of the year.
Jack is playing tennis
the whole year.

Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion

concept of a year. The responses of five participants, two
from the partial metaphor condition and three from the
holistic metaphor condition were excluded from any
analyses as a result of participants’ failure to comply with
the experimental instructions, resulting in a total of 66
participants (34 for condition 1 and 32 for condition 2). The
pictures participants drew for the target task were scanned
and converted in black-and-white JPEG format and any
identifying features of each participant’s condition (i.e., the
presence of the words half or whole) were eliminated to
allow for blind coding. Two independent raters then coded
all pictures on six measures intended to capture whether the
participant used a prevailing linear or circular representation
for the time concept of a year, as well as to examine the use
of mathematical symbols in the two conditions. The
measures were as follows:
1. Linear representation prevailing
2. Circular representation prevailing
3. Combined linear and circular representation
prevailing
4. Presence of a calendar
5. Presence of the four seasons
6. Presence of mathematical symbols3
Following the rationale of Experiment 1, for participants
who represented the year by using the four seasons,
responses were also coded on the following measures:
1. Circular representation of seasons
2. Z-shaped representation of seasons
3. Linear representation of seasons
Inter-rater reliability (Pearson’s r) ranged from r = .76 to r =
.82. Any differences between the two raters were resolved in
conference. The agreed combination of the coding of both
raters was used for further statistical analysis.
Analysis Chi-square comparisons were employed to
examine differences between the two groups. It was
hypothesized that participants in the partial shape metaphor
condition would represent the concept of a year by
employing either linear or circular representations. In
contrast, participants in the holistic shape metaphor
condition were expected to be influenced by the sentence
the whole year and represent the concept of the year by
employing more circular than linear representations.
According the results of Experiment 2 (see Table 4)
participants in the partial time metaphor condition did not
use significantly more linear than circular representations
for the concept of the year relative to the holistic time
metaphor condition (χ2[1, N = 66] = .92, p = .34, φ = .12). In
contrast, participants in the holistic time metaphor condition
employed significantly more circular than linear
representations for the concept of the year relative to
participants in the partial time metaphor condition (χ2[1, N =
66] = 4.80, p = .03, φ = .27). There was no difference
between the two conditions regarding the number of

Coding Similar to Experiment 1, participants’ responses on
the target task were collected and coded for the presence of
prevailing linear or circular representations of the time

3

1124

Measures 1, 2, and 3 are mutually exclusive and exhaustive
categories.

In sum, the results of Experiment 2 showed that, in
accordance with the experimental hypothesis, participants in
the holistic shape metaphor condition were influenced by
the holistic metaphor used and did employ circular shapes to
represent time significantly more than participants in the
partial shape metaphor condition. In addition, the results of
Experiment 2 suggest that the partial metaphor increases the
likelihood that participants will employ abstract
mathematical symbols to represent time, whereas the
holistic metaphor biases participants toward the use of
shapes as opposed to mathematical symbols.

participants who employed a combined linear and circular
representation, (χ2[1, N = 66] = .34, p = .56, φ = .07).
Similarly, there was no difference regarding the presence of
a calendar in the responses of participants between the two
conditions (χ2[1, N = 66] = .56, p = .46, φ = .09). The
difference between the two conditions with respect to the
presence of the four seasons in participants’ designs was
only marginally significant (χ2[1, N = 66] = 3.03, p = .08, φ
= .21). Finally, with reference to the use of mathematical
symbols, participants in the partial time metaphor condition
employed significantly more mathematical symbols in their
representations relative to participants in the holistic time
metaphor condition (χ2[1, N = 66] = 20.22, p < .001, φ =
.55).

General Discussion

Table 4: Percent of participants’ representations of the time
concept of a year by condition for Experiment 2

The present paper argued that metaphorical systems based
on a linear domain of space may not be the only ones
involved in the representation of the abstract concept of
time. The results of the two experiments presented suggest
that the abstract domain of time may be structured through
the use of shape metaphors in language. In particular,
Experiment 1 showed that the use of linear or circular
metaphors influences participants’ representations of the
time concept of a year: The presence of a linear metaphor
increases the likelihood that the year will be depicted more
linearly than circularly, and vice versa. It should be noted
that the linear metaphor seems to elicit stronger effects
relative to the circular metaphor when people represent the
time concept of a year. Finally, there seemed to be no
difference regarding participants’ use of a calendar or the
four seasons in their representations between the two
conditions.
Experiment 2 investigated the effects of partial and
holistic shape-related metaphors on participants’
representations of time. Similar to Experiment 1, the results
are indicative of the implication of shape metaphors in the
construction of the abstract domain of time. Specifically,
participants in the holistic metaphor condition were more
likely to employ circular metaphors relative to participants
in the partial metaphor condition.
Overall, the results of both experiments complement and
extend the findings of previous studies regarding the use of
concrete domains of experience to represent the abstract
concept of time (Boroditsky, 2000, 2001; Boroditsky &
Ramscar, 2002; Gentner & Imai, 1992; Gentner et al., 2002)
by suggesting that shape metaphors in language are
implicated in the representation of time concepts. Further
research should address whether the effects reported in the
present paper would also be observed for other time
concepts and whether there are differences in the use and
significance of specific spatial or shape metaphors among
the different units of the abstract concept of time (e.g. day,
week, month).

Measures
Linear
representation
prevailing
Circular
representation
prevailing
Combined linear
and circular
representation
Presence of a
calendar
Presence of the
four seasons
Presence of
mathematical
symbols

Condition 1:
Partial time
metaphor
.65

Condition 2:
Holistic time
metaphor
.53

.18

.34

.17

.13

.53

.44

.24

.44

.71

.16

Similar to Experiment 1, among participants who
employed the four seasons in their responses to represent the
concept of the year there were no differences with respect to
the circular, Z-shaped, or linear representation of the
seasons between the two conditions (χ2[1, N = 19] < 2.50, p
> .13, φ = .27).
It should be noted that within the partial metaphor
condition participants were less inclined to use circular
representations relative to other shapes (p < .01, two-tailed
binomial test), less inclined to employ the four seasons in
their representations (p < .01, two-tailed binomial test), but
more inclined to use mathematical symbols (p = .02, twotailed binomial test). In contrast, within the holistic
metaphor condition participants tended to employ more
circular representations, but this difference was not
significant (p = .11, two-tailed binomial test). They were
less likely, however, to use mathematical symbols in their
designs (p < .01, two-tailed binomial test).

References

1125

Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.

Barsalou, L. W., & Weimer-Hastings, K. (2005). Situating
abstract concepts. In D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan (Eds.),
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory language, and thinking (pp. 129-163).
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University
Press.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1-28.
Boroditski, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
Mandarin and English speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-22.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body
and mind in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13,
185-189.
Griggs, R. A., & Cox, J. R. (1982). The elusive thematicmaterial effect in Wason's selection task. British Journal
of Psychology, 73, 407-420.
Christensen, P. R., & Guilford, J. P. (1958).
Creativity/Fluency Scales. Beverly Hills, CA: Sheridan
Supply, Co.
Chrysikou, E. G. (in press). When shoes become hammers:
Goal-derived categorization training enhances problem
solving performance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial metaphors in temporal
reasoning. In M. Gatis (Ed.), Spatial schemas in abstract
thought (pp. 203-334). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Grudin, J. (1985). The evolution of mental
metaphors in psychology: A 90-year retrospective.
American Psychologist, 40, 181-192.
Gentner, D., & Imai, M. (1992). Is the future always ahead?
Evidence for system-mappings in understanding spacetime metaphors. In the Proceedings of the Fourteenth

Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
510-515). Bloomington, IN: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space Æ
time metaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17,
537-565.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Matlock, T., Ramscar, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2005). On the
experiential link between spatial and temporal language.
Cognitive Science, 29, 655-664.
Pecher, D., & Zwaan, R. A. (2005), Grounding cognition:
The role of perception and action in memory language,
and thinking. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press.
Weisberg, R. W. (1995). Prolegomena to theories of insight
in problem solving: A taxonomy of problems. In R. J.
Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight
(pp. 157-196). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Whitrow, G. J. (1972) What is time? New York: Oxford
University Press.
Zwaan, R. A. (1999a). Situation models: The mental leap
into imagined worlds. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 8, 15-18.
Zwaan, R. A. (1999b). Embodied cognition, perceptual
symbols, and situation models. Discourse Processes, 28,
81-88.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanfield, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002). Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

1126

