UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Some Problems with a Behavioristic Account of Early Group Pretense

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3h78r688

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Devitt, Kate

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Some Problems with a Behavioristic account of Early Group Pretense
Kate Devitt (skdevitt@gmail.com)
Philosophy Department, Rutgers University
26 Nichol Ave., New Brunswick, NJ 08901 USA

Abstract
In normal child development, both individual and group
pretense first emerges at approximately two years of age. The
metarepresentational account of pretense holds that children
already have the concept PRETEND when they first engage in
early group pretense. A behavioristic account suggests that
early group pretense is analogous to early beliefs or desires
and thus require no mental state concepts. I argue that a
behavioral account does not explain the actual behavior
observed in children and it cannot explain how children come
to understand that a specific action is one of pretense versus
one of belief. I conclude that a mentalistic explanation of
pretense best explains the behavior under consideration.

Introduction
In this paper I compare two cognitive accounts of
pretense: the meta-representational view of Alan Leslie
(1987a, 1987b, 1988, 1994, 2002) and the behavioral
boxology account of Shaun Nichols and Stephen Stich
(2000, 2003) (henceforth represented in the text as ‘N&S’).
More specifically, I contrast the arguments of each theory in
explaining very early group pretense. The paper is
structured into several sections. Section one outlines key
facts about early pretense that both accounts agree upon and
briefly summarize the cognitive accounts offered by these
two perspectives. Section two focuses on the major point of
disagreement between the two accounts; i.e., whether early
group pretense is essentially mentalistic. In this section I
articulate the three arguments presented by N&S against a
mentalistic explanation of early pretense and provide
reasons why these criticisms fail. Section three examines
develops my critique of the behavioristic model of pretense
offered by N&S. Finally I conclude the best explanation of
early pretend behavior is that it is the product of conceptual
thinking.

Some Facts About Pretense
Pretend behavior first occurs around two years of age. At
this time a child can be observed pretending to themselves
that some aspect of reality is different to what it actually is.
For example, a child might feed pretend food to their doll or
empty pretend dirt from their toy dump truck. At
approximately the same age, the child can participate in
group pretense activities. For example, if mother pretends
that a banana is a telephone, then the child will effortlessly
join in the pretense. Both Leslie and N&S are interested in
the underlying cognitive mechanisms of pretense and the
information processing tasks these mechanisms have to

perform (Leslie 1987a; N&S, 2003). Both theories agree
that in order to avoid ‘representational abuse’1, true beliefs
must be kept functionally separate from pretend mental
contents. So, the child who pretends that the banana is a
telephone must be able to keep the true properties of the
banana (e.g. edible) separate from the fictional ones (e.g.
communication device). Both Leslie and N&S agree that if a
child could not keep these properties distinct, then they
would suffer from terrible conceptual confusion.
In Leslie’s account, the way contents of pretend beliefs
are isolated from actual beliefs is by being ‘decoupled’ into
a metarepresentation.
Decoupling effectively gives
otherwise transparent mental contents—e.g. the cup is
empty—into opaque ones—e.g. “the cup is empty”. By
making the content of pretend representations opaque; the
reference, truth and existence conditions can be
semantically segregated from primary representational
meaning. Leslie suggests that mental representations
underlying pretense have the form: I PRETEND2 ‘this empty
cup contains tea’ (1987a, 420). Thus Leslie’s account
essentially involves an intentional agent (e.g. the child or the
mother), an informational relation and the opaque content.
Importantly, Leslie’s mentalistic account requires that the
child has the concept PRETEND to engage in pretense.
In N&S, semantic segregation is achieved via the possible
world box (PWB). In the PWB, the entire contents of the
belief box are downloaded and then specific beliefs are
altered to fulfill the requirements of the pretend task. So, in
the case when a child is pretending that an empty cup
contains tea, she alters a belief in the PWB from the true
belief ‘this cup is empty’ to ‘this [empty] cup contains tea’
(2003, 51). In N&S’s account, early pretense functions like
any other propositional attitude like belief or desire. An act
of pretense is merely “behaving in a way that would be
appropriate if p were the case” (2003, 53). On this theory, a
child (or non-human primates) can engage in acts of
pretense without having conceptual knowledge of them as
pretense. Thus, the crucial difference between the two
accounts of early pretense is that Leslie’s is mentalistic,
whilst N&S is behavioristic.
1
The description ‘representation abuse’ was introduced by Leslie
(1987) to indicate the risk to the reference, truth and existence
relations of veridical mental content during an act of pretense.
2
In this paper capitals are used to indicate concepts, as opposed to
simply propositional attitudes. Thus, BELIEF is ‘the concept of
belief’. Where as ‘belief’ is simply the propositional attitude of
belief. The difference is important because very young children
could plausibly have beliefs as functional propositions influencing
their behavior before they come to have BELIEF.

1228

Why a behavioristic explanation does not explain how a
child comes to understand a pretense episode.
Looking more closely at N&S suggestion, what does it
mean to construct a scenario in the PWB based on the
observation of action? That is, how does a pretend scenario
get to the PWB via behavioral cues? Using the banana case
mentioned above—if N&S are right—then there must be
something about mother’s actions picking up the banana and
holding it to her ear that triggers behavioral cues about
picking up a telephone.
The problem with this sort of account is that a huge
variety of actions can satisfy a single instance of pretending
and conversely, the same action can signify a variety of
mental activities. As Leslie states, the fact that “one and the
same piece of behavior can, in principle, be produced under
different internal states… makes it so extremely difficult to
produce a watertight behavioral definition of pretense”
(1987, 414). Another serious problem for N&S’s behavioral
account is the impact of verbal behavior.
Leslie (1987) points out that linguistic performance
accompanies exaggerated gestures and other cues to signal
pretense to the child by the mother. E.g., when a child hears
the mother saying, ‘let’s pretend that the banana is a
telephone’ a plausible account is that the child switches to
conceptualizing the sequence of activities as pretense, rather
than belief. Trying to account for Verbal behavior
behaviorally will simply not work as Chomsky (1967) so
savagely demonstrated to B.F. Skinner.
In addition to this, if the child simply mimics the mother
in her actions, thus triggering some process, then it provides
no account for the playful divergences from the ‘script’ that
so often accompany pretend play. This leads to my second
point about the intentions that lie behind episodes of pretend
play.

Is Pretending Essentially Mentalistic?
Leslie’s mentalistic account depends upon three major
arguments3: The simultaneous development of individual
and group pretense, the parallels between pretense and
mental state expressions and the fact that autistic children
are both poor at mindreading and pretense. In this section I
will articulate these arguments.

The Simultaneous Development of Individual and
Group Pretense
One of the intriguing aspects of pretend behavior is that
there is very little time between the first time a child
pretends during solo play and the first time they engage in
pretense behavior with other people. Leslie (2002) argues
that because the abilities for individual and group pretense
develop at the same age and because group pretense requires
understanding other people’s mental states, then the
parsimonious explanation of all pretense is that it is
essentially mentalistic. N&S reply that a behavioristic
explanation of early group pretense has not been ruled out
by Leslie and indeed cite evidence to the contrary. N&S’s
argue that:
“In order to engage in the banana/telephone pretense, the child
must understand that Momma is behaving in a way that would
be appropriate if the banana were a telephone. But as several
researchers have noted, the child need not have a mentalistic
understanding of pretense. (Harris 1994b: 250-1; Jarrold et al.
1994: 457; Lillard 1996: 1,718.” (N&S, 2003, p.53)

The behavioristic explanation of a mother pretending that
a banana is a telephone is that: the child understands that
mother is behaving in a way that would be appropriate if the
banana were a telephone (N&S, 53). The child upon
perceiving this event takes her belief ‘this is a banana’ and
updates the contents of her PWB with the content ‘this
[banana] is a telephone’ retaining all other beliefs as they
were. N&S claim that a child’s motivation to engage in
pretense, “derives from a real desire to act in a way that fits
the description being constructed in the PWB” (p.59). That
is, the child impetus is a desire to act consistently with a
constructed scenario. If this behavioristic account of
pretense is right, then it reduces the attractiveness to posit
theory of mind to early pretend behavior, thus undermining
Leslie’s project.
However, in the next section I argue that N&S’s
behavioristic solution does not explain early pretense. I have
two major criticisms of N&S. 1) That a behavioristic
explanation does not explain how a child comes to
understand that specific behaviors indicate a pretense
episode and 2) it is not a necessary part of pretending that a
child must desire to act in a way that would be appropriate if
the pretense were true.

3

Why it is not necessary to act in a way that “would be
appropriate if the pretense was true”.
Although people might pretend by acting consistently
with a set of updated beliefs, this conception misses a
crucial component of pretense. The real excitement of
pretense is the flexibility to do something that is entirely
inappropriate to the pretend episode. For example, what
would the child do if mother picked up the banana and said,
“Hello, is this the zoo? Could you send me an elephant
please; we’d like to play ‘circuses’”. Surely it is totally
inappropriate if mother was really on the telephone to the
zoo and asked them to deliver elephants? It is inappropriate
behavior because, on the telephone one only asks for real
things from people, one is not allowed to say anything they
like. Yet, if mother did ask for elephants, would the child
be confused? Would this ‘inappropriate behavior’ of
mother doom the entire pretense episode? Of course not!
The child would most likely start giggling and probably ask
for some monkeys too!
A large proportion of the fun of pretense is found in
acting in ways that can be completely unlike the appropriate
behavior. Also consider that not only did the mother violate

The analysis of Leslie’s view into these three major arguments
originates in N&S (2003). I have kept this structure both because I
agree that it does indeed mirror the arguments of Leslie and
because it clearly shows how N&S disagree with Leslie’s position.
1229

rules of etiquette here, but she violated the physical
requirements of the task by not even dialing any telephone
number. That is, mother simply picked up the ‘phone’ and
suddenly the zoo answered. This is not only inappropriate,
it is totally inaccurate phone-pretense if pretense is all about
behavior and not about the intention behind the behavior.
Perhaps N&S would respond to this criticism by saying
that the child quickly updates more beliefs into the PWB as
the pretense continues, so that new contents like ‘to talk to
someone on the telephone, you don’t need to dial any
number’ and ‘when on the telephone to the zoo, you can ask
for elephants’. But, this explanation seems to be clutching
at straws. If a child did ask for monkeys, then how does
updating the PWB with the statement, ‘when on the
telephone to the zoo, you can ask for elephants’ explain the
child’s behavior?
If the child can generalize from
requesting elephants, to requesting all animals, doesn’t that
show that the child is thinking about the situation?
It looks as though the child is engaging in conceptual,
mentalistic processes. The behavioral explanation of group
pretense fails because it does not and cannot explain what it
purports to explain: which is how children can understand
what is going on when someone other than themselves
begins pretending. I will say more about this in section
three.

The Parallels Between Pretense and Mental State
Expressions
One of Leslie’s arguments to support his decoupling
account of pretense is that the semantic properties of
‘pretend’ parallel the semantic properties of other mental
state expressions. N&S argue that Leslie is making the
wrong connection. They argue that instead of making a
parallel between pretending and other conceptualized
mental state expressions, the correct comparison for
‘pretend’ is with other propositional attitudes such as
‘belief’ and ‘desire’. N&S go on to say that because beliefs
and desires can be held without conceptual understanding, it
is inconsistent to make pretense conceptual. Because
beliefs and desires can be nonconceptual, N&S imply that
other propositional attitudes, like pretend, must also be
nonconceptual. Must we agree with N&S that most or all
propositional attitudes have the same properties as belief
and desire?
It is true that out of all the propositional attitudes,
evidence for belief and desire in non-humans is the
strongest because we can observe behavior that would be
consistent with fulfilling such attitudes. For example, if we
observe an ape pushing his arm through the bars of a cage
towards a banana, the behavior is consistent with desiring
food. Plus, the fact that the ape is pushing his arm at the
precise point closest to food is consistent with him believing
that there is food there. As N&S articulate, these animals
could have “lots of beliefs and desires though they are
entirely incapable of conceptualizing mental states” (2003,
52). Whilst the case for belief and desire seems convincing,
how many other propositional attitudes would it be

reasonable to consider affecting the actions of non-humans?
Could we say with conviction that an ape imagines?
Probably not. Why? Because there is no behavioral cues
which could inform us and we have no way of mindreading
what an ape is thinking. I am not alone in thinking this (see
Yablo, 1993; Walton, 1990). Walton says succinctly:
It is not easy to see what behavioral criteria might throw light on
imagining, or what the relevant functions of a functional account
might be. Imagining seems less tractable than more frequently
discussed attitudes such as believing, intending, and desiring as
well as emotional states such as being happy or sad or feeling
guilty or jealous. (21)

Walton suggests that important differences exist between
mental states with behavioral indicators such as emotional
states versus deeply introspective states with little or no
external markers such as imagining. As Nagel (1974) has
taught us, there is no way for us to know what it is like to be
a bat, nor a rat or an ape. So, the best we can do is to
observe the behavior of animals and make suppositions.
Because of this restriction, there are lots of propositional
attitudes that we must remain agnostic about when it comes
to animals or pre-verbal children. Hoping, dreaming,
imagining, forgetting, expecting and thinking all exhibit few
behavioral cues. Plus, the cues that we can see easily
describe a variety of mental states, so it is nigh impossible
to determine whether an individual incapable of
communication has them or not. What about pretense?
Pretending is one of the few propositional attitudes which
does have behavioral cues. Perhaps ‘pretend’ is more like
‘belief’ and less like ‘think’ or ‘hope’.
However, does having behavioral cues entail that pretense
functions in the same way as belief and desire? The fact that
non-human primates do not seem to engage in pretense is a
reason to think that pretense requires a different sort of
architecture than belief and desire. In fact, one plausible
reason that non-humans do not pretend is because they lack
the necessary conceptual capacity. Also, when we consider
young children, it is important to recognize the fact that
simply because a young child who is pretending may not be
able to discuss the pretense indicates nothing about their
conceptual abilities and everything about their linguistic
skills. The distinction between concept acquisition and
language acquisition must not be conflated.
Finally, many propositional attitudes such as regretting or
hoping require conceptual apparatus. Therefore, whatever
the parallels between propositional attitudes, N&S provide
no argument against some requiring conceptual knowledge
and some that do not. Without this parallel, then N&S’s
criticism has nothing to contribute against Leslie’s account.

1230

Autistic Children are Poor at both Mindreading
and Pretense
The third of Leslie’s arguments is that a theory of mind
explanation is the best way to explain the curious fact about
autistic children that they neither engage in pretense, nor
seem to understand the mental states of others. Thus, if the
child does not have the decoupling mechanism responsible
for metarepresentation, then they will fail any task requiring

similarly to this when holding a real drink, she would end
up pouring the fluid down the front of her clothes. So,
pretend behavior itself is importantly different from
behavior elicited from belief. Nichols and Stich seem to be
missing the fact that belief and pretense are not merely
behavioral outcomes, they are very different mental states.
This difference can be made clearer with an example:
Imagine the difference between circumstances where a
teddy bear can talk versus one where a child pretends that
her teddy-bear can talk. In the former, a child would listen
silently as Teddy spoke (one toy in the 80s famously said
“Hi! I'm Teddy Ruxpin. Do you want to hear a story”). In
the latter condition, a child would not ‘listen’ silently to
imaginary speaking and then respond as she would do in the
former situation. No, during pretense, the child talks for
teddy and then replies to teddy’s questions. If pretense
really involved ‘acting as though content x were true’, then
she would not speak for teddy, because she is pretending
that teddy can speak for himself. Therefore, N&S’s
behavioral explanation of pretense fails to explain the facts
about pretend behavior.

the understanding of mental states. N&S argue that rather
than a specific theory of mind failure, autistic symptoms are
explained by a failure of the mechanism which puts
representations into the PWB.
Yet, experiments have shown that autistics can complete
other tasks that require correctly putting representations into
the PWB. A good example of this is their success at
counterfactual reasoning. Leslie & Thaiss (1992) gave
autistic children a version of the false-belief task which used
photographs instead of mental state descriptions. Autistic
children are very successful at tasks that involve holding
simultaneous
and
contradictory
contents
about
nonintentional subject material. Therefore, the autistic
deficit lies squarely with tasks involving intentionality, i.e.
theory of mind tasks. This is a problem for N&S’s account
because they make no accommodation for what is different
between intentional and non-intentional possible world
thinking, at least at the very early stage of development we
are discussing.
In this section I have gone through the criticisms leveled
at Leslie’s theory by N&S. They have three major concerns
and I have shown how none of these invalidate Leslie’s
hypothesis. 1) N&S’s behavioristic account of pretense does
not adequately explain early group pretense. 2) The fact
that pretense is essentially conceptual is not impacted by the
nonconceptual nature of belief or desire and 3) the PWB
provides a poor substitute as an explanation of autistic
cognitive deficits. In the next section I will elaborate on
how a behavioristic account of pretense fails to explain early
group pretense.

Conclusion

Problems with a Behavioristic Account of
Pretense

In this paper I have evaluated the criticisms leveled
against Leslie’s conceptual account of pretense by N&S.
N&S suggest that a behavioral account of early group
pretense is preferable to a conceptual account because it can
do the work without superfluous mental baggage. N&S
claim that early pretense it is simply a propositional attitude,
like belief or desire. They also suggest that autistic deficits
can be better explained with their behavioristic boxology
account, rather than by recourse to discussion about theory
of mind. I have argued that a behavioral account is
untenable because it does not explain the actual behavior
observed in children and it cannot explain how children
come to understand that a specific action is one of pretense
versus belief. I have argued that propositional attitudes
have a variety of properties, do not always have behavioral
cues to indicate their satisfaction conditions and may
necessitate conceptual apparatus. Finally, I have shown that
N&S’s account does not explain the finding that autistics
can think counterfactually when it involves nonintentional
agents. I conclude that a mentalistic explanation of pretense
best explains the behavior under consideration.

Nichols and Stich claim that pretending is ‘acting as
though content x were true’. In their actual words, “To
pretend that p is (at least to rough first approximation) to
behave in a way that is similar to the way one would (or
might) behave if p were the case” (2003, p.37). How exactly
does this formulation explain the difference between
pretense and any other behavior? Unfortunately this
definition fails because it is the same explanation that
underlies belief. That is, ‘to believe that p is to behave in a
way that is similar to the way one would behave if p were
the case’. More seriously, the behavioral consequences of
belief entail ‘acting as though content x were true’. For
example, if I believe that there is milk in the cup, then I’ll
drink it, or offer it to someone else. In other words, I’ll
behave in a way that is similar to the way one would behave
if milk is in the cup.
Not only does N&S’s definition not distinguish between
pretending and belief, but it is also too weak to really
explain the behavior in question. As Leslie (1987) discusses,
acts of pretense are observable via the exaggerated gestures
of the pretender. For example, If Sally is pretending that this
cup has milk in it, then, when she pretends to drink from the
cup, she does not put the cup to her lips, instead she tips the
cup just before it reaches her mouth. If she behaved

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Rutgers University for travel awards.

References

1231

Chomsky, N. (1967) A Review of B. F. Skinner's Verbal
Behavior. In Leon A. Jakobovits and Murray S. Miron
(eds.), Readings in the Psychology of Language,
Prentice-Hall, pp. 142-143
Leslie, A. (1987a). Pretense and representation: the origins
of “theory of mind”. Psychological Review, 94: 412-26

Leslie, A. (1987b). The child’s understanding of the mental
world. In R. L. Gregory (Ed), The Oxford companion to
the mind. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Leslie, A. (1988). Some implications of pretense for
mechanisms underlying the child’s theory of mind. In J.
Astington, D. Olson, & P.Harris (Eds), Developing
theories of mind. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Leslie, A. (1994). Pretending and believing: issues in the
theory of ToMM. Cognition, 50: 211-38.
Leslie, A. (2002). Pretense and representation revisited. In
N.L. Stein, P.J. Bauer & M. Rabinowitz (Eds),
Representation, Memory, and Development: Essays in
Honor of Jean Mandler. New Jersey USA: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Harris, P. and Kavanaugh, R. D. (1993). ‘Young children’s
understanding of pretense’, Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development. 58/1

Perner, J., Barker, S., and Hutton, D. (1994). ‘Prelief: the
conceptual origins of belief and pretense’, in Children’s
Early Understanding of Mind: Origins and Development.
Lewis, C., & Michell, P. (eds). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. 261-86.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a Bat. Philosophical
Review. 83. 435-450
Nichols, S. & Stich, S. (2000). ‘A Cognitive theory of
pretense’, Cognition, 74: 115-47.
Nichols, S. & Stich, S. (2003). Mindreading. Oxford:
Oxford University Press
Walton, K. (1990). Mimesis as Make Believe. Cambridge,
Mass: Harvard University Press.
Yablo, S. (1993) Is Conceivability a Guide to Possibility?
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 53. 1-42

1232

