UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
SPAM-Ling: A Dynamical Model of Spatial Working Memory and Spatial Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7c71w57b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Lipinski, John
Samuelson, Larissa K.
Schöner, Gregor
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

SPAM-Ling: A Dynamical Model of Spatial Working Memory
and Spatial Language
John Lipinski (john-lipinski@uiowa.edu)
John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Gregor Schöner
Institut für Neuroinformatik,
Ruhr-Universität-Bochum, Germany
structure. Such descriptive accounts are, of course, critical
to theory development, but their potential flexibility makes
them difficult to empirically falsify. The second limitation is
that both approaches focus on representational structure in
the abstract. Spatial language studies have tended to focus
on the nature of representational structure rather than the
second-to-second processes that give rise to those
representations. This can lead to a theoretical impasse
because the empirical probes of the underlying
representational structures are not strongly grounded in realtime, task-specific performance. We contend that it is
critical to understand these real-time processes if we are to
make headway on the challenges inherent in integrating
“higher” cognitive and sensory-motor systems.

Abstract
Spatial language is an ideal domain to examine perceptualmotor and language integration precisely because it is an
unambiguous case of these systems coming together. To date,
however, researchers in this domain have made little headway
in understanding the real-time processes underlying spatial
language behaviors. Here, we describe a dynamical systems
model—SPAM-Ling—that integrates the real-time processes
that underlie spatial working memory and the use of spatial
prepositions in a canonical “above” ratings task. Comparisons
between empirical data and model simulations demonstrate
the effectiveness of this approach. We conclude by
highlighting several novel predictions of the model that we
are currently testing in our laboratory.

How Do Sensory-Motor and
Linguistic Systems Interact?

Spatial Language: An Empirical Impasse
Consideration of an ongoing debate within spatial language
illustrates the limitations discussed above. To examine the
correspondence between linguistic and sensory-motor
spatial representations, Hayward and Tarr (1995) conducted
a series of experiments comparing linguistic and sensorymotor spatial representations. Based on preposition use,
ratings of the applicability of spatial prepositions to visual
displays, location memory performance, and same-different
discrimination judgments, Hayward and Tarr concluded that
linguistic and sensory-motor systems depend on the same
representational spatial structure, a result consistent with
Barsalou’s PSS approach. In particular, results suggested
that people use spatial prototypes aligned with the cardinal
axes in the task space.
Subsequent work by Crawford, Regier, & Huttenlocher
(2000) probing both linguistic ratings and visual
representations of space presented a different picture. For
instance, although people rated, that prototypical “Above”
was aligned with the vertical axis as in Hayward and Tarr
(1995), Crawford et. al. also found evidence of a location
memory bias away from the vertical axis in a location
memory task when targets appeared to the right and left of
this axis. To account for these memory biases away from
the vertical axis, Crawford et al. posited that spatial
category prototypes lie along the diagonal axes in the task
space. Consequently, responses in the memory task are
biased toward these prototypes and away from the vertical

Understanding how the sensory-motor and linguistic
systems interact is a central issue in cognitive science.
Spatial language is an ideal domain to explore the
relationship between these systems because it brings
language and space together. To date, two general
approaches to representation speak to this interaction in
spatial language (Barsalou, 1999): amodal symbolic systems
and perceptual symbol systems.
Amodal symbolic systems presume representational
independence between symbolic processes like language
and sensory-motor systems (Harnad, 1990). As a result of
this strong separation, amodal systems require a
transduction process that permits “communication” between
these separated systems.
Barsalou’s Perceptual Symbol Systems (1999)
approach contrasts with this transduction-based, amodal
approach by positing inherently grounded perceptual
symbols. These perceptual symbols are “records of neural
states that underlie perception” (p.583) and are both in the
given sensory modality and capable of replicating the
flexible, productive, hierarchical capacities of traditional
symbolic systems.
Although both approaches to the interaction of sensorymotor and linguistic systems have received support, there
are two critical limits of these proposals. First, they largely
rely on descriptive, conceptual accounts of representational

489

black curtains covering all external landmarks. A curved
border occluded the corners of the table (and therefore the
diagonal symmetry axes).
A single referent disc appeared along the vertical axis
30cm in front of the participant and remained visible
throughout each presentation trial. At the start of each trial
the participant moved a cursor to this disk. A number (100500) then appeared and participants begin counting
backwards by 1s aloud until they made a response. This
counting task prevented the verbal encoding of the task. A
small, spaceship-shaped target then appeared on the screen
for two seconds.
For spatial memory trials, participants were instructed
to move the cursor to the location corresponding the ship’s
location when the computer says “Ready-Set-Go”. For
spatial language rating trials, on the other hand, participants
were instructed to rate on a scale of 1 (“definitely not
above”) to 9 (“definitely above”) the extent to which the
word “above” described the spaceship’s location relative to
the reference disk and say their rating when the computer
said “Please give your ‘Above’ rating.” The spoken stimuli
that indicated which response to provide were each 1500ms
in duration. In No Delay conditions, completion of the
spoken stimulus was timed to coincide with the offset of the
spaceship target. In the 10s Delay conditions, completion of
the spoken stimulus occurred exactly 10 seconds after the
disappearance of the target. Spaceship targets appeared at a
constant radius of 15cm at 19 different locations relative to
the vertical axis (0º): every 10º from -70º to +70º as well as
±90º and ±110º. Responses to the ±110º targets were not
formally analyzed because they were at the extremes of the
task space.

axis. This proposal is consistent with the Category
Adjustment (CA) model (Huttenlocher et al., 1991).
Considered together, the results from Hayward and Tarr and
Crawford et al. illustrate the limits of dealing with
representation in the abstract: both sets of researchers used
similar experimental tasks and reported largely similar
findings, yet they draw starkly different conclusions,
conclusions that depend critically on abstract definitions of
representational structure (in this case, prototypes).
Why might this be the case? We contend that because
the real-time processes underlying spatial memory and
ratings generation are not specified, it is difficult to make
precise predictions about performance across tasks that
delineate between the two accounts of spatial language and
its relationship to spatial memory. This failure to reach a
satisfactory resolution mirrors the larger failure to resolve
the modal-amodal conflict. In both cases, the current
empirical data fail to delineate the proposed accounts.

Shared Processes in Language and Memory
In attempting to synthesize these competing accounts, we
observed a subtle but critical methodological difference
between the typical ratings and spatial memory tasks.
Unlike the spatial memory task, in which participants
generated their response when the target was absent, ratings
responses could be generated while the target was visible.
In light of this task difference, the obvious question is
whether spatial language might exhibit a performance
profile similar to that of spatial memory once this timedependent methodological difference is taken into account.
To the extent that spatial language and spatial memory
exhibit similar time-dependent signatures, it would suggest
that that they rely on a shared set of real-time processes.
This would be consistent with the spirit of Barsalou’s PSS
proposal. If, on the other hand, there are minimal
similarities in performance across the memory and ratings
tasks even after we take the real-time processing
considerations into account, it would suggest that the
methodological difference was merely incidental and that
spatial language and spatial memory are nonetheless
representationally distinct.
To answer this question, we tested whether the
processes that create delay-dependent biases in spatial
memory might also leave some empirical signature in a
spatial language task. The data presented are from a single
experiment previously reported. Because they are indicative
of the general findings and have been replicated across
several variations (e.g. Lipinski et al., 2005), we simply
present the general results. All effects discussed are
significant (p<.05).

Empirical Evidence: General Results
Consistent with previous findings, we expected that spatial
language ratings would be highest for targets that appear
along the vertical axis (centered at 0º) and fall off
systematically as the target locations shifted to the left or
right of this axis. Beyond these established findings,
however, we also conjectured that ratings provided after a
10s delay should show a delay-dependent “drift” away from
the vertical axis analogous to spatial memory “drift” away
from this axis. In particular, we expected that ratings would
be systematically lower after a 10s delay relative to ratings
produced immediately after target offset. Why might this be
the case? Given that location memories drift away from the
vertical axis, they also drift away from the prototypical
“Above” location at that axis. If ratings and memory
processes are integrated in real-time, then ratings produced
after a delay should reflect this memory drift away from
prototypical “Above” and yield lower ratings. Recall that
Crawford et al. used the memory drift effect to differentiate
non-linguistic prototypes at the diagonals from linguistic
prototypes along the cardinal axes. If ratings exhibit the
analogous “drift” effect over delay, then memory biases can
no longer be used as an index of linguistic and nonlinguistic spatial prototypes; the ratings drift effect would

Empirical Evidence: General Methods
Participants sat at a large table with a homogeneous surface.
A compute mouse was placed on the table directly to the
participant’s right. A projector underneath the table
projected the stimuli onto the table surface. Experimental
sessions were conducted in dim lighting in a room with
490

No Delay
This
location 10
information
first 8
Delay
enters the network
6
through the IDego
field (see Figure
4
2A). Along the x2
axis of this field are
a set of spatially- 0
tuned neurons that -2 -90 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 90
capture the range of
Target
possible
target 9
locations, where 0º 8
lies
along
the
7
No Delay
vertical axis, -90º
6
Delay
is directly to the
left of the reference 5
dot, and +90º is 4
directly to the right 3
(note that “left” and
-90 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 90
“right” is from the
Target
participant’s
Figure
Figure1.1.See
Seetext
textfor
fordetails
details.
perspective and is
reversed in the present picture to show how activation
changes during the memory delay). Time, from the start of
the trial at 0 s to the end of the trial at 10 s, is on the y-axis,
and activation is on the z-axis. The spike of activation at the
30º location in the IDego field reflects the brief visual input
at this target location in the task space.
This input is passed to SWMobj via the reciprocal
coupling between SWMobj and the IDego perceptual field.
Because the IDego and SWMobj fields code location in
different reference frames, there must be a dynamic process
that aligns these reference frames and keeps them calibrated.
This alignment is captured by a dynamical system with
fixed-point dynamics captured here by the ∆y parameter
(Fig. 2B). This parameter maintains a simple translational
shift between the two fields.
To capture the characteristics of spatial working
memory, location-related information is maintained in the
SWMobj field via the dynamic interaction among neurons in
Ratings

Error (deg)

constitute a bias in the direction away from the “Above”
prototype. Indeed, if prototypes truly underlie delaydependent biases as the CA model predicts, then “Above”
ratings should exhibit bias towards the prototype and
increase over the delay.
The top portion of Figure 1 shows the effect of delay on
spatial memory, with the dotted line representing responses
in the 10s delay condition and the solid line representing no
delay responses. Positive values reflect errors away from the
vertical axis. Overall, the elevated dotted line indicates that
spatial memories were biased away from the vertical axis
over the delay, particularly for targets appearing just to the
right or left of the vertical axis (e.g., the ±10°-50° targets).
The bottom portion of Figure 1 shows the effect of
delay in spatial language ratings, with the dotted line
representing responses in the 10s delay condition and the
solid line representing no delay ratings. Critically, ratings
were significantly lower after a 10s delay, suggesting that
spatial language ratings are indeed subject to the same delay
effects manifest in spatial memory.

SPAM-Ling: Towards Integration
At the broadest level, we have argued that an
understanding of the integration of sensory-motor and
linguistic systems depends heavily on sensitivity to realtime
performance
characteristics.
Our
empirical
examination of spatial memory and spatial language
supports this broader argument. Critically, however, we
need to specify the real-time processes at work in these
tasks in a way that can both account for the current data and
yield testable predictions. Thus, in the next section we
describe a new model—SPAM-Ling—that integrates the
dynamics of Spatial Planning And Memory with Linguistic
processes.

SPAM-Ling: An Overview
SPAM-Ling is a neural network that builds on the Dynamic
Field Theory (DFT) originally proposed by Thelen et al.
(2001) to explain reaching errors in infancy and extended by
Spencer, Schutte, and Schöner to explain the development
of spatial working memory beyond infancy (Schutte,
Spencer, & Schöner, 2003; Spencer & Schöner, 2003). This
new model captures the empirical effects described above
and makes novel predictions regarding the influence of
enhanced perceptual structure and spatial language
semantics on spatial working memory.
SPAM-Ling consists of 4 dynamically coupled layers
(see Figure 2): a Perceptual Field that is primarily input
driven and in an egocentric frame of reference (IDego;
Fig.2A), an object-centered Spatial Working Memory Field
(SWMobj; Fig. 2C), an associated Long Term Memory Field
that is also in the object-centered frame (LTMobj; Fig. 2D),
and a layer of localist Word neurons (Fig. 2E).
To see how this model captures performance on a
single 10 s delay trial from the ratings task, consider the
simulation in Figure 2. On this trial, we presented a target
30º to the right of the reference dot along the vertical axis.

IDego
(A)

(C)

∆y

SWMobj

(B)

(D)

LTMobj
40

30

20

(E)

Word
Nodes

Right

+

-

Above

+

-

10

(F)
0

-

Left

+

-10

-20

-30
0

1000

2000

Figure 2. See text for details

491

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

Node Activation

9000

Because the
Emp.Delay
Emp. No Delay
dynamic
Mod. Delay
Mod. No Delay
processes
of
9
SPAM-Ling
8
7
operate
6
symmetrically
5
across the right
4
and left sides of
3
2
the task space, the
1
empirical
data
0
presented in the
-1 -90 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 90
following
-2
Target
simulation figures
Figure
3.
See
text for details
reflect
the
averaging of corresponding target values across the right
and left sides (e.g. both the -10° and +10° error values in
Figure 3 are set to the average of the observed -10° and
+10° values). The data point for each target simulation
corresponds to the location of the maximally active neuron
at the end of the trial. Positive values reflect errors away
from the vertical axis while negative values reflect errors
towards the vertical axis.
Figure 3 compares results from our simulations of the
model with the previous empirical observations. The x-axis
indicates the target location and the y-axis represents
memory error. Lines with square data-point markers
represent the empirical data. Lines with triangular data-point
markers, on the other hand, represent the SPAM-Ling
simulated errors. The solid lines correspond to the no delay
trials while the dotted lines correspond to the 10s delay
trials. Positive errors signify errors away from the vertical
axis.
For the empirical no delay results (solid line with
square markers), we again see minimal error over all the
target locations. Consistent with these observations, SPAMLing yielded uniformly low spatial memory errors. In
addition, all errors were positive as was the case with the
empirical results. Across all targets, results from these no
delay simulations deviated from the empirical data by only
.39º with a maximum deviation of 1.09º.
Critically, simulation results of the 10s delay also
reveals a strong overall similarity between the empirical and
simulated results. Specifically, the difference between the
empirical and simulated errors for the 10s delay trials was
less than 1º for 11 of the 17 targets. Although there were
some larger deviations at the ±30º and ±40º targets, the
average absolute difference between the simulated and
empirical results was only 0.93°. This low deviation is
particularly notable given the strongly non-linear profile of
delay-dependent memory drift. This correspondence,
considered together with the no delay simulations, indicates
that SPAM-Ling can accurately capture spatial memory
performance with and without delay.
Error (d eg)

this field. In particular, neurons in SWM interact according
to a local excitation/lateral inhibition function, consistent
with neurophysiological data. The result of this interaction
over time is that highly active neurons that code for similar
locations excite each other while simultaneously inhibiting
neurons that code for more distant locations. The selfexcitatory nature of local excitation coupled with broad
lateral inhibition allows activation peaks in SWMobj to
maintain themselves through time, even in the absence of
input from the world (e.g., during the delay period in Figure
2). Although the SWMobj field maintains a memory of the
target location, the peak in Figure 2C drifts systematically
during the delay away from 0º, that is, away from the 30º
target location in a clockwise manner. The location with the
maximum activation at the end of the trial corresponds to
the remembered target location.
In a spatial memory task, SPAM-Ling must capture the
delay-dependent memory drift away from the vertical axis.
SPAM-Ling accounts for this memory drift through a strong
inhibitory long-term memory trace around 0º in the objectcentered LTMobj field which is reciprocally coupled to
SWMobj (Fig. 2D). This memory trace around 0° reflects
activation associated with the vertical symmetry axis of the
task space. Note that this trace has an inhibitory trough for
locations to the right and left of the vertical axis. As a
consequence, neurons on the side of the activation peak
closest to the vertical axis will tend to be inhibited. This
biases the dynamics of the target activation profile, pushing
the peak (and thus the memory) away from the vertical axis
over delay. Note that this formalized process accounts for
spatial memory bias away from reference axes without
positing prototypes (Spencer & Schöner, 2003; Schutte,
Spencer, & Schöner, 2003). Thus, contra the CA model, one
need not infer the influence of prototypes to account for
delay-dependent biases in spatial memory.

SPAM-Ling: Simulating Spatial Memory
To simulate spatial memory performance, we ran a single
trial simulation for each individual target (0, ±10,
±20,±30,±40,±50,±60±70,±90) for both the no delay and
10s delay conditions. Each simulation began with a 200
time step (ts) relaxation period. To map the real-time
processes of spatial memory and spatial language onto the
SPAM-Ling simulations, each subsequent time step (ts) in
the model corresponded to 1.5ms in real time. For example,
the 2s target presentation time in the experiment was
modeled with a 1333 ts model presentation time (1333ts X
1.5 ms/ts= 2000ms). Responses for the no delay condition
were made following a 1s response preparation and
execution interval (relaxation (200ts) + stimulus
presentation (1333ts) + response preparation and execution
(667ts)). The remembered target location was indicated by
the spatially coded neuron with the maximum activation at
the end of the trial. For 10s delay simulations, model
execution was terminated at 8867ts: relaxation (200ts) +
stimulus presentation (1333ts)+ response delay (6667ts)+
response preparation and execution (667ts).

SPAM-Ling: Integrating Spatial Semantics
To bring spatial language and spatial working memory
together, we have integrated the spatial working memory

492

layer with a connectionist-style localist Word layer (Fig.
2E). Each node in this layer represents a single spatial
language term (e.g., “above”). Figure 2 shows three nodes
from the model (“Below” is not shown though it was
included in all simulations). The nodes are mutually
inhibitory. In addition, each node has a self-excitatory
connection and can also receive excitatory input from
external speech. Note that these are bi-stable word neurons
that can sustain inputs in WM using dynamics similar to
those present in the SWM field. Thus, each word node has
the capacity to maintain excitation even when the target is
no longer present.
Each node is reciprocally coupled to the SWMobj field
through a set of spatially-specific connection weights
centered on the prototypical spatial location for that word.
For instance, the “Above” node is coupled to the SWMobj
field through connection weights distributed according to a
Gaussian distribution centered at 0º, the prototypical
location for the “Above” relation in our task (see Figure 1).
Similarly, the “Right” and “Left” nodes are coupled to the
SWMobj field through connection weights distributed
according to Gaussian distributions centered at +90º and 90º, respectively (not shown). In the current
implementation, each Gaussian has a variance of 60 units.
These Gaussian distributions are hypothesized to emerge
over development as children learn the statistics of spatial
term use within an object-centered reference frame.
What are the functional consequences of coupling
between the Word nodes and SWM? When the nodes
receive input from SWMobj, they become active and
compete. A plot of node activations for the 30º ratings trial
simulation (Fig. 2F, solid line) shows that the “Above” node
quickly dominates. This domination arises for two reasons.
First, we provide a 200ts burst of speech input to the
“Above” node to elicit a ratings response. This burst mirrors
the signal heard during the experiment (“Please give your
Above rating”). The timing of this input in all simulations
reflects the details of the experimental paradigm; thus, the
stimulus presentation differed between the no delay (567 ts)
and 10s delay conditions (7234ts). Coinciding with this
speech input, the resting level of all the semantic nodes is
raised. This elevation engages the entire spatial semantic
network, allowing each node to become active, compete,
and potentially entire a self-sustaining activation state.
In addition to the elevated node activation and the
speech burst, the “Above” node dominance depicted in Fig.
2F is also facilitated by the memory peak at approximately
30º. At this location, the memory peak is most closely
aligned with the “Above” node Gaussian centered at 0º, thus
provided greater input to that node. Note, however, that
because non-vertical targets tend to drift away from the
vertical axis over memory delays, the alignment of the
memory peak with the “Above” node Gaussian declines
over delay and increasingly favors the competing “Right” or
“Left” nodes. SPAM-Ling accounts for the delay-dependent
ratings “drift” effect through this delay-dependent shift of
node activation and node competition.

To get a closer look
at how SPAM-Ling
rating simulations work,
Figure 4 depicts the
activation level of all
nodes
(above=red,
right=blue, left=aqua,
below=green) when the
target was presented at
30° in a no delay ratings
Time
trial. Note that the time
Figure 4. See text for details
steps are marked along
the x-axis and activation level marked along the y-axis. At
the beginning of the trial, the node activations are uniformly
low. At 567ts the activation levels rise for all the nodes and
the “Above” node (red solid line) additionally receives the
speech input signal. These changes lead to sudden activation
increases for all nodes, but especially for the Above node.
After the input boost, the “Above” node then begins to
suppress its competitors, thus driving down their activation.
Nonetheless, the “Right” node (elevated dashed line) has a
somewhat higher activation level. The elevated “Right”
node activation level is due to the sustained peak of
activation in SWMobj near the 30º location which partially
overlaps with the “Right” node Gaussian. Delayed ratings
trials operate in a similar manner but with the delayed
speech signal parameters.
To convert “Above” node activation to a linguistic
rating, we first identified the largest node activation value
across all targets and delay conditions (the 0º target in the
no delay condition). Next, we scaled all the other node
activations by this value, dividing each by the maximum
activation. This converts activation values to a percentage of
this maximum. Finally, we multiplied each activation level
by 9.
Note that we were generally conservative in our
approach to generating ratings of “Above”. In particular, all
nodes were connected to SWM using the same Gaussian
profile, just centered over a different prototypical value. In
addition, we engaged the semantic network uniformly at the
“go” signal. The only competitive advantage given to the
“Above” node was the speech input which reflected the
structure of the experimental paradigm. All other simulation
details were identical across nodes. One advantage of this
conservative approach is that it allows us to easily predict
ratings performance in other tasks in which the to-be-rated
word (e.g. “left”, “right”, “below”) is signaled only by the
specific instructions given on each trial.
40

30

Activation

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30
0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

SPAM-Ling: Simulating Spatial Language Ratings
To simulate spatial language ratings performance, we again
ran a single trial simulation for each individual target (0,
±10, ±20,±30,±40,±50,±60±70,±90) for both the no delay
and 10s delay conditions. Note that the only difference
between the memory and ratings simulations was the
engagement of the semantic network and the addition of the
speech input: all IDego, SWMobj, and LTMobj field

493

these is the influence of 9
feedback on location 8
memory
trials.
According to the model, 7
Emp. No Delay
feedback about location 6
Emp. Delay
memory
performance 5
Mod. No Delay
should build up memory
traces in the LTMobj 4
Mod. Delay
field. If SPAM-Ling is 3
correct,
then
-90 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 90
Target
systematically erroneous
Figure5.5.See
Seetext
textfor
fordetails.
details.
Figure
feedback about target
memory performance received only during the memory
trials, should shift delay-dependent biases in the direction of
that feedback for both the memory and ratings even though
feedback was never provided during the ratings trials.
Through these and related efforts, we hope to further
establish SPAM-Ling as a model that can account for
canonical spatial language and spatial memory performance
and also generate novel, testable predictions about the realtime processes underlying the integration of sensory-motor
and linguistic systems.
Ratings

parameters were identical across the memory and ratings
simulations for both no delay and 10s delay trials.
Figure 5 compares ratings simulations for both the no
delay and 10s delay conditions at all target locations with
the previous empirical observations. The x-axis indicates the
target location and the y-axis represents the rating. Lines
with square data-point markers represent the empirical
ratings. Lines with triangular data-point markers, on the
other hand, represent the SPAM-Ling simulated ratings. The
solid lines correspond to the no delay trials while the dotted
lines correspond to the 10s delay trials. As with spatial
memory simulations, we assume symmetry across the left
and right sides. The empirical data shown are thus the
average of the corresponding targets across the left and right
sides.
The first observation is the strong correspondence
between the empirical and simulation ratings profiles for
both the no delay and delay conditions. Although the
simulations are slightly higher for targets near the vertical
axis, the overall shape suggests that SPAM-Ling effectively
captures the core empirical spatial language ratings gradient.
In addition to capturing this core behavior, SPAM-Ling
captures the effects of delay. Examination of the empirical
ratings shows a generally lower ratings gradient but also a
tapering of those differences for the ±70º and ±90º target
locations. Likewise, the simulations show generally lower
ratings with delay as well as a reduced delay effect for the
±70º and ±90º targets, although the simulated delay effect
for targets at and very near the vertical axis (0°, 10°) is
somewhat underestimated. Overall, these simulation results
for both the no delay and delay conditions indicate that
SPAM-Ling can indeed capture the essential details of
spatial language ratings behaviors.

Acknowledgments
NIMH 1 F31 MH072133-01A1 to John Lipinski
NIMH RO1 MH62480, NSF BCS 00-91757, and NSF
HSD 0527698 to John P. Spencer

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22,577-660.
Crawford, L.E., Regier, T., & Huttenlocher, J. (2000).
Linguistic
and
non-linguistic
spatial
categorization.Cognition, 75, 209-235.
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem.Physica
D, 42, 335-346.
Hayward, W.G., & Tarr, M.J. (1995). Spatial language and
spatial representation. Cognition, 55, 39-84.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98, 352-376.
Lipinski, J., Spencer, J.P., & Samuelson, L.K. (2005).
Shared representational processes in spatial language and
spatial working memory. Poster presented at the 46th
Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society. Toronto.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2003). Testing
the dynamic field theory: Working memory for locations
becomes more spatially precise over development. Child
Development, 74, 1393-1417.
Spencer, J.P. & Schöner, G. (2003). Bridging the
representational gap in the dynamic systems approach to
development. Developmental Science, 6, 392-412.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. B. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A dynamic field theory of
infant perseverative reaching errors. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 24, 1-86

Summary and Future Directions
In the present report, we used results from the domain
of spatial language to show how emphasizing
representational structure to the exclusion of real-time
processes can lead to unresolved theoretical and empirical
conflicts. Consideration of these real-time processes led to
the discovery of a new empirical finding—language ratings
“drift”—directly analogous to the well-established delaydependent memory drift effect. To account for both of these
findings, we introduced SPAM-Ling, a new dynamical
systems model of spatial language and spatial memory.
Results from a series of simulations showed that SPAMLing can account for both no delay and delay performance
across the memory and ratings tasks. This is notable given
the strongly non-linear performance profiles of both tasks as
well as the marked performance differences between them.
These results clearly demonstrate how taking real-time
processes seriously can not only enhance our understanding
of integration across systems, but also yield informative
empirical outcomes.
Additional consideration of SPAM-Ling’s structure and
real-time dynamics have led to several other novel
predictions which we are currently testing. Chief among
494

