UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Stereotypes: From an illusory stability to an illusory belief account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fz7q18k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Dos Santos, Sofia Correia
Garcia-Marques, Leonel
Moreira, Sergio

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Stereotypes: From an illusory stability to an illusory belief account
Sofia Correia dos Santos (sosantos@fpce.ul.pt)

Sérgio Moreira (d8281@students.iscte.pt)

Faculdade de Psicologia e Ciências da Educação da
Universidade de Lisboa, Alameda da Universidade, 1649013, Lisbon, Portugal

Higher Institute of Social Sciences and Organizational
Studies (ISCTE), Avenida das Forças Armadas, room 224,
1649-026 Lisbon, Portugal

Leonel Garcia-Marques (garcia-marques@sapo.pt)
Faculdade de Psicologia e Ciências da Educação da Universidade de Lisboa, Alameda da
Universidade, 1649-013, Lisbon, Portugal
Ballato, 1986).
Other research shows that common
categories are largely context-sensitive, in that the
immediate linguistic context biases both how typical an
instance is judged to be as well as how fast it can be
accessed (Roth & Shoben, 1983).
Should we expect mental representations of social
categories to show the same degree of fluidity as non-social
categories? At first sight, the answer to this question may
seem quite obvious. Just consider the famous “Princeton
trilogy” (Gilbert, 1951; Karlins, Coffman, & Walters, 1969;
Katz & Braly, 1933). Although the level of consensus
decreased somewhat across studies, successive generations
of Princeton University students conveyed only slightly
more benevolent versions of basically the same stereotypes.
Moreover, abstractionist tendencies should make
stereotypes self-perpetuating and highly resistant to change
(e.g., Hamilton & Trolier, 1986).
However, stereotype stability has been typically assessed by
the correspondence between the attributes chosen to
describe the social category across different studies (e.g.,
Devine & Elliot, 1995). Consequently those studies do not
provide an answer to one key issue: Are stereotypes stable
over time within the same individual? Although, some of us
might be tempted to suggest a positive answer, the fact is
that we simply lack the relevant empirical evidence to
answer this question (for one exception, see Rothbart &
John’s, 1987 unpublished longitudinal study, described in
Rothbart & John, 1993). So, we may have been neglecting
important attributes of social information processing, such
as the malleability and context sensitivity of stereotypes.
Studies in this paper were designed with three main goals in
mind. Study 1 assesses whether stereotypes show the same
type of malleability that has now been demonstrated for
mental representations of non-social categories using
longitudinal methodology (for a review, see Barsalou, 1989;
Barsalou & Medin, 1986). Study 2 takes further the idea of
malleability assessing to what extent are stereotypes context
sensible knowledge structures. Study 3 provides preliminary
evidence about what processes may be responsible for
stereotypes malleability.

Abstract
The categorization literature has shown that concepts are
unstable and context-dependent knowledge structures (e.g.,
Barsalou, 1987; 1989). Three studies show similar findings
for stereotypes. Study 1 revealed only moderate levels of
within-participants stability in the content of social categories.
Study 2 showed that irrelevant attributes of social groups are
incorporated into the groups’ stereotype as long as they are
contextually salient. Study 3 provided preliminary evidence
suggesting that stereotype context sensitivity may be
accounted for a belief illusion account.
Keywords:
cognition

Stereotypes; Conceptual instability; social

According to early abstractionist positions, knowledge
structures play an important role in achieving cognitive
economy (e.g., Rosch, 1978). Fulfilling such a role demands
cognitive structures that are both constant and persistent. It
is assumed that the need for cognitive stability coupled with
the scarcity of cognitive resources leads to the neglect of
much of the detailed information about exemplars of nonsocial categories. So, perceivers are highly insensible to
variant characteristics of exemplars and are likely to use the
invariant characteristics already represented in the category
mental representation to go beyond the information given.
In short, perceivers become chronic abstractionists (Frank
& Bransford, 1971; Posner & Keele, 1968). Such
abstractionist
tendencies
thus
envisaged
mental
representations of objects as enduring mental entities that
exhibit an impressive degree of constancy in the face of
environmental turmoil. One corollary of such approach is
that knowledge structures, at least under ideal measurement
conditions, should exhibit high reliability across relatively
extended periods of time within the same individual.
Nonetheless, empirical evidence assessing the stability of
common concepts and categories indicates much more
instability than a classic abstractionist position would
suggest. The same individual on two different occasions
(24 hours or two months apart) exhibits only modest
reliability in defining and characterizing common concepts
(Barsalou, Spindler, Sewell, Ballato & Gendel, 1987),
retrieving exemplars from common categories (Bellezza,
1984), classifying instances into categories (McCloskey &
Gluksberg, 1978), and rating the typicality of instances
relative to their parent categories (Barsalou, Sewell &

Study 1
The likelihood of selecting the same attributes to
characterize a social category at two different points in time

732

(Barsalou et al., 1987) seems to be a particularly appropriate
way to assess stereotype stability. In fact, attribute or
property selection was the first procedure used to study
stereotypes empirically (Katz & Braly, 1933), it was used in
the series of studies that assessed stereotypes in different
generations of the same student population to infer the
temporal persistence of stereotypes (Gilbert, 1951; Karlins,
Coffman & Walters, 1969; Katz & Braly, 1933), and it has
remained quite popular ever since (for a review see Dovidio,
Brigham, Johnson & Gaertner, 1996). However, none of
these studies asked the same participants to characterize a
social group at two different points in time. In Study 1, we
asked participants about the cultural stereotype content –
what “people in general” think about the social groups at
stake (e.g., Devine & Elliot, 1995). Our primary goal was to
assess stereotype stability as reflected in the communality of
stereotypic attributes selection within individuals over
time.).

Results and Discussion
Aggregate Sample (Within-Item) Stability When the
checklist methodology is used, stereotype stability is
typically assessed by the correspondence between the
attributes chosen to describe the social category across
different sessions (e.g., Devine & Elliot, 1995). We
followed this procedure to compare attributes chosen across
the two sessions. Across sessions agreement was very high
(the within-item correlations varied from .94 to .97). As in
previous studies (e.g., Devine & Elliot, 1995) within item
analysis (aggregating across participants) apparently support
stereotype stability.
Within-participants stability To determine the degree of
overlap in the attributes used to describe social groups by
each participant across sessions, a common-element
correlation was used (Bellezza, 1984). This measure of
correlation represents the proportion of common to total
items and varies between the values of 0 and 1. Mean
overlap scores ranged in value from .48 to .60, indicating
that only approximately half a participant’s trait selections
for a category in one session were also chosen in the second
session. These moderate levels of within-participant
stereotypes are generally similar to those found with nonsocial categories, using a similar experimental paradigm
(Barsalou et al., 1987).
To sum up, the overlap values indicated that there was only
moderate correspondence between the category’s attributes
selected in the two sessions. These results reverse the
picture we obtained when stability was assessed within-item
aggregating across participants. The evidences reported
stand in stark contrast to abstractionist expectation. On the
other hand, our evidences are well predicted by partial
retrieval exemplar models (e.g., Smith & Zárate, 1992) and
by global matching memory models (e.g., Ratcliff &
McKoon, 1988). According to these models, salient
contextual information may be incorporated in the
knowledge assembling. Consequently, more then merely
instable, these memory models see knowledge structures as
highly context sensitive. In line with this prediction, study 2
tests if contextually salient stereotype irrelevant attributes
may be incorporated in the stereotype assembling.

Method
Participants Participants were 46 University of Lisbon
students who volunteered for the study at the researcher’s
request.
Design The design of the study was a 3 immigrants social
categories (Gypsies, Gays, and African) x 2 verification task
sessions (session 1 and session 2) within-participants
factorial.
Pre-testing the adjective check-list A different group of 31
students from ht e same population that otherwise did not
participate in the study were asked to give descriptions of
three social groups (Gypsies, Gay people, and African
immigrants). Participants were instructed to generate a list
of attributes for each group, based on their cultural
stereotypes. The nine most frequently mentioned attributes
were selected for each group (excluding those overlapping
in meaning). Whenever possible, attribute antonyms were
added to the list. This task produced a final list of 43
personality traits1.
Procedure All participants were tested twice with the
second session following the first session by two weeks. To
identify participants’ answers across sessions, we asked
each participant to indicate his or her birthday date and that
of his/her mother, assuring anonymity.
Participants were given a booklet containing the instructions
and experimental materials. Participants then had to choose
and write down, from the full list of 43 traits, the five that
best described each of the target groups (see Katz & Braly,
1933). At the second session approximately 2 weeks later,
participants were again given the same instruction they
received in the first session and completed the checklist
again.

Study 2
Should we expect stereotypes to be also affected by
contextually salient attributes, even when they are irrelevant
to them? Study 2 tests this hypothesis by priming a nonstereotyped concept immediately before stereotype
assembling by means of an unrelated linguistic task.

1

Since participants almost always generated personality traits in
the pre-test the final list included only traits.
733

During the first part, participants were asked to give
familiarity judgments for several words. This task was used
as a way of giving more credibility to the priming task. In
the second part, they were asked to define two words: a
neutral trait (e.g., conservator) and a word that corresponded
to the trait we wanted to prime (intelligence or friendliness).

Method
Participants Participants were 104 University of Lisbon
students, who volunteered for the study at the researcher’s
request.
Design The design was a 2 priming condition (intelligence
or friendliness) x 2 stereotypes (computer programmer or
childcare professional) x 2 personality traits (stereotyped
and non-stereotyped) mixed factorial design, with the last
factor within-participants.

Results and Discussion
Since we did not find any significant effects of prime on
non-matching traits choices and ratings, these results will
not be referred.

Procedure First, participants completed the linguistic task
by thinking in abstract and define in their own words one of
two concepts, intelligence or friendliness. After, following
Katz & Braly (1933), they selected, from a list of 45 traits2,
the five traits that best describe one of the two occupational
groups included in the study, computer programmers or
childcare professionals.
Finally, they completed 14 relevant 9-point trait rating
scales for the same group described. The 14 trait dimensions
selected were the most frequently used to describe the
stereotypes of the two groups, in the pre-test, because they
could easily represent expectations subjects have about each
group in respect to desirable and undesirable traits.
Dimensions concerning primed concepts were also
included.

Stereotype Attribute Selection Task To determine the
effect of primes on trait choices we used Fisher exact
probabilities tests. Results (see Table 1) showed no effect of
stereotyped primes on choices of stereotyped traits matching
primes (p=.84). In contrast, non-stereotyped primes did
increase the number of choices of non-stereotyped traits
matching primes (p=.0061).
Trait Rating Task We computed a 2 primes (intelligence
or friendliness) x 2 stereotypes (computer programmer or
childcare professional) x 2 traits (stereotyped and nonstereotyped) mixed model ANOVA on traits ratings. A
significant three-way interaction emerged [F (1,100)=13,01,
p<.0005, Mse=1,159], showing that there is no effect of
stereotyped primes on ratings of stereotyped traits matching
primes (see Table 2). But non-stereotyped primes greatly
augmented ratings of non-stereotyped traits matching
primes. So, as predicted by non-“enduring abstractionist”
accounts, the outcome of stereotype assembling is, at least
in part, constituted by context-dependent information, even
though they are irrelevant and not commonly associated
with it.
Study 1 showed that stereotypes are instable knowledge
structures and study 2 suggests that this instability may, at
least in part, be due to context sensitivity. One way to
explain stereotypes context sensitivity is by assuming that
contextually salient information is incorporated in the
assembled stereotype independently of its association with
the category in memory. This is in accordance with the
Source of Activation Confusion model (SAC; e.g., Ayers &
Reder, 1998). The SAC predicts that, once we only have
consciousness of using a concept and not of its source of
activation, highly accessible distracters can be accepted as
true memory without retrieval of specific memory traces.
Our explanation is also in accordance with dual processes
models such as Jacoby and Hollingshead (1990).

Priming Task Primes were chosen from a pretest in which
20 other students were asked twice to perform traits
judgments on 9-point trait rating scales (the fourteen ones
mentioned above in procedure) based on each group
stereotype. Based on these ratings, we then selected the least
frequently mentioned trait for a group (irrelevant) that was
simultaneously one of the most consensually agreed trait for
the other group (relevant). So, by using computer
programmers and childcare professionals as target groups,
the primed concepts (intelligence and friendliness) became
stereotype congruent or irrelevant, depending on the group.
Priming task was presented as an unrelated experiment from
Language Department of Lisbon University. Instructions
and questions were formatted differently from the ones used
in the supposed next experiment to convince participants
that the experiments were indeed separate and unrelated.
Table 1: Percentage of stereotyped and non-stereotyped
traits chosen for each priming condition.
Stereotyped trait
Prime
Intelligent
Friendly
Fisher exact
p test

Non-stereotyped trait

Intelligent

Friendly

Friendly

Intelligent

(Comp. progr.)

(Child pro.)

(Comp. progr.)

(Child pro.)

92%
96%

85%
96%

11%
50%

35%
11%

p=.840

Table 2: Ratings of stereotyped and non-stereotyped traits,
for each priming condition.
Stereotyped trait

p=.006

Prime
Intelligent
Friendly
ANOVA

2
Similar procedures to the ones described in study 1 were also
followed to pre-test this new adjective check-list.

734

Non-stereotyped trait

Intelligent

Friendly

Friendly

Intelligent

(Comp. progr.)

(Child pro.)

(Comp. progr.)

(Child pro.)

7.92
7.77

7.61
7.96

5.54
6.54

6.31
5.65

F(1,100)=13,01, p=0,0005, Mse=1,159

primed subliminally with themselves immediately before
the recognition trial. To control the use of memory
monitoring outcome, for each of the 140 trial half of the
participants had 1 second response deadline and the other
half 3 seconds. For each trial both response accuracy and
response time were recorded. To assure that participates
clearly understood and were familiarized with the
recognition task, a training phase preceded the test phase.

Specifically, once recognition may be based in processing
fluency, most accessible concepts can be accepted as true
memories. Once we used as material people names and
objects instead of groups and attributes, third study can only
be considered as a preliminary test to that belief account as a
possible explanation for stereotypes context sensitivity. In
fact, in order to rule up alternative explanations, we
controlled the information participants had memorized,
using material easier to manipulate and to control
experimentally.

Results and Discussion
Response Accuracy We have run two mixed measures
ANOVAs with 2 (prime) x 2 (response deadline) x 5
(stimulus replications), one for the new items and another
for old mismatch items conditions. The ANOVA showed a
significant prime main effect for the new items condition,
t(1, 105) = 13,568, p = 0,038, Mse=0,006 (one-tailed)
(Mprime = 0.86 vs Mno-prime = 0.88) and a significant
prime response deadline interaction for the old mismatch
items condition, F(1, 105) = 2.669, p = 0.036, Mse=0,011.
Planed comparisons for the old mismatch items results
showed a significant effect of prime in the 1 second
response deadline condition, t(1, 105) = 3,695, p = 0.023
(one-tailed) (Mprime = 0.433 vs Mno-prime = 0.472) that
disappears in the 3 seconds response deadline condition, t(1,
105) < 1 (Mprime = 0.561 vs. Mno-prime = 0.543).
In general, the data is accommodated by our predictions.
Specifically, the results show that in the 1 second response
deadline condition the prime condition leaded to more false
recognition then the no-prime condition, for both new and
old mismatch items. This supports the notion that, under
more severe time constraints, participants base recognition
on processing fluency. In the 3 seconds response deadline
condition the prime effect remained reliable for the new
items condition but disappeared for the old mismatch items.
Once participants had time to trigger memory monitoring in
the 3 seconds response deadline condition, one could expect
that the prime should no longer affect both types of items.
However, what our results suggest is that monitoring will
only succeed when there is sufficiently diagnostic
information available in memory – information that
contradicts the fluency derived from priming (i.e., the case
of old mismatched items). Naturally, this interpretation
claims for further test of the specificities of memory
monitoring processes.

Study 3
Should we expect person mental representations to be
affected by contextually salient objects, even when they are
not associated to them in memory, as predicted by processes
like source of activation confusion and processing fluency?
If so, those same processes can be a viable explanation for
stereotype context sensitivity too. Study 3 does a
preliminary test to this hypothesis using an adaptation of
Jacoby and Whitehouse (1989) and McElree, Dolan and
Jacoby (1999) paradigms .
We predicted for contextually salient objects lower response
accuracy and faster response times in the conditions were
participants were unable to use memory monitoring
outcome as a base for a recognition task.

Method
Participants 115 students from the University of Lisbon
participating in this study for a course credit.
Design The design was a 5 lists x 2 response deadlines (1
second or 3 seconds) x 4 targets (Francisco and Alexandre
and Bernardo and Guilherme) x 3 type of items (old target
matched and old person mismatched and new) x 2 priming
(prime and no prime). The priming is nested with the last
two levels of type of item and all factors except the first two
are within-subjects.
Material Four lists of 35 objects were constructed for this
study. Each list belonged to a specific target and was
composed by three types of objects: 1) 15 old objects (i.e.,
objects exclusive to a specific target presented in the
memorizing and recognition phase of the study); 2) 10 new
objects (i.e., objects that were only presented in the
recognition phase); and 3) 10 old mismatch objects (i.e.,
objects that were associated in the memorizing phase to a
target different from the one in the recognition phase). To
assure that there were no material effects, we use 5 different
quartets of lists as a between subjects condition.

Response time We have run four mixed measures
ANOVAs 2 (prime) x 5 (lists), one for each combination of
item type (i.e., new vs. old mismatch) with response
deadline (i.e., 1 second vs. 3 seconds)3, on response time
(RTs) for yes responses (i.e., false recognitions). The results
(see Table 3) are similar for new and old mismatch objects.

Procedure Participants were instructed to memorize four
lists of objects, each one belonging exclusively to one target
person. After, participants were requested to do a
recognition task for a total of 140 objects (35 for each
target). To make the objects salient (i.e., to enhance objects
processing), half of the new and old mismatch items were

3

Since data distributions for the two response deadlines are quite
different we ran separated analysis for 1 second and 3 seconds
conditions.

735

Table 3: Mean RTs for yes responses for 1 a 3 seconds
response deadline conditions.

Processes responsible for stereotypes context sensitivity
Abstractionist positions clearly clash with the claim that
stereotypes are context sensitive knowledge structures.
However, this claim fits quite well with non-“enduring
abstractionist” views. We propose that, according to these
alternative theoretical accounts, there are at least two
possible processes that may be responsible for stereotypes
context sensibility: parallel matching retrieval and belief
illusion.
Some memory models (e.g., Ratcliff and McKoon, 1988;
Smith and Zárate, 1992) assume that malleability is to be
expected and, moreover, that is greatly due to context
sensitivity. Specifically, these models state that cognitive
economy does not impose input simplification and,
consequently, does not impose cognitive stability, at least in
any austere degree. Instead, cognitive economy may be
achieved through highly efficient retrieval processes like
parallel matching. In other words, concept assembling may
result from parallel matching process between salient
contextual information and information in memory
associated to the contextual cues. Consequently, the
assembled concept is expected to be highly contextualized.
Retrieval assumptions of this nature are present, for
instance, in Smith and Zárate (1992) exemplars model
(partial retrieval process) and Ratcliff and McKoon (1988)
global matching memory model (compound cues process),
and are also totally in line with the recently developed
situated cognition (Barsalou, 2002) and social situated
cognition (Smith & Semin, 2004) views.
Stereotypes context sensitivity can also be explain by a
belief illusion account. For instance, the SAC model (e.g.,
Ayers & Reder, 1998) and Jacoby and Hollingshead (1990)
predict that, because of the source of activation confusion
and processing fluency respectively, highly salient
information may be accepted as true memory even without
retrieval of specific memory traces. Applied to stereotypes,
contextually salient cues can become part of the assembled
stereotype independently of their association with the
stereotype in memory. Similarly to the previous account,
this would result in instable and context sensible
representations. These two processes are probably not
mutually incompatible explanations for stereotypes context
sensitivity. For instance, whenever a person for some reason
(e.g., lack of resources) is not allowed to integrate memory
monitoring outcome in the assembled stereotype, we predict
that stereotype context sensibility may be mainly due to a
belief illusion. However, whenever memory monitoring
outcome can be used in the assembling process, we predict
that both context sensible parallel matching retrieval and
belief illusion are responsible for stereotypes context
sensitivity.
Summing up, first two studies described a phenomenon
almost unexplored – the context sensitivity of stereotypes.
Although there is some recent work that strengthens this
claim, further tests still remain to establish it broadness.
Third study provides preliminarily evidence that allows
regarding belief illusion account as a possible explanation of

1s
3s
new
mismatch
new
mismatch
Prime
636 (22) 656 (13) 1312 (113) 1194 (42)
No-prime 682 (15) 738 (10)
1273 (88) 1219 (34)
Note: Standard deviation in parenthesis
In 1 second deadline condition participants took less time to
respond in the prime condition that in the no prime,
F(1,33)=4,225, p=0,048, Mse=7473, and F(1,51)=49,989,
p=0,000, Mse=3762, for new and old mismatch items.
However, prime effect on RTs is no longer significant in the
3 seconds response deadline condition, both for new and old
mismatch items (both Fs <1).
These results are consistent with our predictions. “Yes”
responses are facilitated by the prime only in the condition
where participates base recognition on processing fluency
(i.e., 1 second response deadline condition). Whenever
participants memory monitoring is efficient, the effects of
the prime in the “yes” responses cease.
To sum up, the accuracy and RTs data supports the
assumption that representations context sensitivity may be
due to processes like source of activation confusion and
processing fluency. More specifically, this preliminary
study suggests that contextually available cues may be
incorporated in category assembling independently of their
association with the category in memory.

General Discussion
Study 1 and 2 suggest that considerable instability in
stereotype knowledge is possible. Moreover, study 2 also
suggests that stereotype instability may mainly be due to
stereotypes context sensitivity. At last, study 3 provides
some preliminary evidence showing that context sensitivity
may be due to processes like source of activation confusion
and processing fluency.
Although our evidences are in line with the research
literature in the cognitive psychology field, convergent data
on social cognition field for stereotypes is considerably
inexistent. Some exceptions can be found. For instance,
Garcia-Marques & Mackie (1999) have shown that the
incongruent exemplars presented previously to stereotype
assembling affect variability judgments. Coats & Smith
(1999) provided data showing that subtypes descriptions are
affected by the most accessible exemplars. Garcia-Marques,
Santos and Mackie (in press) showed with a different
paradigm that manipulation of context stability affects the
stability of stereotype assembling across sessions. These
studies strengthen the claim that stereotypes, as non-social
knowledge structures, are context sensitive. Consequently,
also strengthen the urge to study possible explanations for
this phenomenon.

736

(in press). Setereotypes: Static definitions or dynamic
knowledge structures? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology.
Gilbert, G.M. (1951). Stereotype persistencce and change
among college students. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 46, 245-254.
Hamilton, D.L., & Trolier, T.K. (1986). Stereotypes and
stereotyping: An overview of the cognitive approach. In J.
Dovidio, & S.L. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice,
discrimination, and racism. New York : Academic Press.
Jacoby, L. L., & Hollingshead, A. (1990). Toward a
generate/recognize model of performance on direct and
indirect tests of memory. Journal of Memory &
Language, 29, 433-454.
Jacoby, L.L., & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of
memory: False recognition influenced by inconscious
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 118, 126-135.
Karlins, M., Coffman, T.L., & Walter, G. (1969). On the
fading of social stereotypes: Studies in three generations
of college students. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 13, 1-16.
Katz, D. & Braly, K.W. (1933). Racial sterotypes of 100
college students. Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology,
28, 280-290.
Katz, D., & Braly, K.W. (1935). Racial prejudice and racial
stereotypes. Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology, 30,
175-193.
McCloskey, M.E. & Glucksberg, S. (1978). Natural
categories: Well defined or fuzzy sets? Memory and
Cognition, 6 (4), 462-472.
McElree, B., Dolan, P.O., & Jacoby, L.L. (1999). Isolating
the contributions of familiarity and source information to
item recognition: A time course analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25, 563-582.
Posner, M.I., & Keele, S.W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,
353-363.
Ratcliff, R. & McKoon, G. (1988). A retrieval theory of
priming. Psychological Review, 95, 385-408.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch,
& B.B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization (pp.
27-48). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roth, E.M. & Shoben, E.J. (1983). The effects of context on
the structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 15,
346-378.
Rothbart, M., & John, O.P. (1993). Intergroup relations and
stereotype change: a social-cognitive analysis and some
longitudinal findings. In P. M. Sniderman, P. E. Tetlock
& e. G. Carmines (Eds.), Prejudice, politics and the
American dillema. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Smith, E.R., & Semin, G.R. (2004). Socially situated
cognition: Cognition in its social context. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 36, 53-117.
Smith, E.R., & Zárate, M.A. (1992). Exemplar-based model
of social judgments. Psychological Review, 99, 3-21.

stereotypes context sensitivity. Also, further tests are needed
to extend these evidences to the stereotype literature and to
clearly establish the conditions constraining this process
occurrence.
Sometimes we live in illusion. Some illusions seem to be
inherent to living adaptively. This work describes one of
those cases – we have been fooled by stereotypes stability as
a fact and, ironically, now that we began to question this
fact, not just stereotypes seem flexible as this flexibility
seems to be a result of an illusory belief!

References
Ashmore, R.D., & DelBoca, F.K. (1981). Conceptual
approaches to stereotypes and stereotyping. In D.L.
Hamilton (Ed.), Cognitive processes in stereotyping and
intergroup behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ayers, M.S., & Reder, L.M. (1998). A theoretical review of
the misinformation effect: Predictions from an activationbased memory model. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5,
1-21.
Barsalou, L.W. (1989). Intra-concept similarity and its
implications for inter-concept similarity. In S. Vosniadou
and A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical
reasoning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (2002). Being there conceptually:
Simulating categories in preparation for situated action. In
N.L. Stein, P.J. Bauer, & M. Rabinowitz (Eds.),
Representation, memory, and development: Essays in
honor of Jean Mandler. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Barsalou, L.W. & Medin, D.L. (1986). Concepts: Static
definitions or context-dependent representations? Cahiers
de Psychologie Cognitive, 6 (2), 187-202.
Barsalou, L.W., Sewell, D.R., & Ballato, S.M. (1986).
Assessing the stability of category representations with
graded structure. Unpublished manuscript.
Barsalou, L.W., Spindler, J.L., Sewell, D.R., Ballato, S.M.,
& Gendel, E.M. (1987).Assessing the stability of category
representations with property generation. Unpublished
manuscript.
Bellezza, F.S. (1984). Reliability of retrieval from semantic
memory:Information about people. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 22, 511-513.
Coats, S., & Smith, E.R. (1999). Perceptions of gender
subtypes: sensitivity to recent exemplar activation and ingroup/out-group differences. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 25 (4), 515-526.
Devine, P.G. & Elliot, A.J. (1995). Are racial stereotypes
really fading?The Princeton trilogy revisited. Personality
and Social Psychological Bulletin, 21, 1139-1150.
Franks, J.J., & Bransford, J.D. (1971). Abstraction of visual
patterns. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1, 65-74.
Garcia-Marques, L., & Mackie, D. M. (1999). The impact of
stereotype-incongruent information on perceived group
variability and stereotype change. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 77, 979-990.
Garcia.Marques, L., Santos, A.S., & Mackie, D.M.

737

