UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Supporting Collaborative Learning with Augmented Group Awareness Tools

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0rn2v7cj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bodemer, Daniel
Buder, Jürgen

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Supporting Collaborative Learning with Augmented Group Awareness Tools
Daniel Bodemer (d.bodemer@iwm-kmrc.de)
University of Tübingen, Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany

Jürgen Buder (j.buder@iwm-kmrc.de)
University of Tübingen, Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany

psychological point of view, situational awareness is related
to spatial cognition, i.e. it describes the sense of orientation
that users have in virtual space. Situational awareness is
often insufficient, and thus can be supported by the use of
maps, grids, landmarks, and the like (Darken & Peterson,
2002; Wickens & Baker, 1995). The concept of situational
awareness can be extended to encompass not only spatial
navigation but also semantic navigation because similar
feelings of disorientation have been reported (Conklin,
1987).
Another psychological construct that can be linked to
situational awareness is presence (Steuer, 1992). Presence is
the subjective feeling of “being inside” a virtual space and is
often accompanied by a feeling of non-mediation. Presence
is related to a number of psychological phenomena. For
instance, high levels of presence are needed to experience
anxiety in treatments of phobias (Rothbaum & Hodges,
1999). In order to facilitate presence and situational
awareness, technologies should strive for vividness (e.g.
stereoscopic sight and sound) and interactivity (e.g.
rendering of head movements).

Abstract
This article introduces the concept of awareness, which
emerged in the field of computer-supported cooperative work
and relates it to several psychological constructs. It reports the
support of awareness by technological means and discusses
potentialities of group awareness tools to support
collaborative learning. A prototypical tool is introduced,
which is intended to support online learning groups by
indicating group conflicts. An experimental study is reported,
which examined the benefit of this prototype regarding
minority influence in learning groups. It shows that an
augmented group awareness tool can lead to better individual
and group performances in learning groups.
Keywords: Group awareness; computer-supported collaborative learning; visualization; peer learning; online discussion.

The Psychology of Awareness
The notion of awareness has originated in the literature on
computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW). Although it
is widely used, the term is ill-defined. On the most general
level, awareness can be defined as adaptive knowledge
about an environment (Endsley, 1995). Adaptive means that
knowledge about an environment is not fixed, but must be
updated over time to account for changes in that
environment. Another defining characteristic of awareness
is that it mostly is a by-product of taskwork to be
accomplished, thus making it distinguishable from the
concept of attention.
The first part of this article tries to take a look at this
concept from the viewpoint of psychology. In other words,
different types of awareness will be introduced, compared,
and related to psychological constructs.
First, we suggest to distinguish between situational
awareness and group awareness. Situational awareness is
the perception of affordances in a non-social environment,
whereas group awareness refers to the perception of other
persons in an environment, their activities, and their
products.

Group Awareness
Group awareness adds a social dimension to digital worlds.
Many digital environments give no indication of the
presence or absence of other users, their activities and their
products. However, once such information is added to an
environment, the actions that users perform are not only
informed by spatial and semantic constraints, but also by
social affordances. In other words, semantic navigation and
spatial navigation will be complemented by social
navigation (Dourish & Chalmers, 1994).
We have identified three different types of group
awareness, each of which can be supported by technological
means, and each of which can be related to other
psychological constructs. In the following, we will briefly
address these types of group awareness.
Awareness about the Presence of Others. The simplest
type of group awareness is knowledge or perception about
the presence (or absence) of others. Technologies can vary
in how much they support this type of awareness. Whereas
many digital environments completely lack this type of
awareness, presence indicators can range from quite simple
to rather sophisticated. In the simplest case the presence

Situational Awareness
The concept of situational awareness has emerged from
research on flight simulators, and now is often addressed in
research on immersive virtual environments. From a

77

visible, and at the same time persons are responsible for
what they are doing. In other words, identifiability is the
mechanism that allows for norms and rules to come into
play. Erickson and Kellogg (2003) have termed mutual
identifiability as social translucence, and they suggested it
to be the most important feature of tools for group
awareness and social navigation.
Another psychological by-product of tools to support
workspace awareness is social comparison. Seeing what
others are doing provides individuals with a standard that
strongly influences their own behavior. Both promotive and
detrimental effects of opportunities for social comparison
were demonstrated by Cress (2004) in a social dilemma
scenario.

indicator just provides a list of who is currently visiting the
same content, as can often be found in online discussion
forums.
From a psychological point of view such presence
indicators diminish anonymity in the group, and
consequently can be linked to the psychological research on
anonymity. E.g., while some researchers tend to regard
anonymity as detrimental to group interaction (Kiesler,
Siegel & McGuire, 1984), others have pointed out that
anonymity can sometimes even increase normative
influence in groups (Reicher, Spears & Postmes, 1995).
Another concept that can be linked to simple presence
indicators is the notion of social presence (Biocca & Harms,
2002; Short, Williams & Christie, 1976), i.e. feelings of
being connected to other people. According to social
presence models, the more people feel connected, the
stronger they will be responsive to mechanisms of social
influence.
As described above, group awareness about the presence
of others can be supported by simple “Who’s online” lists,
or by more advanced technological means. E.g., group
awareness about the presence of others will be enhanced by
providing some kind of virtual embodiment of users in an
environment, i.e. the use of avatars. Avatars lend an identity
to online users, thereby fostering issues of impression
management and person perception.
Another feature that comes with (maneuverable) virtual
embodiments is the use of personal space. The field of
proxemics addresses the interpersonal distance that people
express to manage social relationships. Jeffrey and Mark
(2003) have investigated how people strategically position
their avatars to engage in the same socio-spatial
complexities that real-world environments offer (e.g. the
emotional effects of crowding).
Even more sophisticated ways to support group awareness
about the presence of others is provided if avatars have the
ability to express facial and gestural cues. Blascovich (2002)
has investigated the role of nonverbal behavior of avatars in
social settings. For instance, his model of social influence in
immersive virtual environments predicts that humans will
violate interpersonal distances if they believe that a virtual
person is controlled by a computer (i.e. an agent). However,
if the agent shows high behavioral realism (e.g. by keeping
mutual gaze), it will be treated like another human being in
terms of interpersonal distance. Nonverbal behavior plays
an important role in building interpersonal trust and
attraction. Thus, this type of awareness technology adds
another flavor to the social richness of virtual environments.

Augmented Group Awareness. The two general support
mechanisms described thus far (presence indicators,
workspace awareness tools) are somewhat similar in as far
as they try to enrich digital scenarios to make them more
like face-to-face settings. While this step is important to
make online navigation social, we believe that the true
power of awareness tools lies in a third type of technology
support. Hence we call those tools augmented group
awareness tools. Augmented tools provide groups with
information that would be difficult or even impossible to
gain face-to-face.
Augmented tools usually display information that has no
physical equivalent. For instance, some tools provide
information about the cognitive state of a group or its
members. Moreover, augmented tools preserve information
over time, either by storing awareness-related information,
by integrating the past of an interaction into a single
representation that reflects the current status in real-time, or
by preserving the history of a digital objects to be used for
later reflection about the design process.
Examples of augmented group awareness tools can be
found in many commercial environments. For instance,
online bookstores recommend specific products to
customers based on the purchasing behavior of similar
customers. An example for the non-commercial use of
augmented group awareness tools are voting features of
many group decision support systems.
As can be seen from these examples, augmented group
awareness tools do not necessarily have to be
technologically sophisticated. We call them augmented
because they provide information that is not clearly visible
in face-to-face environments (e.g. individual or collective
recommendations in the bookstore examples, preference
structures in a group decision support system). Augmented
group awareness tools receive the necessary information to
be displayed from two sources, either explicitly from
deliberate user actions (recommendations, ratings), or
implicitly from the behavior of other users within the
environment. The difference between these two support
types is commonly referred to as direct vs. indirect social
navigation (Dieberger, 2003).
From a psychological point of view augmented group
awareness tools can be related to the concept of higher-order
cognition. For instance, tools indicating who knows what in

Workspace Awareness. A second type of group awareness
is not only related to knowledge and perception about the
presence of others, but also about the activities that others
are engaged in. This type of awareness is sometimes
referred to as workspace awareness (Gutwin & Greenberg,
2002). Workspace awareness is not coupled to embodiment,
yet it distinctly enhances social interaction above the levels
of the aforementioned presence indicators. While avatars
lend an identity to social actors, workspace awareness tools
introduce identifiability. The actions of persons become

78

feature of the awareness tool is intended to strengthen the
minority influence by pointing out a minority’s potential to
introduce novel concepts to a discussion (Nemeth & Rogers,
1996). The tool required subjects to rate the novelty of
contributions for the discussion, and visualized the
contributions according to this dimension.
Thus, by making salient the existence of conflicts and by
making salient the novelty of minority contributions it was
expected that an augmented awareness tool will strengthen
the impact that such a minority has on group interaction and
group performance. This hypothesis was tested in an
experimental study.

a group could be linked to transactive memory (Wegner,
1987). Similarly, tools that describe other “cognitive states”
of a group (e.g. conflicts, trust) would have a strong impact
on metacognitive processes like planning, monitoring and
evaluating the social interaction.

Augmented Group Awareness for
Collaborative Learning
It was mentioned above that augmented group awareness
tools are quite common in commercial environments, and
sometimes in the organizational context of group decision
support. However, few researchers have applied awareness
tools to support collaborative learning scenarios. Soller,
Martínez Monés, Jermann, and Muehlenbrock (2005) have
cited some examples, however, many of the tools described
in that paper, while technically being awareness tools, are
not intended to feed back awareness information to a group,
but only to inform researchers about patterns of interaction.
The few reports on systems that employ visualizations for a
group and its users (e.g. Barros & Verdejo, 2000) have
focused on the level of technical implementation; however,
an empirical investigation of augmented group awareness
and its implications for collaborative learning was not
undertaken until now.
In order to close this gap we developed a set of
augmented group awareness tools intended to facilitate
computer-supported collaborative learning. Like in many
other group awareness systems, these tools are based on
user ratings. In particular, they require learners to mutually
rate their contributions made in an online discussion forum
on several dimensions. The tools store, aggregate, and
transform these ratings, and visualize the transformed
ratings as a feedback to the group in real-time.
To test empirically whether such a tool does have an
impact on group interaction and group performance we
chose a typical educational scenario, which involved a
group of learners with conflicting viewpoints. From a
Piagetian perspective, conflicting viewpoints can lead to
fruitful discussion, and serve as a basis for the coconstruction of a solution on a higher level. In stark contrast
to that, a host of social psychological research indicates that
conflicts lead to detrimental effects, especially if the
numbers of advocates for those viewpoints are imbalanced.
In this case we have a majority-minority conflict, and it is a
well-known effect that minorities have difficulties to exert
social influence on a majority.
On this basis we adapted an augmented group awareness
tool to the scenario of a majority-minority conflict and
experimentally evaluated its potential to strengthen the
influence of a minority to express its viewpoint and to exert
social influence in an online discussion.
The tool rested on two principles. First, it made
differences between viewpoints salient by graphically
separating majority and minority contributions. By realizing
that a discussion contains minority contributions illusions of
unanimity could be prevented, and an awareness of the
existence of a conflict should be raised. This feature was
implemented by requiring subjects to rate their agreement
with the contributions of the online discussion. The second

Experimental Study
Method
In the study, small groups of four learners each had to
discuss and to agree on a conflicting physics issue in a textbased online discussion environment. Similar to the
informed minority paradigm (Stewart & Stasser, 1998),
information was previously distributed to the group
members in such a way that one learner – the minority – had
more meaningful information about the issue than each of
the other three learners, which together constituted the
majority.
Design. Two experimental conditions were compared,
which differed with respect to the support learners received
regarding the awareness of other group members’
contributions during the online discussion. While learners in
one experimental condition were only provided with an
online discussion environment, learners in the other
condition were additionally provided with a rating-based
group awareness tool.
Participants. 64 students (26 males and 38 females, ages 19
to 31; M = 22.05; SD = 2.35) at the University of Tübingen
were randomly assigned to the two experimental conditions
and – within the small groups – to the minority or to the
majority. They were paid for their participation. To prevent
a very high level of prior knowledge physics students were
excluded from participation.
Material. The application domain was comprised of physics
concepts concerning light propagation.
The instructional material was taken from the web-based
inquiry science environment WISE1 module How far does
light go. It consisted of several information segments
supporting either the correct hypothesis that “light goes
forever” or the wrong hypothesis that “light dies out”. The
information segments were distributed to the group
members prior to the group discussion according to the
informed minority paradigm of Stewart and Stasser (1998).
While one learner in each group was provided with all
information segments, which altogether support the correct
hypothesis, the three majority members in each group were
1

79

http://wise.berkeley.edu/

each provided with a subset of information that rather
support the wrong hypothesis.
The online discussion environment used in both
experimental conditions was developed at Knowledge
Media Research Center in Tübingen as part of the
groupware system VisualGroup (in its ongoing version
renamed as Bebop2). It enabled the small groups to discuss
in a text-based, synchronous, and anonymous way.
The group awareness tool provided to the small groups in
one of the experimental conditions was embedded into the
online discussion environment (cf. Figure 1). It consisted of
(1) seven-point Likert rating scales that allowed learners to
rate other group members’ contributions with respect to (a)
the agreement with a contribution, and to (b) the novelty of
a contribution in the discussion, and (2) a visualization of
the group members’ mean ratings on each contribution,
representing (a) the raters’ agreement to a contribution
along the x-axis of a two-dimensional graph, and (b) the
rated amount of novelty of a contribution along the y-axis of
the same graph. The visualization was personalized in that
each learner could distinguish own contributions from other

group members’ contributions and already rated from
unrated contributions.
The test material for assessing the knowledge of the
learners consisted of two questionnaires given to the
learners individually before and after the group discussion.
It mainly collected the decision of the learners for one of the
two hypotheses, the confidence of the learners in this
decision, and an explanatory statement for the chosen
hypothesis. Choice and confidence rate were used to
calculate the correctness of the decision ranging from 0%
(wrong answer and confidence rate of 100%) to 100%
(correct answer and confidence rate of 100%). Furthermore,
the learners’ interactions with the discussion environment
and with the group awareness tool such as content and time
of contributions and ratings were recorded in log files.
Procedure. The experiment consisted of two crucial phases:
an individual information phase, and a group discussion
phase. In the first of these phases, learners received
information about light propagation individually (10
minutes). While the information received was identical for

Figure 1: Group awareness tool with rating scales and visualization of mean ratings
2

http://svn.kmrc.de/
80

information-based group member status (minority vs.
majority) revealed a significant effect for member status
(F(1, 60) = 4.47, p < .05) but only marginal effects for the
factor awareness support (F(1, 60) = 3.20, p = .079) and for
the interaction of both factors (F(1, 60) = 3.29, p = .075).
However, a pairwise t-Test reveals a highly significant
effect for awareness support indicating that learners who
were provided with the awareness tool achieved much better
performances than learners who discussed only by means of
the online discussion environment (t(62) = 2.97, p < .01). As
supposed, this effect can be ascribed to the learners with
majority status (t(46) = 3.56, p < .001) while there is no
difference between the correctness scores of the minorities
(t(14) = 0.02, p = .989).
While these results demonstrate that an augmented group
awareness tool can strengthen minority influence in
collaborative learning scenarios, there are several open
questions regarding how it exactly affects group
discussions.
Preliminary analyses of the learners’ discussion behavior
indicate that learners who were provided with the awareness
tool discussed marginally longer but wrote much less
contributions than learners without awareness support.
Particularly thematically less relevant contributions seem to
have occurred much more in the condition without
awareness support. This higher efficiency in the awareness
condition is not surprising. Particularly the novelty
dimension in the visualization might serve as a filter not
only for repeated contributions of majority members but
also for thematically irrelevant contributions. This
efficiency might be further increased if the visualization was
implemented navigable in such a way as to enable learners
to access textual contributions by clicking on corresponding
visualized contributions. Thus, learners might be able to
focus on the visualization to a greater extend and to use it
efficiently for processes of search and selection of
information.
An important question that cannot be satisfactorily
answered by means of the experimental study reported in
this paper is whether the use of the awareness tool leads to
better performance as a result of features of the visualization
or merely due to attributes of the rating process. Rating of
other users’ contributions might encourage elaborative
processes during reading because learners are required to
read them attentively. On the other hand, it might increase
the amount of invested effort during writing, because
learners know that they are being evaluated. However, in the
reported study subjective data indicate that within the
condition with awareness tool those learners performed
better who used the visualizations more often, while the
number of given or received ratings had a less important
influence on learning performances.
Presently, we are conducting a follow-up study, which
enables the experimental differentiation between effects of
the rating component and of the visualization component of
a group awareness tool. Moreover, additional studies are
necessary that replicate the results with different paradigms
and tasks, in order to detect further scenarios in which
augmented group awareness tools can enrich collaborative
learning.

all small groups of both conditions, it differed within the
small groups according to the informed minority paradigm
of Stewart and Stasser (1998) as described above.
Subsequent to this phase and prior to the group discussion,
the learners’ knowledge was assessed by the first
questionnaire. In the discussion phase small groups had to
discuss on the basis of the information received and to agree
on one of the alternative hypotheses. According to the
experimental design of the study small groups in one
condition were only provided with the online discussion
environment, while small groups in the other condition were
additionally provided with the group awareness tool.

Results and Discussion
Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations for the
individual learners’ correctness assessed by the
questionnaire before and after the group discussion.
Table 1: Means and standard deviations of
correctness before and after the discussion

Support
Minority
(n = 16)
Majority
(n = 48)
Overall

M
SD
M
SD
M
SD

Without awareness tool
With awareness tool
prepost
prepostdiscussion discussion discussion discussion
80.50
78.63
78.88
78.38
11.24
32.51
17.17
36.18
29.92
37.17
38.33
74.58
21.31
36.89
15.55
36.02
42.56
47.53
48.47
75.53
29.34
39.76
23.75
35.51

Average correctness (%)

As expected, learners with minority status – who were
provided with all information available – performed at a
very high level independent from the experimental condition
they belonged to. In contrast, the performances of learners
with majority status differed with respect to the availability
of the rating-based awareness tool (cf. Figure 2). While
majority members with awareness support almost achieved
the post discussion correctness scores of the minorities, the
scores of majority members without awareness support
lagged far behind those of the other three groups.
10 0
90
80
70

Minority
Majority

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
w i t ho ut t o o l

w it h t o o l

Figure 2: Post-discussion correctness as a function of
awareness support and member status
A two-way analysis of variance with the factors group
awareness support (with vs. without awareness tool) and

81

groupware. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 11,
411-446.
Jeffrey, P. & Mark, G. (2003). Navigating the virtual
landscape: Coordinating the shared use of space. In K.
Höök, D. Benyon & A. J. Munro (Eds.), Designing
Information Spaces: The Social Navigation Approach (pp.
105-124). London: Springer.
Kiesler, S., Siegel, J. & McGuire, T. W. (1984). Social
psychological
aspects
of
computer-mediated
communication. American Psychologist, 39, 1123-1134.
Nemeth, C. J. & Rogers, J. (1996). Dissent and the search
for information. British Journal of Social Psychology, 35;
67-76.
Reicher, S. D., Spears, R. & Postmes, T. (1995). A social
identity model of deindividuation phenomena. In W.
Stroebe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European Review of
Social Psychology, Vol. 6 (pp. 161-197). New York:
Wiley.
Rothbaum, B. O. & Hodges, L. F. (1999). The use of virtual
reality exposure in the treatment of anxiety disorders.
Behavior Modification, 23, 507-525.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social
psychology of telecommunications. London: John Wiley
& Sons.
Soller, A., Martínez Monés, A., Jermann, P., &
Muehlenbrock, M. (2005). From mirroring to guiding: A
review of state of the art technology for supporting
collaborative learning. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 15, 261-290.
Steuer, J. (1992). Defining virtual reality: Dimensions
determining telepresence. Journal of Communication, 42,
73-93.
Stewart, D.D., and Stasser, G. (1998). The sampling of
critical unshared information in decision-making groups:
The role of an informed minority. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 28, 95-113.
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive memory: A
contemporary analysis of the group mind. In B. Mullen &
G. R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior (pp.
185-208). New York: Springer.
Wickens, C. D. & Baker, P. (1995). Cognitive issues in
virtual reality. In W. Barfield & T. Furness (Eds.); Virtual
Reality and Advanced Interface Design (pp. 514-541).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

References
Barros, B. & Verdejo, M. F. (2000). Analysing student
interaction processes in order to improve collaboration.
The DEGREE approach. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11, 221-241.
Biocca, F., & Harms, C. (2002). What is social presence? In
F. Gouveia & F. Biocca (Eds.), Presence 2002
Proceedings. Porto, Portugal: University of Fernando
Pessoa Press.
Blascovich, J. (2002). Social influence with immersive
virtual environments. In R. Schroeder (Ed.), The Social
Life of Avatars (pp. 127-145). London: Springer.
Conklin, J. (1987). Hypertext: An introduction and survey.
IEEE Computer, 20, 17-41.
Cress, U. (2004). Strategic, metacognitive, and social
aspects in resource-oriented knowledge exchange. In R.
Alterman & D. Kirsch (Eds.). Proceedings of the 25th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Darken, R. P. & Peterson, B. (2002). Spatial orientation,
wayfinding, and representation. In K. M. Stanney (Ed.),
Handbook
of
Virtual
Environments:
Design,
Implementation, and Applications (pp. 493-518).
Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Dieberger, A. (2003). Social connotations of space in the
design of virtual communities and social navigation. In K.
Höök, D. Benyon & A. J. Munro (Eds.), Designing
Information Spaces: The Social Navigation Approach (pp.
293-313). London: Springer.
Dourish, P. & Chalmers, M. (1994). Running out of space:
Models for information navigation. Short paper presented
at HCI ’94 (Glasgow, UK).
Endsley, M. (1995). Towards a theory of situation
awareness in dynamic systems. Human Factors, 37, 3264.
Erickson, T. & Kellogg, W. A. (2003). Social translucence:
Using minimalist visualisations of social activity to
support collective interaction. In K. Höök, D. Benyon &
A. J. Munro (Eds.), Designing Information Spaces: The
Social Navigation Approach (pp. 17-40). London:
Springer.
Gutwin, C. & Greenberg, S. (2002). A descriptive
framework of workspace awareness for real-time

82

