UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Temporal Factorisation and the Dynamics of Cognitive Agent States

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3gb1m48w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Treur, Jan

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Temporal Factorisation and the Dynamics of Cognitive Agent States
Jan Treur1 (treur@cs.vu.nl)
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Artificial Intelligence
De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
time). In approaches in Cognitive Science, mental states can
be postulated by the temporal factorisation principle applied
to the dependence of future behaviour patterns on patterns of
past sensory inputs.
In this paper it is shown how certain approaches
described in the literature on Philosophy of Mind can be
generalised beyond the cognitive domain and incorporated in
a conceptual framework based on temporal factorisation. It is
shown, for example, how a more general notion of
representational content for mediating state properties can be
specified, based on a generalisation of Kim (1996, pp. 200202)’s relational specification approach for representational
content of mental state properties. Moreover, the temporalinteractivist approach to the dynamics of mental states as put
forward in Bickhard (1993) and formalised in Jonker and
Treur (2003) is shown to be a special case of temporal
factorisation.
First, the temporal factorisation principle is introduced. It
is shown how its formulation does not commit to any
determinism assumption, and how it relates to views on the
dynamics of the world by Descartes and Laplace. Examples
of temporal factorisation from the physical domain are
discussed. Next, it is shown how the relational specification
approach to representational content of mental state
properties can be used to formulate the temporal factorisation
principle in more detail, and to define a form of
representational content for mediating state properties
resulting from temporal factorisation. Using an appropriate
formal language it is shown how the temporal factorisation
principle can be formalised. Furthermore, it is discussed how,
within Cognitive Science, mental state properties can be
viewed as mediating state properties, resulting from temporal
factorisation. Finally, it is shown how the Dynamical
Systems Theory (DST; e.g., Port and Gelder, 1995) relates to
the principle of temporal factorisation.

Abstract
Dynamics play a major role in a variety of disciplines. This
paper contributes to the identification of common principles
underlying approaches to dynamics used within cognitive and
noncognitive disciplines. As a central, unifying principle, the
temporal factorisation principle is introduced, formalised and
illustrated. This principle expresses, that every temporal
relationship of the form ‘past pattern implies future pattern’ can
be factorised into a relationship of the form ‘past pattern
implies present state’ and a relationship of the form ‘present
state implies future pattern’. It provides a conceptual
framework which unifies various approaches to dynamics,
including the cases where cognitive agent states are modelled.

Introduction
The physicalist perspective on cognition views cognition as
one of the phenomena of nature. A natural consequence of
such a position is that it is a challenge to relate principles
behind cognition to principles in nature, or even to search for
common principles behind the physical world and cognition.
In particular, for cognitive agent models the issue of
grounding or embedding them in the physical world is
challenging. Having common principles behind nature and
cognitive agent models gives a new perspective on this issue,
and can contribute to the development of unified modelling
approaches that are applicable in different (cognitive and
noncognitive) scientific areas. In this paper such a unifying
principle is identified and shown to play a crucial role in
different disciplines, such as Physics and Cognitive Science:
temporal factorisation. Roughly spoken, the temporal
factorisation principle claims that if a certain (past) pattern of
events leads to a certain (future) pattern of events, then there
exists a state property p such that the past pattern leads to a
(present) state where this property p holds, and any state
where the state property p holds leads to the future pattern.
This postulated state property p is called a mediating state
property for the ‘past pattern implies future pattern’
relationship. It enables one to factorise this temporal
relationship into two others, which in general are simpler: a
‘past pattern implies present state’ and a ‘present state
implies future pattern’ relationship.
Examples of mediating state properties from Physics
include velocity, momentum (obtained by temporal
factorisation of past-future relationships between patterns in
the position (and mass) of an object over time), and force
(obtained by temporal factorisation of past-future
relationships between patterns in velocity or momentum over

1

Part of this work was performed at a position at Utrecht University,
Department of Philosophy, The Netherlands

Relating Past, Present and Future
Descartes (1633) introduced a perspective on the world that
sometimes is called the clockwork universe. This perspective
claims that with sufficiently precise understanding of the
world’s dynamics at some starting time, the future can be
predicted by applying a set of ‘laws of nature’. Descartes
emphasizes that after such a starting time nothing (not even
God) except these laws of nature determines the world’s
dynamics. This view on the world’s dynamics is often
compared to a clockwork. The view assumes that the laws of
nature provide systematic relationships between world states
over time, in the sense that (properties of) past world states
imply (properties of) future world states: past states → future
states. The clockwork universe view has been developed
further by Newton, Leibniz, Laplace and others. Laplace
2275

(1825) sketches how an intellect could be able to determine
future world states from a present world state, that by itself is
the effect of past world states.2

specification approach to representational content of mental
state properties, as proposed by Kim (1996), can be extended
beyond the cognitive area to the situation here.
Note that the temporal factorisation principle itself does
not claim that any ‘past pattern implies future pattern’, ‘past
pattern implies present state’ or ‘present state implies future
pattern’ relationships can be found. Due to the conditional, it
only claims that if a ‘past pattern implies future pattern’
relationship is available, then also ‘past pattern implies present
state’ and ‘present state implies future pattern’ relationships can
be found. To make this more precise, if Descartes’ view is
interpreted in the sense that dynamics can be described by
‘past pattern implies future pattern’ relationships (D), and
Laplace’s view is interpreted in the sense that dynamics can
be described by ‘past pattern implies present state’ and ‘present
state implies future pattern’ relationships (L), then the temporal
factorisation principle (TFP) logically connects the two:
Descartes’ view interpreted as D and the temporal
factorisation principle TFP together imply Laplace’s view
interpreted as L, i.e.,
D & TFP ⇒ L.
So, the temporal factorisation principle can be used to
explain the shift in history, from Descartes’s view to
Laplace’s view. While Descartes’ and Laplace’s views each
can be considered to assume a deterministic world, the
temporal factorisation principle is not based on such an
assumption, due to the conditional. Temporal factorisation
addresses those cases and those aspects of the world where
‘past pattern implies future pattern’ relationships can be found,
but does not in any way claim that such relationships can
always be found for all aspects of the world. Thus, the
principle supports all forms of partial determinism, or, in
other words, any perspective between a fully deterministic
world and a fully non-deterministic world. For a more
extensive discussion about (non)determinism, see, for
example, Earman (1986), Dennett (2003, pp. 25-96).

The Temporal Factorisation Principle
The view expressed by Laplace (1825) assumes that the
dynamics of the world can be described in the form of (a)
relationships between past world states and the present world
state, and (b) relationships between the present world state
and future world states: past states → present state & present
state → future states. To analyse in more detail the temporal
relationships pointed at by Descartes and Laplace, the
temporal factorisation principle can be used. This principle,
as introduced in this paper, is formulated in terms of
temporal relationships between past patterns, present states,
and future patterns. Here a past pattern a refers to a property
of a number of states or events (possibly at different time
points) in the past, and a future pattern b refers to a property
of a number of states or events (possibly at different time
points) in the future.3 To put it in a nuttshell, the temporal
factorisation principle states that any systematic temporal
‘past pattern implies future pattern’ relationship a → b between
a past pattern a and a future pattern b can be factorised in the
form of two temporal relationships a → p and p → b for
some state property p of the present world state. More
specifically, the principle claims that for any ‘past pattern
implies future pattern’ relationship a → b there exists a world
state property p (expressed in the ontology for state
properties) such that temporal relationships ‘past pattern
implies present state property’ a → p and ‘present state property
implies future pattern’ p → b hold.4 In short:
a→b ⇒ ∃p a→ p & p→b

The postulated state property p is called a mediating state
property for the given ‘past pattern implies future pattern’
relationship.
The principle claims that the description of the present
world state contains sufficient information so that we can
forget about the temporal pattern a in the past if we want to
understand why the temporal pattern b occurs in the future.
The mediating state property in the present state may be
viewed to represent the past pattern and the future pattern in
the present state. It will be shown how the relational

Some Examples of Temporal Factorisation

2

To illustrate the temporal factorisation principle, as a first
example the notion ‘momentum’ of a moving object in
classical mechanics is taken. For cognitive examples, see
below. For a moving object in free space its future positions
depend on its past positions (and not only on its position in
the present). Within Physics the notion ‘momentum’ has
been postulated to mediate this dependency. Different
histories of an object can lead to the same momentum in the
present state. The future of the object only (given the object’s
current position) depends on this momentum in the present
state, not on the specific history. This was the criterion by
which the concept momentum was introduced in Physics in
history. Therefore the state property momentum can be
understood as a mediating state property for past and future
patterns in (change of) position of an object; the temporal
factorisation principle postulates the existence of this state
property. The state property momentum abstracts from the
various histories that could have happened and would have
resulted in the same future pattern. In the other time

‘We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its past
and the cause of its future. An intellect which at any given moment knew
all of the forces that animate nature and the mutual positions of the beings
that compose it, if this intellect were vast enough to submit the data to
analysis, could condense into a single formula the movement of the greatest
bodies of the universe and that of the lightest atom; for such an intellect
nothing could be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present
before its eyes.’ (Laplace, 1825)
3
An example of a past pattern, referring to different points in time, is: at
some state in the past state property c occurred and since then to the present
it persisted. An example of a future pattern, referring to different time
points in the future is: if in some future state property c occurs, then in
some later state property d will occur. A special, simple case of a past (or
future) pattern is the occurrence of a state property in some single past (or
future) state.
4
So, notice that the notation → is used here to indicate logical implication
(between temporal properties).
2276

direction, a momentum indicates from what pattern it
originated, no matter what future will arise, so it abstracts
from futures. Similarly the concept ‘force’ from classical
mechanics within Physics can be considered a postulated
mediating state property obtained by temporal factorisation
for past to future patterns in momentum: it mediates between
a (past) state with given momentum to a (future) state with
changed momentum.5

Temporal Relational Specification for
Mediating State Properties
A mediating state property p for a ‘past pattern a implies future
pattern b’ relationship, as postulated by the temporal
factorisation principle can be considered to carry information
both about the past pattern a and about the future pattern b; it
in a way represents both the past pattern and the future
pattern in the present state. One of the more recent
approaches to representational content for internal (mental)
agent states described within the Philosophy of Mind
literature, is the relational specification approach; cf. Kim
(1996, pp. 200-202). This approach turns out to be suitable
for the more general case, beyond the cognitive area, for
mediating state properties as well. A temporal relational
specification can be viewed as the specification of temporal
relationships of a (mental) state to other patterns distant in
space and time. Kim explains from a philosophical
perspective how a mental state property can be considered an
intrinsic internal state property, whereas its relational
specification expresses how it relates to other items in the
world; he did not formalise his view.
The concept of relational specification can be extended to
obtain representational content of a mediating state property
as postulated by the temporal factorisation principle as
follows. Addressing the future direction first, if p is a
mediating state property related to some future pattern b (and
some past pattern a), then the actual occurrence of p at some
time point t leads to the actual occurrence of b in the future
after t. Indeed, a relational specification can be identified
expressing the relationship between this mediating state
property p and the subsequent future is (i.e., pattern b). A
similar analysis can be made for the past relationships. Given
past pattern a that is assumed to lead to a mediating state
property p, a relational specification can be identified to
express this temporal relationship. Thus, state property p can
be considered to represent in the present state the fact that the
past pattern a occurred. Combining the past and future
perspective, the fact that p is a mediating state property
between future pattern b and past pattern a, can be
relationally specified in a temporal manner by a scheme of
the following type:
if before t, past pattern a occurs, then at t, state property p holds
if at t, state property p holds, then after t, future pattern b will occur

These two temporal relationships are a ‘past pattern implies
present state property’ and a ‘present state property implies future
pattern’ relationship, respectively. Together they can be

considered to provide a relational specification of the
representational content of the mediating state property p,
which takes into account both the past and the future.

Formalising Temporal Factorisation
In this section, it is shown how the temporal factorisation
principle can be expressed in a formal language. First, this
language is briefly introduced. Next, it is shown how past
and future patterns can be expressed in this language, and it
is shown how temporal relationships between past patterns,
future patterns and present states are expressed. Finally, it is
shown how the temporal factorisation principle as a whole
can be expressed in the language. To specify and formalise
temporal relationships that play a role in temporal
factorisation, an expressive formal language is needed that
allows to refer to patterns over time. Furthermore, it should
be possible to express the existential quantifier for state
properties, which occurs in the temporal factorisation
principle. The Temporal Trace Language (TTL) is such a
language (Jonker and Treur, 2002; Bosse et al., 2006).
The language TTL is based on traces (or trajectories),
time points, and state properties as primitive notions. A state
can be parameterised by a trace in which it occurs and a time
point at which it occurs. The language is built up as follows.
A state ontology is a specification (in sorted predicate logic)
of a vocabulary (i.e., names for sorts, constants, functions
and predicates). A state for ontology Ont is an assignment of
truth-values {true, false} to the set At(Ont) of ground atoms
expressed in terms of Ont. The set of all possible states for
state ontology Ont is denoted by STATES(Ont). The set of state
properties STATPROP(Ont) for state ontology Ont is the set of all
propositions over ground atoms from At(Ont).6 A fixed time
frame T is assumed, which is linearly ordered. Depending on
the application, the time frame T may be dense (e.g., the real
numbers), or discrete (e.g., the natural numbers). A trace or
trajectory γ over a state ontology Ont and time frame T is a
mapping γ : T → STATES(Ont). The set of (names for) traces over
state ontology Ont is denoted by TRACES(Ont).
The set of dynamic properties DYNPROP(Ont) over state
ontology Ont is the set of temporal statements that can be
formulated with respect to traces based on the state ontology
Ont in the following manner. Given a trace γ over state
ontology Ont, a state of the world at time point t is
syntactically denoted by state(γ, t). These states can be related
to state properties p expressed in Ont, via the formally defined
(in TTL syntax) satisfaction relation |= (used as a binary infix
predicate), i.e.: state(γ, t) |= p , which denotes that state property p
holds in trace γ at time t (this has a similarity with the Holdspredicate in situation calculus). Based on these statements,
dynamic properties can be formulated in a formal manner in
a sorted predicate logic with sorts TIME for time points,
TRACES for traces and STATPROP for state formulae, using
quantifiers, among others, over time, traces and state
formulae, and the usual logical connectives such as ¬, ∧, ∨,
6

5

For a more detailed historical case study, see Treur (2005)

When no confusion is expected, the argument Ont will be left out:

STATPROP.

2277

⇒, ∀, ∃. Within TTL (real and integer) numbers can be used
for time, but also within state properties.7
To formalise the temporal factorisation principle,
formalisations are needed for the temporal relationships
between past patterns, present states and future patterns with
respect to a given time point t. As a first step it is shown how
past patterns and future patterns can be specified. The basic
idea is that, for example, a past pattern refers to a specific set
of past traces (up to some time point t). The way in which
this reference takes place is by expressing a pattern in the
form of a (temporal) property that the traces in the set have in
common, or, in other words, that characterises this set of
traces. To express this property characterising a pattern, the
language TTL is used.
A past statement for γ and t is a temporal statement ϕ(γ, t)
where γ and t are free variables, such that each time variable
different from t is restricted to the time interval before t. In
other words, for every time quantifier for a variable s a
restriction of the form s ≤ t, or s < t is required within the
statement. A past pattern is any past statement. A trace γ
satisfies a past pattern ϕ(γ, t) for t if ϕ(γ, t) is true. The set of
past statements over state ontology Ont with respect to time
point t is denoted by PFOR(Ont, γ, t). Similarly as the past
statements, FFOR(Ont, γ, t) denotes the set of future statements
over state ontology Ont with respect to trace γ and time point t:
γ and t are free variables and every time quantifier for a
variable s is restricted by s ≥ t or s > t. A future pattern is any
future statement.
Given the specification of past and future patterns defined
above, the temporal relationships can be defined as follows.
A past pattern implies future pattern relationship for state
ontology Ont at any given time point t is specified as an
implication ∀γ [ ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ ψ(γ, t) ] where γ ranges over the sort
TRACE, ϕ(γ, t) ∈ PFOR(Ont, γ, t), ψ(γ, t) ∈ FFOR(Ont, γ, t). A past pattern
implies present state relationship for a state ontology Ont and
time point t is specified as a logical implication ∀γ [ ϕ(γ, t) ⇒
state(γ, t) |= p ] for a given state property p ∈ STATPROP(Ont) and
ϕ(γ, t) ∈ PFOR(Ont, γ, t), whereas γ ranges over the sort TRACE. A
present state implies future pattern relationship for a state
ontology Ont and time point t is specified as a logical
implication ∀γ [ state(γ, t) |= p ⇒ ψ(γ, t) ] for a given state
property p ∈ STATPROP(Ont) and ψ(γ, t) ∈ FFOR(Ont, γ, t), whereas γ
ranges over the sort TRACE.
Using the notions defined above, the temporal
factorisation principle over state ontology Ont expresses that
for any past and future formulae ϕ(γ, t) ∈ PFOR(Ont, γ, t), ψ(γ, t) ∈
FFOR(Ont, γ, t) with respect to t, for which for any trace γ and
time point t the implication ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ ψ(γ, t) holds, there exists
a state property p ∈ STATPROP(Ont) such that for all traces γ
and time points t the implications ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ state(γ, t) |= p &
8
state(γ, t) |= p ⇒ ψ(γ, t) hold, or in concise format :
7

For a detailed description of TTL’s syntax and semantics, see (Bosse et
al., 2006)
8
Notice that for this formalisation the following three features of TTL are
crucial: (1) it is based on an expressive first-order language for temporal
relationships, (2) traces are first class citizens in the language, which
means that variables and quantification over traces are possible, and (3)

∀γ, t [ ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ ψ(γ, t) ] ⇒ ∃p [ ∀γ, t [ ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ state(γ, t) |= p ]
& ∀γ, t [ state(γ, t) |= p ⇒ ψ(γ, t) ] ]

where γ ranges over the sort
over sort STATPROP.

TRACE, t

over sort

TIME

and

p

Temporal Factorisation and Mental States
One of the challenges in the cognitive agent domain is to
describe how a (human or animal) agent’s behaviour depends
on its past experiences (e.g., sensing of stimuli). As
relationships between future patterns of an agent’s behaviour
and past patterns of its stimuli may be quite complex, the
notion of mental state has been postulated as a mediating state
between past stimuli and future behaviour. The mental state
of an agent depends on its past, and the agent’s future
behaviour depends on its mental state. In this sense the
temporal factorisation principle applies. The postulated
mental state properties play an important role in the
explanation and prediction of behaviour. An example
concerning an agent’s belief state illustrates the case in some
more detail below.
To illustrate how temporal factorisation relates to the
notion of mental state property, consider an agent’s reaction
on its observation of the presence of food at a position P:
if
at any time t' ≤ t the agent observed food at position P
then if at some t" ≥ t the agent observes the opportunity to go to P,
then at some time point t'" ≥ t" the agent will go to P.

The above specification describes a temporal relationship
between past (observation) events and future behaviours,
without taking into account internal, mental states; as such it
is a description from a behaviourist perspective; e.g., Kim
(1996). Here, it is assumed that at the moment that the
opportunity to go to P is observed, the food at P may not be
observed anymore. The mental state property
belief that food is present at position P

can be seen as a temporal factorisation of this temporal past to
future relationship. Its temporal relational specification can be
obtained in a simplified form in the following manner. The
past pattern is described by ϕ(γ, t), which is the past statement
∃t1≤t state(γ, t1) |= observed(food_present_at(P))

which states that there exists a past time point at which the
agent observed food at P. Moreover, the future pattern is
described by ψ(γ, t), which is the future statement
∀t2≥t [ state(γ, t2) |= observed(opportunity_to_go_to(P)) ⇒
∃t3≥t2 state(γ, t3) |= performed(go_to(P)) ]

expressing that as soon as an opportunity is observed, the
agent goes to P. Temporal factorisation of ∀γ, t [ ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ ψ(γ, t)
]
for this case is obtained by the following temporal
relational specifications for the belief state:
state properties are first class citizens, which means that variables and
quantification over state properties are possible.

2278

∀γ, t [ ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ state(γ, t) |= belief(food_present_at(P)) ] &
∀γ, t [ state(γ, t) |= belief(food_present_at(P)) ⇒ ψ(γ, t) ]

Then the belief state property p is a mediating state property
for this past to future relationship ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ ψ(γ, t).

Temporal Factorisation and DST

This states that if there is a past observation of food at P, then
a belief state concerning this fact is there, and if such a belief
state is there, then the agent will go to P as soon as the
opportunity is observed. This also shows how the functional
or causal role of a mental state property (e.g., Kim, 1996, pp.
75-80) can be described by the temporal factorisation
principle.
In recent literature in the area of Cognitive Science and
Philosophy of Mind, cognitive functioning is studied from an
interactivist perspective (e.g., (Bickhard, 1993; Jonker and
Treur, 2003). Bickhard (1993) emphasises the relation
between the (mental) state of a system (or agent) and it's past
and future in the interaction with its environment.9 His view
suggests that mental states are related to interaction histories
on the one hand, and to future interactions, on the other hand.
In (Jonker and Treur, 2003) a formalisation is proposed
which takes into account the temporal aspects of this
interactivist perspective. The general idea is as follows.
Suppose for an agent a mental state property p is given,
which relates to a pattern of past interaction (up to a given
time point t), on the one hand, and to a pattern of future
interaction on the other hand. Let ϕ(γ, t) be a specification of
this pattern of past interaction and ψ(γ, t) a specification of the
pattern of future interaction. The temporal-interactivist
approach considers that the mental state property p holding in
the present can mediate in this process as follows:
[ ϕ(γ, t) ⇒

state(γ, t) |= p

] & [

state(γ, t) |= p

Dynamics in domains such as Physics, Chemistry, and
Biology, has been addressed in history by the development of
the Dynamical Systems Theory (DST). In recent times, it has
been proposed to apply the DST approach to cognition as
well (e.g., Port and van Gelder, 1995). One of the
assumptions underlying DST is the assumption on statedetermined systems (cf. van Gelder and Port, 1995; Ashby,
1952/1960). In this section the state-determined system
assumption is discussed in relation to the temporal
factorisation principle. Van Gelder and Port (1995),
following Ashby (1960), explain what a dynamical system is
in the following manner. A system is a set of changing
aspects (or state properties) of the world. A state at a given
point in time is the way these aspects or state properties are at
that time; so a state is characterised by the state properties
that hold. The set of all possible states is the state space. A
behaviour of the system is the change of these state
properties over time, or, in other words, a succession or
sequence of states within the state space. Such a sequence in
the state space can be indexed, for example, by natural
numbers (discrete case) or real numbers (continuous case),
and can also be called a trace or trajectory. Following
Ashby, such a system is state-determined if:

⇒ ψ(γ, t) ]

These specifications express a temporal factorisation of the
past to future relationship ϕ(γ, t) ⇒ ψ(γ, t); this shows how the
temporal factorisation principle subsumes the temporalinteractivist approach to mental states. An illustration of the
temporal-interactivist approach by an extension of the belief
example above is as follows. Take ϕ(γ, t) the past statement
∃t1≤t [ state(γ, t1) |= observed(food_present_at(P)) &
∀t2 t1≤t2≤t ⇒

A system is state-determined only when its current state always determines a
unique future behaviour. Three features of such systems are worth noting.
First, in such systems, the future behaviour cannot depend in any way on
whatever states the system might have been in before the current state. In
other words, past history is irrelevant (or at least, past history only makes a
difference insofar as it has left an effect on the current state). Second, the fact
that the current state determines future behaviour implies the existence of
some rule of evolution describing the behaviour of the system as a function
of its current state. (…) Third, the fact that future behaviours are uniquely
determined means that state space sequences can never fork. (Gelder and
Port, 1995, p. 6).

¬ state(γ, t2) |= observed(not(food_present_at(P)))

This is a more complex pattern than the one above; in this
case it involves all time points in an interval between t1 and t,
which makes more clear how a complete history can be taken
into account instead of only one past state. Moreover, as
before ψ(γ, t) is the future statement
∀t2≥t [ state(γ, t2) |= observed(opportunity_for(go_to(P))) ⇒
∃t3≥t2 state(γ, t3) |= performed(go_to(P)) ]

According to some, a dynamical system is just a statedetermined system (Giunti, 1995). For others, in particular
those involved in DST, a dynamical system is a statedetermined system for which the state properties are
described by assignments of numerical values to a given set
of variables (van Gelder and Port, 1995). According to
Ashby (1960), a main question for a scientist is how to obtain
an appropriate state ontology such that based on this
ontology for a certain state it can be found out how it is going
to change to a different state, according to a certain rule of
evolution.10 The hypothesis is that such a state ontology
10

9

‘When interaction is completed, the system will end in some one of its
internal states - some of its possible final states. (…) The final state that the
system ends up in, then, serves to implicitly categorise together that class
of environments that would yield that final state if interacted with. (...) The
overall system, with its possible final states, therefore, functions as a
differentiator of environments, with the final states implicitly defining the
differentiation categories. (…) Representational content is constituted as
indications of potential further interactions.’ (Bickhard, 1993)

‘Because of its importance, science searches persistently for the statedetermined. As a working guide, the scientist has for some centuries
followed the hypothesis that, given a set of variables, he can always find a
larger set that (1) includes the given variables, and (2) is state-determined.
Much research work consists of trying to identify such a larger set, for
when it is too small, important variables will be left out of account, and the
behaviour of the set will be capricious. The assumption that such a larger
set exists is implicit in almost all science, but, being fundamental, it is
seldom mentioned explicitly.’ (Ashby, 1960, p. 28).

2279

always can be found. At first sight, this seems to be close to
the consequent ∃p a → p & p → b of the temporal
factorisation principle, especially in the claim that certain
state properties exist. However, in Ashby’s formulation much
emphasis is put on the relationship p → b, almost remaining
silent about how p is brought about based on past events.
Therefore it might be more fair to state that his position is
expressed most sincerely by only part of the consequent: ∃p
p → b. In contrast to Ashby’s bias on the ‘present to future’
relationship, in the formulation of the consequent of the
temporal factorisation principle an equal balance between
past and future has been achieved. A second difference
between Ashby’s state-determined system assumption and
the temporal factorisation principle is the conditional a → b
used in the latter. This conditional may also be expected to be
a silent assumption in Ashby’s view. The temporal
factorisation principle makes this assumption explicit in the
form of a conditional. This conditional makes a crucial
difference in the sense that temporal factorisation does not
assume a deterministic system, whereas Ashby’s notion of
state-determined system is deterministic, and therefore his
notion is more limited.
For a more detailed illustration, an analysis of the state
property (instantanious) velocity or change rate in a
continuous process, which plays a central role in DST,
involves the notion of limit. For example, temporal relational
specification of velocity p(t) at t in the form of a ‘past pattern
implies present state’ relationship a → p is given by

relationship and a ‘present state implies future pattern’
relationship. In this paper, in addition, a formalisation of this
temporal factorisation principle was put forward.
The temporal factorisation principle has been shown to be
a basic assumption underlying standard approaches to
dynamics in disciplines such as Physics and Cognitive
Science; such approaches include Dynamical Systems
Theory (DST, cf. Port and Gelder, 1995), and functionalist
and interactivist approaches to cognition (cf. Kim, 1996,
Bickhard, 1993, Jonker and Treur, 2003). By providing this
unification, the temporal factorisation principle provides a
new perspective on the issue of grounding or embedding of
cognitive agent models in the physical world. For example, it
provides a new perspective on the temporal-interactivist
approach to the dynamics of mental states as described in
Jonker and Treur (2003), as being an instance of a more
general principle of nature.

References
Ashby, W.R. (1952/1960). Design for a Brain. Chapman &
Hall, London, 1952. Revised, second edition, 1960.
Bickhard, M.H. (1993). Representational Content in Humans
and Machines. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5, pp. 285-333.
Bosse, T., Jonker, C.M., Meij, L. van der, Sharpanskykh, A., &
Treur, J. (2006). A Temporal Trace Language for the Formal
Analysis of Dynamic Properties. Technical Report, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam. URL
http://www.few.vu.nl/~treur/TTL.pdf
Dennett, D.C. (2003), Freedom Evolves. Penguin Books.
Descartes, R. (1633). The World or Treatise on Light.
Withdrawn from publication, 1633. In: Descartes, R., The
World and Other Writings. (S. Gaukroger ed.) Cambridge
Texts in the History of Philosophy. Cambridge University
Press.
Earman, J., (1986). A Primer on Determinism. Reidel Publishing
Company, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Gelder, T.J. van, and Port, R.F., (1995). It’s About Time: An
Overview of the Dynamical Approach to Cognition. In: Port
and van Gelder (1995), pp. 1-43.
Giunti, M. (1995). Dynamical Models of Cognition. In: Port and
van Gelder (1995), pp. 549-572.
Jonker, C.M., and Treur, J., (2002). Compositional Verification
of Multi-Agent Systems: a Formal Analysis of Pro-activeness
and Reactiveness. Int. J. of Cooperative Information Systems,
vol. 11, pp. 51-92.
Jonker, C.M., and Treur, J., (2003). A Temporal-Interactivist
Perspective on the Dynamics of Mental States. Cognitive
Systems Research Journal, vol. 4, 2003, pp. 137-155.
Kim, J. (1996). Philosophy of Mind. Westview press.
Laplace, P.S. (1825). Philosophical Essays on Probabilities.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995. Translated by A.I. Dale
from the 5th edition of 1825.
Port, R.F., Gelder, T. van (eds.) (1995). Mind as Motion:
Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass..
Treur, J., (2005). States of Change: Explaining Dynamics by
Anticipatory State Properties. Philosophical Psychology, vol.
18, 2005, pp. 441-471.

limt'↑t ( (x(t') - x(t)) / (t' - t) ) = w ⇒ p(t) = w

which relates past state properties at t' < t to the mediating
state property p(t) at t; similarly
p(t) = w ⇒ limt"↓t ((x(t") - x(t)) / (t" - t)) = w

for the future perspective). Application of the temporal
factorisation principle explains the mathematical theorem
that if a past to future relationship in the form of a
smoothness condition is fulfilled, then at t a derivative exists
for the function x of t (i.e., the function is differentiable at t).

Discussion
The more popular, physicalist views on cognition in
Philosophy of Mind, consider cognition as a phenomenon of
nature. A challenge then is to relate principles behind
cognition to principles in nature, or to search for common
principles: how can physical architectures, functioning on the
basis of principles valid in the physical world, show
cognition; which principles make that possible? A central
principle was identified and discussed, which deals with
dynamics both in the physical world and in cognitive
processes. From a historical perspective, this temporal
factorisation principle seems rather fundamental in scientific
development (e.g., the development of areas within
Mathematics and Physics such as calculus, and classical
mechanics). It postulates the existence of mediating state
properties that can be used to decompose any temporal ‘past
pattern implies future pattern’ relationship into two simpler
temporal relationships: a ‘past pattern implies present state’
2280

