UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Learning to Distinguish Categories on Graded Structure

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rf9r0dn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Kurtz, Kenneth J.
Levering, Kimery

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Learning to Distinguish Categories on Graded Structure
Kimery Levering (kleveri1@binghamton.edu)
Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Binghamton University
Binghamton, NY 13905 USA
Abstract
Research on the internal structure of categories has shown that
central tendency, frequency of instantiation, and ideals are
determinants of graded structure (Barsalou, 1985). Vast differences
in the relative roles of these factors have been observed depending
on the type of category, the immediate context of evaluation, and
the domain knowledge or experiential history of the individual. In
two experiments, using the simplest possible domain of novel
artificial categories (lines of varying lengths), we tested whether
the way in which a category is learned can shape its internal
organization. Specifically, the impact of co-learning multiple
categories within a classification scheme was assessed using
typicality ratings. We found that the internal structure of a category
took qualitatively different forms (i.e., graded structure based on
ideals or central tendency; or even no graded structure at all)
depending on the nature and number of the contrast categories
during learning.

Introduction
A foundational aspect of the scientific understanding of
human concepts and categories is the phenomenon of
graded structure. Specifically, people systematically judge
some members of a category to be better (i.e., more typical
or representative) than others (Rosch & Mervis, 1975; Rips,
Shoben, & Smith, 1973). A traditional example is that robin
is seen as a good example of the category bird, while
penguin is not considered typical. It is widely agreed that
natural categories are organized in terms of family
resemblance (Rosch & Mervis, 1975). Direct and indirect
measures of item typicality are well-predicted by the
proximity or degree of feature overlap between an example
and the central tendency of the category. On one view, the
graded structure of psychological categories closely
parallels and reflects the correlational structure of the
environment (Rosch & Mervis, 1975). Taking the bird
category for example, the high typicality of robin arises
from data showing that robins possess many of the
properties common to birds (i.e., they fly, are of average
size, coloration, feathers, etc.). An additional factor beyond
centrality is the frequency of instantiation of a category
member (Barsalou, 1985; Nosofsky, 1988).
Counter to the view that typicality fundamentally mirrors
the environment, it has been shown that the basis for graded
structure varies between different types of categories
(Barsalou, 1985) and, further, that the graded structure of a
particular category varies across contexts and judges
(Barsalou, 1987; Roth & Shoben, 1983). This is to say, the
typicality of an example is not strictly determined by the
centrality of its feature values and its frequency. In addition,
1681

goal-optimizing properties called ideals have been shown to
powerfully predict the organization of natural taxonomic
and goal-derived categories (Barsalou, 1985; Lynch, Coley,
& Medin, 2000; Bailenson, Shum, Atran, Medin, & Coley,
2002; Burnett, Medin, Ross, & Block, 2005). In many cases,
the examples of a category that best serve the goals or
interactions between a person and object are the ones seen
as most typical.
This can be seen most dramatically in the case of goalderived categories (Barsalou, 1985). For example, in a
category such as foods to eat on a diet, the items judged
most typical are those which contain the least number of
calories (i.e., the category is organized around the ideal of
zero calories). For goal-derived categories, Barsalou (1985)
found that graded structure depended systematically on
proximity to ideals, not to central tendency. Further,
ordinary taxonomic categories were determined both by
central tendency and ideals (as well as frequency). As seen
in the work of Medin and colleagues, experts’ categories are
largely shaped by ideals and different populations with
varying ideals or perspectives on a domain show different
typicality profiles. For example, Burnett, et al. (2005)
reported a study of fishermen from two cultures in the same
geographical region with different notions of desirability
about fish. Participants from the two cultural groups
produced typicality ratings for various kinds of fish, and the
ratings were best predicted by goal-relevant ideals grounded
in cultural desirability.
Medin and colleagues suggest that the evidence
supporting the priority of central tendency in judgments of
typicality has arisen mostly in cases in which participants
know relatively little about the domain. Lynch, et al. (2000)
found that for tree experts, the best examples of the concept
tree were those most consistent with the ideals of maximum
height and minimal weediness – as opposed to the best
examples being those with the most central values on these
two (or other) features. Further, even the novices with little
domain knowledge did not base their typicality judgments
on central tendency; for this group, familiarity was the best
predictor. Finally, Lynch, et al. (2000) found that the
organization of expert categories systematically reflected
the type of expertise (e.g., landscapers versus taxonomists).
Given this background, we point out two unique
properties about ideals: (1) they appear to show an influence
of top-down feature construction or selection based on
knowledge or experience (Wisniewski & Medin, 1994;
Murphy & Medin, 1985); and (2) they represent extreme
points rather than central points of feature values. To

illustrate the first point, examples of foods to eat on a diet
do not offer readily available (i.e., perceptual) information
about their calorie levels, yet this is the critical ideal
underlying the category organization. To illustrate the
second point, note that the ideal for the example above is
zero calories, an extreme value along the dimension that is
optimal with regard to the goal.
In accord with the theorists mentioned above, we believe
that ideals emerge and mediate category structure as a result
of goal-directed experience. More specifically, we suggest
that ideals are based on properties that are highlighted (or
constructed) via classification learning. For example, in the
context of landscaping, one makes classification judgments
with regard to the desirability of particular trees for
particular goals – the learning process associated with such
category decisions picks out ideals such as height and
weediness. We do not discount the potential role of theorylike knowledge, but the current proposal has the advantage
of being fairly clear to articulate and test. Our core claim is
that the internal organization of a category is at least
partially determined (above and beyond the statistics of the
environment) by the process of learning to distinguish
among task-relevant contrast categories.
The interrelatedness of categories has already received
some research attention. Nosofsky (1988) found that the
frequency of presentation of category instances during
learning not only affected the typicality of those items, but
also influenced the typicality of members of the contrast
category. Goldstone (1996) offered a theoretical analysis
entailing a continuum between isolated and interrelated
concepts. One especially interesting aspect of interrelated
categories is that (in contrast with isolated categories)
extreme examples or caricatures are more accurately
categorized than central examples (Goldstone, 1996;
Goldstone, Steyvers, & Rogosky, 2003; Palmeri &
Nosofsky, 2001). The latter study using ill-defined
categories is unique in that the extreme examples were
extreme
only
in
their
(learned)
psychological
representations; that is, the examples were actually
prototypical of their category as physical stimuli.
We focus on a basic component of classification learning
– the number and the nature of the contrast categories
against which a target category is learned – in order to
evaluate the role of co-learning as a determinant of graded
structure. Co-learning refers to the presence of contrast
categories in a classification training set and choice set. We
predict that the exact same set of category members will
show systematically different graded structure depending on
its status relative to contrast categories.
An extremely simple set of novel, artificial categories are
used to evaluate the influence of co-learning on graded
structure. We expect essentially perfect accuracy in this task
and direct our focus toward the ratings of item typicality
collected after the learning phase using single-item
presentations. Learning a single category in isolation is
likely to produce graded structure based on central tendency
(since the learners are novices who lack domain

knowledge). There is no evidence presently available, to our
knowledge, as to whether or in what way the graded
structure underlying a category representation will be
affected by co-learning with one or more categories from
the same domain. The closest related evidence comes from
the study of learned categorical perception where it has been
shown that examples become more or less easily
discriminated depending on their status relative to the
category boundary (Tajfel & Wilkes, 1963; Livingston,
Andrews, & Harnad, 1998).

Experiment 1
This study was designed to evaluate the internal structure of
categories after either 2-way or 3-way classification learning
of simple categories of examples varying in line length. A
preliminary data set revealed that participants who were
introduced to only one category of lines exhibited a central
tendency organization in their item-by-item typicality
ratings. Specifically, on average the mid-length line was
rated as the most typical and the extreme lines (the shortest
and longest) were the least typical. In the current
experiment, the same target category was investigated under
two conditions of co-learning: (1) with a second category of
continuously varying line lengths; and (2) with two
additional categories (one consisting of longer length
examples and one consisting of shorter length examples).
Graded structure based on central tendency would be
evidenced by an inverted U-shaped curve (as in the
preliminary data), while ideal-based typicality would be
evidenced by monotonically decreasing ratings with a high
point located at the extreme value of line length (i.e., the
longest of the long or the shortest of the short).

Method
Participants. 158 undergraduates from Binghamton
University participated in this experiment in order to fulfill a
course requirement.

1682

Material and Design. Stimuli consisted of 15 black lines
separated by length into three categories. All lines were 15
pixels wide and lengths (ranging from 200 to 900 pixels)
were constructed to reflect a consistent difference (of 50
pixels) between each item length within a particular
category as well as between the closest members of two
consecutive categories (see Figure 1). Short lines had
lengths of 200, 250, 300, 350, and 400 pixels, intermediate
lines had lengths of 450, 500, 550, 600, and 650 pixels, and
long lines had lengths of 700, 750, 800, 850, and 900 pixels.
The experiment used a between-Ss design with two
conditions. In the 2-way learning condition (n = 94), only
the short and intermediate lines were learned. In the 3-way
learning condition (n = 64), all three sets of lines were
learned. Note that the preliminary data showing centralitybased organization was collected using the intermediate
lines.

well as in both of the extreme categories of the three-way
learning condition (lines of short and long length). By
contrast, the category of intermediate lines in the three-way
learning condition showed graded structure relative to the
central tendency of the category. The salient characteristic
of these data is that the category of intermediate line lengths
showed a qualitatively different internal structure depending
on whether or not an additional contrast category (the long
length lines) was included in the training phase.

Figure 1: Stimulus Materials for Experiment 1.
Category

Stimulus (scaled to 25%)

Short

Intermediate

Figure 2: Mean Typicality Ratings by Condition and Item in
Experiment 1.

Long

Results and Discussion. In the two-way learning condition,
70% of participants reached criterion (in an average of 50
trials). The two-way learners were highly accurate in
classification at test (M = .95, SD = .06). In the three-way
learning condition, only 22% of participants reached
criterion (in an average of 100 trials), but still showed high
accuracy at test (M = .90, SD = .07). No meaningful
differences were observed when the learners who failed to
reach criterion were removed from the analyses.
Accordingly, all participants (regardless of whether they
met the criterion) were included in the analysis of the test
phase data.
Unlike in the preliminary data based on learning only a
single category, ideal-based graded structure (see Figure 2)
was found for both categories (lines of short and
intermediate length) of the two-way learning condition as

8
Two-way

7
Mean Typicality Rating

Procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the two conditions. Participants were instructed that they
would be exposed to a series of lines and asked to categorize
them into types. Each participant completed a series of
learning blocks in which all items were presented one at a
time in a random order. The lines were displayed
horizontally in the center of the computer display. Below
the example, participants were asked to click with the
mouse on the button with the correct category label. The
categories were labeled with arbitrary names (Type K, Type
H, and Type R) that were selected to convey no meaning to
the learner. After making a classification response,
participants were given correct/incorrect feedback including
the correct category. A learning criterion was set at twenty
consecutive correct responses. Participants who did not
reach criterion proceeded to the test phase after eight blocks
of training (80 trials in the two-way learning condition and
120 trials in the three-way learning condition).
During the test phase each of the training items was
displayed one at a time in a random order. Participants were
asked to judge the typicality of the item, specifically: “How
good an example is this of the category?” Ratings were
collected on a scale from 1 (poor example) to 7 (very good
example). Before providing each rating, the participants
were asked to select the correct category (no feedback was
given). In addition to the typicality ratings, classification
accuracy and response times were recorded for the learning
and test phases.

Three-way

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1

Short

Interm ediate

Long

Stimuli

In order to quantitatively distinguish the profiles of
graded structure, a standard regression formula was used to
calculate slopes of the typicality ratings across the five items
in a category. This measure effectively identified the degree
to which the typicality ratings were influenced by ideals
(greater slope values, either positive or negative, shows
graded structure relative to the extreme point) or by central
tendency (approximately zero slope). The slope was
averaged over participants for each category in each
condition and compared using independent t-tests. All
ratings generated after an incorrect classification were
excluded from the analysis.
In both conditions the ideal of minimum line length had a
great influence on the graded structure of the category of
short lines. The mean slope of the typicality distributions for
the short category was highly negative in both the two-way
learning condition (M = -.76, SD = .55) and the three-way
learning condition (M = -.77, SD = .56). In a consistent
manner, the mean slope for the category of long length
items in the three-way learning condition was highly
positive M = .73, SD = .52). The intermediate length items
showed a highly positive slope as an extreme category in the
two-way learning condition (M = .65, SD = .48), but showed
near-zero slope as the intermediate category in the threeway learning condition (M = .06, SD = .51). The difference
between the slopes for the category of intermediate length
items was significant, t(156) = 7.413, p < .01, between the
two conditions. In addition the slope for the intermediate
category in three-way learning was obviously different than
that of the extreme categories.
In a supporting set of analyses, the mean typicality ratings
for the items of each category in each condition were

1683

compared. Specifically, independent t-tests revealed that the
typicality of the extreme example (i.e., the shortest of the
short or the longest of the long) was significantly greater
than the central example for the ideal-based categories
(those with highly positive or negative slopes), and for the
one remaining category (the intermediate length category of
the three-way learning condition), the central example was
rated significantly higher than the extreme examples (the
details of this analysis are not included due to limited
space).
Our most surprising finding is that the very same target
category (the intermediate length lines) showed an entirely
different, yet in all cases systematic, graded structure
depending upon the learning conditions. After exposure to
only the target category, a central tendency basis for graded
structure was observed. However, when the category
represented a set of extreme values relative to a contrast
category, typicality ratings were ideal-based (as in the short
and intermediate length categories after two-way learning
and the short and long length categories after three-way
learning). Finally, when the target category was co-learned
such that its membership occupied the mid-range of the
critical feature (i.e., the intermediate length category under
three-way learning), an inverted U-shaped profile was
observed was preserved. The typicality profile in this case is
actually open to two interpretations. One possibility is that
this category was unaffected by co-learning and simply
showed the same pattern as in the single-category case.
Alternatively, it is possible that this category also showed
ideal-based organization cohering around an ideal of
extreme middleness. This strikes us as unlikely, but either
account predicts the inverted U-shape form of the
distribution that was observed.
We note that while the classification accuracy was quite
high at test, the errors that were made tended to occur near
the category boundaries. Response times also showed longer
latencies for the border items presumably due to greater
difficulty. While the typicality ratings for incorrect
classifications were not included in the analyses of graded
structure, it remains possible that lower ratings were given
to the border items due to low confidence about their
category membership (rather than due to their low proximity
to a reference point). The following study was designed to
address the issues of the ambiguous interpretation of the
intermediate length category under three-way learning, as
well as the issue of reduced confidence at the category
boundaries.

between the categories. This use of clustered, rather than
continuously varied, line lengths across the categories was
expected to improve the levels of classification accuracy. In
addition, the easily differentiated categories provided a
means of better understanding the impact of co-learning.
Specifically, would the intermediate category under threeway learning continue to show the inverted-U profile?

Method
Participants. 117 undergraduates from Binghamton
University participated in this experiment to fulfill a course
requirement.
Material and Design. Stimuli for the second experiment
were 15 black lines of the same width as in the first
experiment. Although the lengths of these lines also ranged
from 200 to 900 pixels, they were chosen to reflect a greater
difference in length between the categories. As a
consequence, there was a smaller difference of 25 pixels
between each category member (see Figure 3). Short lines
had lengths of 200, 225, 250, 275, and 300 pixels,
intermediate lines had lengths of 500, 525, 550, 575, and
600 pixels, and long lines had lengths of 800, 825, 850, 875,
and 900 pixels. This experiment, like the first, used a
between-Ss design with two conditions. In the two-way
learning condition (n = 58), short and intermediate line
categories were learned. In the three-way learning condition
(n = 59), all three sets of lines were learned.
Figure 3: Stimulus Materials for Experiment 2.
Category

Stimulus (scaled to 25%)

Short
Intermediate
Long

Procedure. The procedure was exactly the same as in the
previous experiment.

Experiment 2

Results and Discussion. As expected, participants learned
the categories more quickly and effectively when the
categories were clustered rather than continuous. In the twoway learning condition, 95% of participants reached
criterion (in an average of 31 trials) with 100% overall
accuracy at test. Participants in the three-way learning
condition performed similarly, with 98% of participants
reaching criterion (in an average of 38 trials), and
categorizing with 99% overall accuracy at test.
Consistent with the results of the first experiment, the
typicality ratings for the categories of clustered stimuli were
again determined by ideals rather than central tendency –
and again there was one important exception in the case of
the intermediate category under three-way learning (see

Our goal was to replicate and extend the findings of the first
experiment by evaluating the role of category
distinctiveness. Specifically, we tested whether the effect of
co-learning would be influenced by the ease with which the
categories could be distinguished from one another.
Additionally, we sought to ensure that the lower levels of
typicality for boundary items were not due to participants’
uncertainty with regard to category membership. A set of
materials was developed with increased length differences
1684

Figure 4). In the current results, however, the typicality
ratings for the intermediate of the three categories exhibited
neither ideal-based nor central tendency-based graded
structure. Instead, to our surprise, the distribution was
essentially flat.
Figure 4: Mean Typicality Ratings by Condition and Item
in Experiment 2.
8

Two-way

Mean Typicality Rating

7

Three-way

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Short

Interm ediate

Long

Stimuli

A possible explanation for this finding emerges from the
differences between the two experiments. One difference
between the data from the previous experiment (conducted
using continuous stimuli) and the present experiment with
clustered stimuli is that the range of the mean typicality
ratings for each category was smaller in the current study.
As more distance was created between categories in order to
evaluate category distinctiveness, the difference in the
lengths within each category was decreased. This change in
length difference (from 50 pixels to 25 pixels) may have
resulted in a decreased overall ability to distinguish between
the members of each category. This speculation is supported
by the fact that 10% of the participants in the two-way
condition and 15% of the participants in the three-way
condition responded with the same rating for all of the
stimuli, compared to only 3% and 1%, respectively, in the
first experiment (note that the experimental findings were
fully preserved when these uniform responders were
removed from the analyses).
However, the existence of systematic ideal-based graded
structure for the extreme categories suggests that reduced
item distinctiveness was probably not an overall
determining factor. Graded structure was extinguished only
in the intermediate category. We interpret the current
evidence to suggest that the internal structure of the
intermediate category under three-way learning was based
on central tendency with the continuous categories of
Experiment 1, but was essentially incoherent with the
clustered categories of Experiment 2. The incoherent
internal structure arose because the boundaries were so clear
between the categories that there was no need to become
familiar with the distributional properties of the intermediate
category. Essentially, the intermediate category may have
acted as a kind of junk category lacking a positive
definition; any item that was neither short nor long would
belong to this class, and the common core among these
items did not require analysis. Evidence favoring this

interpretation emerges from an analysis of individual rating
data. The flat profile of the mean typicality ratings was not
actually representative of the performance of most of the
individual learners. Instead the flat distribution reflected the
average of a wide-range of ostensibly unsystematic profiles.
However, this lack of coherence does not appear to reflect
an inability to tell the examples apart. Compared to the other
two categories, a smaller percentage of participants rated all
of the intermediate length items as equally good examples
of their category. Therefore, it appears that learners were
sensitive to the item differences, but lacked a reference
point for systematically assessing typicality.
Quantitative analyses support our interpretation of the
data. Most importantly, the typicality ratings for the
category of intermediate length items after two-way learning
had a mean slope (M = .16, SD = .30) that was significantly
greater than the slope for the same items in the three-way
learning condition (M = -.02, SD = .30), t(116) = 3.26, p <
.01. Therefore, the category of intermediate items was
organized according to the ideal of maximum length under
two-way learning, but showed no graded structure under
three-way learning.
While the clustered intermediate category lacked
systematic organization when learned along with both
shorter and longer lines, the pattern of graded structure for
the extreme categories was consistent with the findings of
Experiment 1. The main difference from the previous results
was that the slopes were less steep – an apparent reflection
of the reduced within-category distinctiveness. The mean
slope of the item typicality ratings for the category of short
length items was negative for two-way learning (M = -.28,
SD = .39), as well as for three-way learning (M = -.24, SD =
.44), indicating ideal-based graded structure. Likewise, the
mean slope for the category of long length items in the
three-way learning condition was positive (M = .16, SD =
.31). Pairwise t-tests revealed that for the long and short
categories, the extreme examples were rated as reliably
more typical than the central examples.
While the internal structure of the intermediate category
was found to be qualitatively different between experiments,
it is important to note that that the mean slope of typicality
distributions for this category of clustered stimuli (M = -.02,
SD = .31) did not differ significantly from that found with
corresponding continuous stimuli (M = .06, SD = .51). This
is due to the fact that a measure of slope does not
distinguish between a lack of graded structure and a graded
structure based on central tendency (both represented by a
slope approaching zero). In order to clearly quantify the
difference between these two profiles of typicality ratings, a
measure of variability (the standard deviation) of the
typicality ratings for each of the five items was calculated.
An inverted-U shape curve will show much greater
variability than a flat line, despite their similar slopes. In a
cross-experiment comparison, we found that the average
standard deviation for the intermediate category of the
three-way condition in the first experiment (M = 1.06, SD =
.64) was significantly greater than that of the intermediate

1685

category under three-way learning in the current experiment
(M = .63, SD = .60), t(121) = 3.82, p < .01.

General Discussion
We found that: (1) learning one simple artificial category
produces a central tendency-based organization; (2) under
co-learning conditions, the bookend (i.e., extreme-valued)
categories always showed ideal-based graded structure; (3)
the intermediate category in three-way learning did not
show ideal-based graded structure, but instead showed a
central tendency basis when the between-category similarity
was high (difficult boundaries) and showed a lack of
systematic internal structure when the between category
similarity was low (easy boundaries). One could argue that
the difference in the intermediate categories between the
clustered and continuous version was attributable to the
difference in the within-category similarity, however, the
fact that ideal-based organization was observed in both
experiments for the extreme categories speaks against this
interpretation.
The primary implication of our results is that co-learning
is a powerful determinant of graded structure for categories
varying along a single dimension. The same target category
was organized differently depending on whether it was
learned alone, as an extreme category, or as an intermediate
category. More broadly, these results suggest that the role of
ideals in the organization of natural categories may be
grounded in task-driven classification experience and the
relative properties of co-learned categories. Our goals for
future work include extending this paradigm to
multidimensional and naturalistic category domains,
elucidating the underlying mechanism through which the
internal structure of a category takes form, and further
evaluating the relationship between learning tasks, learning
modes, and goal-related activity (see Markman & Ross,
2003).

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of the Learning and
Representation in Cognition (LaRC) Laboratory at
Binghamton University.

References
Bailenson, J. N., Shum, M. S., Atran, S., Medin, D. L., &
Coley, J. D. (2002). A bird’s eye view: Biological
categorization and reasoning within and across cultures.
Cognition, 84, 1-53.
Barsalou, L. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and frequency
of instantiation as determinants of graded structure in

categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629-654.
Barsalou, L. (1987). The instability of graded structure:
Implications for the nature of concepts. In U. Neisser,
(Ed.), Concepts and Conceptual Development: Ecological
and Intellectual Factors in Categorization. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Burnett, R. C., Medin, D. L., Ross, N. O., & Blok, S. V.
(2005). Ideal is typical. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 59, 3-10.
Goldstone, R.L., Steyvers, M., & Rogosky, B.J. (2003).
Conceptual interrelatedness and caricatures. Memory and
Cognition, 31, 169-180.
Livingston, K. R., Andrews, J. K., & Harnad, S. (1998).
Categorical perception effects induced by category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, 732-753.
Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (2000). Tall is
typical: Central tendency, ideal dimensions and graded
category structure among tree experts and novices.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 41-50.
Markman, A. B. & Ross, B. H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 592-613.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1988). Exemplar-based accounts of
relations between classification, recognition, and
typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 700-708.
Palmeri, T. J. & Nosofsky, R. M. (2001). Central
tendencies, extreme points, and prototype enhancement
effects in ill-defined perceptual categorization. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A, 197235.
Rips, L. J., Shoben, E. J., & Smith, E. E. (1973). Semantic
distance and the verification of semantic distance. Journal
of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 12, 1-20.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Roth, E. M. & Shoben, E. J. (1983). The effect of context
on the structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 15,
346-378.
Tajfel, H. & Wilkes, A.L. (1963). Classification and
quantitative judgement. British Journal of Psychology,
54, 101-114.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Medin, D. L. (1994). On the
interaction of theory and data in concept learning.
Cognitive Science, 18, 221-281.

1686

