UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Lexical, Conceptual and Planning Based Factors on Disfluency Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9337x2hk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Schnadt, Michael J.
Corley, Martin

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Lexical, Conceptual and Planning Based Factors
on Disfluency Production
Michael J. Schnadt (m.j.schnadt@sms.ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences,
Edinburgh University, 7 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

Martin Corley (martin.corley@ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences,
Edinburgh University, 7 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

Abstract

it is entirely unclear what the underlying cause of these
disfluencies might be. They could be a consequence of the
relatively low frequencies (compared to closed-class words)
with which open-class words are likely to occur (Levelt,
1983), or in other words, they could be caused by lexical
retrieval difficulties. Alternatively, disfluencies could be
attributed to the vastly greater choice of open-class words
available to the speaker (Schachter, Christenfeld, Ravina &
Bilous, 1991), or to difficulties with lexical choice and
access. Finally, they may be due to causes outwith the
language system: if, for example, a speaker is trying to
name an unfamiliar or ambiguous object (Siegman & Pope,
1966). Effectively, the difficulties signaled by disfluencies
could occur at any stage of the speech process: during
planning, lexical retrieval or articulation of the speech plan,
and it has been argued that different types of disfluency may
signal different kinds of problems during production
(Bortfield et al., 2001). Clearly, a better understanding of
the underlying causes of disfluency would provide an
important contribution our understanding of language
production in general.
In this paper, we present two experiments which use the
Network Task (Levelt, 1983; Oomen & Postma, 2001) to
explicitly manipulate the content of what people say when
describing a network of objects, in order to investigate a
priori what factors influence the production of disfluency.
In Experiment 1, the frequency and name agreement of
items in the networks are varied; Experiment 2 varies the
visual accessibility of pictures used, reflecting difficulties
that do not have their origin in the linguistic system. These
experiments allow us to investigate the causes of disfluency
directly, establishing whether different disfluencies serve
different purposes.

Two experiments were conducted to elicit naturalistic speech,
while manipulating factors thought to influence disfluency
production. Participants described the route taken by a
marker through visually presented networks of objects linked
via one or more paths. In Experiment 1, lexical frequency
and name agreement of the object names were manipulated;
in Experiment 2, linguistic properties were kept constant and
accessibility was manipulated through visual blurring. An
increase in disfluency was observed immediately preceding
object names in cases where the objects named were either
low frequency or blurred. In both experiments, prolongations
were the most frequently occurring class of disfluency.
Additionally, when disfluencies during the path description
were examined, more possible path choices led to greater
numbers of disfluencies, which were predominantly filled
pauses and repairs. This study allows us to draw preliminary
conclusions about the influence of lexical, conceptual and
planning-based factors on disfluency production and to begin
to determine precisely the circumstances under which
disfluencies occur in natural speech.

Introduction
Natural spoken language is full of disfluency, generally
defined as “phenomena that interrupt the flow of speech and
do not add propositional content to an utterance” (Fox Tree,
1995). These phenomena include pauses, interruptions,
substitutions, repeated words or phrases, prolongations,
such as the pronounced “thee”, and filled pauses such as um
and uh. Such disruptions are very frequent: Brennan and
Schober (2001) estimate that around 10% of utterances
contain at least one disfluency, whereas Fox Tree (1995),
averaging across a number of studies, estimated that the rate
of disfluencies in spontaneous speech is about 6 per 100
words.
While the distribution of disfluencies in spontaneous
speech is relatively well understood from corpus-based
studies (e.g., Bortfield, Leon, Bloom, Schober & Brennan,
2001; Clark & Fox Tree, 2002; Shriberg, 1996), and claims
have been made as to the differing functions of different
types of disfluency (e.g., Clark & Fox Tree, 2002),
experimental studies to date have proved somewhat
inconclusive as to their cause. Take, for example, the
finding that disfluencies are more likely to precede openclass words (Maclay & Osgood, 1959). On current evidence,

Experiment 1
Method
The experiment was presented as a communication task.
Participants described the route taken by a marker through a
network of objects to a listener situated behind a screen.

750

Participants Twenty students from the University of
Edinburgh participated in the experiment (8 male, 12
female). All were native British English speakers.
Materials The experimental materials used in the Network
Task consisted of 6 visually presented networks based on
those of Oomen and Postma (2001). Each network
contained 8 black and white line drawings, arranged in
different configurations and connected by one, two or three
straight or curved lines. Each network was associated with a
route through the objects. A route always consisted of nine
steps, where six of the pictures occurred once in the route,
and two of the pictures occurred twice. The route through
the network that participants had to follow in their
descriptions was indicated by a red marker that moved along
the lines connecting each picture (see Figure 1 for an
example).
To construct the networks, 36 experimental and 12 filler
pictures were chosen from Snodgrass and Vanderwart’s
(1980) picture set. Objects were selected based on name
agreement scores taken from Griffin and Huitema (1999).
Included objects had either at least 90% agreement or less
than 50% agreement with the target name. Only pictures
that were given alternative names due to intrinsic
differences in the speakers’ own language processes and
representations were included. Objects given alternative
names due to picture ambiguity were excluded.
Lemmatized word frequencies were taken from Kucera
and Francis (1967). Where a word did not appear in Kucera
and Francis (1967), the British National Corpus (BNC)
frequency list (Kilgariff, 1995) was used, and the frequency
converted to an equivalent scale. 18 high frequency words
with frequencies ranging from 19 (guitar) to 591 (computer)
per 1.5 M (mean = 132.9) with high name agreement and 18
low frequency words with frequencies ranging from 0.26
(gavel) to 20 (suitcase) per 1.5M (mean = 5.4) with low
name agreement were selected.
Individual networks comprised 3 pictures with names of
high frequency and high name agreement (hereafter referred
to as HF) and 3 pictures with names of low frequency and
low name agreement (referred to as LF). Two fillers were
also included at nodes that the marker passed through twice.
Each network was constructed so that the picture sequences
were alternated between HF and LF and so that semantically
and phonologically related targets were not adjacent.
Participants’ speech was recorded on a SONY TLD-D8
DAT Walkman recorder using a Sennheiser C6 microphone.
The networks were presented sequentially on a stand-alone
computer screen, 40cm away from the participant.

Figure 1: An example network.
would see a series of networks and it was their task to
describe the route of a marker through each network so that
the listener could fill in the route and picture names on a
blank network. Participants were instructed to describe the
path of the marker, making sure to include the name of each
picture, the direction the marker was taking, the angle and
shape of the line the marker was moving along, and the
position of the line in relation to the others. The speaker was
instructed to talk in complete sentences and to modulate
their speech rate to keep up with the position of the marker
(as in Oomen & Postma, 2001). Participants were told that
they had to be as accurate as possible as the listener could
not ask for any repeated descriptions.
The order of network presentation was randomized across
participants. The marker started moving through the first
network when the spacebar on the keyboard was pressed. It
took 30 seconds to pass through the whole network, which
was found to be an appropriate speed for eliciting fast
connected spontaneous speech containing sufficient
numbers of disfluencies. Upon completion, participants
pressed the spacebar again to reveal the next network.
Transcription and Coding Transcription and coding was
carried out by the first author. 20% of the transcriptions
were independently verified and coded by another
researcher from the Edinburgh Disfluency Group. The two
coders agreed on 84% of identified disfluencies. Items for
which transcription or coding differed were re-examined by
both researchers until a consensus was reached.
The analysis presented here is based on three classes of
disfluency: filled pauses (such as um or uh); prolongations
(such as ay, thee, or prolonged to); and repairs, including
repetitions and corrections (e.g., insertions, substitutions or
deletions). These are illustrated in Table 1, with examples.

Procedure The speaker and confederate listener sat on
opposite sides of a screen. While both speaker and listener
could hear each other clearly, the screen occluded any visual
interaction.
Participants were informed that the experiment
investigated how well individuals followed instructions
without the aid of eye contact or body language. They

Results
The mean (and standard deviation) number of alternative
names used for each picture was 1.50 (.71) for HF items and
5.28 (3.12) for LF items. As expected, LF targets had
significantly more names used for them than HF targets (t
(19) = 5.01, p < .001).

751

Table 1: Coding scheme for disfluencies.
Disfluency Class Disfluency type

Example (in bold)

Filled Pause

“Right to the_um trophy along the straight line.”
(subject 4, network 5)
“…it’s going up to the uh house…” (subject 2,
network 6)

Um
Uh

Prolongation

Discussion
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to examine the influence
of lexical frequency of an object’s name on the production
rate of disfluencies immediately preceding naming of a
target item. The results demonstrate that pictures possessing
names of low frequency and low name agreement yielded
significantly more disfluencies than for object names of
high frequency and high name agreement. Thus, difficulties
associated with lexical access and retrieval of word forms
do appear to be accommodated through the use of
disfluencies.
When disfluencies were broken down into classes, only
the number of prolongations produced showed a significant
increase preceding low frequency items. Additionally,
prolongations occurred much more frequently preceding the
target item than did other classes of disfluency.
Prolongations comprised over 75% of observed
disfluencies, compared to about 13% and 10%, respectively,
for filled pauses and repairs. Perhaps surprisingly, given
that much of the literature concerns them, very few filled
pauses were observed preceding target names, although the
proportionate increase was similar to that for prolongations.
This may have been due to the fact that participants were
instructed to modulate their speech rate to the pace of the
marker, and under this time-pressured condition were less
likely to use a filler term.
The relative abundance of prolongations in the Target
position suggests that they are specifically used to
accommodate short term difficulties in the retrieval of word
forms, and that these difficulties are resolved more quickly
than those that require the formulation and insertion of a
filler term into upcoming speech. In comparison, Clark &
Fox Tree (2002) have proposed that filled pauses are used to
signal a variety of production difficulties, including lexical
access and retrieval.

Prolongation - Ay

“Then the dot’s moving left to ay table on a left
straight line” (subject 5, network 5)
Prolongation – Th:e “…down to th:e lion badge…” (subject 8, network 6)
Prolongation – to:o “…along to:o a hammer.”(subject 2, network 5)

Repair

Repeat
Correction

“…towards the s_sickle um along the…” (subject 6,
network 4)
"…towards the s_rectangle" (subject 20, network 2)

Out of a total of 720 items, 29 items were not named in
participants’ descriptions (7 HF and 22 LF items), and were
removed from further analysis. Disfluency analysis was
performed from the remaining 691 data points.
Table 2 shows the percentage of utterances that contained
a disfluency overall, percentages by disfluency class and for
information, by individual disfluency types. It also details
the proportional increase in disfluencies produced between
the HF and LF conditions.
A 1-way ANOVA on
disfluencies immediately preceding the target item showed a
significant overall effect of item type (LF vs. HF) on the
total number of disfluencies produced (F1 (1,19) = 22.01, p
< .001; F2 (1,34) = 24.13, p < .001). When disfluency
classes were examined, LF utterances contained
significantly more prolongations in the Target position than
did HF utterances (F1 (1, 19) = 25.33, p < .001; F2 (1,34) =
24.83, p < .001).
Filled pauses were present only
marginally more often in the LF condition (F1 (1, 19) =
3.23, p = .088), although this was significant by items (F2
(1,34) = 6.43, p = .016). It is likely that this marginal result
is due to the low occurrence of filled pauses preceding
target items in the data set (27 fillers were observed in this
position in total, 7 HF and 20 LF, compared to 160
prolongations). The class of repairs showed no significant
difference between LF and HF items (F1, F2 both < 1) 1.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 sought to examine problems associated with
the conceptual formulation of the speech message. This was
performed by blurring the object images, which made
identification of the items and therefore conceptual
generation of a message more difficult.

Table 2: Proportion of utterances containing disfluency

Disfluency Class
Total Disfluency
Filled Pause
Um
Uh

Prolongation
Repair
Repetition
Correction

HF
LF Proportional Increase
19.2% 36.9%
1.92
2.0% 5.6%
2.8
1.7%
0.3%

3.4%
2.6%

12.5% 32.5%
2.7% 3.9%
1.2%
1.5%

2.1%
1.9%

Method

2
8.67

The experimental method was identical to that of
Experiment 1, with the exception of the materials used in
the networks, as described below.

2.6
1.44
1.71
1.27

Participants 20 students (7 male, 13 female) from the
University of Edinburgh participated in the experiment. All
were native British English speakers.

1

Individual disfluency types were also examined, but no
significant effects were found for types of filled pause or repairs,
with the exception of uh, which showed an effect that approached
significance (F1 (1, 19) = 3.85, p = .065; F2 (1,34) = 5.88, p =
.021), but was based on only 10 data points.

Materials 8 visually presented networks were used, based
on those of Oomen and Postma (2001), each containing 8
pictures of objects. 64 objects were selected from the
Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) set of 260 objects. The

752

images used were grayscale textured images, which were
found to be more suitable for blurring (taken from Rossion
& Portois, 2004).
All selected images had Kucera and Francis (1967)
frequency counts of 10-30 per 1.5 million (mean = 19), and
a CELEX (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1993)
frequency within the range of 8-45 counts per million (mean
= 19.4). Image names were rated 4 or above on a scale of 15 in a rated picture name agreement measure (Barry,
Morrison, & Ellis, 1997).
All of the test images were blurred using a Gaussian blur
with a 1.5 pixel radius to create a set of 48 clear images and
a set of 48 blurred images that had a similar degree of visual
naming difficulty. 16 filler items were also selected from the
same item set.
Each network contained 8 pictures (6 test items and 2
fillers), as described previously. 2 sets of networks were
created with alternating clear and blurred items, so that the
use of clear and blurred images was counterbalanced across
participants. Items were positioned so that semantically and
phonologically related items were not adjacent to each
other.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 demonstrated that impeding
conceptual access of object representations through image
blurring did significantly affect the overall rate of disfluency
production. The data for individual disfluency classes
showed a similar pattern to those of Experiment 1, with
prolongations comprising the majority of disfluencies
observed preceding the target name, while filled pauses and
repairs were observed in less than 4% of utterances.
Interestingly, the relative increase in disfluency rates
between item conditions was not as great in Experiment 2 as
that observed in Experiment 1, thus speakers were actually
more fluent when naming blurred items in their descriptions
than they were when naming low frequency items. This
could be taken as evidence that as conceptualization occurs
earlier in the production process than generation of the word
form, speakers identify conceptual difficulties earlier,
providing them with more opportunity for fluent resolution.
However, since the frequency and blurring manipulations
influence different processes, further research is needed to
determine whether the effect of one manipulation was of a
greater magnitude than the other.

Transcription and Coding Transcription and coding was
carried out by the first author, and 20% of transcriptions
were independently verified and coded as in Experiment 1
(mean inter-rater coding agreement was 87%).

Disfluencies Produced During Path Description
While access and retrieval of word forms can produce
processing difficulties that result in disfluent speech,
arguably the largest processing task associated with
utterance generation is the formulation of the speech plan.
Disfluencies and speech errors have long been studied as
useful tools to gain more insight into the cognitive processes
of speech planning as they are closely associated with
increased processing loads on parts of the production system
(Shriberg, 1996).
One aspect of the current experiment that is directly
related to utterance planning is speakers’ description of the
path that the marker takes from one node to the next. The
structure of the networks lends itself well to further analysis
of these path descriptions as each pair of nodes either has 1,
2 or 3 paths connecting them, and the marker always takes
one of these to pass from one node to the next. As the
speaker had to describe this path at speed to keep up with
the marker, multiple possible paths between nodes should
increase the processing load substantially, and lead to more
disfluencies. It is of interest here to examine exactly how
the pattern of disfluencies produced during the path
description compares to the pattern observed immediately
preceding the target name. In addition, the pattern of
disfluencies produced at the start of each utterance can be
analyzed to see whether they are influenced by planning
load or retrieval difficulty, which would indicate that they
are associated with utterance planning, or whether they are
being used as structural devices by the speaker.

Results
23 items (7 clear and 16 blurred) were not named and the
analysis was performed from the remaining 937 utterances.
Table 3 shows the percentage of utterances that contained
a disfluency, and the proportional increase in disfluencies
between clear and blurred conditions. A 1-way ANOVA
(blurred vs. clear) on disfluencies immediately preceding
target items demonstrated a main effect of item type (F1
(1,19) = 5.6, p = .029; F2 (1,47) = 4.72, p = .035). When
disfluency classes were examined, blurred items were
preceded by significantly more prolongations than clear
items (F1 (1,19) = 7.14, p = .015; F2 (1,47) = 6.68, p =
.013). For both filled pauses and repairs these differences
were non-significant (all p’s > .1). Analyses of individual
disfluency types for filled pauses and repairs showed no
significant differences (all p’s > .1).
Table 3: Proportion of items preceded by disfluency
Disfluency Class

Clear Blurred Proportional Increase

Total Disfluency

18.1% 24.7%

1.36

Filled Pause

3.3%

2.1%

0.64

1.7%
1.6%

1.7%
0.5%

1.00
0.31

Um
Uh

Prolongation

14.2% 21.8%

1.54

Repair

1.6%

1.9%

1.19

Path Analysis & Results

0.6%
0.8%

0.8%
1.3%

1.33
162

Analysis of the data from Experiment 2 (which was the only
suitably counterbalanced experiment) was performed on test

Repetition
Correction

753

items that were connected by 1, 2 or 3 paths from the
previous item. As the path description tended to be
considerably longer than the target description, it was
possible that more than one disfluency, sometimes of the
same type, would occur in a single utterance. Therefore, the
numbers given are the average number of disfluencies per
utterance as opposed to the percentage of utterances
containing a particular disfluency, as reported previously.
A 2-way ANOVA (item type vs. number of paths) on the
data from Experiment 2 showed a significant effect of the
number of paths on the average number of disfluencies
produced in each path description, both by subjects and by
items, (F1 (2, 38) = 10.6, p < .01; F2 (2, 37) = 7.74, p <
.005). There was no effect of item type on the average
number of disfluencies in the path descriptions (F1, F2 < .1,
p’s > .5). When each disfluency class was examined there
was an effect of number of paths on filled pauses produced
(by items, F2 (2, 37) = 5.065, p < .01, marginal by subjects,
F1 (2, 38) = 3.159, p = .054). There was also a significant
effect on the number of prolongations produced (F1 (2, 38)
= 10.717, p < .001; F2 (2, 37) = 5.122, p = .011). Finally
there was a main effect of number of paths on the repairs
produced (F1 (2, 38) = 5.19, p = .01; F2 (2, 37) = 3.35, p =
.046). When individual disfluency types were examined,
ums showed a marginally significant increase with number
of paths (F1 (2, 38) = 2.89, p = .068; F2 (2, 37) = 4.83, p =
.014), and a significant effect was also observed for the
number of corrections (F1 (2, 38) = 4.87, p = .013; F2 (2, 37)
= 3.64, p = .036). No significant effects were observed ofr
uhs or repetitions (p’s > .2). These results are summarized
in Table 4.
Across all disfluency classes, item type (clear vs. blurred)
again did not have any significant effect on the number of
disfluencies produced in the description of the path leading
up to that item (all F’s < 3.366, p’s > 0.05).
Disfluencies produced during the part of the utterance
classified as “beginning”, i.e. before the path description
had been initiated, were also analyzed. On average, 7.9% of
utterances contained at least one disfluency in this position.
85% of disfluencies produced were filled pauses, of which
over 70% were ums. A 2-way ANOVA (item type vs.
number of paths) showed a marginal effect of the number of
paths (F (2, 38) = 2.796, p = .074) and no effect of item type
(F (1, 19) = .368, p > .5) on the number of disfluencies
produced at the beginning of the utterance.

Discussion
This analysis demonstrates an increase in overall disfluency
production when speakers had more possible paths to
choose from in their description of the marker’s route.
Additionally, disfluencies produced were not related to the
upcoming target item, but to difficulties linked with the path
description itself, suggesting that having multiple possible
paths increases the processing load associated with planning
and formulating the correct descriptive utterance for a given
path.
Interestingly, the pattern of disfluencies observed in the path
description was markedly different to that found preceding
the target item. In the path description, filled pauses and
repairs were more frequent than prolongations, whereas
preceding the target item, prolongations occurred much
more frequently than either filled pauses or repairs. The
predominance of filled pauses could reflect more serious
difficulties associated with utterance formulation, as
opposed to access and retrieval, particularly as the words
used in the path descriptions often repeated between items.
Additionally, the increased processing load resulting from
having to accommodate more than one path in the
description is likely to have an impact on utterance
planning, and this is borne out by a higher rate of observed
repairs, which were primarily corrections. Due to the
speeded nature of the task, speakers may have had to initiate
planning of the next utterance before they were certain of
where the marker was moving, and only identified their
error after commencing articulation, thus requiring a repair.
The analysis of disfluencies occurring at the beginning of
the utterance showed no effect of either number of paths or
the item condition, indicating that disfluencies occurring
here do so largely irrelevant of potential upcoming
difficulties. However, the vast majority of these were filled
pauses, and in particular um’s, which it is suggested are
used as inter-phrasal continuation devices (Clark & Fox
Tree, 2002; Swerts, 1998), and as such, may have been
inserted either to maintain the pace of speech with the
marker or as a dialogue structuring device.

General Discussion
The two experiments presented here demonstrate that
factors influencing disfluency production can be
manipulated using an online task where participants produce
spontaneous, task-specific utterances. We examined how
changes in the representational accessibility of a target item
influenced disfluency production immediately preceding the
item in the speaker’s descriptive utterances.
The similarity of the pattern of results for disfluency
classes between the two experiments gives an indication that
the source of the problem within the production system,
whether conceptually or lexically driven, does not appear to
affect the type of disfluency used to accommodate it. It is
probable that the nature of the difficulty (whether related to
planning, formulation or access and retrieval), the point at
which it has been identified in the production of an
utterance and where the disfluency is placed within the

Table 4: Number of Disfluencies Per Utterance in Path
Description
1 path

2 paths

3 paths

Total
Filled Pauses

0.048
0.021

0.172
0.047

0.243
0.097

Um
Uh

0.007
0.014

0.030
0.023

0.059
0.039

Prolongations

0.000

0.032

0.054

Repairs

0.027

0.092

0.093

0.007
0.021

0.018
0.083

0.012
0.086

Repetition
Correction

754

References

syntactic frame of the utterance are stronger influences on
the type of disfluency produced.
Consequently, the
prevalence of prolongations preceding the target item is
likely to be due to the fact that difficulties here tend to be
related to access and retrieval of the word form, which can
be quickly resolved, and such items are normally preceded
by easily prolonged articles like the or to. Because the
disfluency is produced in or immediately preceding the
noun phrase, prolongation of the or to can provide the time
required to resolve the difficulty without additional
articulation and in a way that maintains the integrity of the
speech flow. This raises further questions about how the
type of disfluency is related to where it is produced within
the utterance, and how factors associated with other aspects
of the production system influence the type and rate of
disfluencies produced.
It also appears that lexical frequency may only have an
influence on speakers’ disfluency rates for very low
frequency words. Disfluency rates for clear items in
Experiment 2 were closer to those from the high frequency
condition in Experiment 1 than the low frequency condition,
which contained more than twice as many disfluencies.
However, this could also be accounted for by differences in
name agreement. Both of these factors could provide
alternate accounts for the results of Experiment 1. If name
agreement is the driving factor, disfluencies may be the
result of increased processing requirements related to
choosing one of several competing lexical representations
for a particular item. Further
research explicitly
manipulating frequency and name agreement is necessary to
resolve this question.
When disfluencies in the path description for Experiment
2 were examined, a clear effect of the number of paths was
observed for all disfluency classes. However, the majority
of disfluencies observed during description of the path were
either fillers or repairs, suggesting that increases in
processing load due to planning and formulating an
utterance with multiple descriptive options may cause
difficulties that often take some time to resolve. The
increase in repairs suggests that often a speaker may embark
upon planning and even generating an utterance before they
know which path the marker is taking.
Although these studies highlight many issues for further
research, they also provide a significant contribution to the
ongoing debate concerning the provenance of disfluency.
By explicitly manipulating the content of spontaneous
speech, we provide causal evidence that particular
disfluencies may be the consequence of different underlying
difficulties in the language production system.
Experimental approaches such as those illustrated here
provide an important complement to the existing body of
corpus-based disfluency literature.

Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The
CELEX Lexical Database. Nijmegen: Centre for Lexical
Information.
Barry, C., Morrison, C. M., & Ellis, A. W. (1997). Naming
the Snodgrass and Vanderwart pictures: Effects of age of
acquisition, frequency and name agreement. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A(3), 560-585.
Bortfield, H., Leon, S., Bloom, J. E., Schober, M. F., &
Brennan, S. E. (2001). Disfluency rates in conversation,
age effects, relationship, topic, role and gender. Language
and Speech, 44(2), 123-147.
Brennan, S. E., & Schober, M. F. (2001). How Listeners
compensate for disfluencies in spontaneous speech.
Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 274-296.
Clark, H. H., & Fox Tree, J. E. (2002). Using uh and um in
spontaneous speaking. Cognition, 84, 73-111.
Fox Tree, J. E. (1995). The effects of false starts and
repetitions on the processing of subsequent words in
spontaneous speech. Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 709-738.
Griffin, Z. M., & Huitema, J. (1999). Beckman picture
naming norms. From http://langprod.cogsci.uiuc.edu
Kilgariff, A. (1995). BNC database and word frequency
lists. From http://www.itri.brighton.ac.uk
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational
analysis of present-day American English. Providence, RI:
Brown University Press.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1983). Monitoring and self-repair in
speech. Cognition, 14, 41-104.
Maclay, H., & Osgood, C. E. (1959). Hesitation phenomena
in spontaneous English speech. Word, 15, 19-44.
Oomen, C. C. E., & Postma, A. (2001). Effects of time
pressure on mechanisms of speech production and selfmonitoring. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 30(2),
163-184.
Rossion, B., & Portois, G. (2004). Revisiting Snodgrass and
Vanderwart's object pictorial set: The role of surface detail
in basic-level object recognition. Perception, 33, 217-236.
Schachter, S., Christenfeld, N., Ravina, B., & Bilous, F.
(1991). Speech disfluency and the structure of knowledge.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 362367.
Siegman, A. W., & Pope, B. (1966). Ambiguity and verbal
disfluencies in the TAT. Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 30(3), 239-245.
Shriberg, E. (1996). Disfluencies in Switchboard. Paper
presented at the International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing (ICSLP '96), Philedephia, PA.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 260 pictures: norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 6, 174-215.
Swerts, M. (1998). Filled pauses as markers of discourse
structure. Journal of Pragmatics, 30, 485-496.

Acknowledgements
The first author was supported by ESRC studentship PTA030-2002-01229. We gratefully acknowledge the help of
Lucy Clark, Hannah Furness and Lucy MacGregor.
755

