UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Independence between the History of Usage of an Expression and Common Ground: A
processing account for pragmatic effects on comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rj0936b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Barr, Dale J.
Kronmuller, Edmundo

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Independence between the History of Usage of an Expression and Common
Ground: A processing account for pragmatic effects on comprehension
Edmundo Kronmüller (ekron001@ucr.edu)
Dale J. Barr (dale.barr@ucr.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside
900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA 92521
Abstract
It has been thought that during conversation, the effect of the
history of usage of an expression on comprehension depends
on common ground. We tracked listeners’ eye movements
during a referential communication task in which they
received instructions from two different speakers who
described a referent either consistently or inconsistently with
a previous description. We also manipulated cognitive load.
Results showed that the effect of common ground and history
of usage on comprehension are independent. A processing
account for pragmatic effects on language comprehension is
suggested.

Introduction
In conversation, when people refer multiple times to the
same objects, they tend to stabilize their descriptions
(Krauss & Weinheimer, 1966). This phenomenon has been
referred to variously as lexical entrainment (Garrod &
Anderson, 1987), or as the establishment of conceptual
pacts (Brennan & Clark, 1996) or linguistic precedents
(Barr & Keysar, 2002).
The fact that speakers use the same expressions
consistently across a conversation and listeners expect such
consistent use, has important implications for theories of
spoken
language
comprehension
and
referential
communication. One of those consequences is that not only
the features of the objects are relevant for the description to
be successful, but also the history of usage of the
expression. For example, Brennan and Clark (1996) showed
that people would violate the Gricean Maxim of Quantity
(Grice, 1975), over-specifying a referent using a subordinate
level term where the basic level term would have been
enough to differentiate the object from among the other
objects with which it was presented. Thus, if in a previous
mention the (subordinate level) expression loafer was used
to refer to a shoe in the context of other shoes, then in a
subsequent mention, the speaker would re-use the
description loafer, even when there was no other shoe in the
array of context objects, making the basic level term shoe
appropriate. Barr and Keysar (2002) showed in a series of
eye-tracking experiments that listeners, indeed, are sensitive
to the history of usage of an expression, expecting the use of
precedents by the speaker.
Because the history of a conversation is something that
we share with the people present in the conversation, and
not with people outside of it, it has been assumed that the
use of linguistic precedents and their benefit to
comprehension depend on common ground: knowledge that

is shared and known to be shared by the participants in a
conversation (Clark and Marshall, 1981; Clark and Carlson,
1981). For example, imagine that you and I are zoologists
classifying new specimens of flies we recently collected in
South America. We are working in the lab and we have all
our flies on the classification table. One of the specimens on
the table is really small, but not as small as another
specimen that got lost in our trip back. Nevertheless, we
keep calling that small fly the big fly, even thought in the
new context of flies it is the smallest one. Thus, we are
being consistent with the name we gave to that fly to
differentiate it from the other, smaller fly, that is no longer
present. At a certain moment I leave the lab. During my
absence a student stops by and, looking at the classification
table, he says to you: the big fly is still alive! If the historical
effect depends on common ground, then the precedent we
have established to refer to the smallest fly (the big fly)
should not be used in interpreting the expression the big fly
uttered by the student, who wasn’t present during the trip
when we established the precedent; instead, you should
interpret that expression against the context of all the flies
that you and the student mutually know about. In this
example, that context is all the flies on the table, where the
fly we called the big fly, is actually the smallest one.
Empirical evidence, however, has shown that people use
precedents even when they are not in common ground. Barr
and Keysar (2002) and Metzing and Brennan (2003) found
that the latency to launch a first fixation to a target object
upon hearing a description previously used to refer to that
object—a precedent—was the same independently of
whether the speaker who uttered the description was the
same or different from the speaker who established the
precedent. Importantly, this was the case even when the
listeners knew the speakers did not share any information
about how to refer to the object. In our example, you would
consider the smallest fly as the referent for the expression
the big fly uttered by the student—even if you knew the
student couldn’t know about the other even smaller fly that
got lost in the trip back—just because you had that
precedent available in memory and not because it was
mutually known with the student. Listeners, then, do not
appear to rely on common ground when they interpret
expressions that are consistent with an established
precedent.
However, Metzing and Brennan (2003) showed that
listeners delayed their fixations to a target object more when
a speaker used a new expression to refer to an object

1635

previously named by him with a different name, than when
a different speaker referred for the first time to an object
previously named by another speaker using a different
name. In other words, if an old speaker breaks a precedent
there is a delay in recognizing the target object compared
when a new speaker breaks somebody else’s precedent. In
our example, if I suddenly stop referring to the smaller fly
as the big fly and start using the expression the short fly,
then you should experience more interference than if the
student uses the expression the short fly. This finding could
suggest that information about what a specific speaker
knows is considered early in comprehension, producing a
sort of interference. This interference could be taken as
evidence that the history of referring and common ground
might not be independent, at least, in the cases where a
speaker breaks a precedent.
In the following experiment, we present fine grain timecourse eyetracking data from a comprehension task, and the
results of a cognitive load manipulation, that suggest that
the history of usage (henceforth precedents) and common
ground are independent effects. Specifically, we show that
they have a different temporal profile, and that they are
affected in different degrees by cognitive load.
We tracked participants’ eye movements as they
performed a referential communication task with two
speakers. During the task, speakers produced certain 'test
instructions' in which they referred to an old referent for
which a precedent had been established. The experiment
involved three independent variables: (1) the variable of
speaker, corresponding to whether the speaker producing
the test instruction was the same as (Old), or different from
(New), the speaker who originally established the precedent;
(2) precedent, which was whether the precedent that was
established was consistent with (Maintain) or inconsistent
with (Break) the test instruction; and (3) cognitive load (No
Load versus Load).

never been referred to before the test trial (see figure 1). The
speaker manipulation was implemented by either having the
same speaker giving the instruction across the whole block,
or changing the speaker in trial 8, right before the test trial.
We motivated these changes of speaker by telling the
participants that the goal of the experiment was to
investigate the comprehension of instructions from different
speakers. We made sure the participants knew the speakers
had no communication between them during the recording
of the instructions. To this end, we told them that the
instructions were recorded in two different sessions (see
below). The precedent manipulation was implemented by
keeping the test trial instruction constant and varying the
previous mentions of the objects (see figure 1). Finally, the
load manipulation was instantiated by introducing a
secondary task, in which listeners had to keep in memory a
string of numbers presented right before the test trial started,
for a test that would take place after the test trial ended. For
the trials in the no load condition, no additional task was
performed by the listeners. All three factors were combined
factorially and administered within subject (2 x 2 x 2 within
factor design).

Method
Figure 1: Example of an experimental item: The target object is
in the lower-left part of the display, the Unmentioned object on the
top, and the Mentioned object in the lower-right part of the display.
The italiced text represents speech by the male speaker and the
normal text represents speech by a female speaker. Applicable for
both load conditions.

Participants
Fifty-six (56) undergraduate students from the University
of California, Riverside participated in the study in
exchange for course credit. All were native English
speakers.

Procedure and design

Materials

We tracked participants' eye movements while they
listened to pre-recorded instructions from two different
speakers asking them to click on one of three pictures of
objects in the screen. The objects lacked conventional
names, making the success of the task strongly rely on the
use of precedents. Each test trial was embedded in a 10 trial
block. The speakers referred to the target object twice
before the test trial, which was either the trial 8th or 9th of the
block. In the test trial, along with the target object there
appeared another object that had been mentioned twice
before the test trial, and an 'unmentioned' object that had

1636

There were 32 items consisting of five pictures presented
three at a time in a set of ten displays. The instructions were
recorded by two naïve participants in a production version
of the experiment. In order to produce the stimuli for all the
conditions, we asked the participants, after the production
sessions, to imitate the other speaker's instructions. We
instructed them to use the same words used by the other
speaker and convey the same level of certainty, but with
their own style. Half of the test expressions were the
original ones and the other half were imitations. For the
secondary task we used 256 random strings of 6 digits from

0-9. 64 of these were strings to be remembered, 32 for the
test trials and the other 32 for trials in the block other than
the test trial. The other 192 were used as distractors
presented three at the time for each memory test.

and items: F1(1, 55) = 2.98, MSe = .011, p = .09 and F2(1,
31) = 3.09, MSe = .006, p = .09.

Results and Discussion
If speaker (common ground) and precedent (history of
usage) effects are independent, then they should be
distinguishable in the time-course of processing. They also
might be affected in a different manner by cognitive load.
We tested these predictions by examine the proportion of
looks to the Unmentioned object in the displays, across
seven different time windows starting from the onset of the
referring expression plus 180ms (time necessary to program
an eye movement, Matin, Shao & Boff, 1993). The idea that
broken precedents depend on common ground predicts that
a new expression inconsistent with an established precedent
should be mapped onto the unmentioned object differently
when the speaker is old than when the speaker is new.
Specifically, if precedent and speaker effects are dependent,
listeners should look to the unmentioned object more in the
case where an old speaker breaks a precedent than when a
new speaker, with whom there is no precedent established,
uses a new expression to refer to the already-mentioned
target.
As Figure 2 top panel shows for the case of No Load, this
speaker effect in the Break condition appears in the fourth
time window (900-1200 ms), well after the effect of
precedent, which starts in the second window and is carried
over the next five windows. This shows that the effect of
precedent (whether or not the expression has been used
before or not) is prior to the effect of speaker: they have
different onsets. Interestingly, this effect of speaker is not
present in the same fourth window in the Load condition
(bottom panel), in which appears only an effect of
precedent. A three-way within-factor Anova by subjects
(F1) and items (F2) shows a reliable three-way interaction
for that window: F1(1, 55) = 5.611, MSe = .021, p < .05;
F2(1, 31) = 7.44, MSe = .009, p = .01 . Further analysis
shows that this three-way interaction is mainly driven by the
presence of a two-way speaker by precedent interaction in
the No Load condition (F1(1, 55) = 9.743, MSe = .016, p <
.01, F2(1, 31) = 8.15, MSe = .011, p < .01), and the absence
of that same interaction in the Load condition (F1(1, 55) =
.403, MSe = .021, p = .53, F2(1, 31) = .463, MSe = .011, p =
.50). Cell means comparisons show that the old and new
speaker break conditions differ in the No Load condition
(t1(55) = 2.56, Se = .032, p < .05, t2(31) = 2.24, Se = .036, p
< .05) but not in the Load condition (t1(55) = .375, Se =
.033, p = .71, t2(31) = .386, Se = .032, p < .7).
The effect of speaker in the break conditions seems that it
might appear later in the Load conditions (bottom panel);
namely, in the sixth and seventh time windows (bottom
panel). However, there is no reliable three-way interaction
in window seven, and a two-way within factor Anova for
the Load conditions in the seventh window shows a
marginal speaker by precedent interaction by both subjects

Figure 2: Proportion of fixations to the unmentioned objects
across experimental conditions in the No Load condition (top
panel) and the Load condition (bottom panel). The error bars
represent the standard error of the difference between new and old
speaker for each level of Precedent.

The effect of precedent in the Load conditions also
appears delayed compared to the No Load conditions. It
starts in the third window and, as in the No Load condition,
is carried over the subsequent windows. A Three-way
Anova on window two shows the delayed effect of
precedent in the Load conditions compared to the No Load
conditions in a Load by Precedent interaction: F1(1, 55) =
10.79, MSe = .040, p < .01; F2(1, 31) = 8.53, MSe = .029, p
< .01. Collapsing over Speaker, the effect of precedent is
significant in the No Load condition (t1(55) = 5.45, Se =
.023, p < .001, t2(31) = 3.96, Se = .031, p < .001), and not
significant in the Load condition (t1(55) = .087, Se = .028, p
= .93, t2(31) = .099, Se = .025, p = .92).

1637

The results presented above show that the effect of
precedents and speaker are different in at least two ways.
First, they have a different time course: The onset of the

effect of precedent precedes the onset of the effect of
speaker. Second, cognitive load more drastically delays the
onset of the speaker effect than the precedent effect. There
are, then, reasons to believe that these two pragmatic effects
are independent.

General Discussion
How can, then, these two pragmatic effects be
characterized in terms of processing?
The history of usage, manipulated in our experiments as
whether or not the expression was used before or not
(independently of the speaker), can be thought of as
produced by the difference between the processes involved
in finding a referent when there is a previous expressionobject relation already established (i.e., when a precedent is
maintained), and the processes involved in find a referent
when that expression-object relation does not exist (i.e.,
when a new expression is interpreted). When speech
following a precedent is heard, the task is to retrieve from
memory a expression-object relation: It is a memory search
process using no more information than the certainty that
that expression being used is familiar. Once retrieved, the
task is solved, and no further processing and information is
necessary. This would explain why the unmentioned object
is rapidly discarded as a potential referent when a precedent
is maintained. One important prediction derived from this
view of the use of precedents is that the time needed to
identify a referent when a precedent is used is a power
function of the number of times that identification as taken
place before, i.e., precedent use should display the
properties of automatization (Logan, 1988).
In contrast, when a new expression is heard and a
precedent is broken, there is no memory instance relating
that expression to a specific referent; therefore, it is
necessary to match the features of the potential referents
with the description given. This task should demand more
time, as predicted by the power law relation assumed before.
Because it demands more time, it gives the chance for other,
slower pragmatic effects to appear; in this case, the effect of
common ground. We believe that the processing of common
ground requires more steps than the processing of a
precedent explained above, because it requires more
complex inferences that take more time. For example,
consider the case of a new speaker using a new expression.
When the object that best matches a new expression is one
that was previously referred to using a different expression,
by using common ground the listener can reach the
conclusion that that object is the target because the previous
name given to the object is not known by the current
speaker, and it makes perfect sense for a new speaker to use
a different expression than a previous speaker in referring to
the same object. In the case of an old speaker using a new
expression, in contrast, there would be no straightforward
inference that could explain why she is using a new
expression, making listeners consider the new object as a
potential referent for longer time. Now, the fact that the
common ground effect is delayed more drastically by the

cognitive load manipulation than the precedent effect, may
suggest that not only one effect is fast because it requires
less steps and information than the other, but that they are
different types of processing. One, the faster one, could be
characterized as an associative process; the slower one, in
contrast, could be characterized as inferential rule base
processing. This distinction between different types of
processing can be found throughout the literature on
reasoning (for a review see Sloman, 1996).
There are many ways in which these two hypothesize
processes could interact; they might start sequentially, in
parallel, or in cascade (McClelland, 1987). These and other
issues regarding the specifics of the processes are interesting
questions for future research.
We have provided empirical support for the claim that
pragmatic information can be integrated at different
moments in comprehension. More importantly, our
processing account provides an explanation for why
different
pragmatic
information
might
impact
comprehension at different moments. By doing this, we are
shifting attention from the time-course of the effects to the
characteristics of the processes involved. Time-course data
by itself may be insufficient to identify different kinds of
processing mechanisms. Despite much attention to timecourse data, the controversy of how common ground is used
in comprehension remains unresolved (Keysar, Barr, Balin
and Paek, 1998; Keysar, Barr, Balin and Brauner, 2000;
Hanna, Tanenhaus and Trueswell, 2003; Hanna and
Tanenhaus, 2004; Barr and Keysar, 2002). We believe that
an experimental approach focused on differentiating the
different cognitive processes involved in integrating
pragmatic and linguistic information might help in
understanding language comprehension in its natural
environment.

References

1638

Barr, D. J., & Keysar, B. (2002). Anchoring comprehension
in linguistic precedents. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46(2), 391-418.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6),
1482-1493.
Clark, H. H., & Carlson, T. B. (1981). Context for
comprehension. In J. Long & A. Baddeley (Eds.),
Attention and performance IX (pp. 313-330). Hillsdale, N.
J., USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite reference
and mutual knowledge. In A. K. Joshe & B. L. Webber &
I. A. Sag (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding (pp.
10-63). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you mean
in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27(2), 181-218.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Sintax and semantics 3: Speech acts (pp.
41-58). New York: Academic Press.

Hanna, J. E., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2004). Pragmatic effects
on reference resolution in a collaborative task: Evidence
from eye movements. Cognitive Science, 28(1), 105-115.
Hanna, J. E., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C. (2003).
The effects of common ground and perspective on
domains of referential interpretation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 49(1), 43-61.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Brauner, J. S. (2000).
Taking perspective in conversation: The role of mutual
knowledge in comprehension. Psychological Science,
11(1), 32-38.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Paek, T. S. (1998).
Definite reference and mutual knowledge: Process models
of common ground in comprehension. Journal of Memory
and Language, 39(1), 1-20.
Krauss, R. M. & Weinheimer, S. (1966). Concurrent
feedback, confirmation and the encoding of referents in

verbal communication. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 4(3), 343-346.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological review, 95(4), 492-527.
Matin, E., Shao, K. C., & Boff, K. R. (1993). Saccadic
overhead: Information-processing time with and without
saccades. Perception & psychophysics, 53(4), 372-380.
McClelland, J. L. (1979). On the time relations of mental
processes: An examination of systems of processes in
cascade. Psychological Review, 86, 372-380.
Metzing, C., & Brennan, S. E. (2003). When conceptual
pacts are broken: Partner-specific effects on the
comprehension of referring expressions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49(2), 201-213.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological bulletin, 119(1), 3-22.

1639

