UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Structural Support on the Evaluation of Analogical Inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15f5x1pp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Laux, Jeffrey P.
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Structural Support on the Evaluation
of Analogical Inferences
Jeffrey P. Laux (laux@mail.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, 1University Station A8000
Austin, TX 78712-0187 USA

Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, 1University Station A8000
Austin, TX 78712-0187 USA

Abstract
Analogical inferences occur when knowledge about one
domain is extended by virtue of its similarity to a second.
How such inferences are evaluated is not yet known, but
two factors (support and extrapolation) were suggested by
Forbus, Gentner, Everett and Wu in 1997. We report an
initial test of the role of support in inference evaluation.
Subjects were asked to provide a confidence rating for an
inference that had more or less structural support. The
results yielded evidence that support influences the
evaluation of inferences. This paper is discussed within the
framework of the Structure-Mapping Theory of analogy.

Introduction
Analogy is a central cognitive process involved in
representation, learning, categorization, and reasoning. An
important use of analogies is to extend knowledge of one
domain based on the analogy to a second domain. While
some research has explored factors that govern how these
inferences are made, little research has examined how they
are evaluated. An important question that needs to be
addressed is how people make judgments about the strength
of an inference that is based on an analogy. Specifically,
what factors make people think that an inference is more or
less likely to be true? These questions will be addressed
within the framework of Gentner’s (1983) StructureMapping theory of analogy. There are other theories of
analogy in cognitive psychology, but the general description
used in the Structure-Mapping theory is compatible with the
consensus of many researchers in the field (see, for
example, Gentner, Holyoak, & Kokinov, 2001; Hummel, &
Holyoak, 1997; Keane, Ledgeway, & Duff, 1994).

Review of Structure-Mapping Theory
Structure-Mapping Theory posits that concepts are
represented “as propositional networks of nodes and
predicates” (Gentner, 1983, p. 157). A predicate is a
statement that is asserted of a subject or subjects; arguments
are the subjects of which predicates are asserted. These
predicates are partitioned into attributes (defined as taking
single arguments) and relations (which take two or more
arguments). For example, in the statement ‘the boot is
brown’, brown is an attribute, and can be written using the
one argument predicate Brown(boot).
In the form

‘Brown(boot)’, ‘Brown’ is a predicate and ‘boot’ is its
argument. The boot itself, outside of its role in the
predicate, is an object. In the statement ‘the boot is larger
than the shoe’, larger-than is a relation, which would be
written
with
the
two
argument
predicate
Larger_than(boot,shoe).
Relations can connect other
relations as well as objects. The most common example of
this is the relation cause, as in ‘Bob is taller than Sam,
causing Bob to jump higher than Sam’, written
Cause(Taller_than(Bob,Sam), Can_jump_higher_than(Bob,
Sam)). Such a relation is known as a higher order relation
(in the preceding example cause is a second order relation).
In general, the order of a predicate is one higher than the
order of its highest ordered argument; objects are always
zero order (for a fuller account, see Falkenhainer, Forbus, &
Gentner, 1989).
Using these definitions, the Structure-Mapping Theory of
analogy holds that analogies are a special case of
comparisons between two domains, where primarily the
relational predicates, but not the attributes or objects, match
(Gentner, 1983; see also Gentner & Markman, 1997). The
two domains are called the base and the target. Usually the
base domain is the one the analogizer knows more about,
although it is possible that both are known equally well.
In the Structure-Mapping theory, analogical comparison
and inference generation take place via a process of
mapping. Mapping occurs when the predicates of the base
domain are placed in correspondence with the target
domain. The theory places several constraints on the
mapping process including parallel connectivity and one-toone mapping. Parallel connectivity ensures that once a
correspondence between two predicates has been made,
their arguments are placed in correspondence also. One-toone mapping means that once an element of the target has
been swapped out for an element of the base, that same
correspondence must be honored for the rest of the mapping
process. In this manner, an element in one of the domains
cannot correspond to more than one element in the other
domain.

Review of Analogical Inference

1663

Analogies would be of limited use if they only found
similarities between domains. Analogies can also help
people extend their knowledge of a topic by virtue of its
similarity to another, better known topic. An analogical

inference is a conjecture about the underlying structure of a
lesser known (i.e. target) domain, based on similarities that
exist between its structure and that of a better understood
(i.e. base) domain.
This conjecture consists of
hypothesizing the existence of relations between objects (or
other relations) in the target domain because those same
relations are known to obtain between the corresponding
objects in the base domain. Within the Structure-Mapping
Theory, the inference is executed by carrying relations from
the base to the target. Next, substitutions are made for
matching objects, and the existence of new elements in the
target may be proposed if licensed by the structure of the
base domain.
The generation of inferences in this manner is widely
considered to be a central aspect of analogical processing
and use. Naturalistic observation of scientists engaged in
the discovery process has shown that this kind of reasoning
is frequently used (Dunbar, 1995). Similarly, Gentner,
Brem, Ferguson, Markman, Wolff, Levidow, & Forbus
(1997) found that Johannes Kepler used analogies
constantly to generate ideas in the process of discovering the
laws of planetary motion.
Analogical inference is arguably more important than
other kinds of reasoning (e.g. syllogistic) that have received
considerable scrutiny in cognitive psychology. However,
very little research has been conducted on analogical
inference thus far (but see Clement & Gentner, 1991;
Holyoak, Novick & Melz, 1994; Krawczyk, Holyoak, &
Hummel, 2005; Markman, 1997; and Spellman & Holyoak,
1996)1.
One important issue concerning analogical inference is
how the potential inferences are constrained. Once an
analogy between two domains is noticed, many inferences
are possible. Indeed, any fact known about the base could
possibly be posited about the target, but most of these
inferences would probably be false or irrelevant. This
necessitates limits on the inference generation process.
Clement & Gentner (1991) demonstrated that inferences are
constrained by a principle of systematicity. This means that
when someone is faced with a situation in which many
mappings are possible, they prefer to map relations that are
more deeply interconnected or that create more deeply
matching systems of relations in the domains. Markman
(1997) found additional support for this principle.
An issue that has not been resolved is how people
evaluate inferences that are drawn from analogies. In
particular, what underlying structural aspects of an
analogical inference make people think that a relation is
more or less likely to be true in the target domain as well?
Forbus, Gentner, Everett and Wu (1997) suggested two
structural aspects of analogy that might influence
confidence in an inference: support and extrapolation.
Figure 1 illustrates these factors. The black elements are
known correspondences between the two domains, while the
gray elements are known to exist in the base domain and
inferred in the target. Forbus et al. (1997) define support as
the amount of corresponding structure directly connected to

Correspondences
between the base
& target domains

Extrapolation

Support

Figure 1: Structural Factors Hypothesized to Influence
Evaluations of Analogical Inferences.
the inference. The more support for an inference, the more
confident people should be in that inference. Extrapolation
is the degree to which the inference goes beyond the known
correspondences. The plausibility of an inference should
decrease as extrapolation increases.

The Present Experiment

1

Our program of research examines the role of support in
analogical inference.
We created a fictitious situation that allowed us to
experimentally manipulate the level of support for a relation
that was to be inferred in the target domain. We
operationally defined support as the number of
corresponding relations that were directly connected to the
inference. In this study we will contrast a one relation
condition with a three relation condition. If support
influences inference evaluation, confidence in an inferred
relation should be higher in the three relation condition. We
predict that this will be the case.
Because pilot testing indicated that the materials were
detailed enough to make it difficult to see how all the
relationships fit together, we needed another task to ensure
that the participants fully understood the materials before
they evaluated the analogical inference in which we were
interested. We accomplished this by having the participants
evaluate the truth of a series of other propositions about the
domains first. Forbus et al.’s hypotheses make no specific
predictions about the subjects’ responses to these
statements, but these statements do allow us to examine
whether the participants understood the task and were taking
it seriously. We included false and unrelated propositions in
order to minimize a response bias. In addition, we told the
participants that we were testing a hypothesis about
memory. We hoped the idea of an upcoming test would
also help to motivate them to study the materials carefully.

A PsychINFO keyword search for “Syllogistic Reasoning”
yielded 255 hits, as opposed to the five papers listed here.
1664

Figure 2: The structure of the domains in the one and three relation conditions.

Method
Participants
The participants were 132 undergraduates at the University
of Texas at Austin (91 females, 41 males, median age = 19,
range 18-29) who received course credit for their time.

Design
This experiment used a two group, between-subjects design.
The main factor was Support Level. There were two
Support Levels: one antecedent relation and three
antecedent relations. The basic design can be seen in figure
2. The one relation condition was further subdivided into
three subgroups based on which of the antecedent relations
was given. There were 66 participants randomly assigned to
each condition, with 22 in each of the subgroups of the one
relation condition.

Materials
The materials for this study described a fictitious tribe in the
West African rainforest that some cultural anthropologists
want to study. The anthropologists have seen some pottery
that the tribe makes, but they have never seen the tribe’s
houses. Nonetheless, they have heard some rumors about
the houses.
We created two versions of this story. In the base domain
(i.e. pottery), both versions have three antecedent relations
that obtain between two kinds of jars. Collectively, these

three antecedent relations cause a consequent relation to
obtain. In the three relation condition, all three of these
antecedent relations map onto the target domain (the
construction of the tribe’s houses). In the one relation
version, only one of the three antecedent relations was
given. Which of the three antecedent relations was given
was randomly assigned.
Briefly stated, the content was as follows: In the base
domain, of the two kinds of jars the tribe made, the first was
more ornately decorated, made from more rare materials,
and made by more skilled craftsmen (the tribe’s elders),
than the second kind of jars. These facts caused the first
kind of jars to be considered closer to the spirit world. The
target domain concerned how the tribe constructed their
houses. These were one room structures that had a space to
the right and a space to the left inside the door. In the three
relation condition, the left area is known to be more
decorated, built with rarer materials, and built by more
skilled craftsmen than the area to the right. In the one
relation condition, only one of these was given. The
structure of the domains in the different conditions is
illustrated in Figure 22.

1665

2

Note that in the figure, in the one relation condition, the
decorated relation is given, while rare and skilled are not. In the
actual study, there were participants who were given rare but not
decorated or skilled, and participants who were given skilled but
not decorated or rare as well.

One Relation Condition, Given

Three Relation Condition, Given

One Relation Condition, Not Given

Confidence Rating

5
4
3
2
1
0

Decorated

Rare

Skilled

Pote ntial Conclusion Evaluate d
Figure 3: Mean confidence ratings for the antecedent relations. Error bars represent 1 SE.
Following the descriptions of the base and target domains
were a series of seven potential conclusions that the
anthropologists could draw based upon the information
given. These were the same in both conditions. The
potential conclusions were related to the information given
in the descriptions in such a way that the participants should
have known that they were certainly true or false, except for
one that was completely unrelated. The false and unrelated
propositions were included to minimize the potential for a
response bias; they will not be discussed again. One
distinction is worth noting: for participants in the one
relation condition, two of the antecedent relations are not
given, and thus should receive lower ratings. The potential
conclusions are listed in Table 1. The first five were
randomly ordered for each participant; the last two always
came last in the order displayed in the table.
Other materials included a distracter packet with
similarity ratings between scenes and two questionnaires
(self-construal and need for cognition), and a final packet
Table 1: Potential Conclusions to Evaluate
Title
1 Decorated
2 Rare
3 Skilled
4 False
5 Unrelated
6 Similar
7 Spiritual

Question
The space to the left of the door is much more
ornately decorated than the right.
The materials used in the construction of the left
area are more rare than those for the right.
The space on the left is constructed only by the
village elders.
The roofs of Brou houses are made out of
bamboo.
Brou houses are built on stilts.
The principles and cultural practices that are
involved with Brou pottery and architecture are
very similar.
The area to the left of the door is considered to be
closer to the spirit world.

consisting of a ten item true-false memory test and
demographic questionnaire. These materials allowed us to
gather some additional data and facilitated the deception
that the experiment was about memory, but were peripheral
to the main question at issue. They will not be discussed
further.

Procedure
The participants were told that the experiment was intended
to test memory for a body of material after having drawn
conclusions based on it. They were told to pay very close
attention to the relationships between all of the details in the
first packet. The contents of the first packet are described
above.
After reading about the two domains, the
participants rated the plausibility of the seven potential
conclusions that the anthropologists could draw. First,
subjects checked whether they thought the proposition was
true or false. Then they had to write a few sentences
justifying their response. Finally, they had to provide a
confidence rating on a scale from zero to five (completely
confident).3 This setup was designed to ensure that the
participants had built an accurate representation in their
minds of the two domains and the correspondences between
them before they made the judgment in which we were
primarily interested.

Results
Seven outliers were trimmed. The overall pattern of the data did
not change as a result of trimming: none of the results switched
between significance and nonsignificance because of trimming.

To establish the validity of our primary analyses, we first
need to show that the participants understood the task and
performed rationally. This can be assessed by examining
the pattern of responses to the other potential conclusions.
3

For purposes of data analysis, the confidence ratings were scored
as negative values if the participant checked that they thought the
proposition was false.
1666

One Relation Condition

Three Relation Condition

Confidence Rating

5
4
3
2
1
0
Similar

Spiritual

Figure 4: Mean confidence rating for the last two
potential conclusions
Figure 3 shows the global pattern of results for the
confidence ratings for the antecedent relations. A
2(Condition) X 3(Antecedent) ANOVA was conducted on
the confidence ratings for the antecedent relations when
they were given. The content of the antecedent relations
was treated as a random factor for this analysis.
Unsurprisingly, the test revealed no differences among the
ratings (the grand mean for the antecedents when they were
given was 4.22). There was no main effect of condition
F(1,2) = 2.02, p = 0.29, η2 =0.0034, there was no main effect
for the content of the antecedent relation F(2,2) = 0.44, p =
0.69, η2 = 0.001, and there was no interaction F(2,247) =
0.41, p = 0.66, η2 = 0.003. These results show that the
participants understood that the information they were given
was solid; neither the content of the proposition nor the
other information they were given influenced this.
Alternatively, when the antecedents were not given, the
content of the propositions did influence the judgments that
were made (decorated: M = 2.44, rare: M = 1.85, skilled: M
= 0.57). A one-way ANOVA conducted on the antecedent
relations, when they were not given, was significant
F(2,119) = 3.92, p = 0.02, η2 = 0.06. This merely implies
that the content of these relations differ in their a priori
believability.
Figure 4 displays the results for the last two potential
conclusions that the participants evaluated (noted in table 1
above). Subjects in the three relation condition expressed
more confidence in the proposition that the two domains
were similar (M = 3.58) than those in the one relation
condition (M = 2.42), t(1115) = 3.01, p = 0.003, d = 0.54.

Regarding the primary hypothesis of this investigation,
subjects in the three relation condition (M = 4.13) were
significantly more confident in the inference than subjects in
the one relation condition were (M = 3.69), t(123) = 3.33, p
= 0.001, d = 0.6.
Participants in the one relation condition could be further
subdivided into three subgroups based on which of the three
antecedent relations they were given. However, these
subjects did not differ in their ratings for the consequent
relation based on which of the three antecedent relations
they had been given, F(2,58) = 0.31, p = 0.73, η2 = 0.01.
This result, coupled with those stated above, suggests that it
is the amount of structural support that influences the judged
strength of the inference, not the content of the supporting
relations. This is true even though the antecedents differ in
believability.
This experiment was designed explicitly to test the
support hypothesis. However, making the three relation
condition have more support than the one relation condition
also caused it to be more similar. Therefore, as a post-hoc,
alternative hypothesis, one could argue that support does not
increase the plausibility of an inference, but rather that
similarity does.
Under this interpretation, increasing
support would cause similarity to go up, and similarity
would mediate the relationship between support and the
perceived strength of an inference. To test this possibility,
we ran a regression analysis predicting the ratings for the
inference based on the ratings for the similarity proposition.
Similarity was not a significant predictor, b(similar) = 0.05,
F(1,123) = 2.27, p = 0.13, r2 = 0.02, thus it does not seem to
be driving inference evaluation.

Discussion

4

This study provides strong evidence for Forbus et al.’s
support hypothesis. The participants were influenced by the
logical structure of the information they were given. Those
in the three relation condition rated the consequent relation
more likely to be true, as the support hypothesis predicts.
When information is given, the propositions are evaluated
without regard for their a priori believability, despite the
fact that these propositions do vary in their innate
plausibility.
Furthermore, when only one antecedent
relation is given, the likelihood of the consequent relation is
the same without regard for the content of the antecedent
relation the participants knew about. Thus, for these stories,
the strength of the analogical inference is based on structural
aspects, not content. These facts suggest that a judgment of
an inference based on different content than that used in this
study, but that had the same structural properties, would be
influenced similarly. These results suggest that support is a
structural factor that influences the evaluation of analogical
inferences independent of content.
The results are especially impressive considering that this
study was conducted using a between-groups design. The
participants were not even aware that they were in a
reasoning experiment, having been told that we were
investigating memory. In addition, the subjects only
evaluated one analogy and relevant analogical inference.
Typically, in reasoning research, participants generate or
evaluate several inferences and/or arguments. These within

We assert the null here and several more times in the remainder
of the results section. Such assertions are invalid when the
investigation does not have enough statistical power to capture an
effect even if it did exist. We chose to run 132 participants for this
reason, and never have less than an 80% chance of resolving a
large effect if there is one. Note also that in each instance where
we assert the null the effect size is very close to zero.
5
There are fewer degrees of freedom for this test because
homogeneity of variance did not hold.
1667

subjects designs boost the effect size that is found by
reducing the error variance, making a more powerful test.
But, this is not the only effect. They also provide the
participants with an opportunity to calibrate their intuitions
by exposing them to a wide range of the argument space.
When there are arguments of differing strengths to be rated,
the participant can become clearer about how to evaluate an
argument than they would otherwise be. This does not well
reflect the evaluations people make in natural situations. In
addition, task demands may be introduced. It is worth
reiterating that this was not the case here: we found a larger
than average effect size despite the fact that participants
only evaluated one inference.
Further research needs to be done in the future to develop
a fuller understanding of analogical inference. Additional
research is required to fully test Forbus et al.’s hypotheses
as well. We are planning several follow-up experiments to
replicate and extend our findings concerning support.
Based on a qualitative examination of the justifications
participants wrote for their evaluations, some individual
differences dimensions (e.g. need for cognitive closure) may
play a role in the evaluation of analogical inferences. In this
way, we are planning to broaden our investigation.
Ultimately, Forbus et al.’s extrapolation hypothesis needs to
be tested as well.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the members of the Similarity and
Cognition lab, and the Cognition and Perception area of the
University of Texas at Austin, and Mariska Leunissen for
helpful comments and discussion. We would also like to
thank Mary Joe Amuneke and Thao Bui for help with
running subjects.

References
Clement, C. A. & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J. Sternberg &
J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: An algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., Everett, J. O., & Wu, M. (1997).
Towards a computational model of evaluating and using
analogical inferences. Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
229-234). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., Brem, S., Ferguson, R., Markman, A.B., Wolff,
P., Levidow, B.N., & Forbus, K.D. (1997). Analogical
reasoning and conceptual change: A case study of
Johannes Kepler. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6,
3-40.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N. (2001). The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. & Markman, A. B. (1997).
Structural
alignment in analogy and similarity.
American
Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Holyoak, K. J., Novick, L. R., & Melz, E. R. (1994).
Component processes in analogical transfer: Mapping,
pattern completion, and adaptation. In K. J. Holyoak & J.
A. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in connectionist and neural
computation theory, Vol. 2: Analogical connections.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping, Psychological Review, 3, 427-466.
Keane, M. T., Ledgeway, T., & Duff, S.
(1994).
Constraints on analogical mapping: A comparison of
three models, Cognitive Science, 3, 387-438.
Krawczyk, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Hummel, J. E. (2005).
The one-to-one constraint in analogical mapping and
inference. Cognitive Science, 29, 797-806.
Markman, A.B. (1997).
Constraints on analogical
inference. Cognitive Science, 21, 373-418.
Spellman, B. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). Pragmatics in
analogical mapping. Cognitive Psychology, 31, 307-346.

1668

