UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Divergent-Reconvergent Model of Serial Order Encoding and Retrieval

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mn4w5tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Elman, Jeffrey L.
Shieh, Danke X

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Divergent-Reconvergent Model of Serial Order Encoding and Retrieval
Danke X. Shieh (dxie@crl.ucsd.edu)
Jeffrey L. Elman (elman@crl.ucsd.edu)

Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

most likely to be the middle item “9” than others. To account for these psychological findings, positional information is considered to be required, though there are disputes
concerning its nature (Page & Norris, 1998).
From current behavioral and modeling studies of working
memory for serial order, it may best be assumed that CQ
interacts with some positional or contextual coding mechanism. This view has been explicitly or implicitly adopted in
most major models. Burgess and Hitch (1999) used fast
synaptic changes to associate contextual code to items,
where the item-level representations by themselves work on
a CQ basis. Henson (1998)’s start-end model can be seen as
integrating CQ in one of its positional signals (the start signal), because this signal is equivalent to an activation gradient, and it is used, among other information, to cue stored
items.
Now that CQ has directly or indirectly played important
roles in working memory models for serial order, how can
the activation gradient that CQ works upon be generated in
the brain? Many mechanisms have been proposed, but there
has not been a consistent and neuropsychologically-based
account.
The primacy model (Page & Norris, 1998) assumes that
the primacy gradient “results from some association of each
item with some representation of the start-of-list context”.
SARDNET (James & Miikkulainen, 1995) assumes that all
items are activated at presentation to the same level and
begin to decay, which makes the last item the ‘strongest’,
and the first the ‘weakest’. Burgess and Hitch’s (1999)
model assumes that each item is inhibited to a low level
after presentation, but the inhibition is gradually removed,
leaving the first item ‘strongest’ and the last item ‘weakest’,
the opposite of SARDNET. This mechanism meets the requirement of CQ (starting from the most active item), but
the indicated inhibition implies two conditions – occurring
immediately after presentation, and lasting throughout recall,
which are not yet found in neuropsychological studies. To
support the CQ framework, other mechanisms may be
needed.
How can the activation gradient be generated in a neuropsychologically plausible way? This paper presents a simple
neural mechanism that has not been explored before. It is
notable that the connectivity pattern in this model resembles
that of the basal ganglia, and this pattern may also be available in the neocortex. It is hoped that this model will shed
light on the computation and function of the basal ganglia,
and other brain areas that may implement it.

Abstract
This paper presents a new connectionist model for serial order encoding and retrieval. It is based on a divergent-reconvergent structure, which encodes a list of
items by superimposed distributed representations of
each of the items, where early items are coded by more
active units than late ones due to lateral inhibition. Thus,
the first item is the strongest and the last the weakest.
Retrieval is based on the activation gradient: selecting
the most active item, and then inhibiting it to allow the
next item to be retrieved. Side effects of this mechanism gives rise to the primacy effect, the recency effect
and basic similarity effects, similar to those found in
human immediate serial recall. The divergentreconvergent structure strikingly resembles the anatomical structure of the basal ganglia. This model provides a plausible computational and functional account
for the sequencing function of the basal ganglia, and
other brain areas that may implement it.

Introduction
In 1951, Karl Lashley identified the serial-order problem as
fundamental to understanding the brain and cognition. The
serial-order problem can be loosely defined as how behavioral sequences are produced. It underlies much human and
animal behavior, ranging from locomotion, reaching, grasping to language and memory. In the field of memory, many
theories have been proposed to account for the nature of
serial order encoding and retrieval (see Henson, 1998 for a
review).
One influential theory, the ordinal theory, assumes that
order is represented by relative values of a continuous property (e.g., the activation level of the items) with the first
item ‘strongest’ and the last item ‘weakest’. The order of
items is retrieved by iteratively selecting the most active
item, with each retrieved item temporary suppressed. This
mechanism is also known as Competitive Queuing (CQ,
Houghton, 1990).
Models based on CQ can reproduce dominant patterns of
order errors (omission, intrusion, transposition). A CQ system extended with rehearsal and multiple presentation modalities (visual and auditory) can account for an even larger
amount of data (Page & Norris, 1998). The simplicity and
explanatory power of CQ is appealing. However, CQ itself
cannot explain phenomena where positional coding appears
to be essential. For example, in the recall of a temporally
grouped sequence: 4 5 2 – 3 9 7, if the middle item “5” of
the 1st group is transposed with an item in the 2nd group, it is
786

The Divergent-Reconvergent Model
The Divergent-Reconvergent Model is a novel neural network model for serial encoding and retrieval. The goal of
the current model is to show 1) a special connectivity pattern in the basal ganglia, the divergent-reconvergent structure (Graybiel, Aosaki, Flaherty, & Kimura, 1994), can give
rise to serial order encoding and retrieval in a way that has
not been explored before; 2) side effects of this structure
induce essential characters of human working memory: the
serial order effects and similarity effects.

The basic idea
The main input station of the basal ganglia, the striatum,
collects inputs from the entire neocortex and sends processed information, through other parts of the basal ganglia,
to the motor and frontal areas of the forebrain. It has puzzled investigators for years that there are millions of projection neurons in the primate striatum, but they project to a
much smaller set of neurons in the basal ganglia output nuclei, the global pallidus (GP). Graybiel et al. used anatomical tracers on the basal ganglia pathway, and found a divergent-reconvergent connection structure. They proposed that
this network works as “local experts” performing distinct
computational tasks, and their results are selected by a gating network.
We propose a different function that the divergentreconvergent structure may also perform – the sequencing
of motor and cognitive elements. They may include hand
and foot movements, percepts as perceived letters and words,
and other cognitive entities as mental arithmetic operations
and chess moves. Basal ganglia involvement in high-level
cognition has also been argued for by other researchers
(Graybiel et al., 1994; Lieberman, 2000).

Architecture

c

a

b

GP

Figure 2 shows the structure of the proposed model involving the PFC, basal ganglia and the motor cortex. The Neocortex-Striatum-Motor pathway embodies the divergentreconvergent structure illustrated above. The winner-take-all
function of the GP and its subsequent triggering of an action
in the motor cortex by way of the thalamus are simplified as
a single striatomotor reconvergent projection. The Neocortex-PFC pathway actively maintains the items (without order information in the current model). The PFC provides
additional item representations, which are inhibited when
the items are retrieved. This kind of item-level inhibition is
also often assumed in other working memory models of
serial order (e.g., Burgess & Hitch, 1999).
Layers in this model are described below. In addition,
there is a single recall inhibitor unit that inhibits the motor
layer during item presentation. The signs + / − on a projection designate excitatory and inhibitory, respectively.
Neocortex layer. This is the input layer of the system. It
has nf units, each corresponding to an input feature. An item
can have multiple features. When it is presented, its feature
units are activated for 1 time step. This layer projects to the
striatum layer (via the divergent projection) and to the PFC
via an all-to-all projection. In the divergent projection, each

Reconvergent proj.
c

b

c

a

a

a

b

c

b

Striatum

Divergent proj.
a

rent loops and lateral inhibition are added to the striatal
units, an interesting phenomenon appears: presented items
are actively maintained in the striatum (discussed later), and
early items inhibit a proportion of striatal units representing
late items. This will make the distributed representation of
late items “weaker” than that of early ones. In this way, an
activation gradient can be produced in the striatum. The GP
can then perform a competitive selection process to iteratively retrieve items sequenced in the striatum.
It is interesting that the structural and functional requirements in the above mechanism (lateral inhibition, competitive selection) are indeed available in the basal ganglia. The
primary neurons in the striatum (the spiny neurons) are
characterized by a dense and extensive local axon collateral
field, and they have inhibitory effects on neighboring spiny
neurons. The GP (more specifically, its internal segment,
GPi) can function as an action selector, performing a kind of
winner-take-all function, or as some researchers prefer, a
“loser-take-all” function, given its inhibitory output which
in turn disinhibits a selected action (Berns & Sejnowski,
1998).
Though the striatal spiny neurons do not have local recurrent loops, their activity may be maintained in indirect ways:
1) there are loops between the basal ganglia and the prefrontal cortex (PFC) (Beiser & Houk, 1998); 2) the striatum may
constantly receive input from the PFC, which maintains
activation by its loops with other parts of the brain.
It can be noted that the divergent-reconvergent connection
pattern may also be available in the neocortex, where sequential information needs to be processed (e.g., auditory
perception). In this model, we focus on the basal ganglia
because of its privileged role in sequencing. This serial order mechanism, either implemented in the basal ganglia or
the neocortex, can be a plausible mechanism for the brain.

c
b

Neocortex

Figure 1. The divergent-reconvergent connectivity
scheme
Figure 1 shows the divergent-reconvergent connectivity
structure that can support sequence encoding and retrieval.
For comparison purposes, the layers are labeled by their
putative brain counterparts, but the diagram is not intended
to show the fine anatomy of the brain.
Units in the neocortex represent input items. When an
item is presented, it activates a set of units that are spatially
distributed in the striatum. This set of units convergently
activates an output unit in the GP. With this connectivity,
the network remaps an input unit to a corresponding output
unit, via a distributed internal representation. But, if recur787

neocortex unit connects to the same number of units that are
randomly selected from the striatum layer. For simplicity,
striatum units receiving input from different neocortex units
do not overlap. If overlapping is allowed, the system will
work under a bit more interference.
PFC layer. This layer actively maintains item-level representations. Its units should be at least as many as items.
This layer is trained with unsupervised learning to recognize
items presented to the neocortex layer. After learning, each
item should activate a unique unit in this layer. Units that do
not respond to any item will remain inactive. The activation
function is sigmoid,
f ( x) =

1

Motor output (WTA)
recallinhibitor

-

+ reconvergent
(via GPi)

+ self rec
+

PFC
- later.inh

+

Striatum

,

(1)

1 + e − ( ax + b )
where x is the net input, and parameters a = 7, b = -6. Items
are actively maintained by self-recurrent connections
(weight = 2). The dynamics is bi-stable, in the sense that a
strong input (>0.8) can stimulate a unit to a stable activation
level close to 1, and it will stay active until a strong inhibition (<-1.3) resets it to 0. Spontaneous decay has not been
modeled but can be easily done with a leaky-integrator neural model.
Striatum layer. This layer is the substrate for order encoding. It has ns units. The main input source is the neocortex via the divergent projection. Units in this layer are randomly divided into subsets of the same size (ns / nf ), each
receiving input from a neocortex unit (weight = 1). This
layer uses the same neural model as (1). The layer size can
be chosen fairly freely, as long as there are enough units to
produce fine-grained activation gradients. Another input
source is the PFC, from where actively maintained items
continuously activate their corresponding striatal units
(weight = 1).
Each unit in this layer exerts strong lateral inhibition
(weight = -2) on 4 neighboring units in the cardinal directions, except for the edges, where there are fewer neighbors.
When a unit is active, it dominates and completely inhibits
those neighboring units from firing. If a neighbor unit receives input from the same neocortex feature as this unit,
the inhibition will eventually be removed by Hebbian learning since they will frequently fire together. This reduces
undesired variations in the activation gradient. Other numbers of inhibited neighbors can also be used.
Motor output layer. This is the output layer of the system. As the PFC layer, it should have more available units
than items, and is to be trained by unsupervised learning to
respond to the items. The actual neural pathway from the
striatum to the motor cortex is a complicated chain of inhibitory and gating processes through the GP and thalamus
(Berns & Sejnowski, 1998). It is summarized here by a single winner-take-all projection. After training, item-specific
units will summate striatal activation for the items. Units
whose net input is above the threshold (0.2) can compete for
output. The strongest unit will be reported, and it will inhibit
an item representation in the PFC, which, in turn, deactivates the item in the striatum, allowing the next item to be
retrieved.

+ divergent

Neocortex

Figure 2. The Divergent-Reconvergent Model

Training
Two projections in the network are fixed. They are the divergent projection from the neocortex to the striatum, and
the self-recurrent connections in the PFC. Learning will
apply to other projections. At initialization, each striatum
unit is given strong inhibitory weights on 4 neighboring
units, and small random weights are assigned to other modifiable projections.
During training, the recall inhibitor is set inactive, so that
the network can produce output at any time. Each item is
presented to the neocortex layer in turn. Before the next
item is presented, network activity is reset to 0. The network
only receives individual items but not sequences in training.
After an item is presented, competitive learning
(Rumelhart & Zipser, 1985) is applied to two layers: the
motor output layer and the PFC layer. Units in these layers
will learn to recognize patterns in their input layers. For
example, after an item is presented, it produces an activation
pattern in the striatum layer. Motor units will learn this pattern. The most strongly activated unit “wins” and its weight
vector w is adapted to the pattern vector x,
w = w + η ( x / Σ xi − w),
i

(2)

where η = 0.1 is the learning rate. The pattern x is normalized to sum to 1 by the factor Σi xi. This is helpful because
otherwise patterns with more features will simply be more
active and output early. Although it may be a valid phenomenon that a salient item (supposedly highly active) is
recalled first by humans, this paper does not intend to model
this phenomenon. Units in the PFC are similarly trained to
learn the item patterns in the neocortex layer.
Hebbian learning is applied to adapt the lateral inhibition
between striatum units. As mentioned above, initial inhibition between co-active units will be eventually removed.
Hebbian learning is also applied to the projection from the
PFC to the striatum layer (max weight = 1). This will associate items in the PFC with their distributed representations
788

in the striatum. This association is important for the maintenance of the striatal activity. Anti-hebbian learning is applied to the projection from the motor output layer to the
PFC layer (min weight = -2), so that a motor response will
inhibit its corresponding item unit in the PFC.
The model is trained with 40 passes of all items. At the
end of training, every item should reliably activate one PFC
unit and one motor unit. It is notable that although the network is not trained to encode and retrieve sequences explicitly, this ability has emerged from its structure and what it
has learned about the items.

Striatum activity patterns
Present item 1

Present item 2

Present item 3

Item 1 retrieved

2 tics later

1

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

Item activation in the striatum

Figure 3. Network activity in sequence
encoding and retrieval

Simulations
Simulation 1 - Serial recall
In this simulation 1 , we test the network’s basic ability to
encode and retrieve sequences. Recall accuracy and serial
position effects will be investigated to assess its validity as a
model for human working memory. During the testing
phase, no further learning occurs. As noted above, the serial
recall effects are a consequence of the network's architecture,
once it has learned to recognize items in isolation.
The materials are lists of 3 to 8 items, randomly drawn
from a family of 20 items without repetition (the total number of items is important for this model, discussed later). For
each length, 800 lists are used. In this simulation, each item
is represented by a single feature. Items containing multiple
features will be studied in Simulation 2.
A list is presented and retrieved as follows. First, set the
recall inhibitor unit active, so that the network will store the
sequence without generating any output. Then, the items are
presented to the neocortex layer, each for 1 time step followed by an interval of 5 time steps. After a list has been
fully presented, the recall inhibitor is deactivated to start a
recall. Every time a response is generated, the recall inhibitor is temporarily set active for 5 time steps. No output is
produced in this interval, allowing the network to stabilize
after an item is retrieved. The recall process ends when the
network doesn’t generate any output in 15 time steps.
While items are presented, an activation gradient is
formed in the striatum (Figure 3, Plots 1-3). It is interesting
that after an item is inhibited after retrieval, some neighboring units that it has inhibited are now liberated. Items that
make use of these liberated units will see an increased activation due to the input from PFC (Plots 4-5). This is a special property of the system: after an early item is retrieved,
late items can fill up the gap it leaves, allowing the network
to add new items to the end of the list. Thus, this model can
elegantly handle continuous input and output. It is immune
to some criticisms against early buffer theories of human
memory, which need to be emptied before new items can be
stored.
1
The network sizes are neocortex layer nf = 20, striatum layer ns =
3600 (60×60), PFC layer 400 (20×20) and motor output layer 400
(20×20). Gaussian noise (σ = .05) is injected into the motor output
layer.

789

In human immediate serial recall, three types of errors are
commonly found: omission, transposition and intrusion.
Omissions are very rare in this simulation since decay has
not been modeled. Intrusions are also rare, because the only
input to the model is the current list, and there is no interference from long-term memory or other input sources. Most
errors are transposition errors, caused by the noise injected
to the recall process.
Recall accuracy is plotted as a function of list lengths, and
serial positions (Figure 4). The result shows clear list length,
primacy and recency effects. Long lists are recalled worse
than short ones, because 1) there are more items competing
for output at each point, 2) exponentially fewer units represent each additional item, because of the added-up lateral
inhibition from all previous items. The memory span is approximately a log function of the memory resource, and is
considerably stable in face of variances of the latter.
The primacy effect occurs because activation levels are
more distinct among early items than late ones. This is a
result of the exponential-like activation gradient. The recency effect occurs in this model for two reasons. First, no
confusion can happen at the last position, since all other
items have been retrieved. This explanation is also given in
some other models (Page & Norris, 1998). Second, the activation of late items grows up after the removal of early
items. This also contributes to the recency effect, since the
increased activation makes late items more distinct. The
second factor rests on the assumption that retrieved items
are inhibited from the memory, or have decayed for they are
no longer needed, as is found in cell recordings in monkey’s
delayed match-to-sample tasks (Fuster & Jervey, 1982). It is
valid only to the extent that this assumption is true. Other
factors that may contribute to the recency effect include
stronger activation of recent items due to less decay
(Davelaar & Usher, 2003), or additional memory components, such as the precategorical acoustic store (PAS,
Crowder & Morton, 1969).
Discussion
The total number of items needs to be chosen with some
care, because it indirectly determines how many striatum
units are allocated for each item. If there are too few items,
too many striatum units may be allocated for each, and the
lateral inhibition may be so strong that the network has too
little a memory span. If there are too many items, the stria-

A

B
Accuracy (%)

80
60
40
20

List length
100

3
4

80

5

60

6

40

7
8

20

0
3

4

5

6

7

8

1

2

3

Length

4

5

6

7

8

Serial position

Figure 4. List length and serial-position effects

Simulation 2 - Similarity effects
Typical working memory models based on CQ adopt localist representation for the items. Since localist representations do not represent item similarity by themselves, many
models have resorted to a two-stage process to account for
similarity effects: first, selecting a correct item, and then,
passing it to a confusion process which probabilistically
produces erroneous output items, according to their similarity to the item selected in the first stage (Henson, 1998;
Page & Norris, 1998). The model proposed in this paper
does not require two separate stages to account for similarity effects. Rather, it naturally allows interaction between
similar items based on the neural network’s ability to handle
distributed representations.
Specifically, two hypotheses are to be tested. First, are
lists with confusable items more difficult to retrieve? Second, is the current architecture adequate to account for the
following phenomenon? In lists containing a pair of phonologically confusable items (e.g., BHPYX), this pair of confusable items are likely to be transposed with each other,
while other items are kept in their correct positions.
In this simulation 2 , a new set of 20 items are used, each
containing 5 features. Each of the first 16 items contains 5
completely distinct features (Items 1-16). In addition, there
are two pairs of similar items: a pair sharing 1 feature (labeled A and B), and a pair sharing 2 features (labeled X and
Y). This item set requires 97 different features.
The test material is 3 types of experimental lists. The Dissim type contains 5 distinct items. The Sim1 and Sim2 types
contain 3 distinct items plus either of the above two pair of
similar items, respectively. For each type, the total number
of lists is 800.

100

Accuracy (%)

Accuracy (%)

100

Some modification has been made to the network for this
simulation. In Simulation 1, competitive learning is used to
train the motor and PFC layers. That was to show that the
system can work in an unsupervised fashion. However,
competitive learning requires many more units than the
number of patterns. To simplify the system and reduce
computational costs, in this simulation, only 20 motor and
20 PFC units are used, and each of them is designated to be
the “winner” of one item. Although the designation of output units is similar to supervised learning, this is only to
simulate the effect of having a large number of units in unsupervised learning.
The result (Figure 5A) shows the serial position curves of
the 3 types of lists. A clear similarity effect can be observed:
lists with higher confusability induce more errors. The effect is produced because the activation levels of items with
shared features are less distinctive than those without shared
features (shared features cannot contribute a difference to
the items’ activation levels). This basic similarity effect is
consistent with the fact that people have greater difficulties
recalling phonologically confusable lists than nonconfusable ones (Henson, 1998). Now, the first hypothesis
to be tested has been shown to be true.
A

B

80
60
40

Dissim

20

Sim 1
Sim 2

0
1

2

3

4

Serial position

5

Transposition errors

tum units allocated for each may be too sparse, and the
weak lateral inhibition may not generate good activation
gradients. In this paper, the total number of items is always
chosen to balance this trade-off. The number or density of
striatum units for an item or feature may be defined as an
independent parameter in the future.
Since the network parameters have not been optimized to
fit human data, quantitative comparison is not yet available.
However, qualitative results have provided initial support
for the proposed model.

350

290

300

246

250
200

Dissim
154

Sim 1

150

Sim 2

100
50

5

14

Dist 2

Dist 3

0
Dist 1

1

Distance of transposition

Figure 5. Similarity effects on accuracy and
transposition error distributions
Next, transposition errors are studied in more details. In
human immediate serial recall, transposition errors tend to
be local, occurring between items that are close to each
other in the list. They are explained by some models as having similar position coding (Burgess & Hitch, 1999; Henson,
1998). This characteristic has also been found in this model
(Figure 5B), especially in the Sim2 condition, where a clear
transposition gradient can be seen: more transposition errors
occur between close items than distant ones. The locality of
transposition errors occurs because when an item is not produced at its right position, it will tend to be produced in the
next position, because it has higher activation than later
items. The same property is true of other CQ models (Page
& Norris, 1998).
An important question is, are the pair of confusable items
more likely to transpose with each other than with other
items? In human experiments, this phenomenon has been
confirmed. Phonologically confusable items tend to transpose with each other, while keeping non-confusables items
in the right positions. Unfortunately, this property has not
been found in this model. When a pair of confusable items
is included, their transposition did occur. For example,
sometimes “Y 6 1 X 5” is recalled as “X 6 1 Y 5”. But it is
accompanied by increased transposition errors between con-

2
The network sizes are, neocortex layer nf = 97, striatum layer ns =
6400 (80×80), PFC layer 20 and motor output layer 20. Gaussian
noise (σ = .05) is injected into the motor output layer.

790

fusable item and non-confusable items. The sawtooth-like
accuracy curve for alternating phonologically confusable
and non-confusable items have not been found either, in a
separate simulation.
Discussion
What does the result suggest? Does it mean that the model
is wrong? Here we provide two analyses. First, the serial
order model is partially motivated by the neural anatomy of
the basal ganglia. As discussed before, this mechanism may
apply to the sequencing of many types of elements: motor,
perceptual, cognitive and linguistic. Though it is true that
phonologically encoded lists exhibit an obvious sawtoothlike serial position curve if the lists contain alternate confusable and non-confusable items, this curve is generally not
obvious in other modalities like vision. Thus, the model,
which is based on the basal ganglia, may correctly not exhibit this effect. Second, further analysis of the difficulty
from similarity reveals the same issue as repeated items –
repeated activation of a feature does not induce a new representation. This is an intrinsic difficulty for CQ and arguably
the brain. The brain’s solution to the repetition problem appears to be non-trivial (consider the binding error of repeated items, such as 233 recalled as 223, or 858 as 585),
and this model may provide a starting point for studying the
brain’s solution.
In a more advanced simulation, we have confirmed that if
additional phonological information is used to cue items in
this model, the effects found with alternate phonologically
confusable and non-confusable items will emerge.

explain very well why mixed foot and hand movements are
harder to sequence than foot or hand movements alone.
The Divergent-Reconvergent Model provides a neurologically viable account for the brain’s mechanism for serial
order. However, it has not addressed many important issues
(e.g., recall of non-words, temporal grouping and item repetitions). They will be directions for future research.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Hal Pashler, Marty Sereno, Gary
Cottrell, Jochen Triesch, Marta Kutas, and Ginny de Sa for
insightful and supportive comments on this research, and
three anonymous reviewers for their expert feedback that
greatly improved this paper. Danke owes inspiration to the
Geisel Library and PSY201B. This research was supported
in part by grant NIH MH60517 to the second author.

References
Beiser, D. G., & Houk, J. C. (1998). Model of cortical-basal ganglionic
processing: Encoding the serial order of sensory events. Journal of Neurophysiology, 79, 3168-3188.
Berns, G. S., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1998). A computational model of how the
basal ganglia produce sequences. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10,
108-121.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Memory for serial order: A network
model of the phonological loop and its timing. Psychological Review,
106 (3), 551-581.
Crowder, R. G., & Morton, J. (1969). Precategorical acoustic storage (pas).
Perception & Psychophysics, 5(6), 365-373.

General discussion

Davelaar, E. J., & Usher, M. (2003). A neurocomputational account of

This paper presents a novel computational mechanism (the
divergent-reconvergent scheme) for encoding and retrieving
sequences. It has been demonstrated with computer simulations that the Divergent-Reconvergent Model indeed possesses the capability. The side effects of the mechanism give
rise to the list length effects, serial position effects and basic
similarity effects. More importantly, it provides a viable
account for the function of the basal ganglia, which has puzzled researchers for decades.
It is notable that the model has not been explicitly trained
to encode and retrieve sequences. Instead, it is only exposed
to individual items in isolation. Its ability to recall sequences emerges from the architecture of the model. This
model has obvious psychological advantages: humans have
little difficulty recalling sequences after being familiarized
with the items. The amount of training appears to be right.
It might appear that this model requires too rich lateral inhibition among all items in the brain, which is problematic,
given that mental objects of different modalities are located
in different areas of the brain, and there isn’t comprehensive
lateral inhibition between these areas. However, this is exactly the reason why the brain’s sequencing function may
resort to a centralized mechanism. In our opinion, this
model is best matched with the computation going on with
one module of the striatum (Graybiel et al., 1994). The lack
of lateral inhibition across modules (e.g., foot and hand) can

short- and long-term recency effects. Paper presented at the CogSci 2003.
Fuster, J. M., & Jervey, J. P. (1982). Neuronal firing in the inferotemporal
cortex of the monkey in a visual memory task. Journal of Neuroscience,
2, 361-375.
Graybiel, A. M., Aosaki, T., Flaherty, A. W., & Kimura, M. (1994). The
basal ganglia and adaptive motor control. Science, 265(5180), 18261831.
Henson, R. N. A. (1998). Short-term memory for serial order: The start-end
model. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 73-137.
Houghton, G. (1990). The problem of serial order: A neural network model
of sequence learning and recall. In R. Dale, C. Mellish & M. Zock (Eds.),
Current research in natural language generation. London: Academic
Press.
James, D. L., & Miikkulainen, R. (1995). Sardnet: A self-organizing feature map for sequences. In G. Tesauro, D. S. Touretzky & T. K. Leen
(Eds.), Advances in neural processing systems (Vol. 7).
Lieberman, P. (2000). Human language and our reptilian brain: The subcortical bases of speech, syntax, and thought. Cambridge: Mass: Harvard University Press.
Page, M. P. A., & Norris, D. (1998). The primacy model: A new model of
immediate serial recall. Psychological Review, 105 (4), 761-781.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Zipser, D. (1985). Feature discovery by competitive
learning. Cognitive Science, 9, 75-112.

791

