UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Revision of Beliefs about Causes and Enabling Conditions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hc6v826

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Frosch, Caren A.
Johnson-Laird, P.N.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Revision of Beliefs about Causes and Enabling Conditions
Caren A. Frosch (froschc@tcd.ie)
School of Psychology, University of Dublin, Trinity College.
Dublin 2, Ireland

P. N. Johnson-Laird (phil@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08540, USA

Speakers therefore mention causes rather than enabling
conditions (Hilton, 1990; see Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird,
2001, for a review of theories).
An alternative view is that causes and enabling conditions
do differ in meaning and, as a consequence, in their logical
implications (Johnson-Laird, 1999; Goldvarg and JohnsonLaird, 2001). According to this theory, the claim that an event
will cause an effect is compatible with three temporallyconstrained possibilities:

Abstract
We argue that propositions about causes differ in meaning from
those about enabling conditions: with a cause the effect is
necessary, whereas with an enabler it is possible. But, the
salient mental model is the same for both. We report an
experiment that tested this difference in a study of belief
revision. The results showed that causes and enabling
conditions are revised differently. On trials in which
participants encountered information consistent with an earlier
interpretation, most of them maintained their belief in a
particular enabling condition whereas only half of the
participants maintained their belief in a particular cause. On
trials in which they encountered information inconsistent with
an earlier interpretation, just over half of them switched their
belief in a particular enabling condition whereas the majority of
participants maintained their belief in a particular cause. We
discuss the results with reference to theories of causality.

cause

effect

no cause

effect

no cause

no effect

Given the cause, the effect is therefore necessary, and in cases
of strong causation, the cause is the only way to bring about
the effect (the second possibility above cannot occur). In
contrast, an enabling condition makes possible the effect:

Keywords: belief revision; causality; enabling conditions;
mental representation; reasoning.

Introduction
A cause brings about an effect whereas an enabling condition
makes the effect possible, but it is not always easy to
distinguish the two. For example, when individuals are told
that low unemployment and low interest rates lead to a
flourishing economy, they may not agree on which of these
two events is the cause and which is the enabling condition.
They may say they are joint causes. Following Mill (1874),
many psychologists have argued that no difference in
meaning exists between causes and enablers, and they have
distinguished between them in other ways. They argue, for
example, that the cause is an unusual state and the enabler is
the usual state, the cause is inconstant whereas the enabling
state is constant (Cheng and Novick, 1991), or the cause
violates a norm whereas the enabling condition does not
(Einhorn and Hogarth, 1986). According to another school of
thought, the cause is the factor that is conversationally
relevant in explanations. Hence, Hilton and Erb (1996) argue
for a two stage process:
“explanations are first cognitively generated
by building mental models of the causal
structure of events, from which particular
factors are identified in conversationally given
explanations” (p. 275).

enabler

effect

enabler

no effect

no enabler

no effect

A weak sort of enabler allows all four possible contingencies.
But, the stronger sense compatible with the three possibilities
above is more informative. In short, with a cause the effect is
necessary; with an enabler it is possible, but the effect cannot
precede its cause or enabler.
Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird (2001) showed that
participants do distinguish between causes and enabling
conditions. For example, given the premises:
Eating protein will cause her to gain weight.
She will eat protein.
the participants in an experiment tended to draw the
conclusion: She will gain weight. But, as the theory predicts,
they tended not to draw this conclusion from the premises:
Eating protein will allow her to gain weight.
She will eat protein.

1329

In contrast, given the premises:
Eating protein will allow her to gain weight.
She won’t eat protein.
the participants tended to draw the conclusion: She won’t gain
weight. But, they tended not to draw this conclusion from the
premises:
Eating protein will cause her to gain weight.
She won’t eat protein.
Although the difference between causes and enabling
conditions depends on the fully explicit possibilities
compatible with assertions, individuals tend to consider one
possibility at a time, and to represent it in a mental model,
which do not make explicit what’s false in a possibility
(Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird, 2001, pace Kuhnmünch &
Beller, 2005). One consequence is that individuals to focus on
the possibility in which the cause (or enabler) and the effect
both occur, and so they are not able to distinguish between
causal and enabling claims – a phenomenon that explains the
tendency for theorists to argue that they don’t differ in
meaning. Nevertheless, their difference in meaning shows up
in the conclusions that the participants drew in the reasoning
experiment.
Our aim in the present study was to make a further test of
the model theory of causes and enablers in the context of a
study of belief revision. We made three main predictions.
First, participants should have some difficulty in
distinguishing between causes and enabling conditions,
especially if they are given an incomplete scenario that is
ambiguous, e.g.:
Given that the sun shines, if a new fertilizer is used then
the plants grow.
This assertion is compatible with all possibilities except one.
It rules out as impossible the case in which the sun shines and
the fertilizer is used, but the plants don’t grow. Hence, the
assertion treats the conjunction of sunshine and fertilizer as a
jointly the cause and enabler of growth. Without one of them,
the plants may, or may not, grow. In this case, individuals
have no semantic basis to identify one event as the cause and
another event as the effect.
Second, if participants have relevant general knowledge
about the two antecedent events, then they should use it to try
to identify cause and enabler. For example, they may suppose
that fertilizers are in general more likely to be the cause of
growth than sunlight. Similarly, Kuhnmünch and Beller
(2005) have argued that the phrase “given that”, though it is
equivalent in meaning to “if”, somehow signals an enabling
condition.
Third, a subsequent disambiguating sentence, such as:
If the sun does not shine then whether or not the fertilizer
is used the plants do not grow.
should affect the participants’ identification of cause and
enabler. The two assertions together make clear that the sun
1330

shine is the enabling condition and the fertilizer is the cause.
The disambiguation occurs in both the mental models and the
fully explicit models of the two assertions. Hence, those
individuals who made this initial interpretation should
maintain it, and even be strengthened in their belief. But,
those who made a different initial interpretation should no
longer be so confident in their belief, and they may even
switch their identifications of the two events. Given the
different sets of possibilities compatible with causes as
opposed to enablers, the disambiguating sentence may have
different effects on their revisions. We carried out an
experiment to test these predictions.

The Experiment
Materials and design
The materials were causal vignettes derived from a study in
Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird (2001). We divided these
vignettes into two sentences: the first sentence was
ambiguous, and the second sentence in principle resolved the
ambiguity. The participants identified the cause and the
enabler in the first sentence, by answering the question, e.g.:
What causes the plants to grow (i.e. brings about the
event)?
They rated their confidence on a scale of 1-7. They then
answered the question, e.g.:
What allows the plants to grow (i.e. makes the event
possible)?
They again rated their confidence on a scale of 1-7. They then
read the second sentence, and again identified the cause and
the enabler and rated their confidence in their judgments. In
line with Cheng and Novick (1991) and Goldvarg and
Johnson-Laird (2001), we only gave minimal instruction
about the difference between causes and enabling conditions.
Accordingly, a cause was described as something that brings
about the event and an enabling condition was described as
something that makes the event possible. Participants made
five pairs of judgments with different contents, which were
presented to each participant in a different random order. The
materials also counterbalanced whether the cause or the
enabler was introduced using the word “given” or “if” (cf.
Kuhnmünch and Beller, 2005), and whether the cause or the
enabler was in the first or second clause of the initial sentence
(where its identification depended on the second sentence).
We counterbalanced the order of the two questions about
cause and enabler for both sentences. And we
counterbalanced which of the two events was identified as the
enabler in the second sentence. There were accordingly eight
versions of the first sentence and its questions, and four
versions of the second sentence.
The contents of the materials concerned five different
domains:
Psychological (given a person is sensitive, if they are insulted
then they get angry),
Socio-economic (given that there is low unemployment, if the
banks lower the interest rates then the
economy will flourish),

Physiological (given that a person exercises, if they follow
this diet then they will lose weight),
Mechanical (given that there is a bullet in the chamber, if the
trigger is pulled then the gun fires)
Biological (given that there is fertilizer, if the sun shines then
the plants grow).
The different contents were assigned to the forms of item in a
different random way for each participant.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually. Eight of the first 20
participants failed to distinguish between causes and enabling
conditions in more than half of the first sentences, and instead
identified both events as joint enabling conditions. Although
we had predicted this difficulty, it made redundant the test of
belief revision, and so we replaced these participants with
eight new participants. We realized that the instructions had
not been clear enough in emphasizing that one event was the
cause and one the enabling condition, we therefore added the
following sentence to the instructions: Please note that an
event is either the cause or else it allows the outcome to
happen. There was no time limit and completion of the task
took about 15 minutes.

Participants
We tested eight Princeton undergraduates and 12 Trinity
College undergraduates, and we replaced 8 of the latter with
new participants from the same population (see the
procedure). They took part for course credit. However, we
excluded two of these eight because they also failed to
distinguish between causes and enabling conditions on more
than half the trials. The results are accordingly based on 18
participants (seven men and eleven women, ranging in age
from 17 to 30 years).

of the 84 trials in the analysis, 42 were consistent and 42 were
inconsistent.
The overall prediction was that for consistent trials
participants should maintain their judgment, but for
inconsistent trials participants would change their judgment.
A mean of 3.4 (standard deviation, 1.1) trials fitted the
prediction and a mean of 1.2 (standard deviation, 1.1) trials
went against it (the means do not sum to 5 because not all the
participants provided relevant data on every trial). Table 1
shows that on consistent trials participants tended to identify
the same event as the enabling condition after the second
sentence, whereas they tended to switch identifications on
inconsistent trials. This interaction was reliable (Wilcoxon
test, z = 2.1, p < .05). As the table shows, on consistent trials,
only 12% switched the identity of the enabler to being the
cause (88% maintained versus 12% switched, Wilcoxon test,
z = 3.43, p < .001). The difference was not reliable for the
inconsistent trials (43% versus 57%, Wilcoxon test, z = .74,
n.s.). For the participants who maintained their belief 22%
reduced their confidence in their belief and 17% increased
their confidence in their belief, Wilcoxon test, z = 0.45, n.s..
Table 1: Percentages of trials on which participants switched
identification of enabler to the cause and switched
identification of cause to the enabler, after disambiguating
sentences that were consistent or inconsistent with initial
identification.
Switched belief in Switched belief in
enabler to cause
cause to enabler
Consistent trial

12

42*

Inconsistent trial

57

18

* The balance of the percentages in each row were the trials
on which the participants maintained their beliefs.

Results
The 18 participants included in the analysis carried out a total
of 90 trials. We excluded six of these trials from the analysis
as participants had identified a combination of both events as
the enabling condition. On an additional 39 trials, the
participants identified the same event as both the cause and
the enabler, that is they said sunshine was both the cause and
the enabling condition. We therefore analyzed the responses
for causes and enabling conditions separately, as if they were
not interrelated.
The linguistic cue ‘given’ in the first sentence led to a mean
of 2.8 (61% of all trials) identifications of enabler whereas the
cue ‘if’ led to a mean of 1.8 (39%) identifications of enabler,
but the difference was not reliable (Wilcoxon test, z = 1.42, p
> .1; pace Kuhnmünch & Beller, 2005). The different
contents, however, were not always wholly ambiguous: 90%
of participants chose the same pairing of cause and enabler
for the psychological and mechanical materials after reading
the first sentence.
For the enablers, a trial was consistent if the event a
participant judged to be the enabler after the first sentence
was disambiguated as the enabler in the second sentence;
otherwise, the trial was inconsistent. Although we could not
determine in advance the distribution of the two sorts of trial,
1331

For the causes identified in the first sentence, a trial was
consistent if it was the cause in the disambiguating sentence,
otherwise the trial was inconsistent. Table 1 shows that on
consistent trials participants tended to show a slight bias to
identify the same event as the cause after the second sentence,
but, strikingly, on inconsistent trials they showed an even
greater tendency to maintain their identification. On a mean
of 1.9 trials (standard deviation, 1.3) participants maintained
their belief in a particular cause on a consistent trial and
switch their belief on an inconsistent trial. But, on a mean of
2.9 trials (standard deviation, 1.6) trials went against this
pattern. The interaction was in the opposite direction to the
interaction found for the enabling conditions (Wilcoxon test, z
= 2.6 p < .01). Designed comparisons showed that on
consistent trials, no reliable difference occurred between trials
on which the participants maintained their belief in the cause
or switched their identification of it to the enabler (58%
versus 42%, Wilcoxon test, z = .89, n.s.). On inconsistent
trials, however, the majority of participants maintained their
identification of the event as the cause even though it had
been disambiguated as the enabling condition (82% versus
18%, Wilcoxon test, z = 3.11, p < .002).

We examined the five different contents for deviations
from the pattern of responses found for the combined
materials. Table 2 presents a breakdown for the different
contents compared to the overall pattern. We carried
Friedman non-parametric tests to check whether the contents
led to different patterns of revision for causes and for
enabling conditions. Neither test yielded reliable results: for
enablers ℵr2 = 3.1, df = 4, p = .5; and for causes ℵr2 = 3.8, df
= 4, p = .4. We also examined whether there were any
differences in the frequency with which participants followed
the overall pattern of results. Again the two Friedman tests,
failed to yield reliable results: for enablers ℵr2 = 1.7, df = 4, p
= .8; and for causes ℵr2 = 2.7, df = 4, p = .6.
Table 2: Comparison of the five different contents on rates (in
percentages) of belief revision.
Switched belief in Switched belief in
enabler to cause
cause to enabler
Consistent trial
Total
psychological
socio-economic
physiological
mechanical
physical

12
0
9
17
20
13

42
21
59
58
35
31

Inconsistent trial
Total
psychological
socio-economic
physiological
mechanical
physical

57
45
57
71
50
67

18
32
29
0
13
11

(not reported here). We asked participants to think aloud
during the last pair of trials. There is evidence in these
protocols of their understanding of the distinction between the
two even when their written responses are not always
consistent with this understanding.
Second, if relevant general knowledge was available, then
it too exerted an effect in the identification of cause and effect
in the first sentences. Thus, our participants knew that in the
case of the psychological contents: “given a person is
sensitive if they are insulted then they get angry”, sensitivity
is an enabling condition, not a cause. Likewise, in the case of
the mechanical contents: “given that there is a bullet in the
chamber, if the trigger is pulled then the gun fires”, they
knew that a bullet in the chamber is an enabling condition for
the gun to fire, not its cause. However, our content analysis
shows that even for these materials, where participants had
prior ideas about the cause and the enabler, the patterns of
responses were not significantly different from those to the
other materials.
Third, according to the theory, the second sentence
identifies the cause and the enabling condition in an
unambiguous way. It therefore follows that if this
identification is consistent with a participant’s previous
judgment, the participant should maintain their judgment.
But, otherwise they should tend to switch their judgments.
The experiment corroborated this prediction for the enablers,
but not for the causes. This difference bears out that a
distinction exists between them, but it raises a puzzle that we
can illustrate with an example. Consider this sequence of
sentences:
Given that the sun shines, if a new fertilizer is used then
the plants grow.
If the sun does not shine then whether or not the fertilizer
is used the plants do not grow.

Discussion
The model theory of causes and enabling conditions was
corroborated by the experiment in three main ways. First, the
mental models of the two sorts of relation make salient the
same possibility, and so it should not be easy to distinguish
between them. When individuals are forced to make a
decision, they are therefore likely to use any cue that they
can. Some participants were unable to identify a cause and an
enabler in the initial ambiguous sentence; others had a
tendency to treat “given” as a cue to the enabler. Kuhnmünch
and Beller (2005) argued that this cue is the only one that
matters. But, our results failed to corroborate this view. The
tendency to use this cue occurs only because no semantic
difference is available in the first sentence to guide judgment.
The responses to the second, disambiguating, sentence also
indicate that some participants had difficulty in distinguishing
causes and enabling conditions as evidenced by some
participants’ tendency to identify the same event as the cause
and the enabling condition. Skeptics might argue that this
difficulty demonstrates that causes and enabling conditions
are not distinct. However, this claim is inconsistent with the
results we found for enabling conditions and it is also
inconsistent with comments made in “think aloud” protocols
1332

Those participants who identified the fertilizer as the enabler
in the first sentence, tended to switch its role to the cause
condition when they encountered the second sentence. But,
those participants who identified the sunshine as the cause in
the first sentence did not switch their identification when they
encountered the second sentence. We do not know for certain
why this difference occurred. One possibility is that enabling
conditions are more mutable, because weak enablers are
consistent with any contingency. Another possibility is that
the second sentence highlights the dependence of the cause on
the enabling condition. In other words, in the second sentence
the cause can no longer be regarded as sufficient for bringing
about the event. The second sentence makes the following
model explicit:
cause

no enabler

no effect

It is also possible that some participants viewed the second
sentence in isolation from the first sentence. This factor
would explain why some participants chose the same event as
the cause and as the enabling condition, neglecting the
information given to them in the first sentence where both
events were given causal roles. The experiment shows that

the distinction between causes and enabling conditions is
worthy of further investigation.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Irish Research Council for
the Humanities and Social Sciences major research grants.
We thank Geoffrey Goodwin and four anonymous reviewers
for comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript. We
would also like to thank Clare Walsh for her comments on
this research.

References
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1991). Causes versus
enabling conditions. Cognition, 40, 83-120.
Einhorn, H.J., and Hogarth, R.M. (1986) Judging probable
cause. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 3-19.
Goldvarg, E., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Naïve causality:
a mental model theory of causal meaning and reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 25, 565-610.

1333

Hilton, D. J. (1990). Conversational processes and causal
explanation. Psychological Bulletin, 107(1), 65-81.
Hilton, D. J., & Erb, H. (1996). Mental Models and Causal
Explanation: Judgments of Probable Cause and
Explanatory Relevance. Thinking and Reasoning, 2(4),
273-308.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1999) Causation, mental models, and
the law. Brooklyn Law Review, 65, 67-103.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kuhnmünch, G., & Beller, S. (2005). Distinguishing Between
Causes and Enabling Conditions-Through Mental Models
or Linguistic Cues? Cognitive Science, 29, 1077-1090.
Mill, J.S. (1874) A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and
Inductive. Eighth Edition. New York: Harper. (First edition
published 1843.)

