UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Remnants of Insight

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/509348f5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Chronicle, Edward P.
MacGregor, James N.
Ormerod, Thomas C.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Remnants of Insight
Thomas C. Ormerod (t.ormerod@lancaster.ac.uk), Evridiki Fioratou (e.fioratou@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK

Edward P. Chronicle (chronicl@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 2340 Campus Road
Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

James N. MacGregor (jmacgreg@uvic.ca)
School of Business Administration, University of Victoria, P.O.Box 1700,
Victoria BC, V8W 2Y2, Canada
Abstract
What remains after individuals encounter solutions to insight
problems determines whether they can solve the same or
similar problems on another occasion. We propose that
insight problems are amenable to re-solving if they allow the
recoding of a single and executable solution principle.
Analysis of non-naïve participants tackling the nine-dot
problem showed that many recalled only part of the solution
and reverted to a hill-climbing heuristic when attempts to
apply solution knowledge failed. In Experiment 1, naïve
participants failed to transfer solution knowledge to a spatial
variant of the cheap necklace problem even with a hint to do
so. In Experiment 2, spatial variants of the six-coin problem
gave similar solution rates but differing reproduction rates.
We discuss the results in terms of the role of prior knowledge
and the place of restructuring in insight problem-solving.

Introduction
Recent progress has been made in understanding sources of
difficulty in solving insight problems. Two main sources
have been identified: inappropriate constraints placed by
prior knowledge upon the initial representation of a problem
(Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider & Rhenius, 1999), and
restrictions on move selection that result from applying a
hill-climbing heuristic (cf. Newell & Simon, 1972) to
monitor progress towards a goal (Macgregor, Ormerod &
Chronicle, 2001). Similarly, success in solving insight
problems has been accounted for as the relaxation of
knowledge-based constraints (Knoblich, Ohlsson & Raney,
2001) or failure to meet criteria for satisfactory progress
leading to expansion of the search space (Ormerod,
MacGregor & Chronicle, 2002). Recent studies suggest that
both factors mediate success in insight problem-solving
(Jones, 2003; Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2004).
Less attention has been paid to the knowledge and skills
acquired as a result of insight. Buyer & Dominowski (1989)
provide evidence for a generation effect with insight
problems: when participants solved number-meaning
problems (e.g., 1001 = ? : ? = Arabian Nights), they retained
more solutions than when the answer was presented. Also,
studies of analogical transfer between variants of Duncker’s
(1945) Radiation problem (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1980)
have implicated schema-based retrieval. However,

successful transfer to a target assumes usable knowledge of
the solution to the source, and few studies focus on memory
for the source solution, per se (though see Keane, 1987).
Empirical evidence for reproduction of solutions to
insight problems is equivocal. Knoblich et al (1999) found
that participants who solved matchstick algebra problems
were able to solve similar problems that required the same
insight. For example, given III = III + III, the insight to
override a familiar equation structure allows the solution III
= III = III, which once discovered, should be immediately
available to solve XI = XII - XI. Similarly, participants who
solved or were shown a solution to the eight-coin problem,
to re-arrange an array of coins such that each coin touches
exactly three others, were able to solve the same problem
again after an interval of some months (Ormerod et al,
2002). The insight, to stack coins in three dimensions,
appears to have been readily memorized and executable.
Not all studies have shown successful recall of solution
knowledge. For example, Weisberg and Alba (1981) found
that 5 out of 12 participants failed to solve the nine-dot
problem (see Fig. 1) five months after seeing the solution
(Expt. 1b), and 8 out of 23 failed one week after seeing the
solution (Expt. 1c). Insight in the nine-dot problem has
generally been held to hinge upon making the conceptual
breakthrough that lines can extend from the perceptually
organized ‘square’ of the dot array (e.g., Scheerer, 1963).
Indeed, the problem may be the origins of the phrase “think
outside the box” beloved of creative thinking instructors.
Weisberg & Alba argue that it is not perceptual organization
but constraints arising from prior knowledge of drawing
dot-to-dot pictures that makes the problem difficult.
However, even though the insight was seemingly available
in prior knowledge, since the solution was seen previously,
some participants failed to reproduce the solution.
What makes some insight problems easy to re-solve while
others resist solution reproduction? Solutions to singlemove problems (e.g., matchstick algebra) may be more
memorable than solutions to multi-move problems (e.g., the
nine-dot problem). However, the eight-coin problem has
more than one move yet appears highly amenable to
reproduction. Another possibility acknowledged by
Weisberg and Alba is that failure to reproduce solutions
may be an artifact of a generation effect (e.g., Jacoby,

1893

1978). In other words, where participants fail to re-solve,
they are typically shown the solution after failing to
discover it. However, as Ormerod et al (2002) found, even
when participants are shown rather than generate a solution
to the eight-coin problem, it remains equally and absolutely
reproducible after long delays. Experiment 2 further tests
these hypotheses using isomorphic and multi-step insight
problems that appear to differ in ease of reproduction.
Another explanation of failure to reproduce a seen
solution is that some participants simply forget the insight.
Weisberg and Alba report that, of 23 participants in
Experiment 1c, 10 solved on the first attempt. Of the
remaining 13, 6 went outside the square on their first
attempt, and 5 of these went on to solve. The 7 who did not
go outside the square on their first attempt all failed to
solve. Weisberg and Alba suggest that these participants
simply forgot the insight to extend lines beyond the dot
array. However, in this experiment, participants were given
36 attempts, and Weisberg and Alba do not report whether
these 7 participants continued to draw solution attempts
within the array on subsequent attempts.
The forgetting explanation begs the question as to why
some insights are remembered while others are lost.
Weisberg and Alba provide example protocols in which a
failing participant recalled the ‘going outside’ insight but
could not execute it, and a successful participant who
remembered an arrow shape but who took a number of trials
to “remember exactly how the lines went” (p. 177). Thus,
forgetting alone may not determine re-solving. The
knowledge required to reproduce a solution to the nine-dot
problem is complex, involving not only the ‘going outside’
concept but also an ‘arrow shape’ concept, and perhaps also
a procedural execution concept (e.g., “start from the bottom
right and draw a diagonal line...”).
When partial knowledge (of the arrow shape, going
outside, or the order of lines) fails to yield a solution, one of
two things might happen. A participant might persevere
with attempts to apply that knowledge. Alternatively, they
might, at least temporarily, abandon their efforts to find a
solution by applying remembered solution knowledge, and
instead seek a solution through other means. We have
previously argued that naïve participants attempt to solve
insight problems by hill-climbing, selecting moves that
make the most progress towards a hypothesized goal state
(MacGregor et al, 2001). Often, the moves that appear to
make the most progress lie off the solution path, which
explains why problems like the nine-dot are extremely
difficult. We suggest that non-naïve participants may return

(a)

(b)

to hill-climbing when attempts to apply prior knowledge of
solution principles do not bear immediate fruit.
In this paper, we report three sets of data. First, we
analyze performance of non-naïve participants from studies
by MacGregor et al (2001). As well as replicating Weisberg
and Alba (1981) with a larger sample, we examined the
repeated attempts made by non-solvers as a test of the
hypothesis that participants switch between applications of
prior knowledge and hill climbing in attempts to reproduce
a solution. We also present two new experiments. In
Experiment 1, participants attempted variants of the Cheap
Necklace problem (e.g., Silviera, 1971). The experiment
investigated whether participants were able to implement
and subsequently reproduce a conceptual insight into the
solution. In Experiment 2, participants solved two variants
of the six-coin problem (Chronicle, MacGregor & Ormerod,
2004). The experiment investigated the effects of providing
different spatial layouts for structurally isomorphic
problems upon production and reproduction of solutions.

Analysis of non-naïve nine-dot data
The data came from Experiments 4 and 5 of MacGregor
et al (2001), in which participants attempted a solution to
the nine-dot problem from a given first line. The
experiments tested a prediction that a diagonal line
remaining within the array would be more facilitative than a
horizontal line that extends outside the array (see Fig. 1b).
This prediction was confirmed with solution rates of 47%
versus 28% (Expt. 4) and 65% versus 43% (Expt. 5). We
interpreted the results as evidence for progress monitoring:
the diagonal version leads to an earlier failure to find moves
that make sufficient progress than the horizontal version,
which in turn leads participants to increase the search space
for possible solutions. The results are inconsistent with
perceptual organization or prior knowledge blocking moves
outside the array, since the horizontal line extends beyond
the array to a non-dot point. Prior to experimental trials,
participants received ten trials consisting of the standard
nine-dot problem, and it is these data we consider here.

Method

(c)

Participants Data were analyzed from 24 out of 134
participants in Experiment 4 and 16 out of 103 participants
in Experiment 5 (MacGregor et al, 2001) who indicated in a
post-experiment questionnaire that they had seen the ninedot problem before. Participants were members of the
general public attending an open day in Experiment 4 and

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. The nine-dot problem (a) and its solution (b). The task is to draw four straight lines without removing pen from
paper to cancel each of the dots. The solid lines in (b) illustrate the alternative first lines given by Macgregor et al (2001,
Expts. 4 & 5). Also shown are examples that illustrate arrow shape (c), going outside (d) and within (e) attempts.
1894

undergraduates in Experiment 5. Responses were collected
without identifiers; hence, gender ratio and mean age of the
participant group are not known.
Design and procedure All participants took part under the
same conditions for trials with the standard problem. Each
participant received a booklet at the point of entry to the
lecture theatre, containing the stimuli and task instructions.
On each of the first ten pages, the standard nine-dot problem
was presented, and participants drew a solution attempt on
each page. Participants were given 30s per attempt, after
which they were told to turn the page onto the next trial.

Solution

Arrow

12

Outside

Within

10

No attempt

8
6
4
2
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 2. Frequency of each response category across ninedot problem trial by non-naïve participants.

Results and discussion
No naïve participants solved the standard nine-dot problem
in either of the experiments. Seven of the non-naïve
participants did not make any response attempt on any trial
and were not analyzed further. The responses of the
remaining 33 non-naïve participants were classified into one
of five categories: a correct solution, ‘arrow shape’, ‘going
outside’, ‘within’, and no attempt. All responses fell
unambiguously into one of these five categories.
The frequencies of each response category across trials
are illustrated in Figure 2. There are two observations of
immediate note. First, consistent with the results of
Weisberg and Alba (1981), 10 participants solved on their
first attempt and 7 on their second attempt, but a further 16
failed to solve within two attempts, and 11 failed to solve
within the 10 available attempts. Thus, the failure of a
substantial proportion of non-naïve participants to reproduce
the solution to the nine-dot problem is confirmed.
Second, the two most common response categories of
non-solvers were ‘going outside’ and ‘within’. The 16
participants who failed to solve within two trials were
further classified according to whether their attempts were
consistently going outside or within (i.e., where at least 8
trials were of one type) or whether their attempts were
mixed (i.e., participants who produced at least three going
outside and three within trials). The frequencies of each
category were 2 ‘within’, 5 ‘going outside’ and 8 ‘mixed’.
These results are inconsistent with participants forgetting
the insight to go outside the square. Instead, it seems that
participants were able to recall the insight, but were unable
to use it to reconstruct the solution. Many participants
oscillated between applying prior knowledge and using hillclimbing to select moves within the dot array. There is also
a slight indication that remembering the arrow shape is
more predictive of solution than the ‘going outside’ insight,
since all three participants who made an arrow attempt on
the first trial solved on the second trial. However, numbers
are too small to tell whether this effect is reliable.
The failure of some participants to use prior knowledge of
the solution successfully points to the complexity of the
knowledge needed to reproduce the solution reliably. The
difficulty of reproducing a solution to the nine-dot problem
seems to arise because the knowledge needed to solve
cannot be coded as a single executable solution concept.

14

This contrasts with problems such as matchstick algebra and
the eight-coin problem where participants can readily
reproduce solutions from single concepts such as ‘three-part
equation’ or ‘stack coins in three dimensions’.

Experiment 1

1895

Can reproduction be enhanced by presenting participants
with a conceptual hint to the nature of the solution? Figure 3
illustrates the Cheap Necklace problem. The task is
notoriously difficult, with solution rates of 10% or less
(Silviera, 1971; Murray, 2005). At least part of the difficulty
stems from a requirement to break one chain length in its
entirety, reducing the number of lengths that must be joined.
It is not immediately clear how prior knowledge might
impose a constraint to block discovery of this possibility.
However, breaking up a whole length seems to take
participants further away from the solution requirement of
forming a complete chain. Fioratou (2005) found that the
most common moves involved joining lengths A to B, B to
C, and so on, a sequence that seems to maximize progress
but leads inevitably to failure.
We presented the problem with a conceptual hint to the
solution. We hypothesized that, if prior knowledge imposes
inappropriate constraints, or if participants lack knowledge
that might help them consider reducing the number of
lengths, this hint should help them solve the problem. In
contrast, if hill-climbing dominates performance, then the
hint will have little effect on solution rates.
The experiment also explored solution transfer to a
problem variant, also shown in Figure 3. Fioratou (2005)
found that participants shown the solution to the standard
problem were able reliably to re-solve it a week later.
Solution reproduction may be based on recall of a
conceptual insight. Alternatively, it might reflect the recall
of a procedural sequence. The problem variant tested these
alternatives: transfer of a conceptual insight should lead to
success, whereas transfer of procedural knowledge would
not. We also hypothesized that, if the activation of relevant
prior knowledge determines insight performance,

participants who received the conceptual hint would be
more likely to solve the problem variant.

Figure 3. The cheap necklace problem (left), variant (centre)
and goal state (right). The task is to form a necklace from
the lengths at a cost of no more than 15 cents. It costs 2
cents to open a link and 3 cents to close a link.

Method
Participants Fifty members of the general public attending
a university open day took part in the experiment.
Responses were collected without identifiers; hence, gender
ratio and mean age of the participant group are not known.
Design and procedure Participants were assigned to one of
two groups, one receiving the hint, the other serving as a
control. Participants received booklets containing stimuli
and instructions, and were given 5 minutes to solve the
standard problem. They were then shown the solution to the
problem as a sequence of link breaks and joins. They then
spent four minutes on a filler task (Wason’s, 1966, selection
task). They were then given 5 minutes to solve the problem
variant. Prior to the variant, they received the instruction
“Information about the first problem you saw may prove
useful in solving the next problem”. Then they were given
two minutes to re-solve the standard problem.
Participants in the hint group received additional
instructions with the first problem: “Hint – sometimes it is
necessary to destroy in order to create. In solving some
problems, you need to go backwards before you can go
forwards”. This wording was chosen to avoid reference to
breaking or undoing links. The hint was repeated on
presenting the problem variant. Finally, they were asked to
write a sentence describing their understanding of the hint.

Results and discussion
Three participants from each group provided no responses
in their booklet. Of the remaining 44 participants, one in the
hint group and two in the control group solved the standard
problem. Failure to use a solution-relevant hint has been
found before. Chronicle, Ormerod & MacGregor (2001)
found that superimposing the nine-dot problem over shading
in the shape of the solution gave little facilitation, even
when its relevance was drawn to participants’ attention.
To examine a possibility that participants did not
understand the hint, we inspected their hint descriptions.
Five participants gave no description, four gave metaphors
(e.g., “you can’t make an omelet without breaking eggs”),
six restated the hint in the same words, three gave irrelevant
or incorrect re-descriptions (e.g., “You need to work hard to

find the solution), and four re-stated the hint with essentially
the same meaning (e.g., “You should undo some of the
required product before you can finish”). These descriptions
are open to interpretation, but we suggest that many
participants understood and remembered the intended
meaning of the hint yet were unable to apply it.
Five participants in the hint group and six in the control
group solved the problem variant. Although solution rates
are slightly higher than for the standard problem, most
participants failed to transfer solution knowledge to the
problem variant. This failure is surprising given reports of
successful analogical transfer between superficially different
but conceptually similar problems, at least when participants
are told of the analogous nature of source and target
problems (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1980). Here, the problems
had both conceptual and superficial similarities, and
participants were cued to their relatedness. The possibility
that participants forgot the solution to the first problem can
be ruled out: all 44 participants were able to re-solve the
standard problem within two minutes.
The results indicate that the knowledge retained of the
solution to the cheap necklace problem, which is sufficient
to reproduce a solution to precisely the same problem, is
purely procedural (i.e., a sequence of steps). Somewhat
disappointingly, the ‘destroy in order to create’ hint does not
help participants to extract a usable conceptual
representation of the solution. This is surprising, since the
cheap necklace problem is upheld as an archetypal insight
problem. Yet here, even when participants see the solution
and its properties are described, they do not get the insight.
A simple change in perceptual layout led to failure to
solve a variant of the cheap necklace problem, even when
the conceptual nature of the solution was reinforced.
Analysis of the responses of 33 participants failing to solve
the variant problem shows four classes of attempt: 7 made
no response, 8 broke three links off one of the four-link
chains, 2 joined the two-link lengths together and then
attempted to link these to the two four-link lengths, and 15
joined the two four-link chains, then joined these to the twolink chains in series. Arguably, the 8 who tried to break up a
four-link chain showed some degree of conceptual insight,
but executed it by following the precise steps used in the
solution to the standard problem. There seems to be a
tension between conceptual, perceptual and procedural
components of solution recall.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we investigated performance on the sixcoin problem (see Figure 4). Chronicle, MacGregor &
Ormerod (2004) found that the problem was very difficult to
solve, with mean solution rates of less than 20%. Moreover,
participants encountered great difficulty in re-solving the
problem, regardless of whether they were shown the
solution or found it themselves. We argued that at least part
of the difficulty stems from the fact that the necessary first
move does not appear to make progress towards the goal
state, and depending on the evaluation participants make of
the initial representation, might even appear to detract from
existing circle components.

1896

The experiment explored a problem layout that anecdotal
reports suggest leads to a reproducible solution. The variant
shown in Figure 4 (centre) has the same goal state and
identical instructions, but a different sequence of moves. In
pilot testing, participants commented that the solution
seemed “to close in on itself”, “like a crab’s claw” or “a
pincer”. No such spontaneous verbal descriptions were
elicited by Chronicle et al with the standard problem. We
hypothesized that, if the variant enables a conceptual
recoding of the solution, then it will be easier to re-solve
than the standard problem.

rotated through 90 degrees. A similar drop in reproduction
occurred after 15 minutes, when the problem was inverted.
The way the Y-shape variant solution seems to fold in on
itself allows conceptual recoding of the solution path that
captures procedural and perceptual aspects within a single
and executable concept. The solution to the standard
problem, on the other hand, allows no simple recoding: each
of the three moves is different both perceptually and
procedurally. To learn the solution, participants must learn
the precise sequence of moves. This purely procedural
knowledge is easily disrupted by small changes to problem
presentation such as inversion or rotation.
Table 1: Expt. 2 - No. re-solving at each attempt (N=17).
Problem
1st - 1 2nd - 2 3rd - 900 4th - 15 5th - 1800

Figure 4. The six-coin problem (left), Y-shape variant
(centre) and goal state (right). The task is to form the goal
state, moving exactly three coins. Only one coin can be
moved at a time, without disturbing others, and must come
to rest against exactly two coins (solution in Appendix 1).

Standard
Y-shape
Fishers
exact, 1 tail

Method

min

mins

rotated

mins

rotated

8
13
0.07

12
16
0.09

4
15
<0.01

10
17
<0.01

6
16
<0.01

General Discussion

Participants 14 male and 20 female undergraduate students
took part (mean age 25.5 years, range 19-45).
Design and procedure Participants were assigned to one of
two groups, one receiving the standard problem, the other
receiving the y-shape variant. Each participant took part on
an individual basis, and their attempts to solve were videorecorded. Participants were given 5 minutes to solve the
problem. They were then shown the solution to the problem
in the form of a sequence of coin moves. Then they were
given one minute to reproduce the solution. They were then
shown the solution again and given a further minute to
reproduce the solution for a second time. The problem was
then rotated 90 degrees and participants were given a further
minute to re-solve. They then spent approximately 15
minutes on a filler task (various syllogistic reasoning
problems). They were then given 1 minute to solve the
problem, after which they were shown the solution again,
and finally the problem was inverted 180 degrees, and
participants received a further minute to re-solve.

The data presented in this paper are an extraordinary and
unexpected litany of failure on the part of otherwise
intelligent and educated adult problem-solvers. Analysis of
non-naïve participants suggests that recalling the ‘insight’ to
go beyond the dot array is often insufficient to re-solve the
nine-dot problem. Failures to transfer solution knowledge to
a conceptually and superficially similar problem variant in
Experiment 1, and to reproduce the solution to the six-coin
problem after many repetitions in Experiment 2, are even
more surprising since reproduction took place within the
same experimental session. In all three cases, it appears that
often participants remembered some part of the solution,
conceptual, perceptual or procedural, but were unable to
capitalize upon this knowledge. These results might be
consistent with multiple-source accounts of insight (e.g.,
Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2004). However, these accounts offer
no explanation as to why some insights are more memorable
than others, even when they contain the same problem
components. In particular, they miss the criticality of an
integrated representation of solution knowledge.
After initial attempts to apply solution knowledge,
participants reverted to seeking the solution through hillclimbing. Non-naïve participants made attempts that
remained within the dot array, since the first one or two
lines make considerable progress in dot cancellation.
Similarly, participants joined chain lengths together to solve
the cheap necklace variant, attempting to maximize the
extent of chain completion. The tension that an individual
faces in any problem-solving episode between relying on
prior knowledge or weak methods remains unresolved in the
insight problem-solving literature, and we suggest that it is a
critical determinant of attempts to re-solve insight problems.
This tension may explain why participants often revert to
moves they know to have failed, even when explicitly told
to avoid such moves (e.g., Weisberg & Alba, 1981).
Success at re-solving insight problems seems to depend
upon retrieving conceptual, perceptual and procedural

Results and discussion
Only four participants solved the standard problem, and six
the y-shape variant, χ2= 0.45, ns. The problems are
approximately equally difficult to solve, so differences in
reproduction do not reflect ease of initial solution. Table 1
shows the number of participants who re-solved the problem
within one minute of each solution demonstration. The
results confirm the prediction that the Y-shape variant is
easier to re-solve. Moreover, the y-shape variant appears
resistant to the influence of rotation. In contrast, when
participants solving the standard problem had seen the
solution to the standard problem twice in two minutes, 12
out of 17 were able to solve, but only 4 were able to solve
the same problem one minute later when the problem was

1897

knowledge in a useable and integrated form. Re-description
of the products of problem-solving is part of abstracting
knowledge from its original context, an important precursor
to relational transfer in problem-solving (Dixon & Dohn,
2003). Participants re-solved the Y-shape variant of the sixcoin problem because the solution path was amenable to
recoding as a single and executable concept. Re-describing
the solution as a “pincer’ captures in a single concept not
only the perceptual form of the solution but also a guide to
its procedural execution, in which coins come from each
side to close up a gap between two sides. The difficulty in
re-solving the standard six-coin problem is that its solution
path is not amenable to recoding as a single and executable
concept. Likewise, although the “destroy in order to create”
hint seems to capture the conceptual nature of the solution
to the cheap necklace problem, it does not provide clues to
its perceptual form or procedural execution. Difficulty in resolving the nine-dot problem stems from the fact that the
‘going outside’ and ‘arrow shape’ components are easily
recoded as evocative but separate solution concepts; they
are not integrated into a single and executable description.
The results presented here lead to two theoretical
speculations. First, prior knowledge may be a critical factor
for solving some insight problems, but theories that invoke
prior knowledge as the sole factor influencing insight
problem-solving are unable to account for the data presented
here. Even when one creates relevant prior knowledge that
ought to be available to aid re-solution, participants often
fail to capitalize upon it. Second, in cases such as the ninedot and Y-shape six-coin problem, recoding the solution as
a single and executable concept arises after solution.
Recoding is a form of restructuring of the problem
representation that allows a new conceptual understanding
of the properties of a problem and its solution. Restructuring
is generally seen as a precursor to solution of insight
problems; the current data suggest that, for some problems
at least, it may be the product of solution.

Acknowledgments
The research was funded partly by an NSERC grant to J.
MacGregor. Experiment 2 was conducted as part of the PhD
research of E. Fioratou, funded by a Lancaster University
studentship. We thank Caroline Wade and Nicola Morley
for assistance with data collection for Experiment 3.
Experiment 3 was previously reported in a poster presented
at the Psychonomics Society conference, Vancouver, 2003.

References

Dixon, J.A. & Dohn, M.C. (2003). Redescription disembeds
relations: Eviodence from relational transfer and use in
problem solving. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1082-1093.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological
monographs, 58, 1-113.
Fioratou, E. (2005) Processes in solving the cheap necklace
problem. Unpublished PhD, Lancaster University, UK.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Jacoby, L.L.(1978). On interpreting the effects of repetition:
Solving a problem vs. remembering a solution. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 649-667.
Jones, G. (2003). Testing two cognitive theories of insight.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:LM&C, 29,1017-1027.
Keane, M. (1987). On drawing analogies when solving
problems. Quarterly J. Exp. Psychology, 39A, 29-41.
Kershaw, T. and S. Ohlsson (2004). Multiple causes of
difficulty in insight: The case of the nine-dot problem.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: LM&C, 30, 3-13.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: LM&C, 25, 1534-1555.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. E. (2001). An eye
movement study of insight problem solving. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 1000-1009.
MacGregor, J. N., Ormerod, T. C., & Chronicle, E. P.
(2001). Information-processing and insight: A process
model of performance on the nine-dot and related
problems. J. Exp. Psychology: LM&C, 27, 176-201.
Murray, M.A. (2005) Reasoning with insight problems.
Unpublished PhD thesis, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ormerod, T. C., MacGregor, J. N., & Chronicle, E. P.
(2002). Dynamics and constraints in insight problem
solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28(4), 791-799.
Scheerer, M. (1963). Problem-solving. Scientific American,
208, 118-128.
Silveria, J.S. (1971) Incubation: The effect of interruption
timing & length on problem solution & quality of problem
processing Unpublished PhD, University of Oregon.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Weisberg, R. W., & Alba, J. W. (1981). An examination of
the alleged role of "fixation" in the solution of several
"insight" problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 110(2), 169-192.

Buyer, L.S. & Dominowski, R.L. (1989). Retention of
solutions: It is better to give than to receive. American
Journal of Psychology, 102, 353-363.
Chronicle, E. P., Ormerod, T. C., & MacGregor, J. N.
(2001). When insight just won't come: The failure of
visual cues in the nine-dot problem. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology.54A, 903-919.
Chronicle, E.P., MacGregor, J.N., & Ormerod, T.C. (2004).
What makes an insight problem? The roles of heuristics,
goal conception and solution recoding in knowledge-lean
problems. Journal of Exp. Psychology:LM&C, 30, 14-27.

Appendix 1. Six-coin and Y-shape solutions
Initial state
First move

1898

Second move
(third move
completes circle).

