UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Ballad of If and Since: Never the Twain Shall Meet?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46w1773w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Schaeken, Walter
Verbrugge, Sara

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Ballad of If and Since:
Never the Twain Shall Meet?
Sara Verbrugge (Sara.Verbrugge@psy.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven,
Tiensestraat 102, Leuven, Belgium
Department of Linguistics, University of Leuven,
Blijde-Inkomststraat 21, Leuven, Belgium

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven,
Tiensestraat 102, Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
This paper investigates the processing of conditional
sentences and sentences with ‘since’ in two respects. Firstly,
we investigate the clausal implicature originating from the
scale <since ‘p, q’; if ‘p, q’>. Secondly, we investigate how
modals can affect the interpretation of these sentences. A
reading time experiment is reported which involved these two
factors. It appears that ‘since’ is processed fastest in a context
in which the antecedent has been affirmed, whereas ‘if’ is
processed fastest in a context with an uncertain antecedent.
The use of modals can speed up or slow down the reading
process. Modals help to speed up processing of sentences
involving ‘if’ in a certain context and ‘since’ in an uncertain
context. However, when modals are used with ‘if’ in an
uncertain context or with ‘since’ in a certain context, they
slow down processing of the relevant sentences. The results
will be situated in two accounts of implicatures, neo-Gricean
and Relevance Theoretic.

Introduction
The introduction will be split up in two parts. The first part
treats the interpretation and processing of implicatures.
Specific attention will be given to the clausal implicature
based on the scale <since ‘p, q’; if ‘p, q’>. The second part
deals with the use of modals and how they can affect the
interpretation of a sentence.

Implicatures
In the past few years, attention has been drawn to the
processing of implicatures in experimental pragmatics.
Experimental psychologists have tested some of the
theoretical claims made in linguistic theory. Many
experiments have investigated the nature of quantity
implicatures. Research topics include the time course, the
acquisition of implicatures, which theoretical frameworks
are better suited to explain the results gathered so far, … (cf.
Bott & Noveck, 2004; Breheny, Katsos & Williams, in
press; Noveck, 2001; Noveck & Posada, 2003; Noveck &
Sperber, 2004; Papafragou & Musolino, 2003).

2305

Grice was the first to draw attention to the existence of
implicatures. They are non-logical inferences people make
on the basis of the information that is directly available in
discourse. The example most referred to is probably the use
of ‘some’. Purely logical, ‘some’ is compatible with ‘all’,
whereas in daily conversation it is often interpreted as
‘some, but not all’. For example, when someone says ‘some
boys are happy’ this usually implicates ‘not all boys are
happy’. This implicature derives from Grices cooperative
principle (people in a conversation should be cooperative)
and the maxims of conversation (Quantity: 1. make your
contribution to the conversation as informative as necessary.
2. do not make your contribution more informative than
necessary; Quality: do not say what you believe to be false,
do not say that for which you lack adequate evidence;
Manner: be perspicuous, and specifically avoid obscurity,
avoid ambiguity, be brief, be orderly; Relevance: make your
contributions relevant). The quantity implicatures derive
more particulary from the first quantity implicature.
Levinson (1983, 2000) translated the maxims as heuristics
for the hearer. The quantity implicature is translated in the
Q-heuristic: what you do not say is not the case (Levinson,
2000). So, if ‘some’ is said and not ‘all’, this implicates that
‘all’ is not the case. In this neo-Gricean view, implicatures
arise automatically and involve no extra processing effort
(cf. Noveck & Posada, 2003).
An alternative account is the Relevance Theoretic
account. According to Sperber and Wilson (Sperber &
Wilson Sperber, 1995, 2004; see also Carston, 1998, 2004),
human cognition tends to be geared to the maximisation of
relevance. There is a subtle balance between cognitive
efforts and cognitive effects. The greater the positive
cognitive effect, the greater the relevance will be. The
greater the processing effort, the less the relevance. The
quest for comprehension follows a path of least effort and
stops when the expectations of relevance are satisfied. In
this view, implicatures generate greater cognitive effects
and are thus effort-demanding. In the general discussion we
will discuss the implications of this study for the neoGricean and Relevance Theoretic accounts.

Apart from <some, all>, many items can be put on
‘informational scales’ (cf. Gazdar, 1979; Horn, 1972)
<always, often, sometimes>, <since ‘p, q’; if ‘p, q’>,
<necessarily p, p, possibly p>, <and, or>, <excellent, good>,
<know, believe>, … For all these examples, it holds that if a
speaker uses the weaker term on the scale, this usually
implicates that she is not in a position to utter the stronger
term. The idea is that the speaker always utters the strongest
element on the scale for which she has sufficient evidence
(Gazdar, 1979; cf. Levinson, 1983, 2000). If she uses the
weaker element on the scale, this implicates that she lacks
adequate evidence to utter the stronger element (cf. maxim
of quantity).
This paper will tackle a specific type of quantity
implicature, viz. the clausal implicature of the conditional.
In other words, it investigates the implicature resulting from
the scale <since ‘p, q’; if ‘p, q’>. Clausal implicatures are
epistemic implicatures that entitle the hearer to infer from an
utterance that the speaker is uncertain about the clauses of
the sentence he uttered. If someone starts a sentence with
‘if’ this means that she is not in a position to use the
stronger term ‘since’. When ‘if’ is used the speaker does not
commit herself to the truth of the antecedent whereas when
‘since’ is used the speaker does commit herself to the truth
of the antecedent. This is in accordance with the claim made
in linguistics that in a sentence with ‘since’ the speaker
asserts the antecedent, whereas in a conditional the speaker
does not assert the antecedent. “Other causal conjunctions
(since, as) are used sentence-initially in the same way as if
is. The essential difference, however, between if on the one
hand and all causal conjunctions on the other is that causal
conjunctions introduce factual, asserted information, while
if does not” (Dancygier, 1998, p. 84). An utterance ‘If A
then B’, has as clausal implicature that the speaker is
uncertain about A, because she should have said ‘Since A,
B’ otherwise. So, it is reasonable to infer that she is
uncertain about both A and B. Cf. Akatsuka’s claim (quoted
in Noh, 2000, p. 184) that ‘“if” is a marker of uncertainty,
and cannot be used to introduce speaker’s knowledge’.
The implicature thus has to do with the certainty with
which the speaker utters the antecedent. Therefore, we will
focus on one type of conditionals in which the certainty of
the antecedent can vary widely. This is the class of
inferential conditionals (Dancygier, 1998; Declerck & Reed,
2001; Haegeman, 2003; Sweetser, 1990; Verbrugge,
Dieussaert, Schaeken & Van Belle, 2004; Verbrugge,
Dieussaert, Schaeken & Van Belle, 2006; Verbrugge,
Smessaert, & Van Belle, 2005). An example of an
inferential conditional is: ‘If he goes on holiday to SaintTropez twice a year, he must be rich.’ While in regular
content conditionals a state of affairs or event in reality is
merely described (e.g., If you heat water, it boils),
inferential conditionals are a blueprint of a reasoning
process in someone’s mind. The antecedent of an inferential
conditional functions as premise, the consequent is the
inferred conclusion. Because the speaker can express
various levels of belief in the conclusion, ‘if’ ranges from
being very hypothetical to almost factual in inferential
2306

conditionals. Contrary to what we have said above, it
appears that in inferential conditionals, the speaker
sometimes seems to know the truth value of the antecedent,
but nevertheless uses a conditional. In this respect, this
paper investigates how close ‘if’ comes to ‘since’.

The use of modals
Some other elements may direct the interpretation of the
sentence in a particular direction. Traxler, Sanford, Aked
and Moxey (1997) showed that the use of modal
constructions or expressions like ‘says that [sentence]’ or
‘thinks that [sentence]’ can help the reader in the direction
of a particular interpretation. They conducted a reading time
experiment with causal and diagnostic (i.e., inferential)
sentences involving ‘because’ (e.g., causal sentence: Tina
had to walk five miles because her engine stalled on the
motorway; diagnostic sentence: Tina ran out of gas because
her engine stalled on the motorway). Overall, the processing
of the second clauses of diagnostic sentences took longer
than the processing of the second clauses of causal
sentences. Yet, in their second experiment they report that
when a particular modal construction (e.g., perhaps, maybe,
might) was added (e.g., causal: Perhaps Jeff got angry at his
neighbours because they played their stereo too loud.
Diagnostic: Perhaps Jeff had inconsiderate neighbours
because they played their stereo too loud), reading times
decreased considerably for the second clauses of the
diagnostic sentences. They were then as easily processed as
causal sentences. Apparently, these modal constructions
create a mental space more compatible with a diagnostic
interpretation. Diagnostic interpretations become more
readily available and are consequently more easily
processed. The use of modal constructions did not
disadvantage the reading times of the second clauses of
causals.
In the present study, we also manipulated this factor. We
assume that the usual interpretations come to the surface
when no modal is used. Modals can help to create a setting
in which unexpected items become more accessible. They
can guide the reader in a particular direction because a new
mental space is set up (see Traxler et al., 1997). We added
the modal ‘zal wel’ (i.e., probably) to cue a relatively
certain inferential interpretation. It is supposed to make ‘if’
more acceptable in contexts in which the antecedent has
been affirmed. The difference with Traxler et al. is that in
their experiment the modal always occurred before the
second clause (mostly in the beginning of the first clause),
whereas the modals we used occur in the consequent of the
conditional. So we do not assume that the modal will cue a
particular interpretation beforehand. We think that a
relevant interpretation crops up in a combination of the
processing of the connective and the modal. Since we have
only measured the reading times of the entire sentences and
not of parts, we do not know where exactly the processing
of the sentences differed. We will take this into account in
future research.

Hypotheses
Based on evidence from previous research sketched above,
we hypothesize the following. Concerning the clausal
implicature, the interpretation of ‘since’ is that the speaker
is certain of the antecedent. We claim that there is no
ambiguity involved in the interpretation of ‘since’: the
certainty belongs purely to the semantics of ‘since’. We
hypothesize that the usual interpretation for ‘if’ is that the
speaker is not certain of the antecedent. In this experiment
we investigate whether this is reflected in the reading times
of conditionals and ‘since’-sentences. We expect ‘since’ to
be processed faster in a context in which the antecedent has
been affirmed because this complies with the semantics of
‘since’. When ‘since’ is used in a context in which the
antecedent has not been affirmed, it might take longer
because this goes against the semantics of ‘since’. As for
‘if’, we will firstly discuss the hypotheses from a Gricean
perspective. In the neo-Gricean account implicatures are
thought to arise by default and cost no extra processing time
(cf. Noveck & Posada, 2003). On this account, we expect
‘if’ to be processed faster in a context in which it is unsure
whether the antecedent holds. When ‘if’ is used in a context
in which the antecedent has been affirmed, this is contrary
to intuitions and we expect the participant to need extra time
to withdraw or block the implicature that ‘if’ means not
certain. The hearer thought that the speaker was not in a
position to utter the stronger element, now it appears she is,
and coming to terms with this may cost extra processing
time.
The predictions made by Relevance Theory (cf. Carston,
personal communication, 24/01/2006) for the interpretation
of ‘if’ would be that there is no difference between ‘if’ in a
certain and an uncertain context. For the uncertain contexts
the preceding context already makes clear that the
antecedent is uncertain. Therefore, it is not necessary to
derive the implicature that ‘if’ means that the antecedent is
not certain. Because the evidence is already there, it would
be pointless to derive the implicature. It would only mean
more processing effort and no more positive cognitive
effects. For the certain contexts, the preceding context
makes clear that the antecedent is certain and as a result, the
implicature will not be derived. So in both contexts,
Relevance Theory predicts no extra processing costs (and
accordingly, no longer reading times).
Concerning the use of modals, we hypothesize that
modals can affect the interpretation of ‘if’ and make it more
compatible with an interpretation in which the antecedent
has been affirmed. When a modal hinting at the certainty
with which you draw a conclusion is used, ‘if’ might
become more acceptable in a certain context. So, we expect
the processing time to decrease in this case. In an uncertain
context, we think that the modal will not contribute to faster
processing of the sentence. Likewise, we hypothesize that
modals can affect the interpretation of ‘since’. The modal
expression we used ‘zal wel’ hints at relative certainty, but
does not convey absolute certainty. In a certain context, the
modal is not needed because the semantics of ‘since’
2307

conveys certainty already and a combination of both may
only cause confusion. In an uncertain context, however, the
modal is less certain than ‘since’ and can therefore tone
down the certainty of ‘since’. So, generally, we could say
that where modals are not needed, we think that they will
enlarge the differences. When they can help to resolve
inconsistencies that have arisen previously, we think that
they will bridge the gaps.

Pretest
A pretest was conducted to check for general differences in
reading times between sentences starting off with ‘if’ and
‘since’. The program e-prime was used to set up and run the
experiments. The items were presented to the participants in
Dutch, their mother tongue. The Dutch translations of ‘if’
and ‘since’ are ‘als’ and ‘aangezien’. The Dutch ‘aangezien’
only functions as a conjunction of causality. This may make
the interpretation less ambiguous than the English
alternative.
The 10 sentences that were used as items in the
experiment were presented to 50 (26 ‘if’, 24 ‘since’)
participants on a computer screen. No context was given.
They were asked to read the sentences at their own pace and
then press a button. As a check to whether they actually read
the sentences, a word was shown on the next screen and the
participants had to judge whether that word occurred in the
preceding sentence or not. Correct answers were given in
99% of the cases.
The kind of connective (if, since) was manipulated as a
between-groups variable. The dependent variable was the
time taken in milliseconds to read the sentence. Reading
times that deviated by more than two times the standard
deviation from the mean were not included in the analysis.
Reading times were subjected to log linear transformations.
An analysis showed that the reading times of sentences with
‘if’ and ‘since’ did not differ significantly. So, if any
significant differences occur in the reading times of
sentences with ‘if’ and ‘since’ in the experiment proper, this
is due to different processing of the sentences and not to the
normal reading times of ‘if’ and ‘since’.

Experiment
Method
Participants 203 first year psychology students participated
in the experiment as a part of a course requirement. All
participants were familiar with reading from a computer
screen, and had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials and Design The items were presented to the
participants in Dutch, their mother tongue. Ten items were
given to every participant in random order. The ten items
comprised different kinds of inferential sentences: sentences

in which the time of the event of the antecedent preceded
the time of the event of the consequent (e.g., If/Since he has
read all books on the subject, he will know a lot about it)
and sentences in which the time of the event of the
consequent preceded that of the antecedent (e.g., If/Since
they are celebrating, Peter will have won the tennis match).
This was done in order to select a broad mixture of
inferential conditionals, and will not be analysed. The
variables that were manipulated between subjects were: kind
of connective (if, since), presence or absence of a modal
(e.g., If/Since he has read all books on the subject, he
knows/ will probably know a lot about it), and the
affirmation of the antecedent information in the preceding
context. Either the content of the antecedent was confirmed
in the preceding content (e.g., In the morning Peter plays
the finals of a tennis championship. In the afternoon, two
friends drive past his house and see that people are
celebrating) or it was neither confirmed nor denied (e.g., In
the morning Peter plays the finals of a tennis championship.
In the afternoon, two friends are on their way to his house
and wonder whether people will be celebrating). So, in the
first context the antecedent was certain and in the second
context, it remained uncertain whether the antecedent was
fulfilled. Participants were randomly assigned to the
different groups.
Procedure The program e-prime was used to set up and run
the experiments. The participants were tested in groups of
approximately 25. They were seated in a computer room,
each in front of a computer screen. Absolute silence was
requested. First, instructions were given on the computer
screen. Then four items were given as an exercise to get
used to the procedure. After that, the next screen told the
participants they could start with the experiment itself. The
order of the trials was randomised. There were ten trials in
total per participant.
The procedure per trial was as follows: Every sentence
was presented separately on the computer screen. Per trial,
there were five screens in total (2 context, 1 item, 1
question, 1 feedback). Participants were asked to read the
sentence and press the button when they were ready. Then
the next sentence appeared. The first two screens were
sentences sketching the content (and affirming or saying
nothing about the truth of the antecedent that followed,
generating a certain or uncertain context). The third
sentence was the item for the analysis (including either ‘if’
or ‘since’, modal or not). The dependent variable that will
be analysed below is the time taken in milliseconds to read
this item. On the next screen a statement about one of the
preceding sentences was given and participants had to
indicate whether this was true or false. On the next screen
feedback was given. Participants solved the statements
correctly in 93% of the cases.

Reading times that deviated by more than two times the
standard deviation from the mean were not included in the
analysis. Reading times were subjected to log linear
transformations.
An Anova-analysis was conducted with the transformed
reading times as the dependent variable. The kind of
connective (if, since), presence of absence of a modal, and
the affirmation of the antecedent information in the
preceding context were manipulated as between subjects
independent variables.
The analysis revealed a main effect of modal
F(1,195)=14.57, p<.001 with the sentence with modal
taking longer to read than the sentence without; and a threeway interaction effect between certainty in preceding
context, modal and kind of connective F(1,195)=5.99,
p<.05. The three-way interaction was fleshed out by means
of planned comparisons. They revealed that ‘if’ was
processed faster than ‘since’ for the certain contexts when a
modal was used F(1,195)=4.46, p<.05. They revealed that
‘if’ was processed faster than ‘since’ in an uncertain context
when no modal was used F(1,195)=4.49, p<.05. They
revealed that ‘since’ was processed faster in a certain
context than in an uncertain context when no modal was
used F(1,195)=6.03, p<.05. They revealed that ‘since’ was
processed faster in a certain context without modal than
with modal F(1,195)=17.09, p<.001. They revealed that ‘if’
was processed faster in a uncertain context without modal
than with modal F(1,195)=4.77, p<.05.

Certain
No

Yes

Results
The dependent variable is the time taken in milliseconds to
read the sentence (recorded between two key presses).

2308

Table 1: Reading time means in milliseconds.
If-since Modal
Reading SD
N
time
If
Yes
2840
118
24
No
2487
115
25
Since
Yes
2975
115
25
No
2820
115
25
If
Yes
2799
118
24
No
2702
111
27
Since
Yes
3113
111
27
No
2473
113
26

Discussion
As for the clausal implicature and the interpretations of ‘if’
and ‘since’, we observe that ‘since’ is processed faster in a
certain context than in an uncertain context when no modal
is used. This is entirely in line with the semantics of ‘since’.
‘If’ was processed faster than ‘since’ in an uncertain context
when no modal was used. This is in line with the claim that
the status of the antecedent is uncertain in conditionals.
As for the use of modals, we see that sentences with
modals take longer to process than the ones without. Of
course, this is simply due to the fact that sentences with a
modal contain two words more. ‘Since’ is processed faster
in a certain context without modal than with modal. This
difference is not significant for the uncertain contexts,

although exactly as in the certain condition, there are still
two words extra in the condition with modal. ‘If’ is
processed faster in an uncertain context without modal than
with modal. This may just be due to the two words extra.
However, this difference disappears in the certain context.
Now no significant differences can be observed anymore
between modal and without modal, although there are
exactly as in the uncertain condition, still two words extra in
the condition with modal. As we sketched out in the
introduction, modals hinting at a degree of certainty help to
strengthen the interpretation of ‘if’ to become acceptable/
more easily processed in a certain context and weaken
‘since’ to become more acceptable/ more easily processed in
an uncertain context. The modals do not contribute to a
faster processing of ‘if’ in an uncertain context or ‘since’ in
a certain context, but only seem to cause confusion.
Also the fact that ‘if’ is significantly processed faster than
‘since’ in a certain context when a modal is used, supports
our hypothesis that modals help to make ‘if’ more
acceptable in a certain context, whereas that does not come
into play for ‘since’ in a certain context.
We would like to draw special attention to these
differences in reading times between ‘if’ with and without
modal and to the reading times of ‘since’ with and without
modal. Although the modal condition each time contains
two words extra, significant differences disappear in the
relevant conditions: certain for ‘if’ or uncertain for ‘since’.
Although the sentence with modal comprises two more
words, it takes hardly any more time to process. So, our
hypothesis that modals help to resolve inconsistencies that
have arisen previously rings true (i.e., inconsistency
between ‘if’’s uncertainty and certain context is resolved
and inconsistency between ‘since’’s certainty and uncertain
context is resolved, by means of a modal hinting at relative
certainty).

General Discussion
This study investigated the differences in processing
between ‘if’ and ‘since’ with an inferential interpretation in
certain and uncertain contexts. In inferential conditionals,
‘if’ sometimes reaches near certainty. In that respect, we
wanted to investigate the nature of the clausal implicature of
the conditional, saying that when a speaker utters ‘if’ he is
uncertain about the antecedent.
Since reading times are a reflection of the time it takes to
process a sentence, we can draw the following conclusions.
The usual interpretation of ‘since’ is in a certain context.
The fastest interpretation of ‘if’ appears to be in an
uncertain context.
We will try to show how the results concerning the
clausal implicature of the conditional can be explained in
the two main frameworks on implicatures, the neo-Gricean
account and the Relevance Theoretic account. As we
outlined above, the two theories probably make the same
predictions concerning ‘since’ because it has only to do with
the semantics and not with implicature derivation.

2309

An important difference between these two approaches
regarding the processing of implicatures is that the “neoGricean approach (e.g. Levinson, 2000) assumes that
implicatures intrude automatically on the semantics of a
term like Some. Relevance Theory (Sperber and Wilson,
1985/96) assumes that implicatures are effortful and not
automatic” (Noveck & Posada, 2003, p. 203).
According to Relevance Theory, implicatures only arise
when the hearer’s need for relevance has not been satisfied.
This is in line with the finding that the standard
interpretations of ‘if’ (in an uncertain context) and ‘since’
(in a certain context) require least processing time. As we
said in the introduction about the interpretation of ‘if’, it is
not sure in the uncertain context that the implicature has
actually been derived because enough relevance may have
been achieved. The uncertainty has already been established
in the preceding context, and there is no need to derive the
implicature. So there will be no extra processing effort. This
is in accordance with the result that we find no significant
difference in reading times for ‘if’ between a certain and an
uncertain context.
As for the neo-Gricean account, implicatures arise
automatically (cf. Noveck & Posada, 2003). When
inconsistent information is found in the context, the
implicature can be withdrawn or blocked but that would
take extra time. To the best of our knowledge, this means
that the processing of ‘if’ would take longer in certain
contexts than in uncertain contexts. In the experiment we
found no evidence that the withdrawal of the implicature
that ‘if’ means ‘not certain’ takes extra time. As said in the
preceding paragraph we find no significant difference in
reading times for ‘if’ between a certain and an uncertain
context.
This study was also set up to show the effect modals can
have on the processing of sentences. Apparently modals
help to make particular interpretations more accessible (see
Traxler et al., 1997). In the experiment we saw that while
there were significant differences between ‘if’ with and
without modal in an uncertain context, this was not the case
for the certain contexts. The reverse held good for ‘since’. A
significant difference was observed in the certain contexts
between with and without modal, whereas that was not the
case in the uncertain contexts. Relevance Theory can
provide us with an explanation why the use of modals can
speed up processing of connectives in the relevant contexts.
Maybe the expectations of relevance will be met more easily
when a modal and a connective are used together. The
modal can help to resolve an incompatibility that arose in a
combination of a certain context and ‘if’, a connective
hinting at uncertainty; and of an uncertain context and
‘since’, a connective affirming the antecedent. Because the
modal ‘will probably’ guides the reader to a relatively
certain conclusion, it may be the middle course between
certainty and uncertainty and resolve previous
inconsistencies. In this way, enough relevance is achieved
and the processing effort of coming to grips with apparent
contradictions is saved.

This was an exploratory study about the clausal
implicature of the conditional and the role modal
expressions can perform for the interpretation process. A
crucial question to be answered concerns clarification of the
exact nature of the clausal implicature. While much
attention has been devoted to scalar implicatures, linguistic
theories and psychological experimental studies remain
largely implicit about the interpretation and processing of
clausal implicatures. It is an interesting matter for both
linguists and psychologists whether clausal implicatures are
to be thought about in the same way as scalar implicatures
(both are quantity implicatures, Levinson 1983). Future
research should address the similarities and differences with
scalar implicatures and the link with other clausal
implicatures, such as <know, believe>. More particulary, in
the case of <since ‘p, q’; if ‘p, q’>, could the results also be
explained by a purely semantic analysis?
In summary, no definite conclusions can be drawn at this
point. Further more fine-tuned research should establish
how the processing of the clausal implicature of the
conditional takes place, which role modals play and which
linguistic account is better suited to explain it.

Acknowledgments
This research was carried out thanks to financial support
from the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen).
We would like to thank Robyn Carston and Richard
Breheny for their helpful comments on an earlier version of
this paper.

References
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are
underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar
inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 51(3), 437757.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (in press). Are
generalised scalar implicatures generated by default? An
on-line investigation into the role of context in generating
pragmatic inferences. Cognition.
Carston, R. (1998). Informativeness, relevance and scalar
implicature. In R. Carston & S. Uchida (Eds.), Relevance
Theory: Applications and Implications. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Carston, R. (2004). Relevance theory and the
saying/implicating distinction. In L. Horn & G. Ward
(Eds.) Handbook of Pragmatics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Dancygier, B. (1998). Conditionals and Prediction. Time,
Knowledge and Causation in Conditional Constructions.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Declerck, R. & S. Reed (2001). Conditionals. A
Comprehensive Empirical Analysis. Berlin/New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Gazdar,
G.
(1979).
Pragmatics:
Implicature,
Presupposition, and Logical Form. New York: Academic
Press.
2310

Haegeman, L. (2003). Conditional Clauses: External and
Internal Syntax. Mind & Language, 18 (4), 317-339.
Horn, L. (1972). On the semantic properties of the logical
operators in English. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Linguistics Club.
Levinson, St. C. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, St. C. (2000). Presumptive Meanings. The theory
of generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge
Massachusetts/London: MIT.
Noh, E. (2001). Metarepresentation: A Relevance-Theory
Approach. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Noveck, I. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78, 165-188.
Noveck, I. A., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterizing the time
course of an implicature: An evoked potentials study.
Brain and Language, 85 (2), 203-210.
Noveck, I. A., & Sperber, D. (Eds.) (2004). Experimental
Pragmatics. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics–pragmatics interface.
Cognition, 86 (3), 253-282.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance:
Communication and Cognition (2nd edn). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (2004). Relevance Theory. In L.
Horn & G. Ward (Eds.). Handbook of Pragmatics.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Sweetser, E. (1990). From Etymology to Pragmatics:
Metaphorical and Cultural Aspects of Semantic Structure.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Traxler, M.J., Sanford, A.J., Aked, J.P., & Moxey, L.M.
(1997). Processing causal and diagnostic statements in
discourse. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23 (1), 88-101.
Verbrugge, S., Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., & Van Belle,
W. (2004). Paraphrasing content and inferential
conditionals. Oral presentation held at the 14th Annual
Meeting of the Society for Text & Discourse, Chicago,
US, (1-4/08/2004).
Verbrugge, S, Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., Smessaert, H.,
& Van Belle, W. (in press). Pronounced inferences. A
study on inferential conditionals. Thinking & Reasoning.
Verbrugge, S., Smessaert, H., & Van Belle, W. (2005).
Distinguishing between content and inferential
conditionals: some experimental evidence. Oral
presentation held at the 15th Annual Meeting of the
Society for Text & Discourse, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, (6-9/07/2005).

