UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Development of Analogical Reasoning in Children: A Computational Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4cf9610q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Doumas, Leonidas A.A.
Morrison, Robert G.
Richland, Lindsey E.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Development of Analogical Reasoning in Children:
A Computational Account
Robert G. Morrison (robertmorrison@xunesis.org)
Xunesis, PO Box 269187 Chicago, IL 60626-9187 USA

Leonidas A. A. Doumas (adoumas@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Lindsey E. Richland (l.e.richland@uci.edu)
Department of Education, University of California, Irvine
2001 Berkeley Place, Irvine, CA 92697-5500 USA
Abstract

Increased Domain Knowledge
The relational primacy hypothesis as advanced by Goswami
and colleagues argues that analogical reasoning is available
as a capacity from early infancy, but that children’s
analogical performance increases with age due to the
accretion of knowledge about relevant relations (Goswami,
1992, 2001; Goswami & Brown, 1989). Piaget conducted
early developmental research that indicated children were
unable to reason analogically prior to achieving formal
operations, approximately at age 13 or 14 (Piaget,
Montangero & Billeter, 1977). Piaget’s tasks, however,
frequently involved uncommon relations, such as “steering
mechanism,” which would likely have been unfamiliar to
younger children. When Goswami and Brown (1989)
replaced such high content knowledge relations with simpler
causal relations, they found children as young as 3 years old
could be successful on some analogical reasoning tasks
when they demonstrated the relevant knowledge about the
particular task relations. In spite of their success, these
children still performed lower than children at higher ages.
So, as noted by the authors, the knowledge-based account
cannot fully account for age-related effects in young
children’s performance on analogical reasoning tasks. In
particular, these authors pointed out that children seem to
fail on analogies in systematic ways even when the children
possess relational knowledge relevant to the task.

We have previously reported results showing that when
children can identify the critical structural relations in a scene
analogy problem, development of their ability to reason
analogically interacts with both relational complexity and
featural distraction (Richland, Morrison & Holyoak, 2004, in
press). In this paper we present computer simulations in LISA
(Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003) demonstrating that both
relational complexity and featural distraction effects can be
parsimoniously accounted for by a simple change in inhibition
in the model. This result is similar to data and simulations of
analogy performance in patients with damage to prefrontal
cortex (Morrison et al., 2004) and older adults (Viskontas et
al., 2004), two other populations whose cognitive
performance is associated with decreases in inhibitory control
in working memory. These results lend support to the
hypothesis that the development of inhibitory control in
working memory is a critical factor in children’s ability to
perform relational reasoning.

Children’s development of analogical reasoning allows
them to notice correspondences and make inferences about
relationally similar phenomena across contexts.
This
greatly enriches children’s capacity for transfer of learning
and schema abstraction, two essential aspects of children’s
learning and cognitive development (Chen, Sanchez &
Campbell, 1997; Gentner, 1977; Goswami, 2001; Halford,
1993; Holyoak, Junn & Billman, 1984). While many have
argued that analogy is important for children’s cognitive
development, there is considerable disagreement on the
mechanisms of development of this important form of
reasoning.

Relational Shift
Alternatively, Gentner and Rattermann (1991; Rattermann
& Gentner, 1998) hypothesized that a domain-specific
“relational shift” occurs. They suggest that as children build
knowledge in a domain, they move from considering
similarity based on perceptual features to considering
similarity based on relations. Thus prior to the relational
shift, children primarily attend to featural similarity between
objects. Following the relational shift, children can and will
reason on the basis of relational features,, making them
successful on analogical reasoning tasks. Gentner and
Rattermann have empirically demonstrated and replicated
this effect. While these authors argue domain knowledge
drives children’s transition through the relational shift, the

Developmental Change in Analogy
Historically, three primary hypotheses have been developed
to explain age-related differences in analogical reasoning:
changes in domain knowledge, a relational shift from object
similarity to relational similarity, and increased working
memory capacity for manipulating relations.

603

mechanisms underlying the observed reasoning patterns
remain unclear.

in capacity to cope with relational complexity (Halford,
1993) would be expected to lead to increased analogical
ability.
As noted by Gentner and colleagues, a second factor of
importance in the development of analogical reasoning is
the challenge of reasoning on the basis of relational
correspondences as opposed to perceptual/ object-based
cues. As demonstrated by studies examining the relational
shift, relational correspondences may compete with
tendencies to respond on the basis of more superficial
featural or semantic similarities between individual objects
(Gentner & Toupin, 1986). Children’s developmental
increases in ability to successfully make relational decisions
in spite of competition may be explained by improvments in
inhibitory control in working memory. Inhibitory control is
of particular importance in managing working memory
when relational and more superficial responses conflict.
Inhibitory control has not been previously discussed directly
as a factor in the development of analogical reasoning, but
this hypothesis is consistent with results from other
cognitive tasks that explore developmental changes in
children’s ability to use inhibitory control (e.g., Diamond,
Kirkham & Amso, 2002). Accordingly, acquisition of fully
developed analogical reasoning seems likely to require both
the working memory capacity to integrate multiple relations,
and the ability to inhibit tendencies to respond on the basis
of competing superficial similarities (see Morrison, 2005,
for a review).

Relational Complexity
Halford (1993) has proposed a third explanation for
children’s development of analogical reasoning based on
working memory capacity.
Halford and colleagues
(Andrews & Halford, 2002; Halford, Andrews, Dalton,
Boag & Zielinski, 2002) have argued that limits in
children’s working memory capacity affect their ability to
process multiple relations simultaneously. Specifically, they
argue that young children can processes only specific levels
of relational complexity, defined as the number of sources
of variation that are related and must be processed in
parallel. For example, the simplest level of relational
complexity, a binary relation, is defined as a relationship
between two arguments, both of which are sources of
variation. Thus “boy chases girl” specifies a single relation
(chase) between two arguments (boy and girl). A reasoner
would have to hold both arguments and the relevant relation
in mind to reason on the basis of this relationship. The next
level of relational complexity, a ternary relation, includes
three arguments as sources of variation. A special case of a
ternary relationship is formed by two integrated binary
relations with three arguments, such as “mom chases a boy
who chases a girl.” Using this metric of relational
complexity, Halford (1993) argued for a developmental
continuum in children’s working memory capacity, such
that after age two children can process binary relations (a
relationship between two objects), and after age five they
can process ternary relations. Thus, children will be unable
to systematically solve analogy problems with relational
complexity above their current level of working memory
capacity.

A Computational Account of Analogy
Learning and Inference with Schemas and Analogies (LISA;
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003) is a neurally-plausible
symbolic-connectionist model of analogical reasoning
which uses synchrony of firing to bind distributed
representations of relational roles to distributed
representations of their fillers. The process of "thinking
about" a proposition entails keeping separate role-filler
bindings firing out of synchrony with one another.
According to LISA, working memory is therefore
necessarily capacity-limited: It is only possible to keep a
finite number of role-filler bindings simultaneously active
and out of synchrony with one another (see Hummel &
Holyoak, 2003, Appendix A). The synchronized (and desynchronized) patterns of activation representing
propositions in LISA serve as the basis for memory
retrieval, analogical mapping, analogical inference and
schema induction.
LISA represents propositions using a hierarchy of
distributed and localist units (see Figure 1 for a schematic
representation of LISA’s architecture as applied to the
Scene Analogy Problems presented in this study). At the
bottom of the hierarchy, semantic units (small circles in
Figure 1) represent objects and relational roles in a
distributed fashion. For example, consider the proposition
chase (cat, mouse). Each role of the chase relation would
be represented by units coding for its semantic content (e.g.,

Multiple Factors in Analogical Development
We believe it is necessary to consider multiple factors to
completely understand the dynamics of the development of
analogical reasoning in children. In particular, we believe
that while acquisition of relational knowledge doubtless is
essential, changes in processing capacity with development
are also important. Constructing an analogy requires a
reasoner to represent source and target analogs and
construct a mapping between elements of the source and
target based upon correspondences between relations in
each (Gentner, 1983; Gick & Holyoak, 1980). Empirical
work has supported Halford’s (1993) claim that these
processes are dependent on working-memory functions
(Morrison, 2005; Morrison & Holyoak, 2006; Morrison,
Holyoak & Truong, 2001; Waltz et al., 2000). In children,
these capacities are in turn dependent on developmental
changes in prefrontal cortex (see Diamond, 2002). Using an
analogy frequently involves mapping multiple relations, a
process that has been shown to critically depend on areas of
the prefrontal cortex associated with working memory
(Christoff et al., 2001; Kroger et al., 2002; Prabhakaran et
al., 1997; Waltz et al., 1999). Thus it follows that increases
604

Figure 1: a) Example of 1-Relation/Distractor Scene Analogy Problem (Richland, Morrison & Holyoak, 2004, in press),
b) LISA architecture for 1-Relation/Distractor Scene Analogy Problem. In order for a reasoner to select the boy in the
target as the correct analogical mapping to the cat in the source, units in the recipient representing the chases (boy, girl)
must inhibit corresponding units in the propositional structure containing the featurally similar “sitting cat” distractor.
among others, aggressor for the first role, victim for the
second, and pursuit for both). Similarly, the arguments
“cat” and “mouse” would be represented by units specifying
their meaning (e.g., cat: animal, pet, soft). Predicate and
object units (triangles and large circles, respectively, in
Figure 1) represent relational roles and their fillers in a
localist fashion, and have bi-directional excitatory
connections to the corresponding semantic units. Subproposition (SP) units (rectangles in Figure 1) bind roles to
their arguments, and have bidirectional connections to the
corresponding predicate and object units. In the case of
chase (cat, mouse), one SP would bind “cat” to the first role
of chase, and another would bind “mouse” to the second.
At the top of the hierarchy, proposition (P) units bind rolefiller bindings into complete propositions via excitatory
connections to the corresponding SPs. A complete analog
(i.e., situation, story or event) is represented by the
collection of semantic, predicate, object, SP and P units that
collectively code the propositions in that analog. Separate
analogs do not share object, predicate, SP or P units.
However, all analogs are connected to the same set of
semantic units. The semantic units thus permit the units in
one analog to communicate with the units in others.
For the purposes of memory retrieval and analogical
mapping (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997) as well as analogical
inference and schema induction (Hummel & Holyoak,
2003), analogs are divided into two mutually exclusive sets:
a driver and one or more recipients. The sequence of events

is controlled by the driver: One (or at most three) at a time,
propositions in the driver become active (i.e., enter working
memory). When a proposition enters working memory, the
binding of its roles to their arguments is represented by
synchrony of firing: All the units under a given SP fire in
synchrony with one another, and separate SPs fire out of
synchrony with one another. The result on the semantic
units is a set of mutually desynchronized patterns of
activation: one pattern for each active SP (i.e., role binding)
in the driver. In the case of chase (cat, mouse), the semantic
features of “cat” (e.g., animal, pet, soft) would fire in
synchrony with the features of the first role of chase (ie.,
chase1), while “mouse” fires in synchrony with the second.
In order to represent the proposition chase (mouse, cat),
LISA would activate exactly the same semantic units, but
their synchrony relations would be reversed, with “mouse”
firing in synchrony with the chase1, and “cat” firing with
the second. The resulting patterns of activation on the
semantic units drive the activation of propositions in the
various recipient analogs, and serve as the basis for
analogical mapping, inference, schema induction, and the
other functions LISA performs (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997,
2003).
The final component of the LISA architecture is a set of
mapping connections between units of the same type (e.g.,
object, predicate, etc.) in separate analogs.
These
connections grow whenever corresponding units in the
driver and recipient are active simultaneously. They permit
605

LISA to learn the correspondences (i.e., mappings) between
corresponding structures in separate analogs. They also
permit correspondences learned early in mapping to
influence the correspondences learned later.

dissimilar (No Distractor) to the object to be mapped in the
source scene. 2-Relation problems were created by having
one object that was not involved in the principal relation
(dog in Figure 1a) in the 1-Relation problems participate in
the principle relation for the 2-Relation version (chase (dog,
cat). Distractor and No-Distractor versions were created by
having an extra object in the same picture that was either
similar (sitting cat in Figure 1a) or dissimilar (sandbox) to
the item to be mapped in the source picture (running cat).

The Role of Inhibition
In LISA, inhibition is critical to the selection of information
for processing in working memory. Specifically, inhibition
determines LISA’s working memory capacity (see Hummel
& Holyoak, 2003, Appendix A), controls its ability to select
items for placement into working memory and also
regulates its ability to control the spreading of activation in
the recipient.
Of particular importance to the present simulations,
inhibition plays a role in the selection of items to enter
working memory because selection is a competitive process:
Propositions in the driver compete to be entered into
working memory on the basis of several factors, including
their pragmatic centrality or importance, support from other
propositions that have recently fired, and the recency with
which they themselves have fired. Reduced inhibition
results in reduced competition and more random selection of
propositions to fire. The selection of which propositions are
chosen to fire, and in what order, can have substantial
effects on LISA’s ability to find a structurally consistent
mapping between analogs. It follows that reduced
inhibition, resulting in more random selection of
propositions into working memory, can likewise affect
LISA’s ability to discover a structurally-consistent mapping.
The role of inhibition in the activity of a recipient analog
is directly analogous to its role in the activity in the driver.
Inhibition causes units in the recipient to compete to
respond to the semantic patterns generated by activity in the
driver. If LISA’s capacity to inhibit units in the recipient is
compromised, then the result is a loss of competition, with
many units in the recipient responding to any given pattern
generated by the driver. The resulting chaos hampers (in the
limit, completely destroys) LISA’s ability to discover which
units in the recipient map to which in the driver.

Summary of Experimental Results
In a series of experiments, Richland, Morrison and Holyoak
(2002, in press) found reliable effects of both relational
complexity and featural distraction on children’s analogical
reasoning ability (see Figure 2, solid lines). Specifically, 3-4
year olds showed strong effects of both distraction and
relational complexity that interacted to reveal the highest
accuracy in the 1-Relation/No Distractor condition and the
lowest accuracy in the 2-Relation/Distractor condition. This
pattern was similar for the 6-7 year olds, with main effects
of both relational complexity and distraction. In contrast,
the 13-14 year olds showed a main effect of relational
complexity but no effect of distraction. In a second
experiment Richland, Morrison & Holyoak (in press),
demonstrated these effects in young children were not due
to problems in identifying the relevant relations.

Simulations
Methods
LISA simulations were performed for the Scene Analogy
Problems. Our intent was to demonstrate that a simple
change in inhibition levels in LISA can account for agerelated performance changes in analogical reasoning as
characterized by relational complexity and distraction in the
stimuli.
To model the Scene Analogy Problems we constructed
LISA representations of the four problem types (Figure 1b
depicts a LISA representation of the 1-Relation/Distractor
problem). For 2-Relation problems both relations were
represented in LISA’s WM together (Hummel & Holyoak,
1997). In LISA units of the same type in the driver and
recipient inhibit one another (ie., SPs inhibit other SPs, Ps
inhibit other Ps, etc). To simulate each age group we
changed the inhibition level between corresponding units in
the recipient. Younger age groups tended to have lower
inhibition levels. Recipient inhibition levels for each age
group are shown in Table 1.

Scene Analogy Problems
Task Description
Richland, Morrison and Holyoak (2002, in press) developed
Scene Analogy Problems to investigate relational
complexity and featural distraction within a single
analogical reasoning task based on a paradigm originated by
Markman and Gentner (1993). The relations and the objects
used to represent them were familiar to preschool age
children.
Figure 1a depicts an example of one of the four
counterbalanced versions that were created for each of the
20 picture sets in the Scene Analogy Problems. Each set of
problems factorially varied (1) the number of instances of
the relevant relation that needed to be mapped (1-Relation
or 2-Relation), and (2) the presence of an object in the target
scene that was either featurally similar (Distractor) or

Table 1: Inhibition Levels in LISA.
Age Group
Mean Recipient
Simulated
Inhibition Level*
3-4 year olds
0.3
6-7 year olds
0.6
13-14 year olds
0.9
*Note: Value sampled from a normal
distribution with SD = .1
606

Each simulation run consisted of firing three phase sets in
LISA’s working memory, “randomly” assigned by LISA.
On each simulation an inhibition level for units in the
recipient was sampled for a normal distribution with the
means listed in Table 1 and a SD of .1. The inhibition
between corresponding units in the recipient was set to the
inhibition level. We ran 40 simulations of each problem
type for each age group. When LISA failed to determine a
stable mapping after firing three phase sets, an answer was
selected based on Equation 1, where mapWeight was unit
i’s maximum mapping weight, and max(mapWeight) was
the highest mapping weight into any recipient Predicate or
Object unit.

between elements of competing relational representations in
working memory) could account for both relational
complexity and featural distraction effects in children’s
analogical reasoning performance from age 3 to 14
(Richland, Morrison & Holyoak, 2002, in press). This
account is consistent with previous simulations of results
from frontal patients (Morrison et al., 2004) and older adults
(Viskontas et al., 2004), whose analogical reasoning
performance also suffered under increases in relational
complexity and featural or relational distraction.
It is our contention, that both long-term relational
knowledge and processing capacity determine an
individual’s reasoning performance. We suggest a useful
way to conceptualize the development of reasoning in
children is an equilibrium between relational knowledge and
processing capacity. As children age, their knowledge
about relations advances while their working memory
capacity as modulated by inhibitory control also advances.
At a given time during development, the child is able to
perform an analogical task based on both their level of
relational knowledge and their working memory resources.
Specifically, the equilibrium operates such that greater
relational knowledge imposes fewer processing demands,
while less knowledge imposes higher demands. Thus, as
relational knowledge increases in a domain, the demands on
a working memory decline, allowing for more complex
reasoning. This pattern in cognitive development builds on
an understanding of working memory effects in expertise
(e.g., Chase & Simon, 1973), once again, a situation where
advanced relational knowledge can decrease processing
demands and thereby allow experts to accomplish cognitive
tasks.
We believe that to truly understand the development of
relational reasoning in children, future experimental and
computational studies must take into account both advances
in relational knowledge and changes in processing
capability, and importantly, studying how these two aspects
of development interact.

(eq. 1)

Results
The simulation results along with the experimental results
from Richland, Morrison & Holyoak (2002, in press) are
presented in Figure 2. LISA’s performance mirrored
experimental results for each age group across conditions.
Specifically, 1) LISA showed a main effect of age, 2) for 34 year olds LISA showed an effect for both relational
complexity and distraction, 2) for 6-7 year olds LISA
showed an effect for both relational complexity and
distraction, but smaller than that for 3-4 year olds, and
finally 4) for 13-14 showed a mild effect for relational
complexity, but no effect for distraction. Lastly, as in the
experimental results, when LISA did not select the correct
analogical mapping in the distractor conditions, the model
preferentially choose the featurally similar distractor object.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank John Hummel for helpful
discussions and the National Institute of Mental Health
(NRSA fellowship MH-64244-01A1; RGM), Xunesis
(www.xunesis.org; RGM), the Indiana University
Developmental Training Grant from the NICMH; LAAD),
the Spencer Foundation (dissertation fellowship: LER), the
Institute of Education Sciences (R305H030141; LER) and
for their generous support.

Figure 2: Experimental (Richland, Morrison & Holyoak,
2002, in press, Experiment 1) and Simulation results.

References

General Discussion

Andrews, G. & Halford, G.S. (2002). A cognitive
complexity metric applied to cognitive development.
Cognitive Psychology, 45, 153-219.

In this paper we presented simulations in LISA that support
the role of inhibition in explaining age-related changes in
analogical reasoning. We demonstrated that simple changes
in recipient inhibition levels in LISA (i.e., inhibition
607

Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind’s eye in
chess. In W. G. Chase, (Ed.), Visual Information
Processing (pp 215–281). New York: Academic Press.
Chen, Z., Sanchez, R., & Campbell, T. (1997). From beyond
to within their grasp: Analogical problem solving in 10and 13-month-olds. Developmental Psychology, 33, 790801.
Christoff, K., Prabhakaran, V., Dorfman, J., Zhao, Z.,
Kroger, J. K., Holyoak, K. J. & Gabrieli, J. D. (2001).
Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in relational
integration during reasoning. . Neuroimage , 14, 11361149.
Diamond A. (2002). Normal development of prefrontal
cortex from birth to young adulthood: Cognitive
functions, anatomy, and biochemistry (pp. 466-503). In
D.T. Stuss & R.T. Knight (Eds). Principles of frontal lobe
function. London: Oxford University Press.
Diamond, A., Kirkham, N., & Amso, D. (2002). Conditions
under which young children can hold two rules in mind
and inhibit a prepotent response. Developmental
Psychology, 38, 352-362.
Gentner, D. (1977). If a tree had a knee, where would it be?
Children’s performance on simple spatial metaphors.
Papers and Reports on Child Language Development, 13,
157-164.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. , & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P.Byrnes (Eds).
Perspectives on thought and language: Interrelations in
development (pp. 225-277). London, Cambridge
University Press.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the
development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K. L. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 306-355.
Goswami, U. (1992). Analogical reasoning in children.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goswami, U. (2001). Analogical reasoning in children. In
D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science (pp.
437-470). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A. L. (1989). Melting chocolate
and melting snowmen: Analogical reasoning and causal
relations. Cognition, 35, 69-95.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Halford, G. S., Andrews, G., Dalton, C., Boag, C., &
Zielinski, T. (2002). Young children’s performance on the
balance scale: The influence of relational complexity.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 81, 383 – 416.
Holyoak, K. J., Junn, E. N., & Billman, D. (1984).
Development of analogical problem-solving skill. Child
Development, 55, 2042-2055.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.

Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Kroger, J. K., Sabb, F. W., Fales, C. L., Bookheimer, S. Y.,
Cohen, M. S. & Holyoak, K. J. (2002). Recruitment of
anterior dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human
reasoning: a parametric study of relational complexity.
Cerebral Cortex, 12, 477-485.
Markman, A . B., & Gentner, D . (1993) . Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Morrison, R.G. (2005). Thinking in working memory. In
K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), Cambridge
handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 457-473).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006). Analogical
reasoning in working memory. Manuscript under review.
Morrison, R.G., Holyoak, K.J., & Truong, B. (2001).
Working memory modularity in analogical reasoning.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 663-668). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Morrison, R.G., Krawczyk, D., Holyoak, K.J., Hummel,
J.E., Chow, T., Miller, B., & Knowlton, B.J. (2004). A
neurocomputational model of analogical reasoning and its
breakdown in frontotemporal dementia. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 260-271.
Piaget, J., Montangero, J., & Billeter, J. (1977). La
formation des correlats. In J. Piaget (Ed.) Recherches sur
l'abstraction reflechissante I (pp. 115-129). Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Rattermann, M.J., Gentner, D (1998) More evidence for a
relational shift in the development of analogy: Children's
performance on a causal-mapping task Cognitive
Development, 13, pp. 453-478
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J. (2004).
Developmental change in analogical reasoning: Evidence
from a picture-mapping task. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, (pp. 1149-1154). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J. (in press).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology.
Viskontas, I.V., Morrison, R.G., Holyoak, K.J., Hummel,
J.E., & Knowlton, B.J., (2004) Relational integration,
inhibition and analogical reasoning in older adults.
Psychology and Aging, 19, 581-591.
Waltz, J.A., Lau, A., Grewal, S.K., & Holyoak, K.J. (2000).
The role of working memory in analogical mapping.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 1205-1212.
Waltz, J. A., Knowlton, B. J., Holyoak, K. J., Boone, K. B.,
Mishkin, F. S., de Menezes Santos, M., et al. (1999). A
system for relational reasoning in human prefrontal
cortex. Psychological Science, 1 0, 119–125.

608

