UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Human Speechome Project

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2g24h4mr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
DeCamp, Philip
Fleischman, Michael
Gorniak, Peter
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Human Speechome Project
Deb Roy, Rupal Patel∗ , Philip DeCamp, Rony Kubat, Michael Fleischman,
Brandon Roy, Nikolaos Mavridis, Stefanie Tellex, Alexia Salata,
Jethran Guinness, Michael Levit, Peter Gorniak
∗

Cognitive Machines Group, MIT Media Laboratory
Communication Analysis and Design Laboratory, Northeastern University

Abstract
The Human Speechome Project is an effort to observe
and computationally model the longitudinal course of
language development of a single child at an unprecedented scale. The idea is this: Instrument a child’s
home so that nearly everything the child hears and sees
from birth to three is recorded. Develop a computational model of language learning that takes the child’s
audio-visual experiential record as input. Evaluate the
model’s performance in matching the child’s linguistic
abilities as a means of assessing possible learning strategies used by children in natural contexts. First steps
of a pilot effort along these lines are described including
issues of privacy management and methods for overcoming limitations of fully-automated machine perception.

2AW SENSOR
DATA

#ONTINUOUS MULTI TRACK AUDIO
VISUAL RECORDING FOR THREE YEARS

Stepping into the Shoes of Children

!DAPTIVE
-ACHINE
0ERCEPTION

3PEECH  VIDEO
META DATA

3INGLE FAMILY HOME OF CHILD  CAREGIVERS
INSTRUMENTED WITH CAMERA  MICROPHONES
PROVIDING TOTAL VISUAL AND AUDIO COVERAGE
OF ALL ROOMS IN HOME

,ANGUAGE
,EARNING
-ODEL

(UMAN
!NALYSTS

To date, the primary means of studying language acquisition has been through observational recordings made in
laboratory settings or made at periodic intervals in children’s homes. While laboratory studies provide many
useful insights, it has often been argued that the ideal
way to observe early child development is in the home
where the routines and context of everyday life are minimally disturbed. Bruner’s comment is representative:

Figure 1: The goal of HSP is to create computational
models of word learning evaluated on longitudinal in vivo
audio-visual recordings.

surge in availability of digital sensing and recording technologies enables ultra-dense observation: the capacity
to record virtually everything a child sees and hears in
his/her home, 24 hours per day for several years of continuous observation. We have designed an ultra-dense
observational system based on a digital network of video
cameras, microphones, and data capture hardware. The
system has been carefully designed to respect infant and
caregiver privacy and to avoid participant involvement
in the recording process in order to minimize observer
effects.

I had decided that you could only study language
acquisition at home, in vivo, not in the lab, in vitro.
The issues of context sensitivity and the format of
the mother-child interaction had already led me to
desert the handsomely equipped but contrived video
laboratory...in favor of the clutter of life at home.
We went to the children rather than them come to
us. [Bruner, 1983]
Unfortunately, the quality and quantity of home observation data available is surprisingly poor. Observations made in homes are sparse (typically 1-2 hours per
week), and often introduce strong observer effects due
to the physical presence of researchers in the home. The
fine-grained effects of experience on language acquisition
are poorly understood in large part due to this lack of
dense longitudinal data [Tomasello and Stahl, 2004].
The Human Speechome Project (HSP) attempts to
address these shortcomings by creating the most comprehensive record of a single child’s development to date,
coupled with novel data mining and modeling tools to
make sense of the resulting massive corpus. The recent

2059

The recording system has been deployed and at the
time of this writing (January 2006), the data capture
phase is six months into operation. Two of the authors (DR, RP) and their first-born child (male, now six
months of age, raised with English as the primary language) are the participants. Their home has been instrumented with video cameras and microphones. To date,
we have collected 24,000 hours of video and 33,000 hours
of audio recordings representing approximately 85% of
the child’s waking experience. Over the course of the
three-year study this corpus will grow six-fold.

Our ultimate goal is to build computational models of
language acquisition that can “step into the shoes” of a
child and learn directly from the child’s experience (Figure 1). The design and implementation details of any
computational model will of course differ dramatically
from the mental architecture and processes of a child.
Yet, the success of a model in learning from the same
input as a child provides evidence that the child may
employ similar learning strategies.
A critical question underlying any model of learning
concerns the balance between nature and nurture. HSP
brings a new perspective to this age-old debate. Given a
near-complete, contextually-rich record of a child’s first
three years, what are the set of ontological constraints
that must be built into a model for it to successfully
learn aspects of language? If a machine can be shown
to acquire some capability or structure X without corresponding innate preconditions, this provides evidence
that the child’s environment provides X – and thus need
not be innate. While definitive conclusions cannot be
drawn from a single subject study, the methodology developed herein enables a new line of investigation that
has until now been unexplored.
This paper is structured as follows. Some further
background motivation is provided for collecting ultradense, in vivo observations. The data collection process
and a set of initial data visualization and mining tools
for semi-automatic annotation are then described. We
conclude by sketching preliminary directions of a modeling effort aimed at harnessing the HSP corpus to examine the role of physical and social interaction in word
learning.

Longitudinal In Vivo Observation

merous theories of word learning have been proposed, some positing language-specific learning constraints (e.g., [Clark, 1987, Markman, 1989]), domaingeneral learning mechanisms (e.g., [Merriman, 1999,
Smith, 2000]), or the importance of social inference (e.g.,
[Baldwin et al., 1997, Bloom, 2000]). There is no obvious way to resolve disputes that arise between these
views without a better understanding of the exact nature of children’s input as it pertains to each theoretical
position. For example, domain-general learning theories
may explain results in controlled word learning experiments, but we cannot know which aspects of real-world
word learning can be explained by these theories unless
they can be tested on more representative data. The
same argument holds for the other positions.
Historically, the scope of observational studies has
broadened with advances in technology. In the earliest
studies, parent-investigators relied on diaries to record
observations in the home. Diarists can of course only
record a small subset of complete activity – typically first
usages and salient errors. Detailed records of input to
the child (especially visual and social context) and complete histories of the child’s everyday behavior cannot be
captured. The introduction of analog and then digital
audio recording technology has enabled more detailed
and unbiased observation. Video recordings, however,
are more difficult to make, are slower to analyze, and
thus remain rare in language acquisition studies. Yet,
visual context is vital for understanding language development. For example, to study how a child learns the
meaning of thank you, investigators need to know the
non-linguistic contexts in which the phrase was heard
and used to understand how the child generalizes from
particular instances to new contexts.
In general, many hypotheses regarding the finegrained interactions between what a child observes and
what the child learns to say cannot be investigated due
to a lack of data. How are a child’s first words related to
the order and frequency of words that the child heard?
How does the specific context (who was present, where
was the language used, what was the child doing at the
time, etc.) affect acquisition dynamics? What specific
sequence of grammatical constructions did a child hear
that led her to revise her internal model of verb inflection? These questions are impossible to answer without
far denser data recordings than those currently available.

Bruner’s comment is echoed in the work of many researchers who recognize the importance of observing language development as it actually unfolds in the home
(e.g., [Bloom, 1973, Nelson, 1974]). The value of longitudinal small-subject studies for examining detailed dynamics of language acquisition is also well established
(e.g., [Brown, 1973]). The density of data samples is
critical. With observations spaced weeks or months
apart, apparently sudden changes of linguistic abilities
(e.g., new vocabulary, new grammatical constructions)
cannot be carefully investigated. Most researchers rely
on speech recordings that cover less than 1.5% of a
child’s complete linguistic experience (e.g., most corpora in the CHILDES archive [MacWhinney, 2000]) –
and far less, if any, visual context. As a result, theories of language acquisition hinge on remarkably incomplete observations and are subject to large random effects due to sampling errors. While researchers widely
recognize the need for increased observational data to
advance empirical and theoretical rigor in the field (e.g.,
[Tomasello and Stahl, 2004]), few efforts have been undertaken to acquire ultra-dense longitudinal recordings
of language acquisition within the home environment.
Dense longitudinal observations, coupled with appropriate data mining and modeling tools, have the potential to make significant theoretical advances. Nu-

2060

Ultra-Dense Observation for Three Years
Eleven omni-directional mega-pixel resolution color digital video cameras have been embedded in the ceilings of each room of the participants’ house (kitchen,
dining room, living room, playroom, entrance, exercise
room, three bedrooms, hallway, and bathroom). Video
is recorded continuously from all cameras since the child
may be in any of the 11 locations at any given time.
In post processing, only the relevant video channel will
be analyzed for modeling purposes. A sample video
frame from the living room camera under evening lighting is shown in Figure 1(left image). The image on the
right shows an enlargement of a region of the left image

demonstrating the camera’s spatial resolution. Video is
captured at 14 images per second whenever motion is detected, and one image per second in the absence of motion. The result is continuous and complete full-motion
video coverage of all activity throughout the house.
While omnidirectional cameras provide situational
awareness of essentially everything in the house (other
than objects occluded due to furniture and people), details such as facial expressions are lost. Although eye
gaze and other subtle behaviors are important for language learning, current technology is unable to provide
both comprehensive spatial coverage and high resolution.
Given our interests in observing and modeling social dynamics expressed in the movements and spatial relations
of caregivers and infants throughout the house (see below), we have opted for wide coverage at the expense of
resolution.
Boundary layer microphones (BLM) are used to record
the home’s acoustic environment. These microphones
use the extended surface in which they are embedded as sound pickup surfaces. BLMs produce high
quality speech recordings in which background noise is
greatly attenuated. We have embedded 14 microphones
throughout the ceilings of the house placed for optimal coverage of speech in all rooms. Audio is sampled
from all 14 channels at greater than CD-quality (16-bit,
48KHz). When there is no competing noise source, even
whispered speech is clearly captured.
Concealed wires (above the ceiling) deliver power and
control signals to the cameras and microphones, and
transmit analog audio and networked digital video data
to a cluster of 10 computers and audio samplers located
in the basement of the house. The computers perform
real-time video compression and generate time-stamped
digital audio and video files on a local 5-terabyte disk
array. With video compression, approximately 300 gigabytes of raw data are accumulated each day. A petabyte
(i.e., 1 million gigabyte) disk array is under construction at MIT to house the complete three-year data set
and derivative metadata. Data is transferred periodically from the house to MIT using portable disk drives.

Figure 2: Top left: Camera and microphone embedded
in ceiling with camera shutter open (the microphone is
the small dark disk to the right). Bottom left: shutter
closed. Right: Wall mounted touch display for recording
control (see section on privacy management for details).
Over the first six months of operation, the participants
have settled into a stable pattern of use with the privacy
controls. On most days, audio recording is turned off
throughout the house at night after the child is asleep
(typically just after 10pm), and is turned back on in
the morning when the child awakes (8am). Audio is
paused on average for one hour per day, mainly around
adult dinner time, for a total of about 13 hours of audio recordings per day. Video is paused on average 2
hours per day, mainly during nursing, resulting in approximately 12 hours of video per day. The oops button
has been used 109 times (63 video deletions, 46 audio
deletions) in the first six months of usage. On average,
video (audio) segments deleted using this feature have
been 7.6 (8.4) minutes long.
Various other privacy management precautions are
being implemented including blackout of video related
to bathroom and change table interactions, procedures
for retroactive data retrieval from archives upon participants request, and the design of secure data servers to
limit access to data.

Privacy Management

Handling 338,000 Hours of Data

Audio and video recordings can be controlled by the
participants in the house using miniature wall-mounted
touch displays (Figure 2, right). Cameras are clustered
into eight visual zones (cameras that view overlapping
physical spaces are grouped into zones). Eight touch
displays are installed next to light switches around the
house, each enabling on/off control over video recording
in each zone by touching the camera icon. Audio recording can also be turned on and off by touching the microphone icon. To provide physical feedback on the status
of video recording, motorized shutters rotate to conceal
cameras when they are not recording. The “oops” button at the bottom of the display (marked with an exclamation mark) opens a dialog box that allows the user
to specify any number of minutes of audio and/or video
to retroactively and permanently delete from the disk
array.

The network of cameras and microphones are generating
an immense flow of data: an average of 300 gigabytes of
data per day representing about 132 hours of motioncompressed video per day (12 hours x 11 cameras) and
182 hours of audio (13 hours x 14 microphones). In
just the first six months we have collected approximately
24,000 hours of video and 33,000 hours of audio. At this
rate, the data set is projected to grow to 142,000 hours of
video and 196,000 hours of audio by the end of the three
year period. Clearly, new data mining tools must be
designed to aid in analysis of such an extensive corpus.
Figure 3 shows a screen shot of a multichannel
data browser and annotation system developed for this
project. Spectrograms of selected audio channels are displayed in the main window. A fish-eye timeline is used to
display large spans of data. The annotator can quickly
get the gist of activity throughout the house by view-

2061

Figure 3: Graphical environment for multi-channel data visualization, playback, and annotation.
ing all channels simultaneously, and then focus in on
regions of interest. To annotate audio, the user selects
segments by mouse and uses the right panel to add categorical labels (e.g., speech versus machine noise; identity of speaker, etc.) and text transcriptions. A second
window (not shown) displays video from all 11 cameras
simultaneously and plays synchronized audio recordings.
Future iterations of the browser will include video visualization and annotation tools.

Machine-Assisted Data Analysis

channel to transcribe given that sound sources usually
register on multiple microphones. To address these issues, we have developed a transcription system which
automatically finds speech within long recordings using
a decision tree algorithm that operates on spectral features extracted from the audio recordings. The speech
detection algorithm has been trained using labeled examples created using the annotation system (Figure 3).
Regions of speech activity are chunked at pause boundaries from the audio channel with the highest intensity
and integrated with a “listen-and-type” interface that
automatically paces speech playback to keep up with
transcription rate. In initial evaluations, we have found
that one minute of conversational speech takes approximately 2.5 minutes to transcribe, signifying a 2- to 3-fold
increase in speed over standard transcription tools used
in the field.

Speech analysis consists of two parallel paths. The first
path is to transcribe speech using a state-of-the-art automatic speech recognizer (ASR) designed for speech in
noise [Prasad et al., 2002]. Even the best ASR systems
will produce high error rates when transcribing unconstrained speech. Thus the second path introduces human annotation. A large corpus of speech which occurs
in the vicinity of the child will be manually transcribed
in order to obtain a relatively error-free complete transcript of all speech heard and produced by the child. The
practicality of this latter goal will depend on available
human resources for transcription as well as the development of tools to speed transcription. Transcripts will
also provide immediate benefits to the development of
the ASR, which requires approximately 50 hours of transcribed speech to adapt acoustic and language models for
optimal performance in the HSP recording environment.
Current transcription tools are unsatisfactory for
working with large, multi-channel recordings. Significant
time is spent on finding speech embedded within long
stretches of non-speech audio, and in selecting which

To automatically generate contextual meta-data for
speech transcription, we are experimenting with algorithms for speaker identification, prosodic feature analysis, and audio event classification.

2062

Our long term plan is to adapt and apply computer
vision techniques to the video corpus in order to detect,
identify, and track people and salient objects. Since the
visual environment is cluttered and undergoes constant
lighting changes (from direct sunlight to dimmed lamps),
automatic methods are inherently unreliable. Thus, similar to our approach with speech transcription, we plan
to design semi-automatic tools with which humans can
efficiently perform error correction on automatically generated meta-data. The combination of automatic motion
tracking with human-generated identity labels will yield

complete spatiotemporal trajectories of each person over
the entire three year observation period. The relative locations, orientations, and movements of people provide a
basis for analyzing the social dynamics of caregiver-child
interactions.

  AM










  AM

Modeling In Vivo Word Learning
As data collection and analysis proceeds, the HSP corpus may be used to study numerous aspects of language
including the development of grammatical constructions,
prosody, speech acts, and so forth. In this section, we
describe first steps of one effort underway to model word
learning.
In previous work, we developed a model of word learning called CELL (Cross-Channel Early Lexical Learning)
which learned to segment and associate spoken words
with acquired visual shape categories based on untranscribed speech and video input. This model demonstrated that a single mechanism could be used to resolve three problems of word learning: spoken unit discovery, visual category formation, and cross-situational
mappings from speech units to visual categories. The
model operated under cognitively plausible constraints
on working memory, and provided a means for analyzing
regularities in infant-directed observational recordings.
CELL was evaluated on speech recordings of six mothers as they played with their pre-verbal infants using
toys. Recordings were made in an infant lab using a
wall-mounted video camera and a wireless microphone
worn by the mothers. The speech recordings were paired
with video of the same objects recorded by a robot,
providing multisensory “first-person” audio-visual input
for the model (the video of caregiver-infant interactions
was only used to keep track of which toy was in play).
CELL successfully acquired a vocabulary of visuallygrounded words using a learning strategy that combined
within-modality co-occurrence and recurrence analysis
with cross-modal mutual information clustering. The
model enabled quantitative analysis of the effects of visual context on speech segmentation, and the effects of
short term memory size on word learning performance
(see [Roy and Pentland, 2002] for details).
Three simplifications made in CELL may be contrasted with our new modeling effort using the HSP corpus. First, CELL was evaluated on a relatively small
set of observations. Caregiver-infant pairs were only observed for two one-hour play sessions, held about a week
apart. The data was thus a snapshot in time and could
not be used to study developmental trajectories. Second, observations were conducted in an infant lab leading
to behaviors that may not be representative of natural
caregiver-infant interactions in the home. It is unclear
whether CELL’s learning strategy would work with a
more realistic distribution of input. Third, visual input was oversimplified and social context was ignored.
The only context available to CELL was video of single
objects placed against controlled backdrops. As a consequence, the model of conceptual grounding in CELL
was limited to visual categories of shapes and colors underlying words such as ball and red. It could not learn






























 (OURS











Figure 4: Sample camera image from the kitchen camera
(top left), 10 regions of interest (bottom left), and visualization of activity of 1 minute, 22 minutes, and 24 hours
(right). For each of the displayed periods, the level of
movement in each region is indicated by the brightness
of the corresponding horizontal band, with time running
from left to right. In the lowest display of a full 24 hour
period, three meals are revealed as clusters of activity
most clearly indicated in region 10.
verbs (since it did not model actions), nor could it learn
social terms such as hi and thank you.
The HSP corpus overcomes the limitations inherent in
collecting small corpora within laboratory settings. To
address the issue of semantic grounding in terms of physical and social action, we have recently developed computational models of perceived affordances for language
understanding [Gorniak, 2005] and intention recognition
for word learning [Fleischman and Roy, 2005]. In these
models, stochastic grammars are used to model the hierarchical and ambiguous nature of intentional actions.
In [Fleischman and Roy, 2005], sequences of observed
movements are parsed by behavior grammars yielding
lattices of inferred higher level intentions. Verb and noun
learning is modeled as acquiring cross-situational mappings from constituents of utterances to constituents of
intention lattices. We plan to use a similar approach
with the HSP data, but with a semi-automatic procedure
for learning behavior grammars from video data. Words
related to routines (baths, meals, etc.) and names of locations (crib, highchair, etc.) might be modeled on this
basis.
The first stage in learning behavior grammars is
to identify stable, hierarchically organized patterns of
movements that yield a “behavior lexicon”. We exploit
the fact that we have static cameras in order to divide
each room into human assigned regions of interest (indicated as numbered regions on the lower left of Figure
4). These regions correspond to locations or objects in
the room that do not move (e.g., the refrigerator) and
have some relevance to various actions (e.g., is used in

2063

cooking events). Computing the amount of movement
in each region provides a multi-variate representation of
movement patterns within a room. This representation
is useful for visualizing behavioral patterns at multiple
time scales (see right side of Figure 4).
We can recast the problem of learning behavior grammars into one of discovering reliable patterns of movement in these multi-variate data streams. In an initial
experiment, we used a set of temporal relations such as
before and during as the basis for learning these patterns. We designed an algorithm that identifies movements in different regions of interest that reliably occur in those temporal relations (e.g. counter-movement
before sink-movement). When a relation between such
primitive movements becomes significantly reliable, it is
treated as a complex movement which itself can participate in temporal relations with other movements. The
algorithm proceeds through the data in an online fashion, generating hierarchical patterns of movement until
all the data is examined. We have found that these patterns can be used to recognize high level events such as
making coffee and putting away the dishes (details forthcoming).
Extensions of this work will focus on developing a
video parser that uses grammars constructed from acquired behavior patterns to infer latent structure underlying movement patterns. Cross-situational learning
algorithms will be developed to learn mappings from spoken words and phrases to these latent structures.

Infants’ reliance on a social criterion for establishing word-object relations. Child Development,
67(6):3135–53.
[Bloom, 1973] Bloom, L. (1973). One word at a time.
Mouton, The Hague.
[Bloom, 2000] Bloom, P. (2000). How Children Learn
the Meanings of Words. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[Brown, 1973] Brown, R. (1973). A First Language: The
Early Stages. Harvard University Press.
[Bruner, 1983] Bruner, J. (1983). Child’s Talk: Learning
to Use Language. Norton.
[Clark, 1987] Clark, E. (1987). The principle of contrast:
A constraint on language acquisition. In Mechanisms
of language acquisition. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
[Fleischman and Roy, 2005] Fleischman, M. and Roy,
D. (2005). Why are verbs harder to learn than nouns?
Initial insights from a computational model of situated word learning. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
[Gorniak, 2005] Gorniak, P. (2005). The AffordanceBased Concept. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
[MacWhinney, 2000] MacWhinney, B. (2000).
The
CHILDES project: Tools for analyzing talk. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
[Markman, 1989] Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in children. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Conclusions
The Human Speechome Project provides a natural, contextually rich, longitudinal corpus that serves as a basis
for understanding language acquisition. An embedded
sensor network and data capture system have been designed, implemented, and deployed to gather an ultradense corpus of a child’s audio-visual experiences from
birth to age three. We have described preliminary stages
of data mining and modeling tools that have been developed to make sense of over 300,000 hours of observations.
These efforts make significant progress towards the ultimate goal of modeling and evaluating computationally
precise learning strategies that children may use to acquire language.

[Merriman, 1999] Merriman, W. (1999). Competition,
attention, and young children’s lexical processing. In
MacWhinney, B., editor, The Emergence of Language,
pages 331–358. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[Nelson, 1974] Nelson, K. (1974). Concept, word, and
sentence: Interrelations in acquisition and development. Psychological Review, 81:267–285.

Acknowledgments

[Prasad et al., 2002] Prasad, R., Nguyen, L., Schwartz,
R., and Makhoul, J. (2002). Automatic transcription
of courtroom speech. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, pages 1745–1748,
Denver, CO.

We thank Walter Bender and the Media Lab industrial consortia for project support, Seagate Corporation and Zetera Corporation for donation of disk storage
hardware, Steve Pinker, Brian MacWhinney, and Linda
Smith for helpful discussions, and Steve Pinker for naming the project. This paper is based upon work supported under a National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship, a National Defense Science and Engineering Fellowship, and NSF Award SGER-0554772.

[Roy and Pentland, 2002] Roy, D. and Pentland, A.
(2002). Learning words from sights and sounds: A
computational model. Cognitive Science, 26(1):113–
146.
[Smith, 2000] Smith, L. (2000). Learning how to learn
words: An associative crane. In Golinkoff, R. and
Hirsch-Pasek, K., editors, Becoming a word learner.
Oxford Univeristy Press.
[Tomasello and Stahl, 2004] Tomasello, M. and Stahl,
D. (2004). Sampling children’s spontaneous speech:
How much is enough? Journal of Child Language,
31:101–121.

References
[Baldwin et al., 1997] Baldwin, D., Markman, E., Bill,
B., Desjardins, R., Irwin, J., and Tidball, G. (1997).

2064

