UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Personal Familiarity on the Speed of Face Recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7ft265x1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Balas, Benjamin
Conwell, Erin
Cox, David

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Personal Familiarity on the Speed of Face Recognition
Benjamin Balas (bjbalas@mit.edu)
David Cox (davidcox@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139

Erin Conwell (econwell@brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912

has led to the powerful, early idea that various face
recognition tasks might be executed by parallel, nonoverlapping “modules” (Bruce & Young, 1986). Since face
familiarity ostensibly depends on the identity of a face, it
has been suggested that under such a model, face familiarity
should not affect other tasks, such as gender judgments,
because “identity” and “gender” would be processed by
separate, non-interacting modules. Along these lines, there
are some results that indicate familiarity does not appear to
affect gender recognition (Bruce, 1986) or expression
classification (Young, McWeeny, Hay, & Ellis, 1986).
More recently, substantial evidence has emerged that
familiarity does influence other “orthogonal” face
judgments. Using images that were parametrically morphed
along a continuum between trained (“familiar”) and
untrained (“unfamiliar”) faces, Rossion demonstrated
significantly faster response times (RTs) for sex
classification of the familiar stimuli compared to the
unfamiliar images (Rossion, 2002). Likewise, other
researchers have pointed out cases where it appears that
there are interactions between the familiarity of a face and
the processing of race (Bruyer, Leclere, & Quinet, 2004),
expression (Gallegos & Tranel, 2005; Kaufmann &
Schweinberger, 2004), and even speech (Walker, Bruce, &
O'Malley, 1995). Taken together, these studies suggest that
experience with faces might exert a strong influence on
tasks beyond those that are explicitly related to identity.
In the present study, we sought to extend what is known
about facial familiarity in three simple delayed-match-tosample tasks in which subjects were required to match faces
on the basis of orientation (upright or inverted), gender, or
identity. We assess the extent to which familiarity with a
face lowers the response time for accurate classification
across our three judgments. There are several reasons why
we believe this experiment fills important gaps in our
understanding of familiar face processing. First, the use of a
matching task minimizes the memory and training
requirements necessary to carry out our three recognition
tasks. Also, regardless of whether the subject is matching a
face according to gender, identity, orientation (or any other
attribute we might choose), the nature of the response (a

Abstract
While previous studies have explored the effects of familiarity
on various kinds of visual face judgments, the role of
familiarity in face processing is not fully understood. Here, we
examine the effect of real-world personal familiarity in three
simple delayed-match-to-sample tasks in which subjects were
required to match faces on the basis of orientation (upright v.
inverted), gender and identity. We find that subjects had a
significant speed advantage with familiar faces in all three
tasks, with the advantage for familiarity in the orientation case
being markedly smaller than the other conditions. This
indicates that real-world experience with a face exerts a
powerful influence on face processing in tasks where identity
information is irrelevant, even in tasks that could in principle
be solved via low-level cues. These results underscore the
importance of experience in shaping visual recognition
processes.

Introduction
The human visual system effortlessly and automatically
extracts a wealth of information from face stimuli, including
identity, gender, expression, race, age, and a host of other
properties. For the most part, the ability to extract such
information from a given face does not require extensive
exposure to that particular face, and judgments of properties
such as gender or race are performed with high accuracy
even on completely novel faces. Even so, humans tend to
encounter a relatively small number of faces repeatedly, and
it is not surprising that these familiar faces may enjoy some
processing advantages relative to unfamiliar faces. (Ge,
Luo, Nishimuira, & Lee, 2003; O'Donnell & Bruce, 2001;
Bruce, Henderson, Newman, & Burton, 2001; Hancock,
Bruce, & Burton, 2000). However, it is not clear a priori
that all face judgments should necessarily benefit from
familiarity, nor is there any reason to believe that various
kinds of judgment should benefit equally from familiarity.
Variation in the advantage conferred by familiarity across
tasks could provide important clues to the nature of face
representations.
The conceptual orthogonality of many face judgments
(e.g. the expression of a face is independent of its gender)
36

left/right choice) is equated across tasks. This makes
comparisons across tasks more justifiable than when a
binary choice (male/female) is required in one task and a
multiple-category choice (expression or identity) is required
in another. Second, the use of personally familiar faces
obviates the need for training on novel images (which may
not lead to complete “familiarity”) or the use of celebrity
faces (which may be more distinctive than typical faces).
There is also reason to believe that personal acquaintances
should give rise to the strongest familiarity effects
(Clutterbuck & Johnston, 2002). Finally, by asking subjects
to perform a very easy matching task, we avoid the
possibility of a speed-accuracy trade-off by looking for
variations in RT while all subjects are performing highly
accurately.

the entire set of individuals in the database and asked to
select 9 individuals familiar to them, 5 of which were to be
of their gender. They were then asked to select an additional
9 individuals (5 gender matched) who they had never seen
before, or seen only infrequently (meaning once or twice).
Each gender-matched control was shown the faces selected
by their experimental group counterpart and asked if they
recognized anyone. Volunteers for the control group who
indicated that they did recognize individuals in the array
were asked to participate in a different experiment not
related to the present study.
Each subject participated in the “Orientation”, “Gender,”
and “Identity” tasks, with task order balanced across
subjects. In each task, a trial began with the presentation of
a cue image for 500ms in the center of the screen. After a
500ms pause, the subject was then presented with two
images (left and right), one that matched the cue image with
regard to the current task and another that did not. Subjects
were asked to indicate which stimulus matched the cue via
button presses as quickly and accurately as possible. Target
images remained on screen until the subject made a
response. Location of the target was randomized across
trials. (Figure 1)

Methods
Subjects
Twenty-four subjects (four men and twenty women, aged
18-25) participated in this study. Twelve of these subjects
were highly familiar with a subset of the individuals
depicted in the face database used here. The other twelve
subjects were gender-matched controls with no
acquaintances among the individuals in the database. All
subjects were compensated for their participation in this
study.

Stimuli
We used a database of faces depicting residents and
affiliates of an undergraduate dorm at MIT. The full image
set contains 190 unique individuals, half men and half
women. Each individual is pictured in left and right profile,
left and right ¾ view, and in two different frontal images.
The pictures were initially full-color and 640x480 pixels in
size.
For presentation, the images were resized to 128x96
pixels, and reduced to grayscale so that broad color cues
could not facilitate recognition of targets. To make the
matching tasks less trivial, target faces were also Gaussianblurred in Adobe Photoshop to approximately 6 cycles
across the face. Blurring was intended to discourage
subjects from performing matching based on small-scale
details like moles or blemishes on the face.
Cue images were generated for the “Gender” and
“Orientation” tasks by creating facial morphs of the images
in our database using MorphMan. The orientation cue image
was the result of morphing together all faces in the database.
For the “Gender” task, male and female cue images were
created by morphing together all the men and women in the
database respectively.

Figure 1: An illustration of the cued 2AFC task used in all
three tasks. An “Identity” trial is depicted here, with the
correct answer being the right-most image.

Procedure

In the “Orientation” task, the cue stimulus was always the
grand average morph described previously, presented
upright, unblurred and in full-color. Test images were

Subjects were seated approximately 0.5 m from a computer
monitor with no restrictions on head position. Before
beginning, subjects in the experimental group were shown
37

blurred, grayscale frontal images of one individual, one
presented upside-down and the other presented upright.
Each individual was used 4 times in this experiment, for a
grand total of 36 “familiar” trials and 36 “unfamiliar” trials
per subject.
In the “Gender” task, the cue image was either the average
female or average male morph described previously. The
cue was presented upright, unblurred and in full-color
followed by blurred, grayscale test images. Test images
always displayed one male and female, both drawn from the
“Familiar” pool or the “Unfamiliar” pool for the subject in
question. Each possible pair of differently gendered faces of
the same familiarity was used twice, once with the male
image as a cue, once with the female image as a cue, for a
grand total of 40 trials per condition. To limit subjects’
ability to utilize “pictorial information” (Bruce, 1983) to
perform the task, the particular view used for each pair of
test images was rotated through the two unique frontal
views and the two ¾ views available for each person.
Finally, in the “Identity” task, subjects were cued with
unblurred, upright, full-color profile images of the
individuals in their stimulus set. Test images were blurred,
grayscale images and also matched at test for familiarity as
described above. Each individual was used as a cue 4 times,
for a grand total of 36 trials per condition. As in the
“Gender” task, the view selected for the test images was
rotated through the frontal and ¾ views for each individual.
All stimulus presentation parameters and response
collection were carried out with the use of the Matlab
Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997).

subjects found the three implementations of this matching
task very easy.

Response Time
To examine the effects of facial familiarity on response
time, we take advantage of the fact that each subject was
required to perform both familiar and unfamiliar recognition
within the same matching task. This allows us to consider
paired differences between “Familiar” and “Unfamiliar”
faces for each subject, enabling us to factor out inter-subject
RT variability. For each subject, we compute the mean RT
for all correct “Familiar” and “Unfamiliar” trials within a
task. Our dependent variable is then simply the “Familiar”
mean subtracted from the “Unfamiliar” mean. If personal
familiarity does indeed give rise to faster recognition, we
shall primarily see positive values of this difference score in
the experimental group that significantly exceed those
obtained from the control group. If there is no effect, we
expect to see scores that are not significantly different from
those of controls.
A two-way ANOVA was carried out with task and subject
group as factors. A significant main effect of subject group
(Experimental > Control) was observed (p < 0.0001), but
there was only a marginally significant effect of task (p =
0.07). A significant interaction between subject group and
task was also observed (p < 0.05). Post-hoc Tukey’s tests
revealed that this interaction was due to a significant
difference between subject groups for both the “Gender”
and “Identity” tasks (p < 0.01), while the difference between
subject groups for the “Orientation” task was not
significant. Bar graphs of the difference scores obtained
from both groups are displayed in Figures 2 and 3.

Results
We expect that if facial familiarity can affect any of the
recognition processes recruited to complete the three tasks
described here, we shall see evidence of reduced response
time for correct judgments of orientation, gender, or identity
matching in the experimental group. Given that the tasks we
present are very easy, we do not expect to see any variation
in accuracy across subjects or tasks. If the relevant cognitive
processes are truly independent of familiarity, we expect
that responses to “Familiar” faces should be no faster than
those to “Unfamiliar” faces. To control for the fact that
some faces may be easier than others to classify according
to gender (or orientation and identity), we shall also directly
compare the speed advantage for “Familiar” v. “Unfamiliar”
faces in our experimental group to that derived from the
control group. In doing so, we are able to rule out any
effects of potentially confusing images that are only
accurately classified if one has personal knowledge of the
individual depicted.

Figure 2: The average RT advantage for familiarity in the
experimental group. Error bars represent +/- 1 S.E. of the
mean. Each difference is significantly greater than zero.

Accuracy
Average performance for all subjects across all three tasks
exceeded 95% correct. A two-way ANOVA with subject
group and task as factors yielded no significant main effects
or interactions (F < 1 in all cases). As we expected, all

38

Figure 3: The average RT advantage in the Control group
for the personal acquaintances selected by subjects in the
Experimental group. Error bars represent +/- 1 S.E. of the
mean. We note that the speed advantage for the Gender and
Identity tasks is significantly less than that seen in the
experimental group and is also not significantly different
from zero. This indicates that the faces selected as
‘Familiar’ by our Experimental group were not simply
easier to classify according to gender or identity. The
Orientation speed advantage for this group is not
significantly greater than zero, but is also not significantly
smaller than the speed advantage seen in the Experimental
group.

“low-level” task and how it impacts more complex
judgments.
It is also interesting that the magnitude of the speed
advantage is so similar across the Gender and Identity tasks.
This is particularly compelling given the RT difference for
processing of unfamiliar faces across these two tasks. In
Figure 4 for example, we see that for subjects in the
experimental group, familiar faces were matched to the cue
image in the Identity task in as much time as it took to
determine the orientation of the same faces. This is
remarkable, considering that judging facial orientation is an
extremely low-level task whereas matching identity across
views is far more difficult computationally. By contrast,
even though there is much more room for improvement in
the RT for gender matching, it does not undergo a similarly
dramatic increase, but rather decreases by approximately the
same absolute amount. This may suggest a wide-spread
mechanism by which familiarity affects many different
recognition processes in the same way, a topic we shall
discuss in more detail.
Finally, it is somewhat surprising that gender matching
appears to take a good bit longer than identity matching.
This may be an artifact of the blurring manipulation applied
to our target images, but gender differences between male
and female faces are generally expressed in coarse, highcontrast features (Russell, 2003). Thus, gender should not
be disproportionately difficult to recover from blurred
images.

Further examination of the difference scores obtained from
the “Orientation” tasks reveals a potentially interesting, but
inconclusive result. A one-sample t-test on the difference
scores obtained from the Experimental group reveals that
the mean difference between “Unfamiliar” and “Familiar”
RT is larger than zero to a highly significant level (p <
0.005). The same statistic calculated for the Control group
yields a non-significant difference (p > 0.4).
While it is premature to conclude from this that personal
familiarity is definitely able to affect such a low-level visual
judgment as face orientation, we find the consistency within
the experimental group with regard to this speed difference
to be compelling. Moreover, the comparison to the control
group may be less crucial in this condition than for gender
or identity matching. A particular face may be difficult to
assign gender to, or to recognize from a new view, making
it crucial to compare experimental group performance to
that of controls. However it seems difficult to imagine how
a face could appear “more upside down” than another (as
opposed to more feminine or more masculine), weakening
the argument that the speed advantage for familiar faces we
observe in the experimental group for the orientation task is
a function of the particular faces displayed therein. We must
point out however, that the RT difference between familiar
and unfamiliar faces in this task is much smaller than that
found for gender or identity matching, however
(approximately 15 ms compared to approximately 100ms)
indicating that even if this effect is real there may be some
important difference between how familiarity affects this

Figure 4: Average RT for matching across task for
experimental group subjects. We display the data in this
form to point out the large differences in mean RT for
“unfamiliar” gender and identity matching that are
nonetheless reduced by the same amount when “familiar”
faces are presented to the experimental group. It is
interesting that the Gender task does not benefit more from
familiarity, and may suggest a unified mechanism by which
familiarity influences both processes.
39

know, for example, that as faces become familiar, subjects
shift from using primarily external face features for
recognition to relying more heavily on internal features
(Young et al.,1985). It seems unlikely that extracting
internal features from blurred images such as those we have
used here would be more accurate or efficient for gender or
identity matching, but a similar change in the information
used to perform the task may be driving the effects we see
here. Some experimental evidence suggests we should rule
out the well-known “configural/featural” distinction as a
candidate (see Collishaw & Hole, 2000), but that does not
exclude other changes in how features are weighted relative
to face familiarity. Classification images could be a useful
tool for exploring the possibility that the information used to
perform various tasks changes with familiarity. In
particular, the “Bubbles” paradigm may be a good vehicle
for understanding how different visual information may be
used for matching familiar and unfamiliar faces (Gosselin &
Schyns, 2001; Schyns, Bonnar, & Gosselin, 2002). For
example, comparisons of “bubbles” images obtained from
performing matching tasks on familiar and unfamiliar faces
could indicate if image information is used differently as
faces become familiar.
Another unified mechanism by which familiarity could
impact many distinct facial recognition processes is through
a change in criterion. This would imply that there are no real
changes in the initial selection of image features, or the
efficiency of feature extraction and evaluation. Rather, the
speed advantage for familiarity would be the result of
lowering the threshold necessary for familiar faces to be
accurately classified. In this model, facial familiarity
(old/new face) would be processed rapidly, and used to
determine how much evidence is required before all other
processes return a value for their respective judgments. Old
faces would receive low thresholds, meaning that very little
evidence could give rise to successful classification. For
new faces, the model would adopt a more conservative
criterion, requiring more information (and thus more time)
before accepting an output. This global criterion shift would
predict relatively uniform speed advantages across tasks
given the same level of familiarity. Comparing the size of
RT differences across a wider range of tasks than presented
here would provide some initial support for this model, as
would disconfirming the hypothesis that subjects use
different image features to process familiar faces.
Finally, what should we make (if anything) of the small
RT advantage found for orientation matching in the
experimental group? One way to think about this “lowlevel” task is as a baseline measure of how much previous
exposure with a face makes any subsequent processing
easier. Having seen a face before may simply prime all
pathways in the visual stream that deal with that face,
“clearing a path” for future recognition. To the extent that
such a global priming effect might exist, the result from the
orientation task suggests that for any visual judgment
regarding a familiar face, a small (~15ms) RT advantage
may be observed. However, given that this RT difference

Discussion
We have found that personal familiarity with faces increases
the speed with which gender matching and identity
matching across views can be performed. This suggests that
facial familiarity, sex, and identity are not independent
cognitive processes, but rather interact with one another.
Moreover, by inspecting Figure 2 we can see that the speed
advantage obtained for performing gender matching is more
or less of the same magnitude as that obtained for identity
matching across views. Finally, our experimental group
showed a very small familiar-face advantage for matching
face orientation. This difference was not significantly
different from that of the control group, but was
significantly larger than zero. This effect may mean that
familiarity with a face can affect very simple low-level
judgments, although not to the same degree as it affects
more complex visual tasks.
An interesting theoretical question resulting from these
findings is how one should revise a model such as Bruce
and Young’s (1986) to incorporate an interaction between
facial familiarity and other recognition processes. That is to
say, what is the mechanism by which familiarity with a face
results in faster judgments of gender and identity?
One possibility is that there may be no single mechanism
of familiarity that cuts across all of the tasks described here.
Familiarity may interface with gender and identity matching
in fundamentally different ways, for example. Though both
of these processes were evaluated in the context of matching
tasks with the same structure, this does not mean that the
recognition problems in question are actually the same. In
particular, the identity matching task requires the subject to
generalize an object label across a pose change, while the
gender task does not. Thus, it could be the case that
familiarity enhances performance in these tasks in
substantially different ways. For the identity matching task,
it could be the case that familiar faces are simply
represented across a wider range of views than unfamiliar
faces. In the case of the gender task, we would need to
determine another aspect of the relevant recognition process
that was similarly affected, as it is difficult to describe this
task in terms of view invariance.
We note however, that Troje and Kersten (1999) suggest
that there is no such difference in the use of object-centered
vs. view-centered representations across familiar and
unfamiliar faces. This gives us good reason to suspect that
the problems being solved in these two matching tasks may
be more similar to one another than we might initially
expect. Still, how might familiarity with a face effect
performance in this matching task?
One possibility is that familiarity induces a change in
processing strategy. Subjects may pay attention to different
parts of unfamiliar faces, for example. When confronted
with an unfamiliar face, it may be that subjects rely on
relevant image cues that are highly reliable across the
population but more difficult to extract. If a face is
confirmed as familiar, different features that can be
extracted and evaluated faster may be given priority. We
40

Clutterbuck, R., & Johnston, R. A. (2002). Exploring levels
of face familiarity by using an indirect face-matching
measure. Perception, 31, 985-994.
Collishaw, S.M. & Hole, G.J. (2000) Featural and
configurational processes in the recognition of faces of
different familiarity. Perception, 29, 893-909.
Gallegos, D. R., & Tranel, D. (2005). Positive facial affect
facilitates the identification of famous faces. Brain Lang.,
93(3), 338-348.
Ge, L., Luo, J., Nishimuira, M., & Lee, K. (2003). The
lasting impression of chairman Mao: hyperfidelity of
familiar-face memory. Perception, 32(5), 601-614.
Gosselin, F. & Schyns, P.G. (2001) Bubbles: a technique to
reveal the use of information in recognition tasks. Vision
Research, 41(17), 2261-2271.
Hancock, P. J. B., Bruce, V., & Burton, M. (2000).
Recognition of unfamiliar faces. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 4(9), 330-337.
Kaufmann, J. M., & Schweinberger, S. R. (2004).
Expression influences the recognition of familiar faces.
Perception, 33(4), 399-408.
O'Donnell, C., & Bruce, V. (2001). Familiarisation with
faces selectively enhances sensitivity to changes made to
the eyes. Perception, 30, 755-764.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: transforming numbers into movies. Spatial
Vision, 10, 437-442.
Rossion, B. (2002). Is sex categorisation from faces really
parallel to face recognition? Visual Cognition, 9, 10031020.
Russell, R. (2003) Sex, beauty, and the relative luminance
of facial features, Perception, 32,1093-1107
Schyns, P. G., Bonnar, L. & Gosselin, F. (2002). Show me
the features! Understanding recognition from the use of
visual information. Psychological Science, 13, 402-409.
Troje, N. F. & Kersten, D. (1999) Viewpoint-dependent
recognition of familiar faces. Perception, 28, 483-487.
Walker, S., Bruce, V., & O'Malley, C. (1995). Facial
identity and facial speech processing: familiar faces and
voices in the McGurk effect. Perceptual Psychophysics,
57(8), 1124-33.
Young, A. W., Hay, D. C., McWeeny, K. H., Flude, B. M.,
& Ellis, A. W. (1985) Matching familiar and unfamiliar
faces on internal and external features. Perception, 14,
737-746.
Young, A. W., McWeeny, K. H., Hay, D. C., & Ellis, A. W.
(1986). Matching familiar and unfamilar faces on identity
and expression. Psychological Research, 48, 63-68.

was only significantly different from zero (not from
controls), further work examining the robustness of the
effect is necessary before any firm conclusions should be
drawn. At present, however, we find the possibility that
familiarity with a face can affect such a simple task for
which identity is completely irrelevant intriguing.
We suggest that the current results demonstrate that
familiarity can powerfully affect a range of visual
judgments in face recognition, including identity, gender,
and possibly the assessment of low-level image properties.
Our results, combined with those from other laboratories,
highlight the need for alternate cognitive models of face
recognition that incorporate these interactions. Further work
elucidating what changes in processing occur as a face
becomes familiar may also prove enlightening.

Conclusions
Facial familiarity was shown to reduce the RT necessary for
accurate gender and identity matching by roughly the same
amount. Judgments of facial orientation may also benefit
weakly from facial familiarity, but this effect is smaller and
less robust. Facial familiarity was shown to affect a range of
face recognition tasks in an extremely simple matching task
using images of personal acquaintances.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Pawan Sinha for his support
of this work. Also, we thank Richard Russell for the use of
his face database, as well as the residents of MIT’s Senior
Haus for posing for the photos. BJB and DC were supported
by National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate
Fellowships.

References
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Bruce, V. (1983) Recognising faces. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B:
Biological Sciences, 302, 423-436.
Bruce, V. (1986). Influences of familiarity on the processing
of faces. Perception, 15, 387-397.
Bruce, V., Henderson, Z., Newman, C., & Burton, A. M.
(2001). Matching identities of familiar and unfamiliar
faces caught on CCTV images. Journal of Experimental
Psychology (Applied), 7(3), 207-218.
Bruce, V., & Young, A. (1986). Understanding face
recognition. British Journal of Psychology, 77, 305-327.
Bruyer, R., Leclere, S., & Quinet, P. (2004). Ethnic
categorisation of faces is not independent of face identity.
Perception, 33(2), 169-179.
Burton, A. M., & Bonner, L. (2004). Familiarity influences
judgments of sex: the case of voice recognition.
Perception, 33(6), 747-752.

41

