UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Predominance of Nonstructural Factors in the Processing of Gapping Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9cp2b8zr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Hendriks, Petra
Hoeks, John C.J.
Zijlstra, Louisa J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Predominance of Nonstructural Factors
in the Processing of Gapping Sentences
John C. J. Hoeks (j.c.j.hoeks@rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Petra Hendriks (p.hendriks@rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Louisa J. Zijlstra (l.j.zijlstra.1@student.rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.
Abstract
Two studies investigated the effects of pragmatic context and
prosody on the processing of sentences like John greeted Paul
yesterday and Ben today. This sentence is ambiguous between
the clearly preferred 'nongapping' reading, where John
greeted Ben, and the unpreferred 'gapping' reading, where Ben
greeted Paul. Participants listen to dialogues and give a
speeded response as to which reading of an ambiguous target
sentence first comes to mind. The results show that context
and prosody have independent and strong effects on the
choice for gapping, and that, in the right combination, they
can make gapping the preferred reading. Thus, even if
structural factors were to play a role in processing gapping,
they are outweighed by context and prosody.

Introduction
The phenomenon of 'gapping' has long been a thorn in the
side of formal and psychological theories of language,
mainly because it involves the seemingly unprincipled
omission of words from an utterance without changing its
formal meaning. Linguistic theory has difficulty assigning
syntactic structure to words or phrases that are not actually
present. For psycholinguistic models, modelling the
comprehension of gapping is also problematic because it
crucially hinges on the use of prosodic information, a factor
which, due to its multi-dimensionality and complexity, is
still poorly understood. Consider sentence (1a).
1a. John greeted Paul yesterday and Ben today.
1b. John greeted Paul yesterday and Ben greeted Paul today.
1c. John greeted Paul yesterday and John greeted Ben today.
In this sentence it is impossible to uniquely identify which
elements were left out; the sentence is ambiguous between
reading (1b), where first John greets Paul, and then Ben
greets Paul, and reading (1c), where John greeted both Paul
and Ben. We will follow linguistic convention and call the
first form of ellipsis, where verb and grammatical object are
elided 'gapping' (1b) and the second one 'conjunction
reduction', or 'nongapping' (1c).

Gapping and Prosody
It has been noted in the literature that it can be very hard for

listeners sometimes to arrive at the gapping interpretation of
an ambiguous sentence; indeed, the nongapping version
seems to be highly preferred. For instance, Carlson (2001)
showed in a written questionnaire study that in sentences
very similar to (1a), gapping interpretations are chosen only
4% of the time. Unfortunately, she did not include these
sentences in a replication experiment where stimuli were
presented auditorily, and prosody was manipulated to either
bias towards the gapping or towards the nongapping
interpretation. Bias was accomplished by making use of the
fact that placement of pitch accent correlates strongly with
the presence of new or contrastive information (e.g.,
Lambrecht, 1994).
Let us take a closer look at sentence (1a). In both the
gapping and the nongapping interpretation there are two
pairs of elements in each conjunct that are contrasted. In the
gapping reading (e.g., 1b), John and Ben make up the first
pair of contrasted elements, and yesterday and today
constitute the second pair of elements that is contrasted. In
the nongapping condition (e.g., 1c), however, the first pair
of contrastive elements is different: it is formed by Paul and
Ben (i.e., John sees Paul on one day, and John sees Ben on
another). Thus, the gapping and the nongapping reading of
an ambiguous sentence seem to have distinct prosodic
realizations by which the listener can tell them apart. But
does the listener use this information?
The answer is yes, according to Carlson’s results, the
listener does use these prosodic cues, but not to the extent
that gapping can become the preferred interpretation;
nongapping is always preferred, no matter how strong the
prosodic bias might be. Gapping promoting prosody can
raise the percentage of gapping responses to a maximum of
44%, still leaving a majority of nongapping responses.
Carlson concludes that prosody is indeed an important factor
in the processing of gapping structures, but that there must
be another, stronger, factor at work to create this seemingly
invincible preference for nongapping structures. What can
this factor be?

Gapping and Context
Carlson concluded from her experiments that the major
force resisting the gapping interpretation is the well-known
Minimal Attachment principle: in case of ambiguity, choose

1511

the simplest syntactic structure in terms of nodes in the
respective syntactic trees. However, there are a number of
reasons not to accept this conclusion. Besides the fact that
different syntactic formalisms give rise to different
predictions about the syntactic complexity of gapping and
nongapping readings (under some linguistic theories there is
no complexity difference), and the fact that choosing the
simplest structure implies that all possible structures are
built and compared, which seems to be computationally
challenging at the very least, there is a strong competing
explanation, namely one involving the principle of Minimal
Topic Structure.
For instance, Hoeks, Vonk & Schriefers (2002) provided
strong off-line and on-line evidence for their view that
readers, and listeners alike, prefer to have one and only one
topic in any given utterance (hence minimal topic structure),
unless contextual or prosodic cues suggest there is more
than one. A topic can be roughly defined as the thing the
utterance provides information about (which most of the
time is the grammatical subject of a sentence). This
preference for a single topic is predicted to lead to
processing difficulty when a sentence has not one but two
topics, as is the case in Sentence Coordinations (e.g.,
Nathan [topic1] helped Wilma and Tessa [topic2] laughed).
Presenting these sentences in a context promoting two
topics, instead of the usual single topic, effectively
eliminated this processing difficulty. This suggests that Scoordinations are difficult not because they are possibly
syntactically more complex, but because they are
pragmatically more complex in terms of topic structure.
The importance of context for the processing of
gapping sentences has been signaled as early as 1976 by
Kuno. However, the principles that Kuno identified as
important were based on intuitive judgment and were not, at
the time, tested empirically. More recently, Keller (2001)
conducted two off-line acceptability experiments to
investigate whether the right context could indeed increase
the acceptability of gapping sentences. He found that
unambiguous gapping sentences (such as, e.g., She
accompanied the boy to school and he to university) could
be made as acceptable as their nongapping counterparts by
using a suitable context (e.g., Where did Hanna and Michael
accompany the boy to?). Keller’s experiments do not
answer the question of whether gapping has indeed become
the preferred structure in ambiguous structures, nor can they
say anything (or only very implicitly so) about the factor
prosody, as only written stimuli were used. In the present
two experiments we do want to find out under what
circumstances, if any, gapping can become the structure of
choice for the listener, by manipulating both context and
prosody of ambiguous gapping sentences. Doing so will
enable us to gauge the strength of each of these factors that
seem crucial to the processing of gapping structures.

Experiment 1
We conducted two experiments using a speeded auditory
decision task, in which participants had to indicate as fast as

possible what reading (i.e., gapping or nongapping) first
came to mind after hearing the ambiguous target sentence.
The first experiment used sentences such as (1a), which in
Carlson's questionnaire study received a gapping reading
only 4% of the time. If we can achieve a gapping percentage
of over 50% in this specific set of sentences, then we may
really have identified the right prosodic and pragmatic
factors. The second experiment used the reverse logic, in
that context and prosody were put in place to increase the
number of nongapping interpretations, even when
nongapping meant semantically implausible (which
constitutes a really strong constraint against any kind of
interpretation!). But let us first look at the processing of
plausible sentences.

Method
Participants Thirty-two native speakers of Dutch were paid
for participating in this experiment (27 female; mean age 21
years, age range 17-25). This imbalance in gender should
not cause problems, because recent research has shown that,
though there may be gender differences in the perception of
emotional prosody, the sexes seem to be equally proficient
when it comes to understanding linguistic prosody, which is
of concern here (Raithel & Hielscher-Fastabend, 2004).
Materials & Design For this experiment, 32 sets of minidialogues were constructed, each set consisting of four
versions of a given dialogue. Four experimental lists were
constructed with 8 experimental dialogues per condition,
and no list containing more than one version of a given item.
Added to these 32 dialogues were another 32 dialogues from
a related experiment, which served as fillers for Experiment
1, and which will be discussed as Experiment 2 (see below).
The order in which experimental and filler items appeared
was determined semi-randomly and was the same for each
list. Each list was presented to an equal number of
participants and each participant saw only one list. The
experimental items for the first experiment appeared in four
versions as exemplified below (2a-d). Note that English
translations are given of the original Dutch stimuli (target
sentences are structurally identical between languages).
Please note also that CAPITALS indicate the presence of a
pitch accent.
2a. (GG) Gapping Context, Gapping Prosody
Context: Wilma has bought a new house. With what did Nathan
and Tessa help her ?
Target: NATHAN helped Wilma with PAINTING and TESSA
with WALLPAPERING.
Proposition (Gapping): Tessa helped Wilma.

2b. (GN) Gapping Context, Nongapping Prosody
Context: Wilma has bought a new house. With what did Nathan
and Tessa help her ?
Target: Nathan helped WILMA with PAINTING and TESSA with
WALLPAPERING.
Proposition (Gapping): Tessa helped Wilma.

2c. (NG) Nongapping Context, Gapping Prosody

1512

Context: Wilma and Tessa have each bought a new house. With
what did Nathan help them ?
Target: NATHAN helped Wilma with PAINTING and TESSA
with WALLPAPERING.
Proposition (Gapping): Tessa helped Wilma.

2d. (NN) Nongapping Context, Nongapping Prosody
Context: Wilma and Tessa have each bought a new house. With
what did Nathan help them ?
Target: Nathan helped WILMA with PAINTING and TESSA with
WALLPAPERING.
Proposition (Gapping): Tessa helped Wilma.

These dialogues were created by crossing the factors
Context and Prosody.
Context The contexts employed here served three distinct
purposes. First, they were designed to promote a certain
topic-structure (either one single topic, promoting
nongapping, or two contrastive topics, promoting gapping).
Secondly, the contexts provide background knowledge,
sometimes also called ‘given’ or ‘old’ information. For
instance, the fact that Wilma was helped is made clear in the
context sequence of (2a) and is therefore old information in
the subsequent target sentence. An utterance does not
consist merely of ‘old’ information, of course, but crucially
instantiates a link between what is known and what is new.
This new information expressed by an utterance is called the
‘focus’. Often, the focus of a sentence coincides with its
grammatical object, but other grammatical elements can
receive focus too. For example, in a sentence with a
nongapping reading such as (1c), not only the pair of direct
objects (e.g., Paul and Ben) stand in a contrastive focus
relation, but also the pair of adjunctive phrases (e.g.,
yesterday and today). So the third purpose of the context
was to set up contrastive focus relations. Note that the pairs
that are in focus are the same pairs that receive pitch accent
(see Gapping and Prosody section above; see also Prosody
section below).
Prosody Prosody is a multi-dimensional construct, and it
would be very interesting to see what aspects of it (e.g.,
energy variations, duration of pauses etc.) play a role in the
processing of gapping structures. However, for our present
experiment we will focus on the role of pitch contours,
which have been shown to crucially contribute to sentence
comprehension. Figure 1 shows the pitch contours of the
example sentence in both prosodic realizations. What
distinguishes the two prosodies is the pattern of pitch
accents in the first conjunct. In the prosody promoting
gapping (see Figure 1, upper panel), the name of the direct
object, Wilma, is de-accented because it is background
knowledge, which is required if this information is to be left
out of the second conjunct. The name of the subject,
Nathan, does receive an accent, because it is part of the
contrastive topic construction involving both Nathan and
Tessa. Each of them is expected to perform some action. In
the nongapping condition (see Figure 1, lower panel), the
pattern of pitch accents in the first conjunct is completely
reversed. The name of the grammatical subject,

Figure 1. Pitch contours of an example target sentence.
Upper panel: prosody promoting gapping; Lower panel:
prosody promoting nongapping.
Nathan, is now de-accented, as it is the single topic of the
sentence, and thus does not receive pitch accent (e.g.,
Lambrecht, 1994). In this case there are no contrastive
topics. What is contrasted here is the direct object in the first
conjunct, Wilma, which is set against the purported
grammatical object in the second conjunct, Tessa. Because
of this contrastive (focus-) relation, both receive pitch
accent.
Two of the combinations (i.e., 2b and 2c) are in effect
infelicitous, because they contain a mismatch between the
expectations set up by the context and the actual prosodic
realization in the target sentence. Comparing the results of
these two specific conditions will show which one of the
two factors is the most influential with respect to
interpretation: the pragmatic context or the prosody of the
target sentence.
All propositions in Experiment 1 represented the gapping
reading of the ambiguous target sentence. The propositions
belonging to the filler items, however, all stated the
nongapping reading of the ambiguous target sentence. Thus,
participants were presented with an equal number of
gapping and nongapping structures (i.e., 32 of each). A
practice session consisting of 16 dialogues preceded the
actual experiment.
Procedure Participants were seated behind a computer
screen in a sound-proof cabin. The dialogues were presented
to them auditorily via two speakers. Each dialogue was
preceded by a range of three asterisks appearing in the
center of the screen ("***"), which indicated the start of a
new item. After 1060 ms, the context sentence, spoken by a
male speaker, was played, followed by the target sentence,
spoken by a female speaker. The proposition (male speaker
again) was played subsequently, together with a visual

1513

1

presentation of three question marks ("???"), indicating that
the participants should make a response.
Participants were instructed to indicate whether the
proposition corresponded with the statement made by the
female speaker (i.e., the target sentence), even if they
thought the proposition sounded a little odd sometimes (this
part was included with Experiment 2 in mind, see below).
They could use the right SHIFT key on a keyboard for
“YES” and the left SHIFT key for “NO”. Participants were
encouraged to respond as fast as they could and to follow
their first impression; it was stressed that there were no
'correct' or 'incorrect' answers.

0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0
GG
GN
NG
NN
Proportion Gapping Responses

3100
2900

Results

2700

Analysis Response times were calculated separately for
“YES” responses and “NO” responses. In Experiment 1, a
“YES” response is always a choice for the gapping reading;
“NO” responses are choices for nongapping. The proportion
of “YES” responses was also determined for each
participant and each item. For all dependent measures, two
analyses were performed: an F1-ANOVA on participant
means for each condition and an F2-ANOVA on item
means. The factors Context (promoting gapping vs.
promoting nongapping) and Prosody (promoting gapping vs.
promoting nongapping) were treated as within-participants
and within-items factors. In addition, a planned comparison
was performed between the two conditions where context
and prosody biased towards different interpretations (see 2b
and 2c). Mean response times (in ms) and mean proportions
gapping response are presented graphically in Figure 2.

2500

Proportion Gapping Responses The main effects of
Context and of Prosody were highly significant on both
participant- and item-analyses (all p-values < .0001). These
results were qualified, however, by a significant two-way
interaction between Context and Prosody (F1(1,31)=8.20,
p<.01; F2(1,31)=8.62, p<.01). This interaction suggested
that the effect of prosody favoring gapping was stronger
when the context favored gapping (i.e., an effect of 25%),
than when the context did not (i.e., an effect of 8%). Posthoc tests revealed that both these effects were significant
(p<.05). The planned comparison showed that the condition
where the context biased towards gapping responses and the
prosody did not (i.e., “GN”) produced significantly more
gapping responses than in the condition where the context
did not favor gapping, but the prosody did (i.e., “NG”). The
highest proportion of gapping responses, 61%, was found in
the “GG” condition, where both context and prosody
promoted gapping.
Response Times “YES” Responses Few participants gave
a “YES” response in every condition (with fewest “YES”
responses in the “NN” condition, see upper panel of Fig. 2),
which led to a considerable number of empty cells in the
Repeated Measures ANOVA. The number of participants
upon which to base this analysis became so small (and with
that, the statistical power of the test) that we decided to
perform a Univariate ANOVA (which can be seen as stricter
than the repeated measures ANOVA, as it tests against a
larger error variance), with Context and Prosody as fixed

2300
2100
GG
GN
NG
NN
Response Times YES to Gapping
3100
2900
2700
2500
2300
2100
GG
GN
NG
NN
Response Times NO to gapping

Figure 2. “GG”=Gapping context, Gapping prosody;
“GN”=Gapping context, Nongapping prosody;
“NG”=Nongapping context, Gapping prosody;
“NN”=Nongapping context, Nongapping prosody.
between-group factors. The main effect of Context was
significant in the analysis by items, though not by
participants (F1(1,83)=3.34, p=.13; F2(1,98)=10.18, p<.01).
This main effect reflected the shorter response times for
accepting the gapping interpretation of the target sentence
when the context promoted gapping (2431 ms; SE=96) than
when it did not (2677 ms; SE=128). No main effect of
Prosody was found, nor was there a significant interaction
(all p-values > .20).
Response Times “NO” Responses Though Repeated
Measures ANOVA's were possible as there were only few
empty cells for the “NO” responses, we will only report the
results for the Univariate ANOVA, for ease of comparison
with the previous section (results of the Univariate and
Repeated Measures analyses were identical). The main
effect of Context was significant by participants and by
items (F1(1,120)=5.10, p<.05; F2(1,124)=25.63, p<.001).
Thus, when the context favored gapping , it took
participants significantly longer to reject the gapping
interpretation (2427 ms; SE=73) than when the context did
not (2199 ms; SE=70). No main effect of Prosody was
found, nor was there a significant interaction (all F-values <
1).

1514

Discussion
In this experiment we wanted to find out whether it was
possible to make the gapping reading the preferred
interpretation of an ambiguous structure containing ellipsis.
If we could, we should see an increase in percentage from
about 4% in isolation (see Carlson, 2001) to over 50% in the
present experiment. Indeed, we saw that given the right
context and the right prosody, participants chose gapping
over 60% of the time (which is significantly different from
50%; p<.05). Importantly, the pattern of reaction times
convincingly shows that there is no sign of any speedaccuracy trade-off; on the contrary, there seems to be a
strong linear relationship between proportion of gapping
responses given, the ease and speed with which they are
given, and the difficulty of rejecting the gapping response.
These results suggest that, even if structural
considerations were to play a role in resolving ellipsis, they
are subordinate to the combination of pragmatic and
prosodic information. However, there must be some reason
why the 61% that was found here is not 90% or more, which
would be expected if context and prosody would have really
won hands down. This could of course be due to matters of
methodology: we used a task that required participants to
consciously access a memory trace of (part of) a dialogue
they had just heard. This procedure may give rise to
considerable noise in the decision process, and thus to a less
than perfect end-result. On the other hand, there may also be
a theoretical factor at work which we have not addressed
here. Future investigations must make this clear.
In addition, we wanted to know which one of the two
factors, context or prosody, was actually guiding the
process; in other words, which one was most important for
choosing gapping? Our results are very clear in showing that
prosody and context both have an independent contribution
to the processing of gapping structures. For instance, the
effect of prosody in promoting gapping responses is
significant in both the gapping and the nongapping context.
However, our results also indicate that in the case of context
and prosody pointing in different directions, context wins.
That is, there are significantly more gapping responses when
context favors gapping and prosody does not (“GN”), than
when it is prosody that favors gapping, and the context does
not (“NG”). Furthermore, the analyses on response times
were very clear in that they showed only a significant main
effect of Context, but not of Prosody. Thus, pragmatic
context outweighs prosody in the processing of sentences
with ellipsis.

Experiment 2
The clear conclusion from Experiment 1 is put to a stringent
test in Experiment 2. As was indicated earlier, this
experiment uses a different logic than Experiment 1. In
Experiment 2, the gapping response is the preferred
response altogether, presumably only because choosing the
normally prevailing nongapping reading results in semantic
anomaly. Consider, for instance, dialogue (3a). If listeners
choose the default nongapping reading, they will end up
with a representation of the sentence reflecting that “some
plasterer filled some painter”, which of course does not
correspond to the usual state of affairs in the world. So what

we are interested to see in this experiment is whether the
context and the prosody manipulations promoting
nongapping responses are as strong as when they encourage
gapping responses. They must perhaps even be stronger,
because they have to take it up against semantic
implausibility, which is indeed very likely to be a strong
determiner of sentence interpretation in case of ambiguity.

Method
Participants The same thirty-two native speakers of Dutch
who took part in Experiment 1.
Materials & Design The dialogues for this experiment
appeared in four versions, see examples below (3a-d).
3a. (GG) Gapping Context, Gapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes. What did the plasterer and the
painter do?
Target: The PLASTERER filled the wall with a SPATULA and
the PAINTER with a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

3b. (GN) Gapping Context, Nongapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes. What did the plasterer and the
painter do?
Target: The plasterer filled the WALL with a SPATULA and the
PAINTER with a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

3c. (NG) Nongapping Context, Gapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes, said the painter. What did the
plasterer do?
Target: The PLASTERER filled the wall with a SPATULA and
the PAINTER with a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

3d. (NN) Nongapping Context, Nongapping Prosody
Context: The wall was full of holes, said the painter. What did the
plasterer do?
Target: The plasterer filled the WALL with a SPATULA and the
PAINTER with a FILLING KNIFE.
Proposition (Nongapping): The plasterer filled the painter.

Results
See Figure 3 (next page) for a graphical presentation of
mean proportions nongapping response and response times.
Proportion Nongapping Responses The main effects of
Context and of Prosody were significant on both participantand item-analysis (Context: F1(1,31)=5.69, p<.05;
F2(1,31)=22.76, p<.001; Prosody: (F1(1,31)=13.48, p<.01;
F2(1,31)=13.26, p<.01)). Participants accepted the
implausible nongapping reading significantly more often
(30% of the time) when the context indeed promoted
nongapping than when it promoted the gapping reading
(21% of the time). At the same time, there was an effect of
prosody: the nongapping interpretation was chosen
significantly more often when the target sentence was
pronounced with a nongapping prosody (31% of the time) as

1515

compared to when it had a gapping prosody (20% of the
time).
The interaction of Context and Prosody was marginally
significant by participants, and not significant by items
(F1(1,31)=2.82, p=.10; F2(1,31) <1). This very weak
interaction may be held to suggest a trend for a somewhat
stronger effect of prosody in the nongapping context (i.e., a
13% increase in nongapping) than in the gapping context
(i.e., a 9% increase). The planned comparison did not reveal
a significant difference between “GN” and “NG”.

1
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0
GG
GN
NG
NN
Proportion Nongapping Responses

Response Times “YES” and “NO”-Responses Statistical
analysis revealed only one effect that approached
significance, which was the main effect of Context in
response times for “YES” responses (Univariate analysis).
This main effect was marginally significant by items, but
did not reach significance in the analysis by participants
(F1(1,60)=1.97, p=.17; F2(1,108)=2.84, p=.095). The effect
suggested a trend for participants to be faster to say “YES”
to nongapping when the context favored nongapping, than
when the context favored gapping (a difference of 227 ms).
No other effects or planned comparisons were significant.

3100
2900
2700
2500
2300
2100
GG
GN
NG
NN
Response Times YES to Nongapping
3100

Discussion

2900

This second experiment showed that even in the face of a
very strong adversary such as semantic implausibility did
pragmatic context and prosody have strong and independent
effects on the interpretation of sentences with ellipsis.
Indeed, if context and prosody teamed up to favor
nongapping, it was chosen almost 40% of the time (which is
barely different from 50%, p=.046)! This is really an
accomplishment, given the enormous pressure not to choose
an implausible interpretation. There was no significant
difference between the two conditions with conflicting
factors. Nevertheless, the evidence from the response times
does suggest that Context was more important in the process
of choosing the nongapping option than Prosody. This leads
us to conclude that, again, pragmatic context is stronger than
prosody in the processing of sentences with ellipsis.

2700

Conclusion
These two experiments made very clear that nonstructural
factors such as context and prosody are predominant in the
processing of gapping structures. Experiment 1 showed that
the right context and the right prosody can make gapping the
preferred interpretation (gapping is chosen over 60% of the
time). Experiment 2 showed that the right combination of
pragmatic context and prosody can encourage listeners to
choose the nongapping reading almost 40% of the time,
even if this reading is highly implausible! Both experiments
indicated that context and prosody have strong and
independent effects on processing gapping. Context appears
to be the stronger factor though: very clearly so in
Experiment 1, admittedly rather less convincingly in
Experiment 2. These findings establish pragmatic context
and prosody as key factors in human sentence processing.

2500
2300
2100
GG
GN
NG
NN
Response Times NO to Nongapping

Figure 3. “GG”=Gapping context, Gapping prosody;
“GN”=Gapping context, Nongapping prosody;
“NG”=Nongapping context, Gapping prosody;
“NN”=Nongapping context, Nongapping prosody.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by grant # 015.001.103 from the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research, awarded to
Petra Hendriks. We are grateful to Erik-Jan Smits and Maartje
Schreuder for lending their voices to our dialogues.

References
Carlson, K. (2001). The effects of parallellism and prosody in the
processing of gapping structures. Language and Speech, 44, 1-26.
Raithel, V., & Hielscher-Fastabend, M. (2004). Emotional and
linguistic perception of prosody. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopedica,
56, 7-13.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Vonk, W., & Schriefers, H. (2002). Processing
coordinated structures in context. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46, 99-119.
Keller, F. (2001). Experimental evidence for constraint competition
in gapping constructions. In: G. Müller & W. Sternefeld (Eds.),
Competition in syntax (pp. 211-248).
Kuno, S. (1976). Gapping. A functional analysis. Linguistic Inquiry,
7, 300-318.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence form:
Topic, focus, and the mental representation of discourse referents.
Cambridge, MA: University Press.

1516

