UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Truth about Possibilities-based and Truth-based Truth Table Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9jh348w9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Dieussaert, Kristien
Schaeken, Walter
Schroyens, Walter
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

7KH7UXWKDERXW3RVVLELOLWLHVEDVHGDQG7UXWKEDVHG7UXWK7DEOH7DVNV




$OLQH6HYHQDQWV $OLQH6HYHQDQWV#SV\NXOHXYHQEH 
:DOWHU6FKUR\HQV :DOWHU6FKUR\HQV#SV\NXOHXYHQEH 
.ULVWLHQ'LHXVVDHUW .ULVWLHQ'LHXVVDHUW#SV\NXOHXYHQEH 
:DOWHU6FKDHNHQ :DOWHU6FKDHNHQ#SV\NXOHXYHQEH 
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology,
102 Tiensestraat, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
$EVWUDFW

confirmation or a falsifying counterexample for that
conclusion?
In an implicit way, classical logic is omnipresent in the
interpretation of the external world in our daily lives. For
example, either it is snowing or it is not, either Belgium is my
current physical location or it is not, either an angle is
orthogonal or it is not. On a more abstract level, classical
logic provides the foundation for all program control
expressions in computer source code: Boolean expressions
evaluate to zero if false and to one if true.
Consider the following example:

Truth table tasks are a popular way to investigate reasoning
performance. In this paper, we make a direct comparison
between the answer patterns yielded by two task formats used
to investigate the mental representation of conditional
sentences: the possibilities-based truth table task and the truthbased truth table task. In a truth table task, participants are
asked to evaluate four logically possible cases produced by
permuting the truth values of the antecedent and the
consequent: true-true (TT), true-false (TF), false-true (FT) and
false-false (FF). In the possibilities-based truth table task, they
have to indicate whether a case is either possible or impossible
according to the rule and in the truth-based truth table task,
participants have to evaluate whether the case makes the given
rule either true, false or is irrelevant with respect to the truth of
the rule. Lately, a discussion of the status of “irrelevance” has
emerged. The experiment shows that when participants have
the opportunity to do so, they are inclined to judge the falseantecedent cases to be irrelevant rather than true with respect to
the truth of a given rule.

(LWKHU P\ SUHVHQW SK\VLFDO ORFDWLRQ LV
%HOJLXPRULWLV%UD]LOEXWQRWERWK

Keywords: Conditional Reasoning; Truth Table Tasks;
Irrelevance

,QWURGXFWLRQ
The interest in the linguistic, psychological and logical
meaning of “if” has provided us with a long history of
research on thinking and reasoning about conditionals. It is
not surprising that the word “if” is one of the most important
in our language: Conditional statements occur extremely
frequent in everyday discourse and in all thinkable contexts.
We use them explicitly in promises or threats, but
conditionals are also omnipresent in an implicit way: we
know that if we are thirsty we have to drink and that if we
cross the street without paying attention, we might get run
over. Conditional reasoning is a central part of our thinking,
allowing us to reflect on the implications of what may come,
could have been or will be. And it goes without saying that
this is a key factor in decision making.
Many studies have been designed in order to externalize
people’s understanding and mental representation of
conditionals. By conditionals, we mean conditional sentences
of the form ³,I$WKHQ&´ with $ being the antecedent and &
the consequent of the declarative clause. It’s important to
know how we represent and use the information we acquire.
For example: How do we get to a conclusion on the basis of
that knowledge? And what information serves as a

The truth of this assertion is a function of the truth of its
constituent atomic propositions. A proposition is a statement
that can be either true or false; it must be one or the other, and
it cannot be both. An atomic proposition is a proposition that
cannot be divided into smaller propositions. So “my physical
location is Belgium” and “my physical location is Brazil” are
atomic propositions. Logicians present those propositions in a
truth table. Each row in a truth table represents a different
possibility. Connectives, i.e., words connecting statements
into more complicated compound statements, that can be
defined in a truth table are known as WUXWK functional: their
meanings are functions that take the truth values of
propositions as inputs and deliver a truth value as an output
(Jeffrey, 1981).

2141

Table 1: Truth Tables for Conditional Statements.
$ &

0DWHULDO
LPSOLFDWLRQ

0DWHULDO
HTXLYDOHQFH

'HIHFWLYH
LPSOLFDWLRQ

'HIHFWLYH
HTXLYDOHQFH

7

7

T

T

T

T

7

)

F

F

F

F

)

7

T

F

I

F

) )

T

T

I

I

Since classical logic has been the starting point and
framework for research in conditional reasoning for many
decades, one frequently used methodology investigating the
mental representation of conditionals sentences is the truth
table task, introduced by Johnson-Laird and Tagart (1969). In
this method, participants are asked to evaluate, with respect to
a given rule, the truth or the possibility of four logically
possible cases produced by permuting the truth values of the
antecedent and the consequent. For instance, given the rule
³,IWKHOHWWHULVD%WKHQWKHQXPEHULVDQ´, four possible
combinations or cases arise:
- a B and an 8 signify a true antecedent and a true
consequent (TT)
- a B and not an 8 signify a true antecedent and a
false consequent (TF)
- not a B and an 8 signify a false antecedent and a
true consequent (FT)
- not a B and not an 8 signify a false antecedent and
a false consequent (FF)
Truth tables are a type of mathematical table used in logic
to determine whether an expression is true or valid.
According to classical logic, the connective LI follows the
truth table for the PDWHULDOLPSOLFDWLRQ(see Table 1), meaning
that only the TF case is false and that the three other cases are
true. Therefore, the rule “ ,I%WKHQ´is falsified only when
there is a B, but not an 8 (TF). This material implication truth
table has the form TFTT.
An alternative logical possibility for the meaning of the
connective LI, is that of the PDWHULDO HTXLYDOHQFH: “ & LI DQG
RQO\ LI $´, the situation in which A implies C and C also
implies A. According to this TFFT truth table, not only TF,
but also the case FT falsifies the rule. So the conditional ³,I
%WKHQ´ is falsified both when there is a B but not an 8 (TF),
and also when there is not a B but there is an 8 (FT). Material
implication and material equivalence are the only two truth
tables for conditionals recognized under classical logic.
More recent research however has questioned whether
classical logic is to be considered as an adequate normative
system for ordinary reasoning: Psychologically, there is
evidence that, next to true or false, people make use of a third
truth value absent in classical logic: irrelevant or
indeterminate (e.g., Evans & Over, 1996, 2004). Wason
(1966) was the first to introduce the “ defective truth table” , in
which false antecedent cases (FT and FF) are considered
irrelevant rather than true. The GHIHFWLYH LPSOLFDWLRQ has a
truth table of the form TFII and the GHIHFWLYHHTXLYDOHQFHof
the form TFFI. In the defective truth table view, people think
that false-antecedent cases have nothing to do with the truth
or falsity of a conditional and are therefore labeled as
“ irrelevant” . This is referred to by Evans et al. (2004) as a
“ truth value gap” for the false-antecedent cases. For example
the FF case “ not a B and not an 8” would be interpreted as
irrelevant with respect to the truth or falsity of the conditional
rule ³,I%WKHQ´This defective truth table representation of

conditionals has been replicated on a number of occasions
(e.g., Newstead, Ellis, Evans & Dennis, 1997).
Throughout the psychological reasoning literature, one can
broadly discern two types of truth-table tasks: a possibilitiesbased and a truth-based variant. In the possibilities-based
truth table task, people have to indicate for each of the four
possible antecedent-consequent cases whether that specific
combination is either possible or impossible with respect to
the given rule (e.g., Barrouillet & Lecas, 1998). In the truthbased truth table task, participants are asked to evaluate for
each of the four cases whether the combination makes the
given rule true, false or is irrelevant with respect to the truth
of the rule (for a review, see Evans, Newstead & Byrne,
1993).
In this context, Evans and Over (2004) state: “ We are a
little suspicious of the ‘possibilities’ form of the truth table
task that is exclusively used by followers of the mentalmodels theory and seems to us to obscure a distinction that
the standard task reveals.” They refer to the truth-based truth
table task as the “ standard task” and argue that with the
dichotomy possible/impossible, used in the possibilities-based
task, one can not point out the difference between true and
irrelevant responses: “ Possible” just means “ not impossible”
while “ true” cannot be presupposed to mean “ not false” when
“ irrelevant” is included as a third manner to classify cases.
We realize that, next to their high degree of resemblance,
the two tasks discussed above differ concerning their
directionality: The truth-based truth table task focuses on the
evaluation of the given rule on the basis of the cases, and the
possibilities-based truth table task on the assessment of the
cases with respect to the given rule. Nevertheless, this is the
format in which the tasks have been administered in the
conditional reasoning research tradition for many years. So
changing the directionality of one of the tasks is impracticable
since it would make an explicit comparison between the
possibilities-based and the truth-based truth table task in their
traditional format impossible. And this is exactly what
constitutes the problem statement of the present exploratory
study: Since a direct comparison of the possibilities-based
truth table task and the truth-based truth table task has never
been subject to an experimental study, it is our aim to bridge
this gap, shedding light on the truth table judgments and the
shift in the response patterns caused by the task differences.

0HWKRG

([SHULPHQWDO6WXG\

3DUWLFLSDQWV Two
hundred
first-year
Psychology
undergraduate students at the University of Leuven (17-23
years of age, Me = 18) took part in this experiment as a
partial fulfillment of a course requirement. None of the
participants had ever taken a logic-course. One hundred
participants received the possibilities-based truth table task
and 100 participants the truth-based truth table task.
0DWHULDOV DQG 3URFHGXUH A truth-table task can be
administered either in a construction or an evaluation format.
In an evaluation truth table task, the participant is asked to
evaluate each of the four presented cases with respect to the

2142

given rule. In the construction variant, participants have to
construct exhaustively all possibilities that verify or falsify
the rule. We chose for the evaluation format in order to keep
the possibilities-based truth table task as similar as possible to
the truth-based task, that is usually administered in an
evaluation format.
Participants were run in two groups, with one group
performing the possibilities-based truth table task and the
other group the truth-based variant. There was a random
assignment of the participants to the task-type.
Both tasks were constructed with ‘E-prime’ software and
presented to the participants on individual standard PCs in a
self-paced manner. Responses were given with the arrowkeys on an AZERTY keyboard. The experiment lasted
between 5 and 15 minutes. All parts of the experiment were
presented in Dutch.
The instructions appeared on the computer screen and
explained that the purpose of the experiment was to examine
how people reason with conditionals. Participants were
provided with a concrete example of a conditional statement,
as well as with an example of the questions in the actual task
(no correct answers were provided). The instructions were
followed by one practice-trial.
In the two task-types, all participants were successively
presented with both the conditional rule and one of the four
combinations of the occurrence and non-occurrence of A and
C. This means that each participant was presented with the
four following cases in a random order:
-

respect to the rule by 91% of the participants, the FF case by
87% and the FT combination is judged to be possible by 52%
of the participants. The TF case, the only impossible
combination according to the material implication truth table,
is evaluated to be possible by only 19% of the participants.
Table 2: Truth table judgments (%) for the possibilities-based
task.


77

7)

)7

))

3RVVLEOH

91

19

52

87

,PSRVVLEOH

9

81

48

13

Table 3: Truth table judgments (%) for the truth-based task.

5XOHLIWKHOHWWHULVD*WKHQWKHQXPEHULVD
&DVH³D*´LQFRPELQDWLRQZLWK³D´

5XOHLIWKHOHWWHULVD*WKHQWKHQXPEHULVD
&DVH³D*´LQFRPELQDWLRQZLWK³QRWD´

5XOHLIWKHOHWWHULVD*WKHQWKHQXPEHULVD
&DVH³QRWD*´LQFRPELQDWLRQZLWK³D´

5XOHLIWKHOHWWHULVD*WKHQWKHQXPEHULVD
&DVH³QRWD*´LQFRPELQDWLRQZLWK´QRWD´



77

7)

)7

))

7UXH

84

15

8

38

)DOVH

5

76

63

8

,UUHOHYDQW

11

9

29

54

Table 4: Response patterns (%) for the possibilities-based and
the truth-based task.

In the possibilities-based truth table task, participants had
to evaluate for each of the four cases whether that
combination was either possible or impossible according to
the rule. In the truth-based truth table task, participants had to
evaluate for each of the four possible antecedent-consequent
combinations whether the combination made the given rule
either true, false or was irrelevant with respect to the truth of
the rule. No feedback was provided. The rule followed by one
of the four cases appeared each time on a different screen and
presentation order of the four cases was completely
randomized.

5HVXOWV
Table 2 summarizes the responses (“ possible” , “ impossible” )
on the four cases presented in the possibilities-based truth
table task. The TT case is evaluated to be possible with

377

777

0DWHULDOLPSOLFDWLRQ

36

4

0DWHULDOHTXLYDOHQFH

37

20

'HIHFWLYHLPSOLFDWLRQ

/

17

'HIHFWLYHHTXLYDOHQFH

/

25

Table 3 summarizes the responses (“ true” , “ false” or
“ irrelevant” ) of the 100 participants that were presented the
truth-based truth table task. The TT case yields 84% of true
and 11% of irrelevant responses, the FF case 38% of true and
54% of irrelevant responses, and the FT combination 8% of

2143

true and 29% of irrelevant responses. The TF case is judged
to make the given rule true by 15% of the participants and
considered irrelevant with respect to the truth of the rule by 9
% of the participants.
Focusing on both tasks regarding the amount of logically
correct judgments according to the material implication truth
table, we performed a Chi-square test for two independent
samples. In Table 2 and 3, the data were arranged into a
frequency table (n = % since both tasks were performed by
100 subjects). The expected frequency in each cell was
computed by multiplying the two marginal totals common to
a particular cell and then dividing this product by the total
number of cases.
We compared the proportion of “ possible” vs.
“ impossible” judgments with the proportion of “ true” vs.
“ false” plus “ irrelevant” judgments for TT, FT and FF. For
the TF case, we made a comparison of the proportion of
“ impossible” vs. “ possible” judgments with the proportion of
“ false” versus “ true” plus “ irrelevant” answers. There is no
significant difference between the number of possible and
true judgments on the TT case (91 - 9 vs. 84 - 16), neither is
there a significant difference between the number of
impossible and false judgments on the TF case (81 - 19 vs. 76
- 24). On the false-antecedent combinations (FT and FF), we
do observe a significant difference between the amount of
possible and the amount of true judgments, both on the FT
case (52 - 48 vs. 8 - 92, ð(1) = 46.1, S < .001) and on the FF
case (87 - 13 vs. 38 - 62, ð(1) = 51.22, S < .001).
In the possibilities-based truth table task, more than 70% of
all responses reflect either material implication or material
equivalence truth table responses, both patterns occurring
equally frequent (see Table 4). In the truth-based truth table
task, permitting the participants to answer “ irrelevant” next to
“ true” or “ false” , only 4% of the participants respond
according to a material implication pattern and 20%
according to a material equivalence truth table. In addition,
17% of defective implication patterns and 25% of defective
equivalence patterns are observed. All other patterns are
given by less than 5% of the participants and therefore
considered negligible.

'LVFXVVLRQ
With the present study, we aimed to provide a first explicit
comparison between two formats of the truth table task: the
possibilities-based and the truth-based truth table variant. The
most striking result occurs with the negative-antecedent
cases: there is a major shift from “ possible” to “ irrelevant” .
This means that people judge false-antecedent cases to be
irrelevant with respect to the truth of the conditional rule,
when they have the opportunity to give that answer. This
finding is incompatible with the material implication truth
table and in favor of a defective truth table representation:
The truth of the conditional is decided by true-antecedent
instances, and false-antecedent-instances are classified as
irrelevant.
The large proportion of irrelevant answers on the falseantecedent cases in the truth-based truth table task is

challenging for the mental-models theory (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991, 2002; Johnson-Laird, Byrne & Schaeken,
1992). According to the “ truth principle” of the mentalmodels theory, people construct mental models of the
possibilities compatible with the premises, but they initially
and by default do not represent what is false. Therefore, their
conclusion is based on the initial model1:
[A] C
…
So mental models represent only one possibility, covering
what is common to all the different ways in which the
possibility may occur. Moreover, mental models represent
explicitly what is true, but not what is false. At least,
individuals do not by default represent what is false, but
under certain circumstances they make ‘mental footnotes’
about the falsity of clauses (represented by the ellipsis or
three dots). If they are able to retain these footnotes, reasoners
can flesh out the implicitly represented information into fully
explicit models, which represent clauses even when they have
false antecedents2:
A C
¬A C
¬A ¬C
These possibilities correspond to the three rows of the truth
table in which the material implication is true, including the
false-antecedent cases FT and FF. So the mental-models
theory has to provide an answer to the observation that the TF
case is judged irrelevant by 30% of the participants and the
FF case by more than 50% of the participants. This means
that the possibilities “ ¬A C” and “ ¬A ¬C” would not occur
in the list of the explicit models representing the given rule.
The mental-models theory is able to explain the TFII
pattern, but only provided that they assume that people base
their answer solely on their initial model: “ [A] C” . This initial
model undoubtedly supports the “ true” judgment of the TT
case. One can explain the “ irrelevant” judgments for the FF
and the FT cases in line with the mental-models theory on the
basis of the fact that in this initial model, the false-antecedent
cases are not represented. Problematic for Johnson-Laird and
Byrne, however, are the “ false” judgments with respect to the
TF case. How can reasoners come up with this judgment?
The solution lies in the square brackets, which is the original
notation of Johnson-Laird and Byrne to indicate that the
antecedent was represented exhaustively: [A] C. In other
words, there are no further models in which there is an A.
Therefore, the TF case is impossible and thus false. The
problem, however, is that in recent writings (e.g., JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 2002) the square brackets are dropped. The
1

Square brackets [ ] are the notation for an exhaustive
representation. [A] C means that the antecedent is represented
exhaustively.
2
The symbol ¬ denotes an abstract mental symbol representing
negation.

2144

omission of these brackets in their latest publications is not
explicitly accounted for, but if you drop them, then it is not
possible anymore to explain the frequently observed defective
truth table pattern TFII.
The high proportion of “ irrelevant” judgments however
has to be put into perspective. The question in the
possibilities-based truth table task “ is the following case
possible or impossible with respect to the rule” is much more
straightforward than the question in the truth-based truth table
task: “ does the following combination make the rule true,
false or is it irrelevant with respect to the rule” . How do
people interpret the clause “ to make the rule true” ? In this
context, Johnson-Laird (1990) argues that “ adults are often
puzzled by the truth or falsity of assertions containing
connectives” , since children first learn to use language to
refer to possibilities and develop only later a meta-linguistic
ability to use the concepts true or false. This means that
reasoning about the truth or falsity of cases is at a higher level
and therefore more difficult than reasoning about possibilities.
It is not unthinkable that when participants do not exactly
know how to reason with the truth-question, they choose the
response “ irrelevant” as a synonym for “ in fact, I don’ t
know” . And this is not the meaning an “ irrelevant” judgment
is supposed to have. This explanation could be ruled out in an
experiment that compares the truth-based truth table task with
a possibilities-based task that also provides three answerpossibilities to the participants: “ possible” , “ impossible” and
“ irrelevant” . Only when participants respond “ irrelevant” to
the straightforward question “ is the case possible, impossible
or irrelevant according to the rule” , one can conclude that
they did not choose this alternative due to a lack of
comprehension. In the current study however, we made use of
the possibilities-task with two answer-alternatives, since it is
this format that is most frequently used in contrast to the
truth-based task within the present research tradition.
Of course, one can debate the meaning of “ irrelevant” in
both variants of the truth table task: Saying that a case is
“ irrelevant according to a given rule” does not presuppose the
same understanding of the word “ irrelevant” than judging a
case to be “ irrelevant with respect to the truth of a given rule” .
Moreover, the difference in directionality has to be taken into
account: from rule to instance in the possibilities-based truth
table task vs. from instance to rule in the truth-based truth
table task. Future work should therefore pin-point the exact
meaning participants ascribe to this answer-alternative, in
order to clarify the reason why they make an irrelevancejudgment, and asses whether the interpretation of “ irrelevant”
depends on the difference in directionality.
In psychological reasoning literature, many experiments
using the truth table task methodology are reported, each of
them administering either the possibilities-based truth table
task or the truth-based variant. It was observed that both
task-types yield different results, but a systematic comparison
between them was never made. In the present study, we
brought together those two separate methodologies within the

same field of interest: the representation of conditional
sentences. The most eye-catching difference between the two
methodologies was an important shift from the “ possible”
answers in the possibilities-based task, to the “ irrelevant”
judgments in the truth-based task. This shift towards a
defective truth table is an observation that does not
immediately leans towards the popular and influential mentalmodels theory. As we discussed above however, our findings
are challenging for the mental-models theory, but not
insurmountable if Johnson-Laird and Byrne can substantiate
that reasoners base their answer solely on the initial model
“ [A] C” , with an exhaustively represented antecedent.

$FNQRZOHGJPHQWV
This research is carried out with the financial support of the
National Council for Scientific Research – Flanders, Belgium
(FWO grant G.0320.05)

5HIHUHQFHV
Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J. F. (1998). How can mental
models theory account for content effects in conditional
reasoning? A developmental perspective. &RJQLWLRQ   ,
209-253.
Evans, J. St. B. T, Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(1993). +XPDQ UHDVRQLQJ 7KH SV\FKRORJ\ RI GHGXFWLRQ
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality in the
selection task: Epistemic utility versus uncertainty reduction.
3V\FKRORJLFDO5HYLHZ 2), 356-363.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D., (2004). ,I Oxford University
Press.
Jeffrey, R. (1981). )RUPDOORJLF,WVVFRSHDQGOLPLWV(2nd
ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1990). The development of
reasoning. In P. Bryant & G. Butterworth (Eds.), &DXVHV RI
GHYHORSPHQW Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, England:
Harvester-Wheathsheaf.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). 'HGXFWLRQ
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. 3V\FKRORJLFDO5HYLHZ  , 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J., & Schaeken, W.
(1992). Propositional reasoning by model. 3V\FKRORJLFDO
5HYLHZ, 418-439.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Tagart, J. (1969). How implication
is understood. $PHULFDQ-RXUQDORI3V\FKRORJ\ 367-373.
Newstead, S. E., Ellis, M. C., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Dennis,
I. (1997). Conditional reasoning with realistic material.
7KLQNLQJDQG5HDVRQLQJ, 49-76.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed), 1HZ
KRUL]RQVLQSV\FKRORJ\9RO,. Harmandsworth, UK: Penguin.

2145

