UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unifying Cross-linguistic and Within-language Patterns of Finiteness Marking in MOSAIC

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2kg1418w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Freudenthal, Daniel
Gobert, Fernand
Pine, Julian

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unifying Cross-linguistic and Within-language Patterns of Finiteness Marking
in MOSAIC
Daniel Freudenthal (D.Freudenthal@liv.ac.uk)
Julian Pine (Julian.Pine@liv.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Liverpool

Fernand Gobet (Fernand.Gobet@Brunel.ac.uk)
School of Social Sciences and Law, Brunel University

age, but optionally under-specify Agreement and/or Tense.
Due to cross-linguistic differences between the grammars of
pro-drop and obligatory subject languages, this leads to the
provision of non-finite verb forms in contexts where a finite
verb form is required in obligatory subject languages such
as English and Dutch, but not in pro-drop languages such as
Spanish.
The great strength of Wexler’s account, which is
consistent with the Universal Grammar approach to
language acquisition (Chomsky, 1981; Pinker, 1984) is that
it provides a unified explanation of the cross-linguistic
occurrence of Optional Infinitive errors. Recently, however,
Freudenthal, Pine and Gobet (2006, submitted) have shown
that the cross-linguistic differences in the occurrence of
Optional Infinitive errors may reflect sensitivity to
differences in the distributional statistics of the input
children are subject to. Thus, Freudenthal et al. showed that
MOSAIC, a performance limited distributional analyser
which receives child-directed speech as input and learns to
produce progressively longer utterance-final phrases
provides a good fit to the developmental characteristics of
the Optional Infinitive phenomenon in English, Dutch,
German and Spanish. The key to MOSAIC’s simulation of
the differential rates of Optional Infinitive errors across the
four languages is its bias towards learning material that
occurs near the end of an utterance. Since finite and nonfinite verbs pattern differently in the four languages,
utterance-final phrases have radically different proportions
of non-finite verbs. MOSAIC was therefore able to provide
a good quantitative fit to the cross-linguistic data as a result
of the interaction between its utterance-final bias and the
distributional properties of the languages to which it was
exposed.
While MOSAIC’s ability to deal with the cross-linguistic
pattern of finiteness marking based on one, relatively simple
processing constraint is encouraging, a clear challenge for
MOSAIC remains the simulation of the pattern of
regularities in finiteness marking that has been found within
languages that display the OI phenomenon. Thus, Poeppel
and Wexler (1993) have identified a number of constraints
relating to verb placement, differential rates of OI-errors in
declaratives and Wh-questions, and the correlation between
the provision of subjects and the finiteness of an utterance.
These regularities, which are particularly noticeable in

Abstract
MOSAIC, a model that has already simulated cross-linguistic
differences in the occurrence of the Optional Infinitive
phenomenon, is applied to the simulation of the pattern of
finiteness marking within Dutch. This within-language
pattern, which includes verb placement, low rates of Optional
Infinitives in Wh-questions and the correlation between
finiteness marking and subject provision, has been taken as
evidence for the view that children have correctly set the
clause structure and inflectional parameters for their
language. MOSAIC, which employs no built-in linguistic
knowledge, clearly simulates the pattern of results as a
function of its utterance-final bias, the same mechanism that
is responsible for its successful simulation of the crosslinguistic data. These results suggest that both the crosslinguistic and within–language pattern of finiteness marking
can be understood in terms of the interaction between a
simple resource-limited learning mechanism and the
distributional statistics of the input to which it is exposed.
Thus, these phenomena do not provide any evidence for
abstract or innate knowledge on the part of the child.

The Optional Infinitive phenomenon
One of the key features of children’s early multi-word
speech is that, in many languages, children often produce
utterances that contain non-finite verb forms in contexts
where a finite verb form is obligatory in the adult language.
Thus, English-speaking children may produce utterances
such as he go instead of he goes. While the English example
may suggest that the child has simply omitted the
inflectional morpheme (-es), data from languages such as
German and Dutch where the infinitive carries its own
morphological marker (-en) make it clear that children
actually produce an infinitive instead of a finite verb form.
Thus, German-speaking children may produce utterances
such as Vater spielen (Daddy play-inf) instead of Vater
spielt (Daddy plays-fin).
While such Optional Infinitive errors are quite frequent in
obligatory subject languages such as English, Dutch and
German, they are quite rare in pro-drop languages like
Spanish and Italian. An influential theory by Wexler (1994,
1998) explains this cross-linguistic pattern of results (and
the relative sparseness of other types of errors) by assuming
that children have correctly set all the clause structure and
inflectional parameters for their language from a very early

232

across a range of languages. MOSAIC has already been
shown to provide a close quantitative fit to the basic
Optional Infinitive phenomenon in English, Dutch, German
and Spanish. Nativist accounts such as Wexler’s (1998),
explain the Optional Infinitive phenomenon by assuming
that children misrepresent a small portion of the grammar,
but have largely set the clause structure and inflectional
parameters for their language correctly. The withinlanguage regularities are consistent with such a view, and
therefore provide considerable constraints for any process
model of children’s early multi-word speech. This paper
aims to establish whether MOSAIC captures these
regularities, thereby providing support for the notion that
children’s early multi-word speech can be understood in
terms of the interaction between psychologically plausible
constraints on learning and the statistical structure of the
input.

languages such as German and Dutch, where verb position
is dependent on finiteness, place considerable additional
constraints on models of children’s early multi-word speech.
This is particularly true, as these regularities appear to be
consistent with Wexler’s claim that children have correctly
set all the clause structure and inflectional parameters for
their language from a very early age, whilst being
problematic for rival Nativist theories of the Optional
Infinitive phenomenon (e.g. Rizzi, 1994).
Given the apparent support that it provides for Wexler’s
account, the within-language pattern of finiteness marking
can be considered a strong test for models like MOSAIC
that embody the notion that children’s early multi-word
speech reflects an interaction between a performancelimited learning process and the statistical regularities of the
input children receive.

Within-language regularities in the pattern of
finiteness marking in German and Dutch

MOSAIC
MOSAIC is a simple distributional learner that learns off
child-directed speech and produces utterances that can be
directly compared to children’s speech. The basis of
MOSAIC is a discrimination net consisting of nodes and
arcs that store the utterances shown to it. Learning in
MOSAIC takes place by adding nodes that encode new
words and phrases to the network. The version of MOSAIC
used in these simulations departs slightly from that
described in Freudenthal et al. (2006, submitted). These
versions of MOSAIC were too reliant on questions in the
input as a source for Optional Infinitive errors: a phrase like
he go was generated by producing the final words of can he
go. Freudenthal et al. (2005a) therefore developed a version
of the model that is capable of producing Optional Infinitive
errors by omitting sentence-internal elements. This version
can produce a phrase like he go by omitting the sentence
internal modal can from the declarative He can go and has
been shown to provide a good quantitative fit to the
developmental data from English, Dutch, German and
Spanish (see Freudenthal et al., 2005b). Learning in the new
version of MOSAIC is anchored at the sentence-initial and
sentence-final position: MOSAIC will only encode a word
or phrase when all the material that either precedes or
follows it in the utterance has already been encoded in the
network. Learning in MOSAIC is slow, and governed by the
following formula:

German and Dutch are particularly interesting languages
with respect to the development of finiteness marking as
verb position in these languages is dependent on finiteness:
finite verbs take second position, whereas non-finite verbs
take sentence-final position. Poeppel and Wexler (1993)
show that (in German) the child overwhelmingly places
finite and non-finite verbs in their correct position from a
very early age. From this finding, Poeppel and Wexler
conclude that the child knows the rules for verb placement.
Poeppel and Wexler also show that, while Optional
Infinitive errors are quite frequent in German and Dutch
children’s early declarative multi-word speech, they are
virtually absent from Wh-questions. Wexler (1998) argues
that it is a property of V2 languages (like German and
Dutch) that Wh-questions should contain a finite verb. By
implication, the absence of OI-errors in Dutch Wh-questions
provides evidence for the notion that Dutch-speaking
children have correctly set the V2 parameter (see also
Poeppel & Wexler, 1993).
Finally, there is a correlation in German and Dutch
between the occurrence of finite verb forms in an utterance
and the likelihood that the utterance contains a subject. It is
well known (see e.g., Bloom, 1990) that children often
produce utterances with missing subjects (e.g. Need a toy).
Several authors have shown that utterances that contain
finite verbs are more likely to contain a subject than
utterances that contain only non-finite verb forms. Poeppel
and Wexler (1993) explain this correlation by claiming that
non-finite verbs license subject omission; it is grammatical
for non-finite verbs to occur without subjects. Thus, in the
utterance He wants to go, the non-finite verb go has no
subject. Finite verbs, on the other hand, do require a subject.
Wexler thus claims that children’s lower rates of subject
provision on non-finite verbs reflects children’s knowledge
that non-finite verbs can occur without overt subjects,
whereas finite verbs cannot.
In summary, the Optional Infinitive phenomenon has
attracted a great deal of attention due to its occurrence

⎞d
⎛
1
NCP = ⎜
⎟
⎝1+ e 0.5((m*c )−u) ⎠
where: ncp = node creation probability
m = a constant, set to 20 for these simulations
u = (total number of) utterances seen
c = corpus size (number of utterances)
d = distance to the edge of the utterance

233

The formula results in a basic sigmoid curve, with the
probability of creating a node increasing as a function of the
number of times the input has been seen. Initially, MOSAIC
will only learn short, sentence-initial and sentence-final
phrases. Longer phrases will only be learnt when the base
number in the formula starts to increase (as a result of
seeing more input).
MOSAIC employs two mechanisms for generating (rote)
output. The first mechanism traverses all branches of the
network, and generates the contents of branches that encode
sentence-final phrases. This first mechanism thus results in
phrases with missing sentence-initial elements. The second
mechanism involves the concatenation of sentence-initial
and sentence-final phrases. When MOSAIC builds up the
network, it associates sentence-initial and sentence-final
fragments of utterances. The concatenation of utteranceinitial and utterance-final phrases results in phrases with
missing sentence-internal elements. Sentence-initial
elements that are associated with sentence-final elements are
normally limited to one word phrases. Longer sentenceinitial phrases can be concatenated only if the phrase is
frequent enough to have been ‘chunked up’ by the model’s
chunking mechanism1. MOSAIC therefore maintains an
utterance-final bias: concatenations consist of relatively
long utterance-final phrases with relatively short utteranceinitial phrases.
MOSAIC’s output thus consists of utterances with
missing sentence-internal or sentence-initial elements. Both
utterance-types are apparent in child speech. Utterances
with missing sentence-internal elements may give rise to
Optional Infinitive errors (e.g. He (wants to) go home).
Utterances with missing sentence-initial elements may give
rise to missing subjects (e.g. (He) wants to go to the shops).
MOSAIC’s early output will consist largely of sentencefinal fragments. As the mean length of utterance (MLU) of
the output increases, concatenations will become more
frequent. With increased learning, incomplete utterances are
slowly replaced by complete utterances.
The two mechanisms described so far are complemented
by a mechanism that allows for the production of novel
utterances through the substitution of distributionally similar
items. A description of this mechanism can be found in
Freudenthal et al. (2005c).

and Matthijs; Wijnen, 1993) were fed through the model
several times, and output (of increasing average length) was
generated after every run of the model. The output files that
most closely matched the MLU (Mean Length of Utterance)
of the child at 4 different points in development were
selected. The output was then divided into utterances
containing only non-finite verb forms (non-finites),
utterances containing only finite verb forms (simple finites),
and utterances containing both finite and non-finite verb
forms (compound finites). The child data are shown in fig.
1. The results of MOSAIC’s simulations are shown in fig. 2.
1
0.8
Non-finite
Simple Finite
Comp. Finite

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1.5

2.2

3.1

4.1

MLU

Fig. 1a: Data for Peter
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Non-finite
Simple Finite
Comp. Finite

1.5 2.1

2.8 3.5

MLU

Fig. 1b: Data for Matthijs
As can be seen, MOSAIC clearly simulates the basic OI
phenomenon for both children. While the model tends to
overestimate the occurrence of Optional Infinitive errors
during later stages of development, it successfully simulates
the initial near exclusive use of Optional Infinitive errors
followed by a substantial increase in the number of
(compound) finites.
MOSAIC simulates the large decrease in Dutch Optional
Infinitive errors as a result of the interaction between its
utterance-final bias and the rules for verb placement in
Dutch grammar. Non-finite verbs take sentence-final
position in Dutch, whereas finite verbs take second position.
Since MOSAIC’s early output consists mostly of utterancefinal phrases, it will contain large numbers of non-finite
verb forms. As the MLU of the model increases (with
successive exposures to the input), finite verb forms, which
occur earlier in the utterance, start appearing and non-finite

The Simulations
The version of MOSAIC used for the simulations described
in this paper has changed slightly from the version
described in Freudenthal et al. (2005a, 2005b) in that the
chunking mechanism described in Freudenthal et al. (2005c)
has now been implemented as well. For this reason, we will
first examine whether MOSAIC still provides a good fit to
the basic Dutch data. For these simulations, the input
corpora (consisting of the maternal speech directed at Peter
1

MOSAIC’s chunking mechanism results in frequent multi-word
phrases being treated as one unit. It is discussed in more detail in
Freudenthal et al. (2005c).
234

utterances are slowly replaced with the compound finites
from which they are learnt.

verbs correctly, and conclude from this analysis that ‘the
finiteness distinction is made correctly at the very earliest
stages of development’ (p. 7). Two-word utterances, where
second and final position overlap, were excluded from this
analysis3. As can be seen from table 1 and 2, the model
overwhelmingly places finite and non-finite verbs in the
correct position. MOSAIC simulates this effect because it
preserves the word order it sees in the input. This finding
makes it clear that correct verb placement is not necessarily
evidence for knowledge of the rules of verb placement.
MOSAIC makes no distinction between finite and non-finite
verbs (in fact, MOSAIC has no built-in linguistic
knowledge at all). MOSAIC places verbs correctly because
it is sensitive to the statistical properties of the input.

1
0.8
Non-finite
Simple Finite
Comp. Finite

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1.5

2.1

2.9

3.9

MLU

Fig. 2a: Model for Peter

Table 1: Verb placement for Matthijs’s model
V2/not final
Final/not V2
Finites
65
3
Non-finites
4
56

1
0.8
Non-finite
Simple Finite
Comp. Finite

0.6
0.4

Table 2: Verb placement for Peter’s model
V2/not final
Final/not V2
Finites
60
4
Non-finites
4
44

0.2
0
1.5

2.2

3

3.9

MLU

Wh-questions
Poeppel and Wexler (1993) show that Optional Infinitive
errors are rare in topicalized structures with a non-subject in
first position in a German child. Such structures include
Wh-questions. Other authors have also shown OI-errors to
be rare in Wh-questions in German and Dutch. This is in
contrast to declarative structures, where OI-errors are quite
frequent. Poeppel and Wexler claim that German (and
Dutch) grammar dictates that such topicalized structures
contain a finite verb form. The lack of OI-errors in Whquestions and related structures is therefore seen as evidence
that the child has acquired the relevant portion of the
grammar. Table 3 gives the rates of OI-errors in declaratives
and Wh-question for the simulations at MLU point 3 in Fig.
2. For the analysis of Wh-questions, a sample was drawn
from the output file4. While the model produces relatively
high rates of Wh-questions with only non-finite verb forms
compared to the rates reported in the literature, it clearly
produces few of them compared with the rate at which it
produces OI-errors in declaratives. This result is not an
obvious consequence of MOSAIC’s utterance-final bias, as
modal/auxiliary + non-finite constructions (which are the
source of OI-errors in MOSAIC) occur in Wh-questions at

Fig. 2b: Model for Matthijs
Having established that MOSAIC successfully simulates the
basic Optional Infinitive phenomenon, we can now turn to
MOSAIC’s success at simulating the finer detail associated
with it. This will be done by investigating whether a)
MOSAIC correctly places finite verbs in second position
and non-finites in sentence-final position; b) Optional
Infinitive errors are less frequent in Wh-questions than in
declaratives; and c) rates of subject omission in utterances
containing only non-finite verb forms are higher than in
utterances containing finite verb forms. It should be stressed
that these additional analyses were performed on the same
output files that were analysed for the basic OI
phenomenon. Thus, the output from one, identical model is
analyzed with respect to four phenomena.

Verb Placement
MOSAIC’s success at placing verbs in their correct
sentential position was investigated by coding two samples
(from MLU point 3 in fig. 2) of finite and non-finite
utterances from MOSAIC’s output with respect to verb
placement. This analysis is similar to that performed on a
German2 child by Poeppel and Wexler (1993). Poeppel and
Wexler showed that the German child placed 90% of the

3

Utterances with a missing subject and a finite verb in first
position were coded as having the finite verb in V2.
4
In keeping with the coding scheme used for declaratives, as verbs
matching the infinitive were counted as infinitives. As a result,
some plural, present tense finites were counted as non-finites. This
may result in these analyses showing relatively high rates of nonfinites compared to those reported in the literature. The present
analysis however, is comparable to that performed on declaratives.

2

Dutch and German have identical rules regarding the placement
of finite and non-finite verbs. Analyses of Dutch and German can
therefore be directly compared.
235

rates that are comparable to declaratives. Instead, it reflects
an interaction between utterance length and frequency
which results in Wh-questions being learned more quickly
than declaratives. The average MLU for Wh-questions in
the input (Matthijs: 5.39; Pet: 4.88) is lower than it is for
declarative structures (Matthijs: 6.09; Pet: 5.84) Whquestions also appear to be more formulaic than
declaratives. In declaratives, the finite verb form may be
preceded by a range of subjects, which may lead to finite
verb forms being encoded relatively late. In Wh-questions,
only a handful of Wh-words precede the finite verb form.
This may lead to relatively fast learning and early encoding
of the finite verb form in Wh-questions.

1
0.8
0.6

fin

0.4

non

0.2
0
t1

t2

t3

t4

Fig. 3b: Data for Matthijs
Note that, while the levels of subject omission on finite
utterances are lower than for non-finite utterances, they are
by no means zero, even at relatively late stages of
development. Poeppel and Wexler explain this result, which
is not predicted on their account of full competence, by
assuming these errors are not instances of subject drop, but
rather instances of topic drop, a pragmatic effect that bears
little relevance to the child’s grammatical development.

Table 3: Proportion of non-finite Wh-questions and
declaratives in Matthijs and Peter’s models
Dec.
Wh-questions
Matthijs model
.46
.27
Peter model
.45
.24

Finiteness and Subject Omission
Several authors have reported a correlation between the
finiteness of children’s utterances and the likelihood of that
utterance containing a subject. Children are less likely to
omit the subject from an utterance that contains a finite verb
form than from utterances that only contain non-finite verb
forms. Poeppel and Wexler (1993) claim this pattern of
results provides support for the notion that children are
aware of the distinction between finite and non-finite verb
forms. Children have high rates of subject omission on nonfinite utterances because the infinitive licenses subject
omission: it is grammatical for the infinitive to occur
without a subject (for example, in the English utterance he
wants to go, the infinitive go has no subject). Since children
are aware of this, they are relatively likely to omit subjects
from non-finite utterances. Finite utterances on the other
hand do require the inclusion of a subject. Children’s lower
rates of subject omission on finite utterances are thought to
reflect this knowledge. Fig. 3 shows the levels of subject
provision for the two Dutch children for simple finite and
non-finite utterances (at the same MLU points as portrayed
in Fig. 1).

1
0.8
0.6

fin

0.4

non

0.2
0
t1

t2

t3

t4

Fig. 4a: Model for Peter
1
0.8
0.6

fin

0.4

non

0.2
0
t1

1
0.8

t2

t3

t4

Fig. 4b: Model for Matthijs

0.6

fin

0.4

non

As can be seen in Fig. 4, MOSAIC clearly simulates the
correlation between finiteness and subject omission.
MOSAIC simulates this effect as a result of the interaction
between its utterance-final bias, and the position of finite
and non-finite verb forms relative to the subject in the
utterance. Subjects in Dutch usually take sentence-initial
position, with finite verbs taking second position and nonfinite verbs taking sentence-final position. A result of this is
that the positional distance between finite verb forms and
the subject is smaller than that between non-finite verb

0.2
0
t1

t2

t3

t4

Fig. 3a: Data for Peter

236

the adult and child language may not be the most
appropriate focus for theories of language acquisition, as it
may simply reflect sensitivity to the distributional statistics
of this input.

forms and the subject. Thus, by the time a learning
mechanism with an utterance-final bias has encoded a finite
verb form, it is quite likely to have encoded the subject as
well. When the same learning mechanism has encoded a
non-finite verb form, it may still be some time before the
subject is encoded. Note that, unlike Poeppel and Wexler’s
account, MOSAIC does not require separate mechanisms to
explain omission of subjects from finite and non-finite
utterances. One mechanism (the omission of sentence-initial
elements) is responsible for subject omission from both
types of utterances. It is the interaction between this
mechanism and the distributional statistics of the input that
results in the differential rates of omission.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Economic and Social
Research Council under grant number RES000230211

References
Bloom, P. (1990). Subjectless sentences in child language.
Linguistic Inquiry, 21, 491-504.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding.
Dordrecht: Foris.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J.M. & Gobet, F. (2005a). Simulating
optional infinitive errors through the omission of
sentence-internal elements. In B.G. Bara, L. Barsalou &
M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah NJ:
LEA.
Freudenthal, D. Pine, J.M. & Gobet, F. (2005b). Simulating
the cross-linguistic development of Optional Infinitive
errors in MOSAIC In B.G. Bara, L. Barsalou & M.
Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah NJ:
LEA.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J.M. & Gobet, F. (2005c). On the
resolution of ambiguities in the extraction of syntactic
categories through chunking. Cognitive Systems
Research, 6, 17-25.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J.M. & Gobet, F. (2006). Modelling
the development of children’s use of Optional Infinitive
in Dutch and English using MOSAIC. Cognitive Science,
30, 277-310.
Freudenthal, D. Pine, J.M., Aguado-Orea, J. & Gobet, F.
(submitted). Modelling the developmental patterning of
finiteness marking in English, Dutch, German and
Spanish using MOSAIC. Submitted to Cognitive Science.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language Learnability and Language
Development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Poeppel, D. & Wexler, K. (1993). The full competence
hypothesis of clause structure in early German. Language,
69.
Rizzi, L. (1994). Early null-subjects and root null-subjects.
In: T. Hoekstra & B. Schwartz (eds.) Language
acquisition studies in generative grammar. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Wexler, K. (1994). Optional infinitives, head movement and
the economy of derivation in child grammar. In N.
Hornstein & D. Lightfoot (Eds.), Verb Movement.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wexler, K. (1998). Very early parameter setting and the
unique checking constraint: a new explanation of the
optional infinitive stage. Lingua, 106, 23-79.
Wijnen, F. (1993a), Verb placement and morphology in
child Dutch: do lexical errors flag grammatical
development? Antwerp Papers in Linguistics, 74, 79–92.

Conclusions
This paper set out to simulate the regularities that exist
within the patterning of finiteness marking in Dutch.
MOSAIC, a model that has already been applied to the
simulation of cross-linguistic differences in the development
of finiteness marking, was applied to the simulation of 1)
correct placement of finite and nonfinite verbs, 2) low levels
of OI-errors in Wh-questions, and 3) the correlation between
finiteness and subject omission.
MOSAIC clearly simulates all the phenomena as a result
of the interaction between the psychologically plausible
constraints on its learning mechanism and the distributional
statistics of the input. MOSAIC places finite and non-finite
verbs correctly as it preserves the word order it sees in the
input. MOSAIC produces fewer Optional Infinitive errors in
Wh-questions than it does in declaratives. This appears to be
caused by Wh-questions, on average, being shorter and
more formulaic than declaratives. This may lead to the finite
verb in Wh-questions being learned more quickly than in
declaratives. Finally, the correlation between finiteness and
subject omission is caused by the differential positional
distance between the subject and finite and non-finite verbs.
Thus, the mechanism that is responsible for MOSAIC’s
successful simulation of the cross-linguistic patterning of
the OI phenomenon (MOSAIC’s utterance-final bias) can
also explain the within-language pattern of regularities
associated with the OI phenomenon.
These findings are significant, as these phenomena have
been taken as support for the notion that children have
correctly set the clause structure and inflectional parameters
for their language. By implication, they are also viewed as
evidence for the wider role of innate linguistic knowledge as
exemplified by the Universal Grammar approach to
language acquisition.
The successful simulation of both the cross-linguistic and
the within-language phenomena within MOSAIC, which
employs no built-in linguistic knowledge, strongly suggests
that these phenomena can be explained through children’s
sensitivity to the distributional statistics of the language to
which they are exposed. It therefore suggests that the fact
that children largely respect the patterning of their language
is not evidence for abstract (or innate) knowledge. In fact, it
suggests that the apparent overlap between the patterning of

237

