UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unity of Consciousness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5x31r8s3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Brook, Andrew
Raymont, Paul

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unity of Consciousness
Andrew Brook, Carleton University (abrook@ccs.carleton.ca)
Paul Raymont, Trent University (praymont@trentu.ca)

Abstract
Despite a burst of work in the past decade or so, some of
it by us, there is still no general agreement on what
unified consciousness is. This despite increasing recognition of its importance. Once more into the breach!

When one experiences a noise and, say, a pain, one is not conscious of the noise and, separately, of the pain. One is conscious of the noise and pain together, as aspects of a single
conscious experience. This is the unity of consciousness. More
generally, it is consciousness not of A and, separately, of B and,
separately, of C, but of A-and-B-and-C together. James had a
term for this: A, B, and C are co-conscious (1909, p. 221).1

1. History
The unity of consciousness figured centrally in the work of
Descartes, Leibniz, Hume, Reid, Kant, Brentano, James – indeed, in most major precursors of contemporary philosophy of
mind and cognitive psychology. It played a particularly important role in Kant’s work (Brook, 1994).

of positions on unity. Briefly, for Leibniz, unified consciousness and the noncompositeness, the indivisibility that he took
to be required for it seem to have served as his model of a
monad, the building block of all reality. With Hume (1739),
things are more complicated. It should have followed from his
atomism that there is no unified consciousness, just “a bundle
of different perceptions” (p. 252). Yet, in a famous appendix,
he says that there is something he cannot render consistent
with his atomism (p. 636). He never tells us what it is but it
may have been that consciousness clearly seems to be more
than a bundle of independent ‘perceptions’. Reid (1785),
almost an exact contemporary of Kant’s, made extensive use
of the unity of consciousness, among other things to run Descartes’ argument from unity to indivisibility the other way
around. Brentano (1874) argued that all the conscious states of
a person at a time will and perhaps must be unified with one
another. (He combined this view with another strong thesis,
that all mental states are conscious.) Finally, late in the 19 th
century James developed a detailed treatment of synchronic
(or ‘at a time’) unity of consciousness. We will discuss his
view later.

starts like this:
When I consider the mind, that is to say, myself inasmuch as I am only a thinking thing, I cannot distinguish
in myself any parts, but apprehend myself to be clearly
one and entire. [Descartes, 1641, p. 196]
Descartes then asserts that if the mind is not made of parts, it
cannot be made of matter because anything material has parts.
He adds that this by itself would be enough to prove dualism,
had he not proven it already. Notice where it is that I cannot
distinguish any parts. It is in the unified consciousness that I
have of myself. The central claim is then that unified consciousness could never be achieved by a system of components.
similar reasoning in Leibniz and Mendelssohn). However, Kant
held that unity tells us nothing about what sorts of entity minds
are, including whether or not they are made out of matter (1781,
chapter on the Paralogisms of Pure Reason). His argument is
that the achievement of unified consciousness by a system of
components acting together would be no less mysterious than
its being achieved by something that is simple, i.e., has no components (1781, A352).

almost disappeared from the research agenda. Logical atomism in philosophy and behaviourism in psychology had little
to say about such a notion. Logical atomism focussed on the
atomic elements of cognition (sense data, simple propositional
judgments, protocol sentences, etc.), rather than on how these
elements are tied together to form a mind. Behaviourism urged
that we focus on behaviour, the mind being either a myth or at
least something that we cannot and do not need to study in a
science of the human person.
sciousness among analytic philosophers in the past few decades, beginning with some influential commentaries on Kant
in the 1960s (Strawson, 1966, Bennett, 1966, 1974) and works
by Nagel (1971) and Parfit (1971, 1984). More recently, a large
number of philosophers and a few psychologists have written
on the subject, including Marks (1981), Trevarthen (1984).
Lockwood (1989, 1994), W hite (1990), Hill (1991), Hurley
(1994, 1998), Dainton (2000), Marcel (1994), Bayne and Chalmers (2003), and Blackmore (2004)

2. Some Varieties of Unity of Consciousness
Unified consciousness can take a number of forms and there
1.

Parfit reintroduced this term in (1984), p. 250.

1056

are some important differences among these forms.

Unified consciousness of self

Unity of consciousness of objects in the world

When one has unified consciousness of self, one is conscious
of oneself not just as subject but, in Kant’s words (A350), as
the ‘single common subject’ of many or all the aspects of the
unified representation that one is now having and of a number
of similarly representations past and, in anticipation, still to
come. (Mutatis mutandis for the single common agent of
various bits of deliberation and action.)

Unity of consciousness of objects – one has unified consciousness of a group of items when to be conscious of
any one of these items by means of that state is to be conscious of other such items and of at least some of the group
of items as a group.
Let us call this form of unified consciousness UCC. In it, ‘item’
covers both objects and properties.
UCC allows us to see why unified consciousness is so
important to us. Suppose that I am conscious of the computer
screen in front of me and also of the car sitting in my driveway.
If consciousness of these two items were not unified, I would
lack the ability to compare them. I could not answer questions
such as, Is the car the same colour as the WordPerfect icon?, or
even, From where I stand, is the car to the left or to the right of
the computer screen? That is what unified consciousness does
for us: it allows us to make such comparisons. Since relating
item to item in this and related ways is fundamental to our kind
of cognition, unified consciousness is fundamental to our kind
of cognition. As we will see, there are disorders of consciousness in which this ability to compare seems to be lost. Such
people have huge cognitive imairments.
In addition to unified consciousness of represented objects,
one can have unified consciousness of representing them, and
unified consciousness of oneself, the thing that has the representations. There is a fourth form of unified consciousness, too,
as we will see shortly. UC(1) does not simply transfer to any of
these three forms. Let us take them one at a time.
Unified consciousness of one’s representing
We typically have unified consciousness of how different items
of content are being represented (by seeing, hearing, remembering, and so on). For example, we can compare what it is like to
see an object to what it is like to touch the same object. This
involves consciousness of experiences themselves, for it is
experiences that are taken to be visual or tactual. Let us capture
the notion at work here a bit more formally.
Unity of consciousness of representing – one has unified
consciousness of representing when to be conscious of
how an item is being represented on the basis of having the
representation is to be conscious of how other such items
are being represented on the same basis.
The same goes for consciousness of feelings by feeling them
and actions by doing them. Let us call this new notion UCR. It
is very similar to UC(1). There is one important difference: the
way in which one is conscious of items does not matter in UCC.
It does matter here.

Neither UCC nor UCR works here. When one is conscious of oneself as the common subject of activities and
contents of one’s current unified representation and the same
subject of unified representations past and to come, one is not
uniting a number of objects, nor a number of ways of representing either. Rather, one is conscious of one and the same
thing in one and the same way, namely, of oneself as oneself
– via a number of contents and activities of one’s global representation.2
Unity of Consciousness of self – Being conscious of,
and knowing that one is conscious of, one and the same
thing, namely, oneself, in the same way, namely, as oneself, via a number of representings.
Call this UCS. It happens both at a time and over time. While
it is different from UCC and UCR, it is not that different. We
have the same core idea: we have unified consciousness when
to be conscious of an item is to be conscious of other items of
the same kind. It is just that in this case, the ‘contents’ are a
number of instances of conscious access to oneself as oneself.

Unity of focus
Finally, there is what we might call unity of focus (UF). UF is
our ability to pay unified, focussed attention to things. It differs from the other sorts of unified consciousness. In the other
two, consciousness ranges over either many represented items
(UCC), complex representings (UCR), or oneself as subject of
many representings (UCS). Unity of focus picks out something within these unified ‘fields’. Wilhelm Wundt captured
what we have in mind in his distinction between the field of
consciousness (Blickfeld) and the focus of consciousness
(Blickpunkt). The consciousness of a single item on which one
is focussing is unified because one is conscious of many aspects of the item in one state or act of consciousness (especially relational aspects, e.g., any dangers it poses, how it
relates to one’s goals, etc.), and of many different considerations with respect to that item (one’s goals, how well one is
achieving them with respect to this object, etc.), in the same
state or act of consciousness. In UF, one integrates a number

2.

According to Kant, indeed, when one is conscious of oneself
as subject, one need not be conscious of oneself as an object at
all (A382, A402, B429).

1057

of cognitive abilities and applies them to an object, especially
to properties of the object that involve relationships to oneself.3

3. Two Theses about Unified Conscious States
What kind of mental state is required for conscious unity at a
time of the UCC and UCR sort? What characterizes unified
consciousness? One thesis is that some kind of relationship
among contents is required, logical coherence for example
(Hurley 1994, 1998). Unified conscious states cannot be inconsistent with one another. But that cannot be right. Suppose that
one sees a stick immersed in water as being bent but knows that
this is an illusion. Here, one’s conscious perception conflicts
with one’s conscious belief that it is not bent. Yet one’s consciousness of them is unified.
Others have advanced what we will call the strong unity
thesis. This is the thesis that all the conscious states of a subject
are unified; every conscious state is unified with every other
conscious state. Bayne and Chalmers (2003): “Necessarily, any
set of conscious states of a subject at a time is unified” (2003, p.
24). Against this thesis, cases of dissociation may be adduced,
particularly split brain cases, where it looks like a subject has
parallel streams of consciousness between which there are no
relations of co-consciousness.
Even though there are strong reasons to question these
requirements on unity, acceptance of them may be behind some
of the recent skepticism about unified consciousness. Nagel
(1971), Davidson (1982), and Dennett (1991) have all urged that
the mind’s unity has been overstated. However, the everyday
incoherence of our beliefs, perceptions, etc., does not threaten
unity at all, and if some of a subject’s conscious states do not
need to be unified with some of her other conscious states, all
that would force us to do is to shrink the range of states over
which consciousness is unified. From the fact that not all of
one’s conscious contents are unified it does not follow that
none are. So there is still something here, unity of consciousness, for which we need to account. Indeed, when theorists
claim that some conscious states may fall outside one’s grasp,
we should ask: outside the grasp of what? The answer would
be: a unified conscious mind.

4. Two Models of Unified Conscious States
So what is unified consciousness like? There are two ways to
understand what the unity consists in. On one view, the experience whereby I have unified consciousness of a number of
things includes simpler experiences of those contents. For example, my experience of the pain and the noise includes an
experience of just the pain, and an experience of just the noise.

3.

If focus is closely related to attention, as we suggested, attention
is not part of some forms of consciousness (Hardcastle, 1997).

These simpler experiences are the relata of co-consciousness,
and are joined as parts of the unified experience of the pain
and noise together. In short, experiences a and b are united in
a third experience, c, which is their joint occurrence. We will
dub this view the doctrine of Experiential Parts (EP).
On the rival account, the conscious mental act through
which diverse contents are presented does not have other
conscious states, experiences, as parts. Call this doctrine No
Experiential Parts (NEP).
To clarify the two, let us use the notation ‘E(o1)’ for an
experience that is the conscious representation of just the
intentional object o1. A conscious representation of just o2 is
E(o2). What is the nature of an experience that takes the
broader content in which o1 and o2 are presented together?
On NEP, it has the structure of E(o1, o2), where this introduces a single experience that has both contents as its object.
To be conscious of o1 by means of that experience is also to
be conscious of it with o2. According to NEP, this is what the
subject’s conscious unity at the time amounts to (if we oversimplify by supposing her to be conscious of nothing but o1
and o2). No ‘smaller’ or simpler conscious states figure as
parts. This experience might be realized in a brain state that
has parts, but these parts would not be further conscious
states.
By contrast, EP must provide an account of how E(o1)
and E(o2) persist as parts of an encompassing experience by
means of which one is conscious of o1 and o2 together. As we
will see, James already saw big problems here.
Proponents of EP include Lockwood (1989, p. 88), who
introduces the notion of co-consciousness as “ the relation in
which two experiences stand, when there is an experience of
which they are both parts” and Dainton (2000, p. 88), who
says, “The relata of co-consciousness are experiences” and
speaks of co-conscious experiences as “component parts” of
the “total experience” that results from their linkage (2000, p.
214). Similarly, Shoemaker (2003, p. 65) says, “ The experiences are co-conscious … by virtue of the fact that they are
components of a single state of consciousness ....”
NEP is advanced by Searle and Tye among others. Searle
ventures the hypothesis that “it is wrong to think of
consciousness as made up of parts at all” (2002, p. 56). For I
have a “single, unified, conscious field containing visual, auditory, and other aspects” (Ibid.), but “there is no such thing as
a separate visual consciousness.” Do “visual experiences
stand to the whole field of consciousness in the part-whole
relation?” No, says Searle (2002, p. 54). Tye offers a similar
view, which he dubs the ‘one-experience view’ (Tye 2003,
chap. 1). Considering the polymodal nature of our experience,
he says, “There are not five different … experiences somehow
combined together to produce a new unified experience”
(2003, p. 27). Instead, “there is just one experience here”
(Ibid.).
James was the first to champion NEP. He endorsed it in

1058

the course of repudiating the ‘mind-stuff theory’, according to
which “our mental states are composite in structure, made up of
smaller states conjoined”(1890, p. 145). Against this, James
says that while our experience is complex, this complexity is
not a matter of there being several experiences (or ‘feelings’)
present in an encompassing experience. This is because “we
cannot mix feelings as such, though we may mix the objects we
feel, and from their mixture get new feelings” (1890, p. 157).4 If
one’s experience appears to become more complex, that is a
matter of a single experience’s content being more complex,
and is not the addition of more experiences (of the diversity of
content).
Putting James’ view in terms of co-consciousness, only
contents, not the experiences of them (or ‘feelings’), are the
relata of co-consciousness, and the contents are made co-conscious by being presented together in the same, single experience. If we say that experiences a and b are fused to form experience c, we should treat ‘fused’ as referring to a process in
which a and b are turned into c, not included in c. They have
been replaced by c, in which their contents are connected, and
they (a and b) no longer exist. As James (1909, p. 189) put it,
contrasting the unified consciousness of the whole alphabet
with the several states involved in consciousness of each letter
taken singly, “It is safer … to treat the consciousness of the
alphabet as a twenty-seventh fact, the substitute and not the
sum of the twenty-six simpler consciousnesses.”
EP faces a difficulty that does not confront NEP. James
describes the problem in his example of the twelve-word sentence. Suppose each word in the sentence is known by just one
of twelve people. It is hard to see, James says, how these twelve
thoughts could be combined to yield a unified consciousness of
the sentence. As he says,
Take a sentence of a dozen words, take twelve men, and to
each one word. Then stand the men in a row or jam them
in a bunch, and let each think of his word as intently as he
will; nowhere will there be a consciousness of the whole
sentence. (James, 1890, p.160)
What EP needs is a way of combining experiences that yields
more than just an experiential aggregate, for a mere combination of experiences is not the experience of a combination. EP
needs, then, a way of putting together experiences that also puts
together their contents. With no story about how this combining of contents is done, we are left with a mere aggregate of
experiences, each member of which is oblivious to the contents
of the other states in the aggregate. As James says, “Idea of a +
idea of b is not identical with idea of (a + b)” (1890, p. 161).
Tye links NEP to the idea that conscious states are transparent. ‘Transparent’ here means that while I am conscious via
conscious states, I am not conscious of them. I ‘see through’

4.

Indeed, he says, “We cannot even … have two feelings in mind
at once” (James 1890, p. 157).

them; hence ‘transparency’. What might seem to be qualities
of conscious states are really qualities that things are represented as having. “Phenomenal unity is a relation between
qualities represented in experience, not between qualities of
experiences” (Tye 2003, p. 36).
However, proponents of NEP need not affirm transparency. Consider, for example, the idea that conscious states are
self-representing states, states of which one becomes conscious just by having them. On this approach, some of the
qualities of which one becomes conscious in having an experience belong to the experience itself. This idea is entirely consistent with NEP. Thus NEP carries no commitment to the
transparency thesis.

5. Disorders of Unified Consciousness
One of the most interesting ways to study psychological
phenomena is to see what happens when they break down or
take an abnormal form. Phenomena that look simple and
seamless when functioning smoothly often turn out to have all
sorts of structure when they begin to malfunction. This is
certainly true of unified consciousness. Abnormalities of unified consciousness take two forms. There are situations in
which it is retained in an unusual form, for example, it splits in
two, and situations in which unity deteriorates more severely,
to the point where it may even be said to be destroyed.
We will begin with cases in which unity is more clearly
retained, but with an unexpected number of instances.
Unusual but still present unity of consciousness
Brain Bisection Operations
Commissurotomies (brain bisection operations) are the best
known situations in which unified consciousness seems to
split but otherwise remains intact. The abnormality is that it
seems to split into two such centres of consciousness within
one body. Here it is natural to say that the unity itself has not
been destroyed or perhaps even damaged. It is just ‘parcelled
out’ differently. In a commissurotomy, the corpus callosum is
cut. The corpus callosum is a large strand of about
200,000,000 neurons running from one hemisphere to the
other. When present, it is the chief channel of communication
between the hemispheres. (These operations are a last-ditch
effort to control certain kinds of severe epilepsy by stopping
the spread of seizures.)
Here are a couple of examples of the kinds of behaviour
that prompt the assessment that under special conditions, two
centres of consciousness can appear in these patients. The
human retina is split vertically in such a way that the left half
of each retina is primarily hooked up to the left hemisphere of
the brain and the right half of each retina is hooked up to the
right hemisphere of the brain. Now suppose that we flash the
word TAXABLE on a screen in front of a brain bisected pa-

1059

tient in such a way that the letters TAX hit the left side of the
retina, the letters ABLE the right side and we put measures in
place to ensure that the information hitting each half of the
retina goes only to one lobe and is not fed to the other. If such
a patient is asked what word is being shown, the mouth, controlled usually by the left hemisphere, will say TAX while the
hand controlled by the hemisphere that does not control the
mouth (usually the left hand and the right hemisphere) will
write ABLE. Or, if the hemisphere that controls a hand (usually
the left hand) but not speech is asked to do arithmetic in a way
that does not penetrate to the hemisphere that controls speech
and the hands are shielded from the eyes, the mouth will insist
that it is not doing arithmetic, has not even thought of arithmetic today, etc. – while the appropriate hand is busily doing arithmetic!
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Another candidate phenomenon is what used to be called Multiple Personality Disorder, now, more neutrally, Dissociative
Identity Disorder (DID). Since everything about this phenomenon is controversial, including whether there is any real multiplicity of consciousness at all, we will not say more about it.
Shattered Unity of Consciousness
In contrast to the cases that we just considered, there are phenomena in which unified consciousness seems not to split but
to shatter.
Schizophrenia
In some particularly severe forms of schizophrenia, the victim
seems to lose the ability to form an integrated, interrelated representation of his or her world and self altogether. The person
speaks in ‘word salads’ that never get anywhere, indeed sometimes never become complete sentences. The person is unable
to put together or act on plans even at the level necessary to
obtain sustenance, tend to bodily needs, or escape painful irritants. Here, it seems more correct to say that the unity of consciousness has shattered than split. The behaviour of these
people seems to express what we might call mere experience-fragments, the contents of which are so narrow and unintegrated that the subject is unable to cope and interact with others in
the ways that even split brain subjects can.
Dysexecutive Syndrome
In schizophrenia of the severe sort just described, the shattering
of consciousness is part of a general breakdown or deformation
of mental functioning: affect, desire, belief, even memory all
suffer massive distortions. In another kind of case, the normal
unity of consciousness seems to be just as absent but there
does not seem to be general cognitive or affective disturbance.
This is what some researchers call dysexecutive syndrome

(Dawson, 1998, p. 215). What indicates breakdown in the
unity of consciousness is that these subjects are unable to
consider two things together, even things directly related to
one another. For example, such people cannot figure out
whether a piece of a puzzle fits into a certain place even when
the piece and the puzzle are both clearly visible and the piece
obviously fits. They cannot crack an egg into a pan. And so
on.5
Simultagnosia
A disorder presenting similar symptoms is simultagnosia or
Balint’s syndrome. In this disorder, patients see only one
object located at one ‘place’ in the visual field at a time. Outside of a few ‘degrees of arc’ in the visual field, these patients
say they see nothing but an “undifferentiated mess” and seem
to be receiving no information about objects (Hardcastle,
1997, p. 62).
What is common to dysexecutive disorder, Trevarthen’s
cases, and simultagnosia is that subjects seem not to be conscious of two items in a single conscious state. They cannot,
for example, compare the objects (or, in Trevarthen’s cases,
the object of a perception with the object of an intention). If
the person has any representation of the second item at all, it
is not a conscious representation. Unlike the split brain case,
it is not just that the representation is missing from one conscious state. Also, it is not incorporated into any other conscious state. Rather than consciousness being split into two
discrete parcels, there is just one diminished parcel. The rest of
the conscious representing that is typical of normal consciousness has disappeared.

6. Is There a Common Thread to the Cases?
We can describe more precisely what is missing in these cases
where consciousness is shattered or seriously impaired. Let us
distinguish between being conscious of individual objects and
having unified consciousness of a number of objects at the
same time. We can think of these as two stages in the construction of one’s conscious state. First, the mind ties together
various sensory inputs into representations of objects (binding). Then the mind ties these represented objects together
into a single array of objects of which a single subject has a
unified representation. (The first theorist to separate these two
stages was Kant, in his doctrine of the synthesis of recognition
in concepts.)
The first stage continues to be available to dysexecutive
and simultagnosia patients: they continue to be conscious of
individual objects, events, etc. The damage seems to be to the
second stage: it is the tying of objects together in unified conscious representation that is impaired or missing. The distinc-

5.

1060

Trevarthen (1984) reports a related syndrome.

tion can be made this way: these people can achieve some measure of UF, unity of focus with respect to individual objects, but
UCC and UCR are abnormally restricted or even missing altogether. (And UCS? It is hard to tell.) Following the same line of
thought, even the first stage is not available in the severe
schizophrenias just discussed.
In brain bisection cases, by contrast, the ability to tie objects together is (relatively) intact, especially in the left lobe.
What opens the way to the idea of a split in consciousness is
that, in some situations, whatever is conscious of some items
being represented in the body in question is not conscious of
other items being represented in that same body at the same
time. (See the examples of the word TAXABLE and the doing
of arithmetic.)
So far we have always had a clear number of instances of
unified consciousness in each case. Some philosophers reject
this result. Nagel (1971) claims that there is no whole number of
‘centres of consciousness’ in brain bisection patients: there is
too much unity to say “two”, yet too much splitting to say
“one”. In our view, this conclusion is not justified.
A common pattern is evident in the cases of commissurotomy, severe schizophrenia, dysexecutive disorder and simultagnosia. In all these cases, consciousness of some items goes
with an unusual lack of consciousness of others.
In the severe schizophrenia cases we considered, there may
also be a failure to meet the conditions of UCS. It is interesting
that in none of the cases we have considered in which UCC
remains, though in unusual forms, is there any evidence of
damage to or destruction of UCS. Consciousness of self as a
single common subject seems to remain intact, though the
number of selves can vary.
To sum up, the unity of consciousness is a pervasive,
cognitively important feature of our kind of mind. It takes a
number of related but still distinguishable forms. And the ways
in which it breaks down are revealing and informative.

bridge University Press.
Dawson, M. 1998. Understanding Cognitive Science. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers.
Descartes, René. 1641. Meditations o n First Philosophy. Indianapolis: Library of Liberal Arts
Hardcastle, V. 19 9 8 . The binding problem. In A Companion to
Cognitive Science, Wm. Bechtel and G. Graham, eds. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers.
Hardcastle, V. 1997. Attention versus c o ns c iousness: A distinction
with a difference. Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese
Cognitive Science Society, 4:3, pp. 56-66. A lso in N. Osaka, ed.
2003. N e u r al Basis of Consciousness. Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Press, pp. 105-120.
Hill, C. 1991. Sensations: A D e f ense of Type Materialism. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Hurley, S. 1994. Unity and objectivity. In Peacocke (1994).
Hu rle y , S. 1998. Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
James, W. 1909. A pluralistic universe. In Essays in Rad ical Empiricism and A Pluralistic Universe. Gloucester, MA: P. Smith,
1967.
James, W. 1890. Princip les of Psychology, Vol. 1. London:
Macmillan.
Kant, I. 1781/87 . C ritique of Pure Reason. P. Guyer and A. Wood,
trans. and eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lockwood, M. 1989. Mind, Brain and the Q u antum. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers.
Lockwood, M. 1994. Issues of unity and o b je c tivity. In Peacocke
(1994).
Marcel, A. 1994. What is relevant to the unity of conscio u s ne ss? In
Peacocke (1994).
Marks, C. 1981. C o m missurotomy, Consciousness and Unity of
Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nagel, T. 1971. Brain bisection and the u nity of consciousness.
Synthese 22: 396-413.
Parfit, D. 1971. Personal identity. Philosophical Review 80: 3-27.

References

Parfit, D . 1984. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Bayne, T. and Chalmers, D. 2003. What is the unity of consciousness? In A. Cleeremans, ed. 2003
Bennett, J. 1966. Kant’s Analytic. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Bennett, J. 1974. Kant’s Dialectic. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ e rsity
Press.
Blackmore, S. 2004. Co n sciousness: An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brook, A. 1994. Kant and the Mind. New York: Camb ridge University Press.
Cleeremans, A, ed. 2003. The Unity of Consciousness: Binding,
Integration and Dissociation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dainton, B. 2000. Stream of Consciousness. London: Routledge
Davidson, D. 1980. Paradoxes of irrationality. In R. Wollheim and J.
Hopkins, eds. Philosophical Essays on Freud. Cambrid ge: Cam-

Peaco cke, C. 1994. Objectivity, Simulation, and the Unity of Consciousness Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Searle , J . 2 002. Consciousness. In his Consciousness and Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. (Origina lly
published in Annual Review of Neuroscience, 23 (2000): 557-78.)
Shoemaker, S. 2003. Consciousness and co-co ns ciousness. In A.
Cleeremans, ed. 2003.
Strawson, P. F. 1966. The Bounds of Sense. London: Methuen Ltd.
Trevarthen, C. 1984. Biodynamic structures: cognitive correlates of
motive sets and the development of motives in infa nts. In W. Prinz
and A. F. Sanders, eds. Cognition a n d M otor Processes. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, pp. 327-50
T ye, M. 2003. Consciousness and Persons: Unity and Ide n tity.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
White, S. 1990. Th e Unity of the Self. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1061

