UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Use of Cognitive Field Research Methods to Investigate Cultural Groups: The Case of
Individual Decision Making in Middle Eastern Crowds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vx9s07v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
McHugh, Anna P.
Sieck, Winston R.
Smith, Jennifer L.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Use of Cognitive Field Research Methods to Investigate Cultural Groups:
The Case of Individual Decision Making in Middle Eastern Crowds
Winston R. Sieck (sieck@decisionmaking.com)
Anna P. McHugh (amchugh@decisionmaking.com)
Jennifer L. Smith (jsmith@decisionmaking.com)
Klein Associates†, 1750 Commerce Center Blvd.
Fairborn, OH 45324 USA

East, with an emphasis on the successes, limitations, and
lessons of the methodology.

Abstract
How does individual judgment and decision making mediate
the behavior of crowds in the Middle East? Questions such as
this cannot be answered by standard experimental
psychological methods, and classic ethnographic approaches
are limited as well. This paper discusses the applicability of the
Critical Decision Method for investigating the decision making
of non-western cultural groups in naturalistic settings. The
results provide an existence proof that the method can be
feasibly extended for studying cognition in non-western
cultures.

Typical Cultural Research Methods

This paper describes methodological approaches for
studying cognition in cultural groups. The discussion is
presented in the context of ongoing research into crowd
behavior, as it emerges from the decision making of
individuals. The general region of interest is the Middle East,
extending from Egypt and the Arabian peninsula in the south
up through Lebanon and Syria, and also extending from the
Mediterranean on the west to the Iraq/Iran border on the east.
These boundaries roughly correspond to those of primary
Arabic speakers, which is often how this broad cultural group
tends to define itself (Patai, 2002). Crowd behavior is an
important international and interdisciplinary research area that
is currently experiencing an upsurge in activity, primarily due
to the practical consequences associated with large,
uncontrolled crowds. At this point, it is still fair to conclude
that, while considerable thought has been directed towards
understanding crowd behavior, the empirical base remains
thin. This state is obviously rooted in the inherent difficulties
in collecting pertinent and rigorous psychological data. In
addition, or perhaps, as a consequence, much existing
theorizing is distinctly behaviorist in flavor, as evidenced by
the rubric, “crowd behavior,” to define the domain of interest.
As mentioned, the focus of the current paper is on
methodologies for investigating cognition in cultural groups,
in general, using our own work on decision making of crowd
members as a specific case. In the remainder of this paper,
we summarize experimental and ethnographic approaches for
studying culture, and then introduce a commonly used
cognitive field research methodology, the Critical Decision
Method (CDM) as a potential alternative approach. We then
briefly describe our ongoing research using the CDM to
investigate crowd member decision making in the Middle

2164

Much important work in culture and cognition is being
carried out by applying standard experimental procedures
across cultures, with national origin constituting the usual
operational definition of cultural group. Such investigations
permit the relative isolation of particular components of
cognition, and thus provide a close comparative analysis of
cultural differences on the details of particular cognitive
processes, such as judgment and reasoning (e.g. Norenzayan,
Smith, Kim, & Nisbett, 2002; Yates, Lee, Sieck, Choi, &
Price, 2002). Nevertheless, such methods are simply not
appropriate for investigating questions pertaining to cognition
as it occurs in natural settings. In order to uncover
individuals’ decision processes in crowd situations, beginning
with questions like, “What judgments and decisions are
people actually making in the context of a crowd event?” it is
necessary to relinquish the rigors of experimental control and
other conveniences associated with laboratory work.
Perhaps the quintessential cultural anthropological method
is ethnography. The roots of modern ethnography are in the
studies of cultural anthropologists, such as Boas and
Malinowski. The research questions that ethnographers
address are typically descriptive in nature. They want to
know, “What are the beliefs, practices, and values of this
cultural group?”
The ethnographer takes a holistic
perspective. To understand a group’s culture, the researcher
studies many aspects of the group, including behavior
patterns, verbal and written communications, religion,
politics, family life, history, and many other areas.
Central to ethnography is the belief that immersion in a
group or community, “encountering it firsthand and making
some sense out of it” (Agar, 1986, p. 12), is necessary to gain
a deep understanding of the culture. The research is timeintensive, sometimes lasting for several years. Fieldwork
typically includes interviews, observations, and reviews of
documents and artifacts. Many ethnographers take on the
role of participant observer, becoming actively involved in
the community rather than watching it from a distance. This
allows them to not only see and hear about how the
individuals live, but to actually live the life themselves.
Unlike most experimental research, ethnographic research
does not proceed linearly, going from hypothesis to data
collection to data analysis. Instead, data analysis is often

conducted in parallel with data collection, and theories are
developed and revised throughout the study. During analysis,
the researcher identifies themes and patterns in the behaviors,
customs, rules, and beliefs that are representative of the entire
group. Based on these observations, the ethnographer makes
inferences about the culture of the group. The product of
ethnographic research is usually a written narrative of the
cultural group.
Although ethnography has much to offer, and it forms a
broader basis for much naturalistic research, several features
of ethnography in its “classic form” make it relatively
unattractive for investigating issues like decision making in
crowds. First, the method requires that extensive time be
spent with a particular localized group of people. This is
certainly useful and appropriate for many kinds of studies.
However, it is undesirable when the research aims require the
capturing of sporadic and dispersed events like crowd
incidents. Secondly, standard ethnographies tend to focus on
broader socio-political and economic contexts of the cultural
group which lead to theorizing about cognition based on such
distal factors. This emphasis tends to be associated with a
lack of detail on more proximal variables, such as specific
cues that inform particular judgments.

Critical Decision Method for Cultural Analysis
Experimental methods and standard ethnographies will
continue to have their place in research on cultural issues.
However, neither presented an attractive alternative for our
research into the judgment and decision making of crowd
participants. In our investigation, we have attempted to
extend methods in common use by cognitive field researchers
to study the decision making of populations in the Middle
East. These Cognitive Task Analysis methods are closely
related to ethnography and share many of the philosophical
underpinnings, but tend to be more focused both in time and
in specificity of proximal drivers of cognition (Schraagen,
Chipman, & Shalin, 2000).
Our cultural research has incorporated a specific interview
technique, the Critical Decision Method (CDM). The CDM
is an incident based interview method for uncovering
information about the knowledge, goal structures, and
judgment and decision processes underlying observable
actions in a particular context (Hoffman, Crandall, &
Shadbolt, 1998; Klein, Calderwood, & MacGregor, 1989).
CDM was originally developed based on an earlier technique
for uncovering critical incidents that comes from direct
experience (Flanagan, 1954). The CDM interview requires
an initial step, that of guiding the participant to recall and
recount a relevant incident. The interviewer then conducts
three additional information gathering sweeps through the
incident: Timeline Verification and Decision Point
Identification; Progressive Deepening; and What-if Queries
(See Figure 1).

Figure 1: CDM overview.
First Sweep: Incident Identification and Selection. In
accord with the goals of the project, the interviewers or
elicitors will have decided ahead of time on an opening query,
such as “Can you tell us about a time when you were part of a
demonstration or protest of some sort?” Once the participant
identifies a relevant incident, he or she is asked to recount the
episode in its entirety. The interviewer acts as an active
listener, asking few (if any) questions, and allowing the
participant to structure the incident account him or herself.
The participant's account, solicited in this non-interfering
way, provides a framework and structure that the elicitor will
use throughout the remainder of the interview.

2165

Second Sweep: Timeline Verification and Decision Point
Identification. In this phase of the interview, the elicitor
attempts to construct a timeline of the incident. The
participant is asked for the approximate time of key events
and turning points within the incident. The elicitor's goal is to
capture the salient events within the incident, ordered by time
and expressed in terms of the points where understanding
changed, where judgments or decisions were made, and
points where actions were taken.
Third Sweep: Progressive Deepening and the Story
Behind the Story. During the third sweep through the
incident, the CDM interviewer leads the participant back over
each critical turning or decision point in the incident as
identified in sweep two to determine presence or absence of
salient cues and the nature of those cues, assessment of the
situation and the basis of that assessment, expectations about
how the situation might evolve, goals considered, and options
evaluated and chosen.
Fourth Sweep: “What if?”. The final sweep through the
incident provides an opportunity for interviewers to shift
perspective. During this phase, interviewers often use a
“What if?” strategy, such as “What if you had taken action Y,
instead of action X?” Answers to such questions provide

additional information on how the participant understood the
complete situation.

Interview Examples
Because the purpose of the current paper is to demonstrate
aspects of the CDM methodology, as applied to Middle
Easterners, we present specific examples of transcribed
exchanges, rather than attempting a comprehensive
discussion of the results. In all of the presented examples, I =
Interviewer, P = Participant, and T = Translator. Our first set
of examples illustrates particular elements of crowd
members’ decision making. In general, they suggest an
alternative to the standard conceptions of crowds presented
above. Specifically, crowds appear to be made up of
members who are highly intentional, and engaged in
assessing their current situations in light of specific goals that
are under ongoing negotiation.

Crowd Member Decision Making in the
Middle-East
Although theorists have been analyzing crowds for over a
century, it is safe to conclude that the psychological
investigation of crowds remains in its infancy. Early theorists
popularized notions that crowd membership drives people
towards irrationality and destructiveness (e.g. Le Bon
1896/1947). Although the empirical basis for these ideas is
quite thin, they have persisted in various forms (but see Drury
& Reicher, 2000). The irrationality conception is perhaps
most enticing in its ability to explain crowd violence by
ordinary citizens. Nevertheless, taking irrationality seriously
implies that crowd members are not making important
judgments in their own interest, such as assessing opposition
capabilities.
More recently, scholarship on crowds has suggested
conceptualization of a crowd as a natural process, roughly
corresponding to a natural disaster, like a hurricane or
volcano. In this “crowd as natural process” view, the crowd
has a beginning (formation), a middle (gathering), and an end
(dispersion). This is an intensely compelling model, since
every crowd event that has ever occurred can be described in
terms of these stages. An important implication of this
model, however, is that, as with any other natural process, a
crowd event will run its course and end in some amount of
time without intervention.
In contrast to these existing conceptions, our general
hypothesis is that crowd members maintain their capacity for
rational, individual decision making. That is, we view crowd
members as making locally-rational decisions in light of their
goals and perceived goal accomplishment, their assessments
of threat, risk tolerance, and commitment against opposition.
Although such a distinctively cognitive approach may seem
the obvious place to start among cognitive scientists, it is not
at all clear in scholarship on crowd behavior more generally.
As noted above, the focus of our investigation is crowd
member decision making in the Middle East. Our intent was
not to engage in cross-cultural comparisons between cultural
groups, but rather to test our general hypothesis in a particular
cultural region. In this sense, our approach is distinctly
ethnographic in spirit.

Example 1. A Lebanese woman recounts her participation in
a demonstration to increase teacher’s salaries. The example
shows how the participants determined that their goals were
met, so that they would no when to stop the demonstration.

Method

T: She said that after about a half an hour after the cameras
left is when the crowd started to disperse.
I: Ok. How did you know that the crowd was starting to
disperse? How did you know that?
T: She said what happened is that after the cameras left they
thought their story was now going to get out and so
everybody went home to their own home. She said the story
that they wanted to get out was now out…
I: Did the teachers end up getting a pay raise, getting what
they were asking for from the government?
T: She doesn’t know.
I: Ok, did you see what the media recorded on the television?
P: yeah…
I: What did you see?
T: She said most of the footage was not of the students but of
the teachers.
I: Did they show the government or the administration
responding to the demonstration?
T: Ok, what she said is, no there was no immediate response
by the government on the raise, but the government said they
would have meetings with the teachers.
I: So when you were watching, when you saw the news report
on TV that night, did you think the message was going to be
heard, or did you think we should have been louder or we
should have had more banners or we should have done
something differently to make sure that they heard us?
T: They felt they got their message out by watching
themselves on TV, or watching the people say stuff about the
message, they were happy with themselves, that they did
something good.

Over the course of the project to date, we have collected
over 30 CDM interviews on several different populations.
However, we restrict discussion here to data collected on
Middle Easterners who were engaged in demonstrations or
similar crowd events in the Middle East. We first interviewed
expatriates from a variety of Middle Eastern countries
currently living in the Dearborn area, and then interviewed
Lebanese citizens in Beirut. A translator was available during
all of these interviews, though many of the participants spoke
English.
2166

Example 2. A Palestinian recounts an incident in the street
near his home. This example illustrates that crowd members
explicitly assess the weapons and level of force being directed
towards them:

I: I'm just thinking, if they shoot the rubber bullets, do people
know that it's rubber?
P: You will become expert.
P: First, how you would know, it's a big size [magazine]
connected to the rifle. You know, the noise is different from
the rifle. Yeah, you would know.
I: So you knew things were going to go badly if you saw
them take off the-P: No-I: Oh, you wouldn't even see that?
P: You have it twenty soldiers. Or fifty soldiers. You will
hear sometimes, whatever they shoot, the noise, you hear if
it's live ammunition in the air. Sometimes it's at you.

incidents. Instead, they tended to move away from the
incident and speak in general terms, or to “bump up” from the
details sto refocus on the theme of the incident. Examples of
these challenges are presented next, along with some potential
hypotheses for why they occurred.

Example 3. A Lebanese woman talks of her participation in
crowds that formed at Baabda Palace over a couple of
month’s time in 1989 to act as a human shield against Syrian
bombing. This demonstrates how persistence in crowd
member actions is dependent on both the intensity with which
goals are held, and also shared attitudes towards risk.

I: So how did this day end? Did everyone just go home? Or
were there more demonstrations afterward?
P: It [the crowd] sometimes gets bigger.
I: But on this day did it?
P: Yeah, sometimes they get bigger even after they go outside
the door… it depends how the police force them. Like if they
force them very hard, they break the demonstrations. But if
they don’t force them very hard…or if they see it’s going to
be a peaceful demonstration, then they let them do something.
Usually if it’s peaceful they try to stop it, but they don’t shoot
gas.

I: But they’re bombing the roads?
P: Yes!
I: So this is to keep people from going to the palace? To keep
them from going back and forth?
P: Yes.
I: So when they started bombing the roads, did you quit going
down?
P: We hide, and when they stopped, we go back. It was like
this. We were crazy then.
I: You were young – college student age. And you would hide
from the bombs and then continue on down…Early on I
asked about who was going down and you said “young
people, old people; it was everybody.”
P: Yes.
I: After the bombing of the roads, who was really still going
down?
P: Everybody.
I: It was still everybody?
P: Everybody, yes. Maybe young is the majority, but…
I: Were there fewer people showing up?
P: Just after bombarding, we were few, but after some hours,
it was normal. The Lebanese are like this; they are crazy.
P: Yes, several times we went to the beach, and they started
to bombard us. Okay, home…we go home, and when
everything is calm, we go back.
I: This is like a thunderstorm for us.
T: Exactly, but it’s raining shrapnel instead.

Methodological Issues
The above examples provide some flavor for the kinds of
information obtained from CDM on Middle Easterners. In
addition, we experienced some difficulty in conducting CDM
interviews with this population, as compared with our
experiences with U.S. interviewees. Specifically, we had
trouble keeping participants focused on the details of specific

Example 4. A Palestinian describes a demonstration
following services at a mosque, when news spread of some
nearby deaths. In this example, the interviewee flipped back
and forth between one incident and other crowd situations he
had seen. When we asked questions to get the interviewee to
focus and stay grounded in the one specific incident, he
appeared to respond to those questions in generalities.

Example 5. A Lebanese man describes his involvement as
an organizer in the massive demonstrations following Prime
Minister Hariri’s assassination in 2005.
These
demonstrations precipitated the departure of Syrian forces
from Lebanon. This example illustrates a tendency to avoid
requests for more detail in favor of reiterating the general
point or theme of their account.
I: But everyone was very angry that day?
P: Yeah.
I: And so, how were they expressing that anger?
P: They were thinking that in this day they will turn the table.
But unfortunately it did not happen.
I: So in terms of just what you were seeing in the crowd,
would they shake their fists, how would they show that they
were angry?
P [passionate]: Maybe on that day you can see lions on the
ground. This is the top level of crazy you can reach on this
day. Nobody came laughing, nobody came to enjoy.
Everybody upset. Everybody angry, everybody want to
finish, everybody want peace. Everybody want the reality, to
know what’s going on in my country. We have reached a
level of country out of control. Not area, not people, country
whole. Country in dungeon. Country out of control.
Everybody was afraid. What is tomorrow, what is after some
hours. Everybody was afraid about himself. His childrens,
his future. His country’s future. Everything… (continues)
I: I see.
It is important to note that while we occasionally
experience similar issues with western respondents, the

2167

difference in working with Middle Easterners was quite
noticeable. There are several hypotheses for why we might
be experiencing these CDM interview challenges with Middle
Eastern participants. One hypothesis for why interviewees
tended to speak in generalities and provide fewer details is
that Middle Easterners tend to be holistic thinkers, focusing
more on connections between elements, and resisting
decomposition (Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001).
Another possible reason for the relative lack of detail might
be due to the use of language in the Middle East.
Exaggeration and repetition are key characteristics of the
speech in the Middle East. There is less emphasis on the
accuracy of the details in a story or an argument, and more
emphasis on the point or the theme that is being
communicated (Patai, 2002). If the theme of the story is most
important, the details may be more likely to either be left out,
or be created (and recreated) to suit the purpose of the theme
being conveyed. A third possibility is that the details are
simply not encoded in memory, and hence are unavailable for
recall. This could occur as a consequence of either of the first
two reasons, for some other unspecified reason.

assistance and guidance. We also deeply appreciate the
wonderful hospitality of David Rababy and his family, as
well as the contributions of all of our research participants.
This research is supported by AF contract FA8650-05-C6549.
†
A division of Applied Research Associates.

References

Summary

Agar, M. H. (1986). Speaking of Ethnography. Ed. J. Van
Maanen. Vol 2 of the Qualitative Research Methods
Series. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
Inc.
Drury, J., & Reicher, S. (2000). Collective action and
psychological change: The emergence of new social
identities. British Journal of Social Psychology, 39,
579-604.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique.
Psychological Bulletin, 51, 327-358.
Hoffman, R. R., Crandall, B. W., & Shadbolt, N. R. (1998).
Use of the critical decision method to elicit expert
knowledge: A case study in cognitive task analysis
methodology. Human Factors, 40(2), 254-276.
Klein, G. A., Calderwood, R., & MacGregor, D. (1989).
Critical decision method for eliciting knowledge.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, 19(3), 462-472.
Le Bon, G. (1896/1947). The crowd: A study of the popular
mind. London: Ernest Benn.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: Holistic versus
analytic cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291310.
Norenzayan, A., Smith, E. E., Kim, B. J., & Nisbett, R. E.
(2002). Cultural preferences for formal versus
intuitive reasoning. Cognitive Science, 26(653-684).
Patai, R. (2002). The Arab Mind. Long Island: Hatherleigh
Press.
Schraagen, J. M., Chipman, S. F., & Shalin, V. L. (Eds.).
(2000). Cognitive Task Analysis. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Yates, J. F., Lee, J.-W., Sieck, W. R., Choi, I., & Price, P. C.
(2002). Probability judgment across cultures. In T.
Gilovich & D. Griffin & D. Kahneman (Eds.),
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment (pp. 271-291). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Overall, we found the CDM to be a useful, efficient field
method for understanding Middle Eastern decision making.
Specifically, it provided insights into the cognition of crowd
members that could not be obtained through behavioral
observations or related methods. In particular, we found that
crowd members were making decisions in support of their
goals, and were assessing a variety of aspects of their
situations, including ongoing assessments of threat and risk,
as well as the extent to which their goals were being
accomplished. These findings speak against associations of
crowd membership with a loss of rationality, as well as
conceptions of crowd processes as unintentional, natural
phenomena.
Our methodological findings suggest that a lower yield of
information should be expected from CDM interviews on
Middle Easterners, and perhaps non-Westerners more
generally. Particular effects may be anticipated for a cultural
group by conducting a preliminary analysis of language
discourse and thinking style of the group.
Further
investigation into use of the CDM for cultural analysis of
decision making is clearly warranted.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Rob Hutton, Helen Klein, Jenni
Phillips, and Wil Readinger for their data collection

2168

