UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Numbers to Structure Space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9190m1qw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Christie, Stella
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Numbers to Structure Space
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60201

Stella Christie (christie@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60201

development of spatial cognition. For example, children
understand element-to-element correspondences before they
understand spatial relational correspondences (Bluestein &
Acredolo, 1979; Presson, 1982). Liben (1998) also
described a relational shift pattern in map understanding:
chidren understood object-based correspondence before they
understood relation-based correspondences. Blades and
Cooke (1994) adapted the classic DeLoache task in which
children watched a toy being hidden at an object in a model
room and were asked to retrieve a similar toy hidden at the
same object in a second model room. All objects (toy
locations) were distinct except for one pair of identical
objects. 3-year-olds succeeded when the toy was hidden at a
unique object, but they failed the task when the toy was
placed at one of the identical objects, suggesting a reliance
on object-matching.
Gentner (2003) has proposed that the learning and
application of relational language is a route to learning
domain relations. Indeed, there is evidence suggesting that
relational language might foster attending to and encoding
particular relations (Hermer-Vasquez, Spelke, &
Katsnelson, 1999; Logan & Sadler, 1996; Regier & CarlsonRadvansky, 2001). For example, in the development of
spatial cognition, Hermer-Vasquez, Moffet, & Munkholm
(2001) found that children’s performance in a search task
was correlated with their ability to use the spatial language
relevant to the task.
Recently, Loewenstein and Gentner (2005) found
evidence from a spatial mapping task for the claim that
spatial relational language fosters the development of spatial
relational knowledge. Because our study is based on their
methods we describe it in some detail. In the more
challenging version of their task, using the cross-mapping
technique—in which object matches do not correspond to
relational matches—they found a semantically specific
effect. Children who heard the set of spatial terms top,
middle, bottom, performed significantly better than children
who heard the set of spatial terms on, in, under.
Loewenstein and Gentner conjectured that this difference in
performance is due to the advantage of systematicity, that is,
a connected system of relations such as top, middle, bottom
invites a better relational representation, and this in turn
supports relational mapping. The set of terms top, middle,
bottom form a connected structure: top > middle > bottom.
Thus they form an interconnected system governed by the

Abstract
We investigated the claim that relational language promotes
the development of relational reasoning (Gentner, 2003).
Prior research has shown the benefit of spatial relational
language (e.g. top, middle, bottom) in preschoolers’
performance in spatial mapping (Loewenstein and Gentner,
2005), suggesting that spatial relational language invites a
delineated relational representation. We generalized this
conclusion by testing the benefit of using nonspatial relational
language in a spatial analogical task. Preschool children were
presented with two identical three-tiered boxes, in which they
watched an item being hidden in one box and were then asked
to search for a similar item in the corresponding location at
the second box. Half of the children heard a set of systematic
terms conveying monotonic structure (1 2 3), whereas the
other half of the children heard non-systematic terms
consisting of names of familiar animals. Both sets of terms
are familiar to preschoolers and neither directly denotes
spatial locations. We found that preschool children who heard
the 123 labels performed better than those who heard animal
names. The results are evidence of young children’s
sensitivity to the relational structure conveyed by language,
and to their ability to apply this structure into a different
domain.

Introduction
Relational similarity is a crucial construct in human
cognition. The ability to perceive relational similarity
underlies a number of fundamental cognitive processes such
as analogies (Gentner, 1983, 2003), categorization (Ramscar
and Pain, 1996), and inductive inferencing (Holland,
Holyoak, Nisbett, and Thagard, 1986). How do children
come to develop relational thinking? This question becomes
especially relevant in the domain of spatial cognition –
where an appreciation of spatial relations is necessary in a
broad range of spatial tasks, from navigating to perceiving
the configuration of a landmark array to map reading (e.g.
Newcombe, 2002; Newcombe and Huttenlocher, 2000).
Previous research has shown that the apprehension of
relational similarities is not immediate in development:
children first rely on overall similarity or on commonalities
based on element matching, and then shift to appreciating
commonalities based on relations (Gentner & Rattermann,
1991, Rattermann & Gentner, 1998a; Halford, 1993). This
relational shift (Gentner, 1988) is also observed in the
267

higher-order relation of monotonicity in the vertical
dimension. In contrast, on, in, and under each conveys a
separate first-order relation between the figure and the
ground (Herskovits, 1986). They serve as three separate
spatial relations rather than an interconnected system
(although on and under can be seen as connected in some
contexts). The structure mapping theory predicts that
connected systems of relations should be favored over
independent relations in analogical processing (Gentner,
1983; Clement & Gentner, 1991). Consistent with this
prediction, hearing the terms top, middle, bottom should
provide a deeper structural representation; and thus supports
the mapping of spatial relations better than the less
systematic set on, in, under.
The possibility that systematic relational language invites
a systematic relational representation offers an appealing
learning mechanism that could contribute to the
development of higher-order cognition. But before
embracing this conclusion, we must consider an alternative
explanation for Loewenstein and Gentner results. It is
possible that the set of terms on, in, under is more
ambiguous in denoting specific locations within the box
than is the top, middle, bottom set. For example, children
might sometimes have interpreted “on the box” as “on the
shelf,” which would lead to confusion between the top and
the interior shelf. In contrast, the terms top, middle, bottom
denote specific locations with greater clarity, e.g. the term
top distinctly refers to the uppermost location of the box.
Thus, the argument can be made that the difference between
these two terms results not from the advantage of systematic
relations, but rather from the advantage of greater referential
specificity.
The current research tests whether systematic relational
language can indeed affect children’s perceiving and
encoding of relational structure. We used Loewenstein and
Gentner’s (2005) spatial mapping task, but crucially, we
used two sets of non spatial terms instead. One set of terms
(123) represents a systematic relation of monotonic structure
whereas the other set of terms does not (names of animals:
sheep’s room, dog’s room and pig’s room). As neither set of
terms is spatial, there is no a priori difference in the clarity
of reference. In addition, in order to avoid possible
canonical correspondences between our study set up and
everyday observations, the three locations of the box were
labeled 1, 2, 3 from top to bottom respectively, differing
from the usual numbering of floors in buildings. We
predicted that children who heard the set of terms 123
would perform better than those who heard names of
animals.
It should be noted that our prediction is not at all obvious.
Because children are ordinarily familiar with names of
animals, one might expect that they will remember them
better than numbers. In addition, young children may not
have fully grasped the structure of the set of terms 123. 1
Thus, one might well predict better performance with the set
of animal names.

In sum, our study expands the original hypothesis of
Loewenstein and Gentner by using general terms that
embody monotonic structure rather than specifically spatial
terms. In doing so, we aimed to investigate (i) children’s
sensitivity to structures in the semantics of their language,
and (ii) whether they can abstract this structure and apply it
to tasks in another domain—in this case, the domain of
space.

Experiment
Participants. Sixty-seven children participated in the
experiment. There were three age groups, averaging 3;6
years (n = 26, range: 3;5 to 3;9 years), 4;1 years (n=24,
range: 3;11 to 4;3 years), and 4;7 years (n= 13, range: 4;5 to
4;9 years). Within each age group, children were randomly
assigned to the Animal condition or to the 123 condition.
Materials
Box Task. Two boxes, a white Hiding Box and a blue
Finding Box, were placed about 2 ft apart on the floor. The
dimensions of each box were as follows: 15 in. high x 12 in.
wide x 7 in. deep. The top, middle and bottom of the box
were labeled as sheep’s room, dog’s room, and pig’s room
respectively for the Animal condition, and number 1 room,
number 2 room, and number 3 room respectively for the
123 condition.
An identical set of three colored cards (aquarium, earth,
pizza) was created for each box. The card was placed in a
clear acrylic 5 in. x 7 in. picture frame. The cards were
placed in the box such that matching pictures were in
mismatched locations (Fig. 1). For example, a card with
pizza picture might be placed in the middle position in the
Hiding Box and in the bottom position in the Finding Box.
One of the cards in each box had a yellow star attached to its
back, making it the “winner” card. At all times, there was a
card placed at the top, middle and bottom of each box, only
one of which was the winner. Two additional plain colored
cards—a grey card for the Hiding Box and a blue card for
the Finding Box, were used for the orientation phase and for
a catch trial.
Number Task. Small plastic fish and zebras were used for
the counting task at the end.

Figure 1: Experimental material. The left box is the
Hiding Box, the right box the Finding Box. The solid
arrow signifies correct corresponding location. The
dotted line signifies an incorrect object match.

1

To test children’s number knowledge, we also administered a
number task which probed children’s understanding of the
successor function (Sarnecka, Cerutti, & Carey, 2005).
268

Pointing task. To assess the child’s memory for the label of
the spatial locations, at the end of the mapping task the child
was asked to point to a particular labeled location. Thus for
the Animal condition the experimenter asked the child “Can
you point to the dog’s room?” or, in the 123 condition “Can
you point to number 2 room?” All three spatial locations
were assessed.

Procedure
Training. The child was first shown the cards at the Hiding
Box. Three picture cards were placed at the top, middle or
bottom of the box. The plain white card was placed in front
of the box. The star was affixed to the back of the white
card—making this card the “winner”. The experimenter
turned over each of the cards and asked the child if there
was anything on the card, using specific labels for each
location. For example, in the Animal condition the
experimenter said, “Let’s look at the one in the sheep’s
room. Does it have anything on the back?” Likewise, in the
123 condition, the term number 1 room (for example) would
be applied. For the card with the star, the experimenter
explained to the child that the particular card was a winner
card, because it had a star on the back. The whole procedure
was repeated at the Finding Box.
The experimenter then explained the mapping task. The
child was told that the winners were always in the same
place in the two boxes. Then the child was given a practice
trial. The experimenter placed the winner to the right of the
Hiding box, saying ‘‘I’m putting this winner next to the
box.” The experimenter then put the winner at the Finding
box in the corresponding place, saying: ‘‘And this winner
goes right here, in the very same place.’’ The child was then
asked to find the winner at the Finding box, and to retrieve
the original winner at the Hiding box. This practice trial was
used to provide a clear demonstration of how to play the
game. The procedure and instruction for the practice trials
were identical for the two conditions.

Open-ended question. After completing the mapping task,
the child was asked: “How did you know where to look?
How did you know which card would be the winner?”
Number knowledge task. Number task was administered to
a subset of the participants. The standard Give-N-task was
used. Children were presented with a wooden shallow box
containing 20 small plastic zebras. The experimenter then
asked the child to give her a certain number of zebras: “Can
you give me __ zebras?” This task was then followed by a
counting task where seven plastic fish were arranged in a
line in front of the child. The experimenter then said “Now
can you please count the fish?”
Scoring. The main dependent measure was the proportion
of correct responses across the six search trials. Children
who searched incorrectly in the catch trials were eliminated
from the final analysis. This was to ensure that errors were
not due to lack of attention or non-understanding of the task
per se. There were no effects of gender, nor of order of
presentation, nor was there any change in search or retrieval
performance across trials.

Search trials. As the child watched, the experimenter
placed the winner at the top, middle or bottom of the box,
saying either “I’m putting the winner in the
sheep’s/pig’s/dog’s room” (Animal condition) or “I’m
putting the winner in number 1/number 2/number 3 room”
(123 condition). The experimenter then asked the child to
close her eyes while hiding the other winner at the Finding
box. The child opened her eyes and was asked to search for
the winner at the Finding box, while reminded by the
experimenter that the winner at the Finding Box was at the
very same place as the winner at the Hiding Box. The child
was allowed to search only once, and the experimenter
showed the correct location of the card if the child searched
wrongly The child was tested at each location twice (nonconsecutively) for a total of 6 trials. Two orderings of
placements were used. Between the fourth and fifth trials
there was a catch trial in which the winners were placed
next to the boxes, just as in the practice trial. The catch trial
was intended to ensure that the child understood and paid
attention to the task.

Memory score. The memory score was assessed from the
Pointing Task result. A score 1 was given if the child
correctly pointed to the location asked by the experimenter.
Since there were three locations, 3 is a perfect memory
score.
Number knowledge score. The understanding of the
successor function, that for a number x, the next number in
line is x +1, is important in understanding the structure of
the integers. This understanding could be relevant for
comprehending the systematicity of the set of terms 123. To
estimate successor understanding, we followed Sarnecka,
Cerutti and Carey’s (2005) “Give a number” method. They
labeled children who could correctly give five or more items
on request as the Cardinal-Principle knowers (CPknowers), and children who could only give 1, 2, 3, or 4
items were considered as Subset knowers. Sarnecka et al.
have shown that while both subset knowers and CP knowers
can count roughly to 10, only the CP knowers performed
significantly above chance on tasks that probed
understanding of the successor function. These include the
direction task – understanding that forward in the count list
means increasing set size , and the unit task – understanding
that a move of one step in the count list corresponds to a
change of one item in the set size. Because knowledge of
the cardinality principle correlates with understanding of the

Retrieval trials. After the child found the winner at the
Finding Box, she retrieved the winner from the Hiding Box
(i.e., the one they had seen being placed). This is a standard
procedure for mapping tasks, and is typically used to assess
children’s memory for the initial location (e.g., DeLoache,
1987).

269

successor function, we assessed performance on the “Give a
number” task for a subset of children after they had
completed the spatial mapping task.

Memory score. We looked at whether the different sets of
labels affect children’s memory of the names of the three
locations on the box. A 3 (Age) x 2 (conditions) ANOVA
revealed main effect of age (F (2, 61) = 4.09, p < 0.05).
However, there was no main effect of condition (F (1, 61) =
.25, p = .62) suggesting that there was no preference for
either 123 label or sheep/dog/pig label to be used as a better
mnemonic for differentiating the different locations in the
box. Next, we compared 3;6-year-olds’ and 4;1-year-olds’
search trial performance in the two conditions given that
they have a perfect memory score. For 3;6-year-olds, the
perfect memory scorers in the 123 condition (n = 5) did not
perform significantly different than those in the Animal
group (n = 7), F (1,10) = .09, p = .77. However, for the 4;1year-olds with a perfect memory score, the 123 group
performed significantly better than chance (n =7, M =.83,
SD = .28), t(6) = 4.54, p < 0.005, whereas the Animal
group (n= 4, M = .38, SD = .44) did not perform better than
chance, t(3) = .21, p = .85. This suggests that for 4;1-yearolds, even when remembering the different locations of the
box is equally easy by hearing either number 123 or names
of animal, the children who heard the set of terms with
structured relation still benefited in the mapping task.

Results
Search trials. 4;1-year-olds in the 123 condition
performed significantly better (M =.69 , SD =. 30 ) than
children in the Animal condition ( M = .44 , SD = .28), F
(1,22) = 4.48 , p <0.05 . The 4;1-year-old children in the
123 condition performed significantly above chance (t(11) =
4.21 p < 0.01), but the children in Animal condition did not
(t (11) = 1.43, p = .18). For 4;7-year-olds, there was no
significant difference in performance between the 123 group
(M =.75 , SD =.36) and the Animal group (M =.65 , SD
=.31), F (1,15) = .48, p = .50. Both groups performed
significantly above chance, minimum t(7) = 2.84, p < 0.05 .
This suggests that for older children, overt use of language
is no longer necessary for representing spatial relations. The
youngest age group, 3;6-year-olds, also showed no
difference between the 123 group (M =.28 , SD =.28) and
the Animal group (M = .37, SD =.21), F (1,24) = .91, p =
.35. However, in contrast to the 4;7-year-olds, neither the
123 nor the Animal groups performed significantly above
chance.

Number Knowledge Score. Across all age groups, we
found no differences in mapping performances between the
CP knowers and the subset knowers (F (1, 45) = .14, p =
.71). It is possible that this test was too advanced to be
sensitive to the simple ordinal structure that we are tapping
into in our labeling system. That is, perhaps understanding
the ordering relation among 123 does not require a general
understanding of the successor function. As a comparison,
in the counting task 90% of the children could count
correctly above three, and majority of the children (73%)
could count correctly beyond 7.

Search Trials

M e an p ro p o rtio n co rrec

0.9
0.8

0.69*a

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.37
0.28

0.74*
0.65*

0.44

Discussion

0.2

We tested the hypothesis that relational language can
influence relational representation. Specifically, we asked
whether hearing a set of terms that convey a systematic
relational structure would invite a correspondingly deep
representation, which in turn would support the mapping of
spatial relations. The most novel aspect of this research is
our finding that the use of nonspatial terms (number 1/2/3
room) can support spatial representation and mapping in
children as young as 4;1. These findings show that young
children can be sensitive to structural relationships
conveyed in the language they hear, and that they are able to
abstract this structure into different domains.
Our results with 4;1 year olds support the hypothesis that
hearing a set of terms conveying a systematic relational
structure invites a representation sufficiently well-structured
that the child can maintain a relational mapping even in the
face of competing object matches.
Our findings are consistent with Loewenstein and
Gentner’s (2005) finding of higher performance on a
difficult cross-mapping task with top, middle, bottom
(which conveys monotonic increase) than with the less

123

0.1

Animal

0

3;6 years

4;1 years

4;7 years

Figure 2. Performance in Search Trials
* p < 0.05 against chance (0.33)
a
p < 0.05 for differences between the two conditions

Retrieval trials. We found a high performance overall in
retrieval trials for all age groups. A 2 (conditions) x 3 (age
groups) ANOVA did not reveal any effect of age group, F
(2, 61) = 2.31, p = .11), nor condition (F (1, 61) = 2.55, p =
.12). There was no significant interaction of age group and
condition, F(2, 61) = .24, p = .79. All three age groups
performed reliably above chance in both conditions.

270

Thus, the youngest children were able to benefit from
within-domain, but not cross-domain relational language.
This finding is consistent with the many prior studies
suggesting that children’s learning begins with highly
concrete, domain-specific representations (e.g., Mix,
Sandhofer & Baroody, 2005). Why might this be? One
possibility is that children lack sufficient processing
capacity to carry out an abstract relational alignment
(Halford, 1993). We think it more likely that their
understanding of numerical structure is not yet firm enough
to support such an abstract and difficult application.
Although we did not see a difference in mapping
performance between children based on whether they were
able to pass the “give a number” test, it may be that a firm,
generalized understanding of the successor principle
requires more experience. It could also be the case that the
“give-N” number task is insensitive to the kind of early
gradation in number understanding that may apply here.

systematic set on, in, under. Our results are also consistent
with the pattern found by Gentner and Rattermann (1991;
Rattermann & Gentner, 1998b). They found effects of
introducing relational language on 3-year-old children’s
ability to carry out a relational mapping. In these studies, the
relational pattern was a monotonic increase in size across a
line of objects; the correct answer was based on matching
relative size and position. As in the present studies, the
mapping was made difficult by introducing a cross-mapping
between the object matches and the relational
correspondences. The results showed that children who
heard language conveying a monotonic relational structure
(either big–little–tiny or Daddy–Mommy–Baby) performed
far better than those who did not. The current findings add
to evidence for a facilitating effect of relational language on
children’s
appreciation
of
relational
similarities.
Furthermore, our findings demonstrate that once young
children acquire a grasp of the relations in a domain (such as
the ordering relation within {123}), they are able to carry
out a relational mapping between domains. At the same
time, further analysis of the youngest age group suggests
that there is a considerable degree of domain specificity at
the outset.

Developmental pattern
Another pattern that emerged from our results is that the
effect of relational language disappears among the oldest
group. While there was a clear advantage for 4;1-year-olds
who heard the systematic terms, we found no such
advantage for our oldest group (4;7 years). At this age,
children in both groups performed equally well, and far
above chance. This finding is consistent with Loewenstein
and Gentner’s prediction that the benefits of overt relational
anguage would disappear with age and experience. They
conjectured that this would occur if over time the linguistic
categories become habitual, so that the support of external
language was no longer needed. Of course, a developmental
change in reliance on language could also come about
through the child developing nonlinguistic cognitive
representations that support spatial reasoning.
While our developmental pattern suggests an attenuation
of the effect of relational language in the older children, we
are not claiming that the language effect is restricted to the
initial period of acquisition. Obviously, the advantage of
using overt relational language also depends on the
difficulty of the task: for a more difficult task, even adults
may still gain advantage from using language. For example,
in a study by Wolff, Vassilieva, and Burgos (2002), people
were given a mental rotation task involving spatial scenes.
The results showed the typical pattern found in mental
rotation studies (Shepard & Cooper, 1982): that is, reaction
time increased with the degree of rotation through 180
degrees. However, when the spatial relations could readily
be labeled, this typical pattern was no longer observed.
Instead, people showed a fast, flat reaction time pattern,
suggesting that the task was solved by using matching
relational descriptions rather than via mental rotations.

Cross-domain vs. within-domain mapping
We can compare our current results with Loewenstein and
Gentner’s results, as the two tasks were identical except for
the set of terms that were used. Both studies utilized
systematic set of terms that conveys a monotonic order: top
middle bottom in L&G, and 123 in the current study.
However, top middle bottom has the advantage of referring
directly to spatial locations within the box, while 123 does
not. 2 Remarkably, for the 4-year-olds (4;1 in the current
study, and 4;2 in L&G) the proportion of correct searches
given 123 is almost the same as that in the top middle
bottom group (M123 = .69, MTMB = .65). This is compelling
evidence for the power of language as a representational
tool for highlighting and mapping relations.
However, among the younger group, we see a clear
advantage for the more directly spatial terms, as would be
predicted by the general finding of domain-specificity in
very early learning. In our youngest age group (3;6), the
numerical system 123 did not lead to insight: performance
was at chance. In contrast, in L&G, the similar age group
(3;7) who received top, middle, bottom performed
significantly above chance. This does not appear to be the
result of differential memory, as the children performed well
in the retrieval task in both experiments. Rather, it suggests
a developmental change in the ability to structurally align
two different (but analogous) relational structures. The
terms top middle bottom in L&G, which have direct spatial
reference, could readily be mapped from box to box. But
for the terms 1, 2, 3, the child had to apply and map a
nonspatial to a spatial situation. It appears that the 3;6 group
has not yet acquired the ability to perform such an abstract
mapping.

Summary
The current results extend our understanding of how
relational language may contribute to the development of
relational cognition. Our results indicate that perceiving and
mapping spatial relations can be enhanced not only by
spatial relational language per se, but also by nonspatial

2

Indeed, to avoid the child mapping from the floors of a building,
we numbered the rooms in the reverse order from building floors;
1 for the top location, 2 for middle, 3 for bottom.
271

task studies of space and language. Cognitive Psychology,
39, 3–36
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition: An
interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in English.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Holland, J. H., Holyoak, K. F., Nisbett, R. E., & Thagard, P.
R. (1986). Induction: Processes of inference, learning, and
discovery. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Liben, L. S. (1998). Developing an understanding of
external spatial representations. In I. E. Sigel (Ed.),The
development of representational thought: Theoretical
perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational Language
and the Development of Relational Mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-353.
Logan, G. D., & Sadler, D. D. (1996). A computational
analysis of the apprehension of spatial relations. In P.
Bloom & M. A. Peterson (Eds.), Language and space:
Language speech, and communication. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Mix, K.S., Sandhofer, C.M., & Baroody, A.J. (2005).
Number words and number concepts: The interplay of
verbal and nonverbal quantification in early childhood.
Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 33, 305346.
Presson, C. C. (1982). The development of map-reading
skills. Child Development, 53(1), 196–199.
Ramscar, M. & Pain, H. (1996) Can a real distinction be
made between cognitive theories of analogy and
categorisation? In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. 346 – 351
Rattermann, M.J., & Gentner, D. (1998a). More evidence
for a relational shift in the development of analogy:
Children's performance on a causal-mapping task.
Cognitive Development, 13, 453-478.
Rattermann, M. J., & Gentner, D. (1998b). The effect of
language on similarity: The use of relational labels
improves young children’s performance in a mapping
task. In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner, & B.Kokinov (Eds.),
Advances in analogy research: Integration of theory &
data from the cognitive, computational, and neural
sciences. Sophia: New Bulgarian University.
Regier, T., & Carlson-Radvansky, L. A. (2001). Grounding
spatial language in perception: An empirical and
computational investigation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 130(2), 273–298.
Sarnecka,B. Cerutti, A. Carey, S. (2005) Unpacking the
cardinal principle counting: A Last-Word rule + the
Succesor Function. Poster presented at IVth Biennial
Meeting of the Cognitive Development Society.
Wolff, P., Vassilieva, T., Burgos, F., (2002). Language and
mental rotation in the localization of objects. 2002 Annual
Meeting of the Midwestern Psychology.

language that conveys a systematic structure of relations. It
appears that, given linguistic support, young children can
map relational structure from one domain to another. This
offers a potential path by which well-structured knowledge
can help to organize other domains in the course of
development. We suggest that relational language plays an
instrumental role in this transmission.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by NSF-ROLE Award REC0337360. We thank Jennifer Hellige and Ashley Rolnik for
their help in data collection and coding, and Kathleen Braun
for helping to organize this research.

References
Blades, M., & Cooke, Z. (1994). Young children_s ability to
understand a model as a spatial representation. Journal of
Genetic Psychology, 155(2), 201–218.
Bluestein, M., & Acredolo, L. (1979). Developmental
changes in map reading skill. Child Development, 50,
691–697.
Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132
DeLoache, J. S. (1987). Rapid change in the symbolic
functioning of very young children. Science, 238, 1556–
1557.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995). Early symbol understanding and
use. In D. Medin (Ed.). The psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 32). New York: Academic Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155- 170
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development. 59, 47-59
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In Gelman, S. A. & Byrnes, J. P.
(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Halford, G. S. (1992) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual
complexity
in
cognitive
development.
Human
Development
Hermer-Vasquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P. (2001).
Language, space, and the development of cognitive
flexibility in humans: The case of two spatial memory
tasks. Cognition, 79, 263–299.
Hermer-Vasquez, L., Spelke, E. S., & Katsnelson, A. S.
(1999). Sources of flexibility in human cognition: Dual-

272

