UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Variations in Language Use across Gender: Biological versus Sociological Theories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1q30w4z0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bell, Courtney M.
McCarthy, Philip M.
McNamara, Danielle S.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Variations in Language Use across Gender:
Biological versus Sociological Theories
Courtney M. Bell (cbell@ mail.psyc.memphis.edu
Philip M. McCarthy (pmccarthy@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN38152
West, 1975; West & Zimmerman, 1983) and overlap
women’s speech (Rosenblum, 1986) during conversations
than the reverse. On the other hand, other research
indicates no gender differences in interruptions (Aries,
1996; James & Clarke, 1993) or insignificant differences
(Anderson & Leaper, 1998). However, potentially more
important than citing the differences, is positing possible
explanations for why they might exist. We approach that
problem here by testing the biological and social
constructionist theories (Bergvall, 1999; Coates &
Johnson, 2001; Leaper & Smith, 2004). These two
theories are the dominant theories by which researchers
define the construct of gender (see Sheldon, 1990, for a
review). This study tests the two theories using corpus
analysis of emotionally laden marital disputes.

Abstract
We examine gender differences in language use in light of
the biological and social construction theories of gender.
The biological theory defines gender in terms of biological
sex resulting in polarized and static language differences
based on sex. The social constructionist theory of gender
assumes gender differences in language use depend on the
context in which the interaction occurs. Gender is
contextually defined and fluid, predicting that males and
females use a variety of linguistic strategies. We use a
qualitative linguistic approach to investigate gender
differences in language within a context of marital conflict.
Differences appeared in the use of self references but not in
the use of social words and positive and negative emotion
words. The results of this study failed to support the
sociological theory and provide preliminary evidence for
the biological theory.
Keywords: gender;
language differences.

social

construction;

Gender Theories

biological;

The biological theory defines gender in terms of
biological sex. The theory assumes that men outsize and
outpower women (Bergvall, 1999; Tannen, 1993) and that
gender polarities exist in language use. The theory gives
little regard to language individualization (Coates &
Johnson, 2001). The biological theory also assumes that
gender roles are static and contextually independent. On
the other hand, the social constructionist theory (Leaper
& Smith, 2004) defines gender in light of social contexts
in which interactions occur. It assumes that gender roles
are fluid and contextually situated (Leaper & Smith,
2004), that gendered identities are voluntary, and that
males and females choose their gendered identities
(Leaper & Smith, 2004). In terms of language use, the
social constructionist theory assumes that males and
females are not confined to one particular language style,
but exchange styles based on the social context of their
interactions (Coates & Johnson, 2001; Leaper & Smith,
2004).

Introduction
Men and women have long been in dispute over things
such as spending, emotions, division of labor, and male
withdrawal during conflict. One of the factors that may
contribute to the continuation of such disputes is language
differences between the two genders. Two competing
theories have evolved to explain language differences
between men and women: the biological theory and the
sociological theory. Because social psychologists have
traditionally studied both decontextualized, mechanical
features of language and isolated the individual from the
social context (Coates & Johnson, 2001), language and
gender research provides little empirical evidence
supporting the sociological theory (c.f., Eckert &
McConnell-Ginet, 2003; Goodwin, M.H., 1990) which
makes the biological theory the most cited and accepted
theory by default. The current study tests predictions
made by the two theories using corpus analysis of texts of
marital disputes. Our results thus contribute empirical
evidence to the gender and language debate.
Currently, results from gender and language research
are inconsistent as exemplified by the research on gender
and interruptions. Evidence suggests that men are more
likely to interrupt women (Aries, 1987; Zimmerman &

Models of Gendered Language Use
Two examples illustrate the influence of researchers’
theoretical orientation towards gender on their
explanations of gender and language variation. Maltz and
Borker’s (1982) model of gender-marked language use is
based on the assumptions of the biological theory. Their

1009

Fitzpatrick, Mulac, & Dinidia, 1995; West &
Zimmerman, 1983). Fitzpatrick and colleagues go further
to suggest interaction context as a better predictor of
interaction style than gender. Also, according to Hyde
(2005), context can create, erase, or reverse gender
differences.
For example, in a meta-analysis of gender differences
in conversational interruption, researchers had the a priori
belief that men interrupted more than women (Anderson
& Leaper, 1998). However, averaged across all studies,
only a small effect was found. The effect sizes for
intrusive interruptions were larger, but the magnitude of
gender differences varied depending on the social context
(Anderson & Leaper, 1998). Anderson and Leaper’s
results suggest a smaller number of interruptions with
dyads and a larger number with larger groups. The results
also suggest there are more interruptions with friends than
strangers. Considered in terms of overall results, the
Anderson and Leaper study illustrates the importance that
context plays in interpreting the results of gender
differences and language.
Anderson and Leaper (1998) found similar results in
emotion talk between same and mixed-gender dyads.
According to Coates and Johnson (2001), Anderson and
Leaper’s study of actual behavior revealed no significant
differences between same and mixed dyads. Coates and
Johnson also report that emotion talk was best predicted
by the topic of conversation such that when subjects
talked about an emotionally laden topic, more emotion
talk occurred regardless of gender

model claims that male and female speech have different
content and serve different purposes. Male speech is
characterized as competition oriented or adversarial.
Males use language primarily to assert their position of
dominance, attract and maintain an audience, and to assert
themselves when other speakers have the floor. In
contrast, female speech is characterized as collaboration
oriented or affiliative. They use language more
cooperatively than males, respond to and elaborate on
what others have said, make more supportive comments,
ask more questions, and work to keep conversations
going. Finally, women use language to create and
maintain relationships of closeness and equality, to
criticize others in acceptable ways, and to accurately
interpret other female’s speech (Sheldon, 1990).
In addition to Maltz and Borker’s model, Gilligan’s
(1982; 1987) model of gender-marked conflict styles also
provides an example of how researchers’ theoretical
orientation towards gender influences their explanations
of gender and language variation. Her model is also based
upon the assumptions of the biological theory of gender.
The model suggests that males’ conflict style has a justice
orientation. It claims that during conflict, males maintain
a universal point of view and use language to command
respect while assuming separation of themselves and
others. Finally, males value logic and rationality while
attempting to resolve conflict through rules or reason.
Gilligan’s model asserts that females’ conflict style has
a caring orientation, focuses on the relationship, and on
maintaining connections between self and others. It also
claims that women use more collaborative speech acts,
pay more attention to the needs of others, and frame
resolutions in terms of the relationship. The model
suggests that contrary to males, females are less legalistic
in their conflicts and more willing to make exceptions to
the rules. Predicated on the assumptions from the
biological theory of gender which suggest that gender
language differences are static and polarized, both the
Maltz and Borker (1982) and Gilligan (1982; 1987)
models predict that males will always use a linguistic
style that reflects their concern for themselves, rules,
dominance, and competition, whereas females will always
use a linguistic style that reflects their affiliative nature,
concern for others rather than themselves, cooperation,
nurturance, and submission (Sheldon, 1990).

Purpose and Predictions
In light of Anderson and Leaper’s (1998) findings, as well
as Gilligan’s (1982; 1987) and Maltz and Borker’s (1982)
theoretical models, the current study tests predictions
made by the researchers which are based on the biological
and social constructionist theories using an emotionally
laden context involving conflict. Based on Gilligan’s
model, the researchers predict that males use more selfreference words than women. In light of both models, the
researchers also predict women use more social words
than men because of the presupposition that women are
more nurturing and concerned with others rather than
themselves. Women are also more likely to use more
social words because of their use of language to maintain
social relationships. For the same reasons as just
mentioned, the researchers also predict that according to
the biological model, women use more positive emotions
and that men use more negative emotions because they
are harsher and can be thought of as being less
cooperative and less likely to be used to maintain
relationships. Based on the social constructionist theory,
the researchers predict that there will be no differences in
the language men and women use during emotional
conflicts (Leaper & Smith, 2004).

Social Constructionist Theory Support
Unlike the generalizable differences assumptions
underlying the biological theory, Coates and Johnson
(2001) suggest that language and communication are
integrally tied to the context in which they occur. Several
researchers concluded that gender differences in language
may be better described as gender preferential than gender
exclusive because of the capabilities of both males and
females to use various linguistic strategies and features
within different contexts (Anderson & Leaper, 1998;

1010

examines written text and classifies it along 70
dimensions such as self-references, social words, positive
emotions, and negative emotions. LIWC provides a word
count for the text, calculates percentage of words
matching up to 85 language dimensions, and records the
data into one of 74 preset dictionary categories
(Brownlow, Rosamond, & Parker, 2003). The LIWC
dictionary comprises 2300 words and stems, and several
sources such as natural language of conversing adults,
written diaries, speeches, a thesaurus, and an English
dictionary.

Our goal is to use an emotionally laden topic involving
conflict to investigate whether the biological theory of
gender or social constructionist theory of gender will
better predict gender styles of language use. The question
we seek to answer is whether stereotypical language
differences as predicted by the biological theory of gender
persist within an emotional context. Consistent with the
social constructionist theory of gender and language use,
our hypothesis is that stereotypical language use does not
persist between genders within an emotional laden
context such as marital conflict. More specifically, we
hypothesize that the statistical analysis of the percentage
of self reference, social, positive emotion and negative
emotion words from a corpus consisting of emotionally
laden marital conflict texts will not show differences
between males and females use of self references, social
words, and positive and negative emotion words.
Our present study has several limitations from the
outset. First, it does not compare gender differences
across contexts. Second, the present study does not
consider the context of the self reference, social, positive
emotion, and negative emotion words. Finally, the use of
the texts from the Ladies Home Journal may not be truly
representative of natural speech acts for males and
females if they were altered for publication purposes and
audience appeal (though we assume that they were not).
In light of these limitations, the present study should be
viewed as a preliminary investigation.

Procedure
Ladies Home Journal relationship column, “Can This
Marriage Be Saved?”, was selected because it contained
texts divided according to gender and was representative
of emotionally laden conflicts. Couples take turns talking
to male or female counselors and therapists primarily
from the East Coast, who then offer resolutions ranging
from small changes in the relationship to divorce. For our
purposes, it was not necessary to include the counselors’
speech. The first three stories were selected from each
relationship topic to be consistent across corpora.
We analyzed the texts using LIWC and recorded the
percentages for self-references, social words, positive
emotions, and negative emotions used within each text.
Examples of self-references include personal pronouns
such as I, me, and my. Social words are those used to
make references to others and exemplified by they, she,
us, talk, and friends. Examples of positive emotion words
are happy, love, and good. Examples of negative emotion
words include sad, kill, and afraid.

Methods
Materials
A corpus of 54 texts, 27 by males and 27 by females, was
generated from counseling transcripts of the relationship
column “Can This Marriage Be Saved?” from the Ladies
Home Journal website at www.lhj.com. Texts covered a
variety of issues, such as, sex, infidelity, jobs, illness,
stepfamily, looks, children, addictions, and in-laws.
Appendix A provides examples of the transcripts. The
corpus contained 41,081 words, 24,765 for females
(M=917.22, SD=319.248) and 16,316 for males
(M=604.30, SD=181.025). The texts were analyzed using
the Language Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC;
Pennebaker, Francis, & Booth, 2001) analysis tool that

Results
To determine if there was a difference in the number of
self references, social words, and positive and negative
emotion words males and females use, we conducted a
one-way ANOVA on each variable. As shown in Table 1,
there was a significant difference between males and
females for self-reference words (p<.05). The difference
between males and females for social words was marginal
(p=.075). There was not a significant difference for males
and females in positive emotion words, nor a significant
difference between males and females for negative

Table 1. Means and standard deviations for the percentages of four types of words (self-reference,
social, positive emotion, negative emotion) for males and females.
Word Types
Self-reference
Social
Positive emotions
Negative emotions
Notes: *p<.05

Male
11.85(1.42)
12.24(2.49)
2.54(.77)
2.67(.84)

Female
9.98(1.56)
13.46(2.45)
2.43(.67)
2.40(.82)

1011

F(1,52)
21.302*
3.294
0.279
1.377

Partial Eta Squared
0.291
0.06
0.005
0.026

The current study adds to the field by providing
empirical evidence for the development of the debate for
both major theories of gender and language use. Future
research will significantly broaden the corpus analyses
into a variety of alternative registers. Such research will
seek to offer empirical evidence as to where, when, and to
what degree language differences can be associated with
gender.

emotion words. These results indicate that the corpus
analysis provides empirical evidence for the biological
theories but does not support the social constructionist
theories.

Discussion
The purpose of the present study was to further examine
gender and language within an emotionally laden context
involving conflict. We investigated whether the biological
theory of gender or social constructionist theory of gender
would best predict gender styles of language use. The
question we sought to answer was whether stereotypical
language differences as predicted by the biological theory
of gender persist within an emotional context. Because of
the role context plays as a determinant of linguistic styles,
our prediction was that language use between men and
women would be consistent with the social constructionist
theory of gender and language. Because of the role
context plays in social interactions (Coates & Johnson,
2001; Anderson & Leaper, 1998), we predicted
stereotypical language use would not persist between
genders within an emotionally laden context such as
marital conflict. We also predicted that the percentage of
self reference, social, positive emotion, and negative
emotion words from a corpus consisting of emotionally
laden marital conflict texts would not show differences
between male and female use of self references, social
words, and positive and negative emotion words.
Some of our predictions were supported by the data.
The results indicated that there were not significant
differences between genders for the number of social
words, positive emotion, and negative emotion words.
These results support the prediction that some
characteristics of stereotypical language use, as assumed
by the biological theory of gender do not persist within a
context of marital conflict. These results in conjunction
with those of Anderson and Leaper (2001) further support
the claim that gender differences in language use are not
polarized and that context does play an important role in
predicting which gender will use a particular language
strategy. We predicted that there would not be a
significant difference between genders and the use of selfreferences according to the social constructionist model;
however, there was a difference biased towards males.
Although, we did not predict a difference between the
average number of words per text for males and females,
the results indicated a difference biased towards females.
These results are consistent with research suggesting that
women are more verbose than men because of their
tendency towards elaborating, question asking, and
making supportive comments during conversations. Such
results may also suggest evidence for the biological
theory. The results from this preliminary study suggest
the need for further empirical investigation of gender and
language use.

References
Anderson, K.J., & Leaper, C. (1998). Meta-analyses of
gender effects in conversational interruption: Who,
what, when, where, and how. Sex Roles, 39, 225-252.
Aries, E. (1996). Men and Women in Interaction:
Reconsidering the Differences. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Aries, E. (1987). Gender and communication. In Philip
Shaver & Clyde Hendrick (Eds.), Sex and Gender.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publication.
Bergvall, V.L. (1999). Toward a comprehensive theory of
language and gender. Language in Society, 28, 273293.
Brownlow, S., Rosamond, J.A., & Parker, J.A. (2003).
Gender-linked linguistic behavior in television
interviews. Sex Roles, 49, 121-132.
Can This Marriage Be Saved? Retrieved November 12,
2005 from www.lhj.com.
Coates, L., & Johnson, T. (2001). Towards a social theory
of gender. In W. Peter Robinson & Howard Giles
(Eds.), The New Handbook of Language and Social
Psychology. New York: Wiley.
Eckert, P., & McConnell-Ginet, S. (2003). Language and
gender. Cambridge, UK: University Press.
Fitzpatrick, M. A., Mulac, A., & Dindia, K. (1995).
Gender-preferential language use in spouse and stranger
interaction. Journal of Language and Social
Psychology, 14, 18-39.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological
theory and women’s development. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Gilligan, C. (1987). Moral orientation and moral
development. In Eva Feder Kittay & Diana T. Meyers
(Eds.), Women and moral theory.
Totowa, NJ:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Goodwin, M.H. (1990). He-said-she-said: Talk as social
organization among black children. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Hyde, J.S. (2005). The gender similarities hypothesis.
American Psychologist, 60, 581-592.
James, D., & Clarke, S. (1993). Women, men, and
interruptions: A critical review. In Deborah Tannen
(Ed.), Gender and Conversational Interaction. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Leaper, C., & Smith, T.E. (2004). A meta-analytic review
of gender variations in children’s language use:

1012

Talkativeness, affiliative speech, and assertive speech.
Developmental Psychology, 40, 993-1027.
Maltz, D. & Borker, R. (1982). A cultural approach to
male-female communication. In John Gumperz (Ed.),
Language and Social Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Pennebaker, J.W., Francis, M.E., & Booth, R.J. (2001).
The Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count. Retrieved
November
12,
2005,
from
http://liwc.net/liwcresarch.php
Rosenblum, K.E. (1986). Revelatory or purposive?
Making sense of a ‘female register’. Semiotica, 59, 157170.
Sheldon, A. (1990). Pickle fights: Gendered talk in
preschool disputes. Discourse
Processes, 13, 5-31.
Tannen, D. (1993). The relativity of linguistic strategies:
Rethinking power and solidarity in gender and
dominance. In Deborah Tannen (Ed.), Gender and
Conversational Interaction.
New York: Oxford
University Press.
West, C., & Zimmerman, D. (1983). Small insults: A
study of interruptions in cross-sex conversations
between unacquainted persons. In Barrie Thorne,
Cheris Kramarae, & Nancy Henley (Eds.), Language,
gender and society. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Zimmerman, D., & West, C. (1975). Sex roles,
interruptions and silences in conversation. In In Barrie
Thorne & Nancy Henly (Eds.), Language and Sex:
Difference and Dominance. Rowley, Massachusetts:
Newbury House.

Appendix
Appendix A. Samples of male and female text
Gender
Female

Transcript
Why isn't Lane turned on by me? It's
been 8 months since we last made love
successfully that is. We've tried a few
times but he loses his erection. Then
he goes to sleep while I lie there
confused and frustrated.
Soon we were fighting about sex.
Naturally he was angry we weren't
having it. When I'd say 'Let's try on
Saturday' then back out because it hurt
too much, he'd grow even more furious.
My husband never listens to me said
Marcy 42 a marketing director and
mother of two. Howard hears the little
things like if I ask him to turn down
the TV, but when it comes to major
issues, he tunes me out. His
indifference is why we are constantly
at odds.

Male

I can't make love anymore. Frankly I'm
scared to initiate sex because I know
I'll just fail again, and Angela doesn't
hesitate to let me know how upset she
is. She'll say things like I guess I don't
turn you on anymore, and I don't know
if I want to stay in a celibate marriage.
I don't want a divorce but I can't stay
in an unconsummated marriage any
longer said Brad 36 a creative director
for an advertising agency. I've been
patient over the past 11 years. I
believed Natalie when she promised to
solve her problem.
Marcy portrays me as the source of our
problems, but she bears half the blame.
One minute we're having a simple
argument, the next she's calling me
hateful names and dredging up my past
sins. I've been hurt by Marcy's unfair
and hostile criticisms, most of which
center on her anger that I don't follow
her instructions for running my
business or handling my family.

1013

