UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What We Can Learn from Causal Conditional Reasoning about the Naïve Understanding of
Causality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76n74114

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What We Can Learn from Causal Conditional Reasoning
about the Naïve Understanding of Causality
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract

In causal conditional reasoning tasks, however, people follow this content-independent interpretation very rarely.
Instead, they interpret the conditional premise content-specifically as a statement referring to a cause and its effect. In
addition, they even consider what they know about alternative causes for this effect, or about inhibitory factors that
need to be absent for the effect to occur (e.g., Cummins,
1995; Cummins, Lubart, Alksnis & Rist, 1991; de Neys,
Schaeken & D’Ydewalle, 2002, 2003; Quinn & Markovits,
2002; Thompson, 1994).
The data show the following general pattern: If people can
think neither of alternative causes nor of inhibitory factors,
then the biconditional interpretation is typically strengthened, and definite inferences are drawn in all four cases (MP,
MT, DA, and AC). If people can easily think of alternative
causes, then the conditional interpretation is strengthened,
that is, MP and MT increase, while the definite DA and AC
inferences decrease. If, instead, people can easily think of
inhibitory factors, then the reversed interpretation is
strengthened, that is, MP and MT decrease, while the definite DA and AC inferences increase. Sometimes, the
retrieval of an alternative cause also activates knowledge
about inhibitory factors (Markovits & Potvin, 2001). Analogous effects of alternative causes and inhibitory factors were
also found in causal selection tasks that require people to
evaluate whether or not a causal conditional is violated (e.g.,
Beller & Spada, 2003; Fairley, Manktelow & Over, 1999).
Typically, these findings are looked at from the perspective
of conditional reasoning. Thereby, it is asked: What do we
learn from causal conditional reasoning about people’s
understanding of and deductions from conditional statements? From this perspective, the experiments show that the
core meaning of the conditional is modulated by semantic or
pragmatic information retrieved from long-term memory
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002) and that people flexibly
include such information in the reasoning process (de Neys
et al., 2002, 2003; Markovits & Quinn, 2002; Quinn &
Markovits, 2002), depending on working memory resources
(de Neys, et al., 2005). The phenomenon of causal conditional reasoning, however, is like a coin with two sides: the
form of the premise (a conditional) and its content (a causal
relation). These should, at least initially, be examined separately in order to understand how they mutually influence
one another (Beller & Spada, 2003). This perspective triggers a complementary question: What do we learn from
causal conditional reasoning about people’s understanding of
and deductions from causal relations? As detailed in the
next section, at least three general principles can be identified.

Causal conditional reasoning means drawing inferences from a
conditional statement that refers to causal content. It is argued
that data on causal conditional reasoning not only tell us something about how people draw deductive inferences from conditionals, but also provide us with information about how they
understand causal relations. In particular, three principles
emerge from existing data: the modal principle, the exhaustive
principle, and the equivalence principle. An experiment sheds
new light on how people interpret and use conditionals in
causal contexts, and reveals evidence for the proposed representational principles.
Keywords: Causality, conditionals, deduction, content effects,
dual source approach.

Introduction
Causal conditional reasoning means drawing inferences
from a conditional premise that refers to causal content. By
evaluating these inferences against the yardstick of propositional logic, the hope is that causal conditional reasoning
tasks will provide a deeper insight into people’s understanding of conditionals (e.g., Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002).
Consider the following example:
(1)

If a car is involved in a serious accident,
then the airbag inflates.

According to the conditional relation “If P, then Q”, this
statement first of all expresses that a condition “P” is sufficient for a consequent “Q”. This justifies two inferences,
Modus Ponens and Modus Tollens:
MP: “If P, then Q” and “P” – infer “Q”
MT: “If P, then Q” and “not Q” – infer “not P”
In the other two cases, Denial of the Antecedent and Affirmation of the Consequent,
DA:
AC:

“If P, then Q” and “not P”
“If P, then Q” and “Q”

it depends on the necessity of “P” whether or not definite
conclusions are possible: If “P” is not necessary for “Q”
(conditional interpretation), then definite conclusions are not
justified. Only if “P” is regarded as necessary for “Q”
(biconditional interpretation) can we definitively infer “notQ” from “not-P” and “P” from “Q”.
The content of the Ps and Qs is not important to obtain
these interpretations; the only important aspect is the relation
between the antecedent “P” and the consequent “Q”, which
is established by the terms “if-then”.

59

Some Principles of Causal Understanding

only the accident causally relevant, according to the modal
and equivalence principle this can be represented as follows1:

Three basic principles of causal understanding emerge from
the causal conditional reasoning data, which may be called
the modal principle, the exhaustive principle, and the equivalence principle (Beller & Kuhnmünch, 2006).
The modal principle was formulated by Goldvarg and
Johnson-Laird (2001). It states that causal knowledge represents possible and impossible states of the world making
such knowledge particularly useful for prediction and intervention. The use of conditional statements “If P then Q” is
compatible with the modal principle as conditionals also
define which states of affairs are possible and which are not.
According to the conditional interpretation, for example,
only the combination of “P” and “not-Q” is impossible.
According to the exhaustive principle people try to consider all causally relevant factors exhaustively when they reason about an effect. Causal factors may contribute to the
effect in different ways, necessitating different ways of integration: Alternative causes require a disjunction of factors,
while a compound cause requires a conjunction of factors.
The causal conditional reasoning data also support this second principle. As explained above, people tend to go beyond
the causal factors mentioned in the conditional and integrate
additional knowledge about alternative causes or inhibitory
factors. In other words: They consider what they regard as
causally relevant for the task at hand. The exhaustive principle does not imply that people in fact have complete causal
knowledge about the causes for an effect; it only means that
they assume – until there is evidence to the contrary – that
they have considered all relevant factors, as otherwise causal
inferences would not be possible at all.
Finally, the equivalence principle qualifies the relation
between an effect and the whole set of causes for this effect
as an equivalence (Beller & Spada, 2003): Every effect has a
cause (a position going back to the Scottish philosopher
David Hume, 1711-1776; cf. Wilson, 1937), and without a
cause there will be no effect. This corresponds with the
assumption that the world is causally determined and reacts
in a causally reliable manner. While the first two principles
are so basic that everyone swiftly agrees, the equivalence
principle is more critical because it implies that people presume a strong conception of causation. Goldvarg and
Johnson-Laird’s (2001) mental model theory, for example,
also allows for weak causation (i.e., sufficient but not necessary causes). Furthermore, the causal conditional reasoning
data seem to support the equivalence principle only in parts:
As stated above, people in fact apply a biconditional interpretation to the conditional (in correspondence with a strong
causal relation) but only if they are sure that there are no
other causal factors. If alternative causes or inhibitory factors
come into play, the inference patterns change suggesting
either a conditional interpretation if alternative causes are
thought of, or the reversed interpretation if inhibitory factors
are considered. It is argued in this paper that even in these
latter cases people presume a strong causal relation between
an effect an its causes, but that we need other than conditional reasoning tasks to detect it.
To illustrate this point, let us consider three examples that
all refer to the causal connection between a car accident and
the reaction of an airbag. Provided that a person considers

(2)

accidentCar ↔ airbag_inflationCar

An accident is necessary and sufficient for the inflation of the
airbag justifying definite inferences in all four conditional
inference tasks (MP, MT, DA, and AC) with reference to
conditional (1): “If a car is involved in a serious accident,
then the airbag inflates.”
If further causal factors come into play, these need to be
considered according to the exhaustive principle. In the airbag scenario, for example, the sensor that triggers the airbag
reaction may come to mind. It may react in an oversensitive
way or not sensitively enough. An oversensitive sensor
opens up the possibility that the airbag is inflated in the
absence of an accident by an alternative cause. This situation
includes a disjunction of causes:
(3)

(accidentCar ∨ oversensitive_sensorCar)
↔ airbag_inflationCar

An accident is still sufficient, but is no longer necessary.
Therefore, definite inferences are possible only in the case of
MP and MT (conditional pattern).
The situation is different if, instead, a person assumes that
the sensor is not sensitive enough. This defect corresponds to
an inhibitory factor that prevents the airbag reaction even
though a car is involved in an accident. The absence of the
defect enters into the causal relation conjunctively:
(4)

(accidentCar ∧ ¬insensitive_sensorCar)
↔ airbag_inflationCar

Because an accident is necessary for the airbag reaction, but
is no longer sufficient, definite inferences are possible only
in the case of DA and AC (reversed conditional pattern).
Note that the equivalence principle can be applied to all
three cases equally. It characterizes the relation between the
effect and the whole set of causes as a strong causal relation.
However, if more than one causal factor is involved as in (3)
and (4), the strong causal relation cannot be detected with
conditional reasoning tasks, as these do not require people to
draw inferences about the whole set of causes but only about
one factor (“P”) for the effect (“Q”). It is the aim of the following experiment to shed light on people’s interpretational
strategies in causal conditional reasoning and to find evidence for the proposed causal principles.

Experiment
The experiment uses the airbag scenario described above.
The basic causal connection is introduced by means of conditional (1). Then, the salience of an alternative or an inhibitory factor is manipulated. Finally it is assessed which
conditional inferences people draw and how the complete
1

60

Logical operators used and their approximate linguistic form:
P↔Q
equivalence
“If and only if P then Q”
P∨Q
disjunction
“P or Q or both”
P∧Q
conjunction
“P and Q”
¬P
negation
“not P”

The inference tasks were followed by an evaluation task,
which aimed at examining the perceived sufficiency and
necessity of the antecedent clause of the conditional. The
task repeated the information of the introductory section,
including the conditional rule. Then, two questions were
posed (each to be answered with Yes or No):

causal situation is reformulated – as a conditional or a biconditional statement. It is expected that the inference tasks will
replicate the typical effects of causal conditional reasoning
(partial support for the equivalence principle), while the
reformulation task will fully support this principle.

Method

Is an accident sufficient for the inflation of the airbag?

Materials. Three airbag scenarios were constructed. The
first scenario mentioned only one cause, the second additionally mentioned a further alternative cause, while the third
scenario additionally mentioned an inhibitory factor.
The relevant causal information was presented in an introductory section, which described the reason for inventing the
airbag and introduced the causal conditional [additional parts
for the alternative cause and inhibitory factor version are
printed in square brackets]:

Is an accident necessary for the inflation of the airbag?
Finally, a reformulation task required participants to
choose the best reformulation of the causal situation. Its aim
was to assess the necessity and sufficiency status of the
causal factor(s) as well as its (their) relation to the effect, that
is, whether it is interpreted as a conditional or as a biconditional. The task repeated the information of the introductory
section, including the conditional rule. Following this, several
reformulations were presented, together with the question:

The airbag was invented to increase the security of car
passengers. It protects persons in the front seats from
frontal impacts in the case of an accident. [The airbag
inflates triggered by a sensor. Normally,] The airbag
functions according to the following simple causal rule:

Which of the following formulations do you consider to
be most appropriate for explaining to another person the
exact causal relation between an accident [, a sensor that
reacts in an oversensitive way / a sensor that is not sensitive enough] and the airbag reaction?

If a car is involved in an accident,
then the airbag inflates.

In the “one cause” scenario, participants had to choose
between a conditional and a biconditional reformulation:

The three scenarios proceeded as follows. In the “one cause”
version, no additional causal factor was mentioned:

If a car is involved in an accident, then the airbag inflates; otherwise you do not know whether or not the airbag inflates. {conditional}

Imagine that the airbag of the following cars A to D is
functioning correctly. What can be inferred in this context for the cars A, B, C, and D?

If a car is involved in an accident, then the airbag inflates; otherwise the airbag does not inflate. {biconditional}

In the two other versions, a second factor was introduced:

In the scenarios with two causal factors, four rules were
given from which to choose. They were constructed by integrating the additional factor into the rules presented above
either conjunctively or disjunctively, resulting in two conditional and two biconditional rules. In the “alternative cause”
version, the antecedent clauses read as follows:

Imagine that the sensor that triggers the inflation of the
airbag of the following cars A to D
might react in an oversensitive way {“alternative cause”}/
might not be sensitive enough {“inhibitory factor”}.
However, you do not know for sure whether this defect is
actually present. What can be inferred in this context for
the cars A, B, C, and D?

If a car is involved in an accident and the sensor reacts
oversensitively, then ...

Then, four inference tasks were presented, corresponding to
MP, DA, AC, and MT with reference to the causal conditional. In each case, three answer options were presented
from which participants were required to choose one:

If a car is involved in an accident or the sensor reacts
oversensitively, then ...
In the “inhibitory factor” version, these clauses read:

MP: Car A is involved in an accident.
What follows from this? (a) The airbag inflates.
(b) The airbag does not inflate. (c) It cannot be
decided whether or not the airbag inflates.
DA:
AC:

If a car is involved in an accident and the sensor is sensitive enough, then ...
If a car is involved in an accident or the sensor is sensitive enough, then ...

Car B is not involved in an accident.
What follows from this? (a) The airbag inflates ...

Participants. 177 students from introductory courses on
cognitive psychology at the University of Freiburg participated in the experiment. 65 students were male and 111
female; the mean age was M = 23.8 years (SD = 5.5; range:
19-51; one person did not indicate his or her sex and age).
Design and procedure. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of three experimental conditions (n = 59)
corresponding to three scenarios (one cause, alternative
cause, and inhibitory factor). Each participant received a
booklet containing general instructions and six tasks. The

The airbag of car C inflates.
What follows from this? (a) The car is involved
in an accident. (b) The car is not involved in
an accident. (c) It cannot be decided whether
or not the car is involved in an accident.

MT: The airbag of car D does not inflate.
What follows from this? (a) The car is involved ...

61

Table 1: Evaluation of the conditional’s antecedent clause
(%; n = 59 in each group; causally expected answers boldfaced).

four inference tasks were presented in one block to ensure
that participants made their inferences on the basis of their
spontaneous interpretation of the scenario. This block was
followed by the evaluation task and the reformulation task.

Results

An accident is ...

In order to determine whether the experimental manipulation
of the necessity and sufficiency of the primary cause had the
intended effect, the evaluation task is analyzed first.
Evaluation task: In this task, participants were required to
directly evaluate the necessity and sufficiency of the conditional’s antecedent clause (“a car is involved in an accident”). According to the typical effects of causal conditional
reasoning, this evaluation should not depend on the conditional form, which does not vary across the three scenarios,
but on the causal content that systematically changes the
necessity and sufficiency status of the accident as represented in the expressions (2), (3), and (4).
Participants’ evaluations are shown in Table 1. The perceived sufficiency of an accident varied as expected across
the three conditions (χ2 = 79.2; df = 2; N = 177; p < .001)
and also the perceived necessity (χ2 = 79.1; df = 2; N = 177;
p < .001). In the “one cause” condition, there was no difference between sufficiency and necessity (z = -.35; p = .724;
Wilcoxon test). According to the equivalence principle, the
majority of participants evaluated an accident as sufficient
(χ2 = 6.1; df = 1; n = 59; p = .013) and as necessary for the
airbag reaction (χ2 = 3.8; df = 1; n = 59; p = .051). In the
“alternative cause” condition, an accident was mostly
regarded as sufficient but not necessary (z = -7.1; p < .001;
Wilcoxon test), whereas in the “inhibitory” factor condition,
it was regarded as not sufficient but necessary (z = -5.9;
p < .001; Wilcoxon test). Altogether, the experimental
manipulation had the intended effects.
Inference tasks: These tasks assess the four inferences
MP, DA, AC, and MT from causal conditional (1). If people
apply the expected causal interpretations (2), (3), and (4), the
inferences should correspond with the evaluation results.
The influence of the scenarios was first checked for each task
separately by means of a χ2 test comparing the frequencies
of the two critical answers that are predicted by the conditional or the causal interpretation (the third answer option
was omitted in these tests, since it was chosen only in a few
cases). In all tasks, significant scenario effects were found,
indicating a strong influence of the causal context (Table 2).
Next, two aggregated measures were computed for each
participant: the mean percentage of conditional inferences
and the mean percentage of causal inferences. Inspecting the
number of conditional inferences, we find the typical effects
of causal conditional reasoning: Compared to the “one
cause” scenario (61.4%), the number of conditional inferences increased to 91.5% in the “alternative cause” scenario,
and decreased to 10.2% in the “inhibitory factor” scenario;
F(2,174) = 195.6; p < .001. Altogether, 54.4% of all inferences follow the conditional interpretation. Assuming a
causal interpretation fits the data much better: 84.6% of all
inferences are consistent with this interpretation, though
with a significant difference between the “one cause” scenario (74.6%) and the other two scenarios (91.5% and
88.1%); F(2,174) = 9.5; p < .001. An examination of the par-

sufficient
necessary

One
cause
66.1
62.7

Alternative Inhibitory
Cause
factor
94.9
6.8

15.3
86.4

Table 2: Causal conditional inferences (%; n = 59 in each
group; causally expected answers bold-faced).
One
cause

Alternative Inhibitory
Cause
factor

MP: The car is involved in an accident. The airbag ...
... inflates.
89.8C
98.3C
8.5C
... does not inflate.
0.0
0.0
3.4
undecidable
10.2
1.7
88.1
DA: The car is not involved in an accident. The airbag ...
... inflates.
1.7
1.7
1.7
... does not inflate.
64.4
11.9
89.8
undecidable
33.9C
86.4C
8.5C
AC: The airbag inflates. The car ... in an accident.
... is involved
61.0
6.8
88.1
... is not involved
0.0
0.0
0.0
undecidable
39.0C
93.2C
11.9C
MT: The airbag does not inflate. The car ... in an accident.
... is involved
0.0
3.4
1.7
C
C
... is not involved
83.1
88.1
11.9C
undecidable
16.9
8.5
86.4
Inferences aggregated across all four tasks
91.5C
conditional
61.4C
causal
74.6
91.5

10.2C
88.1

Consistent inference patterns across all four tasks
biconditional
49.2
1.7
3.4
conditional
27.1C
74.6C
1.7C
reversed cond.
6.8
0.0
71.2
indeterminate
1.7
0.0
5.1
ambiguous
15.3
23.7
18.6
C

62

Logically correct according to the material conditional.
MP: χ2 = 126.1; df = 2; n = 175; p < .001
DA: χ2 = 77.1; df = 2; n = 174; p < .001
AC: χ2 = 81.1; df = 2; n = 177; p < .001
MT: χ2 = 93.2; df = 2; n = 174; p < .001

ticipants’ patterns of inferences across all tasks shows the
reason why.
For this final analysis, four types of interpretations were
distinguished: biconditional, conditional, reversed conditional (i.e. complementary to the conditional), and indeterminate (i.e. giving the answer “undecidable” in all tasks).
The inference pattern of a participant was assigned to a particular category if all four inferences matched; otherwise, the
pattern was classified as ambiguous. The frequencies of the
various patterns are shown at the bottom of Table 2.
The three conditions did not differ with regard to the total
number of consistent patterns; χ2 = 1.4; df = 2; N = 177;
p = .501. Consistent patterns clearly predominated (80.8%
vs. 19.2% ambiguous on average; χ2 = 67.1; df = 1; N = 177;
p < .001). This suggests that the majority of participants
applied one particular interpretation and solved the four
inference tasks accordingly. Altogether, 115 of the 143 consistent patterns (80.4%) fell into the causally predicted categories. An accident was quite uniformly regarded as
sufficient, but not necessary in the “alternative cause” condition (conditional pattern), and as necessary, but not sufficient
in the “inhibitory factor” condition (reversed conditional pattern). In the “one cause” condition, however, only about half
of the participants followed the causally predicted biconditional pattern, while a substantial proportion followed the
conditional interpretation suggested by the form of the
premise. The reason might be that, in the “one cause” condition without any further causal context, the task is open to
both interpretations, while taking the alternative cause or the
inhibitory factor into account necessitates the causal interpretation. Altogether, this analysis reveals that people sometimes follow different, but consistent interpretations, which
are hidden if we analyse each task separately.
Reformulation task: In the final task, participants had to
choose a statement that describes the complete causal situation. To do this, they needed not only to decide how to integrate the alternative cause and inhibitory factor respectively
(disjunctively vs. conjunctively), but also to determine the
relation between the causal factor(s) and the effect as either
conditional or biconditional. Especially this latter aspect
should give information about the proposed equivalence
principle. The results are shown in Table 3.

First, the additional causal factor was considered in accordance with the evaluation and inference results (Table 3A):
The alternative cause was integrated by using a disjunction
and the inhibitory factor was integrated by using a conjunction; χ2 = 101.5; df = 1; n = 117; p < 0.001.
Second, with regard to the type of conditional (Table 3B),
the causally predicted biconditional formulation dominated,
although we also found differences between the scenarios;
χ2 = 11.7; df = 2; N = 176; p = .003. The biconditional interpretation predominated in the “alternative cause” condition
(84.7% biconditional; χ2 = 28.5; df = 1; n = 59; p < .001),
and in the “inhibitory factor” condition (67.2% biconditional; χ2 = 6.9; df = 1; n = 58; p = .009). This means that the
majority of these participants regarded the causal factor(s) as
exhaustive and applied the equivalence principle: If at least
one sufficient cause occurs, then the effect will also occur,
otherwise not. Interestingly, the support for the equivalence
principle from the “one cause” scenario was not as strong as
from the other two scenarios (55.9% biconditional; χ2 = .8;
df = 1; n = 59; p = .362).
What might be the reason for this? A possible explanation
is that some people did not reformulate the causal relation
between an accident and the airbag reaction, but reformulated the original conditional statement instead, since there
was no need to go beyond this. In the other two conditions,
however, participants did have to go beyond the original conditional, as the reformulation required the integration of a
second causal factor; simply re-stating the original conditional was no longer sufficient.
Altogether, the reformulation data indicate that people’s
biconditional interpretations often observed in causal conditional reasoning tasks do not result from interpreting the conditional relation per se, but from a specific understanding of
causal relations that includes an equivalence relation.

Discussion
The inferential results reveal the typical effect of causal conditional reasoning: People’s answers systematically depend
on knowledge about alternative causes and inhibitory factors. It was argued that these effects result from a specific
understanding of causal relations: Participants regarded the
presented causal factor(s) as exhaustive for the effect in
question (exhaustive principle), they integrated them according to their causal background knowledge either disjunctively or conjunctively, they regarded them as, together,
being necessary and sufficient for the effect (equivalence
principle), and they inferred from this which situations are
possible and which are not (modal principle). Further evidence for these principles is provided by three experiments
that replicated the present results and extended them to pure
causal tasks without conditional premise and to abstract
causal tasks (Beller & Kuhnmünch, 2006), as well as by an
experiment that demanded a differentiation between causes
and enabling conditions (Kuhnmünch & Beller, 2005).
The data also reveal a modulating influence of the conditional formulation. This again confirms the necessity of dual
source analyses (Beller & Spada, 2003): Both the domaingeneral understanding of the conditional and the domainspecific understanding of the causal relation are needed to

Table 3: Reformulation of the causal situation (%; n = 59;
causally expected answers bold-faced).
One
cause

Alternative Inhibitory
Cause
factor1

(A) Integration of causes
disjunction
–
conjunction
–

96.6
3.4

3.4
96.6

(B) Type of conditional
conditional
44.1
biconditional
55.9

15.3
84.7

32.8
67.2

1

One missing answer; n = 58.

63

explain the data. The experiment shows in particular how
these two sources of information play together: People represent causal relations according to specific principles and reason from these relations with remarkable precision (content
competence). In conditional reasoning tasks, this competence leads to content effects: People’s conditional inferences
are “biased” towards the respective causal interpretation.
This does not mean, however, that their reasoning is deductively invalid. It only means that people supplement the conditional premise with relevant information from long-term
memory serving as additional premises (cf. Henle, 1962, for
a similar argument). With regard to the underlying causal
relations, the inferences are deductively valid. Interestingly,
our analysis of inference patterns uncovered that many people consistently use only one source of information. Finally,
the reformulation task required people to think explicitly
about conditional statements in relation to the causal content
– and, in such tasks, the majority of them mastered the logical connectives if-then, and, or correctly (form competence).
Evidence for all three dual source phenomena – content
competence, content effects, and form competence – was
also found in other content domains: with conditional promises and threats (Beller, Bender & Kuhnmünch, 2005; Beller
& Spada, 2003), with deontic rules that define what is forbidden and allowed (Beller, 2003), and with various social
and conceptual relations (Neth & Beller, 1999).
As argued in the introduction, the data on causal conditional reasoning tell us something about how people understand causal relations. Three representational principles
could be generated from these data. However, the same principles appeared to also be involved in the interpretation of
deontic rules (Beller, 2003); these principles are therefore
not sufficient to characterize people’s notion of causality
unambiguously. Further aspects are necessary to distinguish
the concept of causality from other concepts, including the
following: Causality is concerned with systematic changes in
the physical world; causes are typically assumed to precede
their effects (cf. Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2001); and
mechanisms are assumed to transmit some sort of force,
energy or “causal power” in order to produce the change
(e.g., Ahn & Kalish, 2000). Only a detailed analysis of how
people understand the concept of causality can help to
explain the full range of phenomena in causal reasoning and
thus in causal conditional reasoning.

Beller, S., Bender, A., & Kuhnmünch, G. (2005). Understanding conditional promises and threats. Thinking and
Reasoning, 11, 209-238.
Beller, S., & Kuhnmünch, G. (2006). What causal conditional
reasoning tells us about people’s understanding of causality. Under review.
Beller, S., & Spada, H. (2003). The logic of content effects in
propositional reasoning: The case of conditional reasoning
with a point of view. Thinking and Reasoning, 9, 335-378.
Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naive theories and causal deduction.
Memory & Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Cummins, D. D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991).
Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory & Cognition, 19, 274-282.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & D’Ydewalle, G. (2002).
Causal conditional reasoning and semantic memory
retrieval: A test of the semantic memory framework. Memory & Cognition, 30, 908-920.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & D’Ydewalle, G. (2003). Inference suppression and semantic memory retrieval: Every
counterexample counts. Memory & Cognition, 31, 581595.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & D’Ydewalle, G. (2005). Working memory and counterexample retrieval for causal conditionals. Thinking and Reasoning, 11, 123-150.
Fairley, N., Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1999). Necessity, sufficiency, and perspective effects in causal conditional reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 52A, 771-790.
Goldvarg, E., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Naive causality:
A mental model theory of causal meaning and reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 25, 565-610.
Henle, M. (1962). On the relation between logic and thinking.
Psychological Review, 69, 366-378.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Conditionals:
A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference. Psychological Review, 109, 616-678.
Kuhnmünch, G., & Beller, S. (2005). Distinguishing between
causes and enabling conditions – through mental models or
linguistic cues? Cognitive Science, 29, 71-84.
Markovits, H., & Potvin, F. (2001). Suppression of valid
inferences and knowledge structures: The curious effect of
producing alternative antecedents on reasoning with causal
conditionals. Memory & Cognition, 29, 736-744.
Markovits, H., & Quinn, S. (2002). Efficiency of retrieval correlates with “logical” reasoning from causal conditional
premises. Memory & Cognition, 30, 696-706.
Neth, H., & Beller, S. (1999). How knowledge interferes with
reasoning – Suppression effects by content and context. In
M. Hahn, & S. C. Stoness (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty First Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 468-473). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Quinn, S., & Markovits, H. (2002). Conditional reasoning
with causal premises: Evidence for a retrieval model.
Thinking and Reasoning, 8, 179-191.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in conditional reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 32, 742-758.
Wilson, F. (1937). Hume’s defence of causal inference. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Acknowledgements I am grateful to Andrea Bender and
Stefan Kleinbeck for helping to collect the data, and to
Andrea Bender, Christoph Klauer, Gregory Kuhnmünch,
Sarah Mannion, and Mike Oaksford for valuable comments
on an earlier version of this paper.

References
Ahn, W., & Kalish, C. W. (2000). The role of mechanism
beliefs in causal reasoning. In F. C. Keil, & R. A. Wilson
(Eds.), Explanation and cognition (pp. 199-225). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Beller, S. (2003). The flexible use of deontic mental models.
In R. Alterman, & D. Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 127-132). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
64

