UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Mr. Blicket Wants It, Children Are Bayesian

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7fk9h80q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Munro, Sarah A.
Sobel, David M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Mr. Blicket Wants It, Children are Bayesian
David M. Sobel (Sobel@cog.brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Box 1978, Brown University
Providence, RI, 02912 USA

Sarah Munro (Sarah.Munro@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, 2255 Wesbrook Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T 2A1 Canada

children to a “blicket detector”: a machine that lights up and
plays music when certain objects (controlled by the
experimenter) are placed upon it. They used a device that
presented a novel causal property of objects to children to
control what prior knowledge the child brought to the
learning environment. They told children that “Blickets
make the machine go”, and initially trained them that the
base rate of blickets in the world was either rare or common.
They placed 12 identical objects on the machine one at a
time, and either 2 or 10 of those objects activated it (and
were categorized as blickets). They then presented children
with ambiguous data: a backwards blocking procedure in
which they took two new identical objects (A and B) and
placed them on the detector together, which activated, and
then placed only object A on the machine alone, which also
activated. Object A is clearly a blicket, but object’s B’s
“blicketness” is uncertain. If children responded on the basis
of the prior probability of blickets, then when blickets are
rare, they should say B is not a blicket, but when blickets
are common, they should say B is a blicket. This was the
pattern of performance observed in 4-year-olds, but not
younger children: Three-year-olds categorized object B as a
blicket in both conditions.
This procedure has been replicated and extended to other
empirical paradigms that test Bayesian inference more
explicitly (e.g., Tenenbaum et al., submitted). At issue here
is whether children are developing a mechanism best
described by Bayesian inference between ages 3 and 4, or if
3-year-olds possess such a mechanism and lack other pieces
of substantive prior knowledge necessary to use it.
One way of considering this question is to examine what
substantive knowledge children must possess in order to
form a hypothesis space about blickets and blicket detectors.
Following Tenenbaum & Griffiths (2003), Sobel et al.
(2004) posited that children must have several pieces of
information in order to form an accurate and representative
hypothesis space. They must recognize that there are two
types of objects in the world: objects and detectors. Objects
are placed on detectors, and detectors either activate or not.
Three- and 4-year-olds appear to have this knowledge.
Next, children must recognize the temporal relationship
between objects and the detector activating. Namely, that
placing an object on the detector causes it to activate, not
that the detector activating causes the experimenter to place
an object on it. Similarly, children must recognize that there
is some form of spatial independence among the objects.

Abstract
Sobel, Tenenbaum, and Gopnik (2004) demonstrated that 4year-olds’ but not 3-year-olds’ causal inferences were welldescribed by a Bayesian mechanism that relies on specific
causal knowledge. Sobel et al. (submitted) demonstrated that
this causal knowledge developed between ages 3-4,
suggesting that if 3-year-olds had access to this knowledge,
their inferences could also be described by this Bayesian
mechanism. These experiments all used a “blicket detector”,
which presented a novel causal property of objects. But this
procedure was limited to children’s understanding of physical
causality. Here, we demonstrated that 3-year-olds have this
requisite causal knowledge when the causal relations are
presented in the psychological domain (specifically an agent’s
desire), and given this finding, then demonstrated that 3-yearolds’ causal inferences about another’s desires are welldescribed by this Bayesian mechanism.

Bayesian Causal Inference
Researchers in cognitive development have suggested that
young children possess causal knowledge across the
physical (e.g., Leslie & Keeble, 1987), psychological (e.g.,
Gopnik & Wellman, 1994), and biological (e.g., Kalish,
1996) domains. There is much consensus on children
possessing causal knowledge – even in infancy – but there is
little agreement on how that causal knowledge is
represented or learned.
Several researchers have recently appealed to causal
graphical models as a way of representing children’s causal
knowledge (e.g., Gopnik, Glymour, Sobel, et al., 2004).
Some researchers have appealed to Bayesian inference over
a hypothesis space of these graphical models as a
description of how children learn new causal relations and
engage in causal inference (e.g., Sobel, Tenenbaum, &
Gopnik, 2004). Under this Bayesian approach, learners use
the substantive prior knowledge available to them to form a
hypothesis space of causal models that potentially generated
the observed data. Those hypotheses are each assigned a
prior probability of being the correct hypothesis. Data are
observed, and those hypotheses are updated via an
application of Bayes’ theorem (see Tenenbaum et al.,
submitted, for a more formal description of this algorithm).
What this approach suggests is that ambiguous data
observed in the world can be resolved by appealing to the
initial prior probabilities that hypotheses were assigned.
Sobel et al. (2004) tested this prediction by introducing

810

identical blocks (the target object) and the unique block
activated the detector, while the third (externally similar to
the target) did not. No information about blickets or blicket
detector was provided. Each block had a dowel covering its
“insides”. The target object’s dowel was removed to reveal
it contained an internal part. The dowel was replaced, and
children were asked to point to another object that also
contained such an internal part. Four-year-olds chose the
object that activated the detector, even though the other
object was perceptually identical to the target.

Putting any one object on the detector does not cause the
experimenter to put any other object on the detector. There
is also good evidence that suggests both 3- and 4-year-olds
possess knowledge about temporal priority and spatial
independence (e.g., Bullock, Gelman, & Baillargeon, 1982).
The final piece of knowledge children must have to
reason correctly is a notion about how causes and effects are
related: how these hypotheses are parameterized. In
particular, children must recognize a deterministic (or neardeterministic) relation between a blicket and the detector
activating. Following Tenenbaum and Griffiths (2003), we
will refer to this piece of knowledge as the “Activation
Law”: there must be something about a blicket that causes
the machine to activate. Without this understanding, the
backwards blocking data are not ambiguous: if the detector
is not deterministic in the backwards blocking procedure, it
is more likely that object B is a blicket than the base rate.
When A and B are on the detector together, it is possible
that A, which is a blicket, failed to activate it, giving B the
possible efficacy to activate the machine.
Does this concept develop between ages 3 and 4? As an
example, Bullock et al. (1982) demonstrated that 3-yearolds generated few mechanistic explanations when asked to
describe the connection between a marble rolling down a
tube and a jack-in-the-box appearing. Mechanistic
explanations were common for 4-5-year-olds. Similarly, 3year-olds do not appear to understand the nature of causal
relationships between physical events: When the marble
was replaced with a sequence of lights, 3-year-olds judged
that the lights would be effective at producing the effect,
while 4- and 5-year-olds judged that the lights would have
little effect, since there was no physical mechanism.
One way “the Activation Law” has been investigated is
by examining whether children understand that there is a
connection between the causal efficacy of an object (i.e.,
whether it activates the detector) and its internal properties
(i.e., whether it has something inside it that can be construed
as a mechanism for the detector’s efficacy). Sobel,
Yoachim, Gopnik, Meltzoff, and Blumenthal (submitted)
demonstrated that 4-year-olds used whether an object had a
novel internal property (a white part inside) to make
inferences about whether it would activate the blicket
detector. They also demonstrated that 4-year-olds tracked a
causally efficacious internal part when it was moved from
one object to another. If such a part was transferred to
another object that previously was shown not to activate the
detector, children now selected the new object in order to
make the machine go (as opposed to the original object,
which previously activated the detector when it contained
this internal part).
Sobel et al. also found that 4-year-olds inferred that
objects that activated the detector shared internal properties,
even in light of contrary perceptual evidence. They
presented children with the blicket detector and sets of three
objects like those shown in Figure 1. In each set, two blocks
had the same external appearance and one had a unique
external appearance. Children observed that one of the

Figure 1: Objects used by Sobel et al. (submitted) and in
the present Experiments.
What about younger children? Sobel et al. replicated this
procedure with a 3-year-old sample, and found that these
children responded in the opposite manner. Three-year-olds
chose the object with the same perceptual appearance as the
target as containing the same internal property, even though
it did not activate the detector. Sobel and Blumenthal
(submitted) also found that 3-year-olds did not understand
that possessing an internal part made an object able to
activate the detector by itself; 4-year-olds did understand
this concept.
As such, it is possible that 3-year-olds’s inferences can
also be described by Bayesian inference, but that they lack
the requisite substantive prior knowledge to form a
hypothesis space correctly. To test this hypothesis, we
changed the nature of the blicket detector from a physical
machine to an intentional agent. There is a great deal of
research in theory of mind that suggests that 3-year-olds do
understand the causal structure of particular mental states,
such as desire (e.g., Gopnik & Slaughter, 1991; Wellman &
Woolley, 1990). In the present experiments, we first
replicated the internal properties experiment, which tests
whether children understand a relationship between the
internal properties of objects and their causal properties (i.e.,
an “Activation Law”) when the causal properties of the
blicket detector instantiate either an agent’s desires or a
physical machine, and then in Experiment 2 reexamined the
procedure used by Sobel et al. (2004), with which 3-yearolds previously were shown to have difficulty.

Experiment 1
The goal of this first experimenter was to replicate the Sobel
et al. (submitted) procedure with a group of 3-year-olds

811

the experimenter spoke only to the child. During this time,
the detector activated spontaneously an equivalent number
of times as in the agency condition. No explanation for this
spontaneous activation was provided and activation was not
contingent on the experimenter’s speech.
The trials in both conditions were equivalent except for
the language used. In each of four trials, three blocks from
the sets shown in Figure 1 were placed in front of the
detector. Each block was individually placed on it. The
detector activated for the two items containing red map pins
and was disabled for the remaining block. In the agency
condition, the experimenter said “Look, Mr. Blicket likes
this one” when the detector activated or “Look, Mr. Blicket
does not like this one” when it did not. In the machine
condition, the child was told either “Look, the machine is
going” or “Look, the machine is not going.”1
The dowel on the block that activated the detector and
belonged to the perceptually identical pair was removed to
reveal that it contained a red internal part. In both
conditions, the experimenter said, “Look, this one is made
of red stuff” and asked the child to point to “another one
made of red stuff.” Children were given four such trials.

introducing the detector either as a psychological agent or as
a physical machine. To introduce the detector as an agent,
we relied on a procedure used by Johnson, Slaughter and
Carey (1998), in which the experimenter and detector had a
contingent relationship – the experimenter talked to the
detector as an agent, and the detector “responded” by
activating, which was interpreted for the child as language
by the experimenter.

Methods
Participants Thirty-two 3-year-olds (20 girls, M = 41.12
months, range 37-47 months) were recruited from flyers
posted at preschools in an urban area.
Materials The blicket detector was 8” x 6” x 3”, made of
black plastic with a white top, which was wired to a set of
LCDs. The detector worked via a remote-controlled switch
(hidden from the child) with two functions. One button
activated the detector – as long as it was pressed, the
detector would light up (green) and play music. This
enabled the experimenter to activate the detector without the
child knowing that the experimenter caused the activation.
Another set of buttons enabled and disabled the detector:
When the detector was “enabled” any object placed on top
of it would cause it to activate. In the agency condition, the
detector was covered by a blue cardboard “face” (see Figure
2). In the machine condition, this face was not present. The
blocks depicted in Figure 1 were also used.

Results and Discussion
Overall, children chose the externally distinct object (the
other object that activated the machine) on 70% of the trials
in the agency condition, significantly more than in the
machine condition (where they made this responses on the
41% of the trials), t(30) = 3.24, p = .003.
This finding was supplemented by a nonparametric
analysis. We categorized children’s response patterns into
three groups: Children were categorized as causal if they
chose the externally distinct object on 3 or more trials.
Children were categorized as perceptual if they chose the
externally distinct object on 1 or fewer trials. Children were
categorized as being neutral if they made exactly 2
perceptual and 2 causal responses. The distribution of
responses differed between the two groups, χ2(2, N = 32) =
6.54, p = .03. Eleven out of sixteen children in the agency
condition were categorized as causal (69%), compared with
only four children in the machine condition (25%). The 69%
of children who were categorized as making causal
responses in the agency condition was significantly greater
than what would be expected by chance (31.25%), Binomial
test, p < .001. This was not the case in the machine
condition; the number of children categorized as causal did
not differ from chance.
Experiment 1 found that 3-year-olds were more likely to
relate an artifact’s internal properties (i.e., whether it
contained an internal part, which constituted what it was
“made of”) with its causal properties when those properties
represented an agent’s desires as opposed to the workings of
a physical device. This suggests that changing the way the

Figure 2: Mr. Blicket: An active blicket detector in the
agency condition used in the Experiments.
Procedure Children were assigned to one of the two
conditions (randomly determined). In the agency condition,
the experimenter introduced the detector as “Mr. Blicket”
and then conducted a brief dialogue in which the
experimenter talked to the detector, and Mr. Blicket
responded to questions and comments by activating
spontaneously (modeled after Johnson et al., 1998). The
experimenter also encouraged the child to interact with Mr.
Blicket by saying hello, in which case Mr. Blicket activated
in response. The children were then told that they were
going to play a game in which Mr. Blicket would tell them
whether he liked a set of objects. This established that Mr.
Blicket’s activation represented his desires.
In the machine condition, the detector (without the face
and eyes) was presented to the child as a “Blicket Machine”.
Instead of the dialogue used during the agency condition,

1

A concern with this procedure is that the language used between
the conditions did not equally point out the causal relation between
object and detector. We are currently replicating this procedure
with this concern in mind.

812

In Experiment 2, we used the procedure in Experiment 1 to
introduce the detector as an agent, and then paralleled the
procedure used to investigate Bayesian inference in a new
group of 3-year-olds (following Sobel et al., 2004). We
trained children that Mr. Blicket liked very few things, and
then presented them with ambiguous evidence as to what he
liked: that he liked two objects together, and then one of
those two objects alone. If they interpret these data in a
manner described by Bayesian inference, then they should
be inclined to say that Mr. Blicket will not like the other
object, even though it has only been positive associated with
his desires. We then perform a similar procedure to
Experiment 1 to examine whether there was a relation
between children’s inclination to response based on a
Bayesian description and their understanding of the relation
between an object’s causal and internal properties.

Children were then given the critical test trial. Two new
objects (A and B), identical to the first twelve, were taken
from the original box, and placed on Mr. Blicket, who
activated. No causal language was used to describe this
demonstration. Then one of those two objects (A) activated
Mr. Blicket on its own. Children were asked to categorize
these two objects (one at a time). Next, children were given
a baseline condition: two new identical objects (X and Y)
were taken from the original box. They were placed on Mr.
Blicket together, who activated, and children were asked to
categorize each. Finally, in a control trial, two new identical
objects were taken from the original box. One activated Mr.
Blicket, and the other did not, and children had to categorize
them. If children failed to succeed on this trial, they were
not included in the procedure. Three children were replaced
for this reason.
After children participated in an unrelated experiment,
they were given an Internal Properties measure, which was
identical to the procedure used in Experiment 1 with one
exception. Because the blocks used in the Bayesian measure
were similar to one set, only three trials were given. The
goal of this measure was to see whether the tendency to
engage in Bayesian inference related to their connecting an
object’s internal and causal properties (a way of examining
whether children understood the “Activation Law”).

Methods

Results and Discussion

blicket detector’s activation is interpreted allowed 3-yearolds to recognize the relation between an object’s internal
properties and its causal power. This potentially provides
them with a concept akin to the “Activation Law”, which
might allow them access to a reasoning mechanism that is
best described by Bayesian inference. Experiment 2 tests
this particular possibility.

Experiment 2

On the test trial, all children responded that Mr. Blicket
liked object A; only 44% of the children (11 out of 25)
claimed that Mr. Blicket liked object B. On the baseline
trial, children claimed that Mr. Blicket liked objects X and
Y no differently from each other, and 80% of the time,
significantly more often than their treatment of object B in
the test trial, Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test, z = -3.29, p =
.001. This suggests the possibility that children were using
the base rate of what Mr. Blicket liked when evaluating
whether he liked object B2.
Performance on the Bayesian Measure was also compared
with performance on the similar procedure used by Sobel et
al. (2004). There, sixteen 3-year-olds were introduced to a
“Blicket Machine” and were told that “Blickets make the
machine go”. Children were trained that blickets were
equally rare, in the same manner as they were trained here
that the things Mr. Blicket liked were rare, given then same
three test trials. For each, they were asked whether each
object was a blicket. In the test trial of that experiment, all
children claimed that object A was a blicket, and 13 of the
16 children (81%) also claimed that object B was a blicket.
This represents a greater percentage than the 44% of the
children who did so here, χ2(1, N = 41) = 5.58, p = .018.

Participants Twenty-five 3-year-olds (11 girls, M = 42.90
months, range 37-48 months) were recruited from flyers
posted at preschools in an urban area.
Materials The same Mr. Blicket and three sets of blocks
from in Experiment 1 were used. In addition, the same
eighteen identical 3.5 x 7.7cm blue cylindrical blocks and
three boxes used by Sobel et al. (2004) were used here.
Procedure All children first received a measure of Bayesian
inference, which paralleled the procedure of Sobel et al.
(2004), except that the blicket detector was introduced as an
agent, and its activation was described as indicating Mr.
Blicket’s desires. Children were introduced to Mr. Blicket in
the same manner as Experiment 1. They were then shown a
box of identical blue blocks. Twelve blocks were taken out
of the box one at a time, and children were shown that Mr.
Blicket only liked 2 out of the 12 blocks. Children were
asked to categorize each object as being one that Mr. Blicket
liked or did not like. Corrective feedback was given if the
child erred, but this was rarely necessary (less than 9% of
the time). The results of this categorization were present on
the table (objects were categorized into a box of things Mr.
Blicket liked and a box of things Mr. Blicket did not like).
Children were also shown that Mr. Blicket would respond
(i.e., activate) if at least one object that he liked was on him.
The training procedure was parallel to the one used by Sobel
et al. (2004, Experiment 3), and we would refer the reader to
that paper for more details.

2

Although 3-year-olds judged that Mr. Blicket liked object B more
often than the base rate (2/12 or ~17%), this relation suggests that
there was a link between children’s conceptualization of the
insides of objects and the detector’s activation. Comparing
responses to the base rate is somewhat difficult as the Bayesian
measure involves a categorical response, in comparison to a
continuous probability value.

813

Since only three children in the previous experiment
claimed that object B was not a blicket (i.e., one part of the
Chi-Squared table had fewer than 5 data points), these data
were also subjected to a Fisher’s Exact test, which also
revealed a significant difference, p = .019. This suggests
that when 3-year-olds were presented with the same
inference as the workings of a machine (as opposed to Mr.
Blicket), they fail to make similar inferences consistent with
a Bayesian description.
The internal properties measure was scored in the same
manner as in Experiment 1, except that there were only
three trials. Overall, children made causal responses on 39%
of the trials (an average score of 1.16 out of a possible 3, SD
= 0.91). In contrast with performance on the agency
condition in Experiment 1, the overall pattern of response
was no different from chance, t(23) = -1.69, ns.
When these data were contrasted with performance on the
Bayesian measure, a different pattern emerged. Thirteen of
these 24 children3 claimed that Mr. Blicket did not like
object B (consistent with a Bayesian description). These
children made causal responses on 56% of the internal
property trials (M = 1.69 out of a possible 3, SD = 0.95). In
contrast, the 11 children who claimed that Mr. Blicket liked
object B (inconsistent with a Bayesian description) only
made causal responses on 18% of the trials (M = 0.55 out of
a possible 3, SD = 0.52). These percentages were
significantly different from each other, Mann-Whitney U =
23.00, z = -2.94, p = .004. This suggests that if children
resolved ambiguous data in a manner that was consistent
with a Bayesian description, they scored higher on the
internal properties measure; they were more likely to
recognize that there was a relation between the detector’s
activation and an internal property of the objects.
A concern here is that the overall level of response on the
internal property question was slightly lower than in
Experiment 1. One possible explanation for this difference
is experimental fatigue: in the present experiment, children
might have paid less attention to the procedure, given the
length of the experiment. This could have resulted in more
of a reliance on external perceptual similarity (e.g., the
working of a “dumb attentional mechanism”, e.g., Smith,
Jones, & Landau, 1996). Further, in the Bayesian inference
procedure, all the objects were perceptually identical, which
might have similarly primed a perceptual response. Such
factors do not seem to solely motivate performance. The
critical finding is that children whose responses were better
described by a Bayesian mechanism were more likely to
override perceptual similarity in the internal properties
procedure and recognize that objects that activate the
detector share internal properties.

2004; Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2003). On this approach,
children use the substantive causal knowledge they possess
to form a hypothesis space about the data they observe.
They assign a set of prior probabilities that each of those
hypotheses actually generated the data they observe in the
world. Those priors are then updated via an application of
Bayes’ theorem given observed data, and causal inference is
made by considering the resulting posterior probabilities. In
previous research, and the present Experiment 2, the data
the child observes is ambiguous, and what differs is the
number of blickets posited by each model. As such, the base
rate of blickets disambiguates the observed data. When the
causal relationship between object and detector represented
a physical relationship, 3-year-olds’ inferences were not
consistent with a Bayesian description. In the present
Experiment 2, when the causal relationship between object
and detector are interpreted as reflecting an intentional
agent’s desires, children’s inferences were more consistent
with this Bayesian description.
Why is this the case? The present procedure offers a clear
explanation: Specifically, 3-year-olds recognize a particular
piece of prior substantive causal knowledge about agent’s
desires, but not about physical events: that there is a relation
between that desire and an internal property of the object
that is responsible for the machine’s activation at a
deterministic (or near deterministic) level. If Mr. Blicket
wants something, it will have a particular property that
(children presume) is responsible for his desire4.
A concern that runs through these experiments is that the
agency manipulation might not actually tap a different set of
causal knowledge, but rather make the procedure more
interesting to children. This might allow them to succeed
more easily on the measures presented here. We do not
believe that interest alone motivates the difference between
conditions here. Rather, we think that these two conditions
(Agency vs. Machine) tap different domain-specific causal
knowledge structures. We hypothesize that children’s
understanding of the activation law would be limited to it
being phrased as a mental state easily understood by 3-yearolds, such as desire. If Mr. Blicket’s activation revealed
other mental states such as thinking, which are not wellunderstood by 3-year-olds, the present findings would not
replicate. We are currently testing this hypothesis.
Another concern is whether the procedure in Experiment
2 generally tests a Bayesian mechanism, as opposed to
alternatives. Experiment 2 showed that 3-year-olds could
appreciate the base rate of what Mr. Blicket likes. However,
one could imagine non-Bayesian accounts for these data.
Tenenbaum et al. (submitted) presented such accounts and
4

These data do not definitively show that 3-year-olds interpret the
internal property as being responsible for the causal property.
Using a separate procedure, Sobel and Blumenthal (submitted) did
demonstrate that 4-year-olds recognize this relationship in the
physical domain (using an ordinary blicket detector), and that 3year-olds do not. This procedure can be replicated using the
agency manipulation, and we are currently working on this
endeavor to definitely answer this question.

General Discussion
Several researchers have suggested that children’s causal
inference can best be described by a rational mechanism that
is consistent with Bayesian inference (e.g., Sobel et al.,
3

Note that one child was excluded because of experimental error.
814

learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets.
Psychological Review, 111, 1-30.
Gopnik, A., & Slaughter, V. (1991). Young children’s
understanding of changes in their mental states. Child
Development, 62, 98-110.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1994). The theory theory.
In L. Hirschfield & S. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind:
Domain specificity in cognition and culture (pp. 257293). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, S., Slaughter, V., & Carey, S. (1998). Whose gaze
will infants follow? The elicitation of gaze-following in
12-month-olds. Developmental Science, 1, 233-238.
Kalish, C. W. (1996). Preschoolers’ understanding of germs
as invisible mechanisms. Cognitive Development, 11, 83106.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J., & Johnson, S. (2002). Visual
statistical learning in infancy. Cognition, 83, B35-B42.
Leslie, A. M., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old
infants perceive causality? Cognition, 25, 265-288.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926–1928.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: a dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Sobel, D. M., & Blumenthal, E. J. (submitted).
Preschoolers’ developing knowledge of causal and
internal properties of artifacts. Manuscript submitted for
publication, Brown University.
Sobel, D. M. & Kirkham, N. Z. (in press). Blickets and
babies: The development of causal reasoning in toddlers
and infants. Developmental Psychology.
Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gopnik, A. (2004).
Children's causal inferences from indirect evidence:
Backwards blocking and Bayesian reasoning in
preschoolers. Cognitive Science, 28, 303-333
Sobel, D. M., Yoachim, C. M., Gopnik, A., Meltzoff, A. N.,
& Blumenthal, E. J. (submitted). The blicket within:
Preschoolers’ inferences about insides and hidden
causes. Manuscript submitted for publication. Brown
University.
Tenenbaum, J. B., & Griffiths, T. L. (2003). Theory-based
causal inference. Proceedings of the 14th Annual
Conference on the Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Vancouver, BC.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Sobel, D. M., Griffiths, T. L., & Niyogi,
S. (in press). Intuitive Theories as Grammars for Causal
Inference. In A. Gopnik & L. E. Schulz (Eds.), Causal
Learning: Psychology, Philosophy, and Computation.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Sobel, D. M., Griffiths, T. L., & Gopnik,
A. (submitted). Bayesian inference in causal learning
from ambiguous data: Evidence from adults and children.
Manuscript submitted for publication, MIT.
Wellman, H. M., & Woolley, J. D. (1990). From simple
desires to ordinary beliefs: The early development of
everyday psychology. Cognition, 35, 245-275.

other procedures that more generally test the predictions of a
Bayesian mechanism. We are currently replicating these
procedures in the lab, to consider this question further.
A general question is where does this prior causal
knowledge come from? We would offer the following
speculations. One possibility is that children acquire
information from recognizing regularity among events.
Many researchers have demonstrated that infants recognize
statistical regularity in language and visual events (e.g.,
Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002; Saffron, Aslin, &
Newport, 1996). Sobel and Kirkham (in press) found that 8month-olds can also recognize conditional independence
and dependence relations in visual sequences. This is
consistent with infants representing statistical knowledge
using the same kind of computational framework – causal
graphical models – that we suggest underlies children’s
representation of their causal knowledge.
Recognizing statistical regularity is only one way that
prior knowledge might be acquired. Algorithms with similar
Bayesian architecture may allow learners to acquire new
pieces of prior knowledge, which can subsequently be
applied to novel inferences. For example, Tenenbaum,
Griffiths, and Niyogi (in press) suggested that Bayesian
inference can be considered at various levels of analysis:
Inferences about causal structure can be made from the data,
but also inferences about how such causal structures are
formed. However, these findings were only with adult data;
a clear extension of this work is to see if applications of this
algorithm generalize onto children’s inferences.
The present experiments suggest that changing the
nature of causal information from that of a physical device
to that of the desires of a psychological agent allow 3-yearolds access to a specific piece of causal information: that
objects that share causal power tend to share a particular
internal structure. This knowledge may allow 3-year-olds to
recognize that there is a deterministic relation between those
objects and the agent’s desires, which in turn helps them to
reason in a rational manner, best described by a Bayesian
inferential system. We hypothesize that what develops is not
a learning mechanism consistent with this Bayesian
approach. Rather, even young children can make rational
inferences, consistent with a Bayesian account when they
possess appropriate domain-specific substantive causal
knowledge.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF (DLS-0518161 to DMS).
We thank Emily Blumenthal, Emily Hopkins, and Philip
Parker who helped with data collection and coding.
References
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The
development of causal reasoning. In W. J. Friedman
(Ed.), The developmental psychology of time (pp. 209254). New York: Academic Press.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
815

