UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Does Ignorance Make Us Smart? Additional Factors Guiding Heuristic Inference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9dh0r4st

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Beaman, C. Philip
McCloy, Rachel
Smith, Philip T

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When does ignorance make us smart? Additional factors guiding heuristic
inference.
C. Philip Beaman (c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL UK

Rachel McCloy (r.a.mccloy@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL UK

Philip T. Smith (p.t.smith@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL UK

than did the other methods investigated (Borges, Goldstein,
Ortmann & Gigerenzer, 1999, but see Boyd (2001) for a
failure to replicate in a bear market). These examples show
how an apparent use of recognition, via a recognition
heuristic, was useful in practice. Other studies have queried
the psychological status of the recognition heuristic
(McCloy & Beaman, 2004; Newell & Shanks, 2004;
Oppenheimer, 2003), here we are concerned with the inprinciple usefulness of recognition as a decision-making
criterion.
In Goldstein & Gigerenzer’s (2002) study, they made use
of the “cities task” as the basis for both their theoretical
speculations and a test-bed for their empirical results. The
cities task has been described as a “drosophila”, or ideal
research environment enabling the analysis of satisficing
algorithms in a well-understood environment (Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996, p.651). Subsequently, Schooler & Hertwig
(2005) demonstrated how the forgetting rate within the
ACT-R cognitive architecture (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998)
could give rise to the use of the recognition heuristic and,
consequently, near-optimal performance on this task. A
rational analysis of forgetting would therefore seem to
encourage the formulation and use of a recognition
heuristic. This conclusion is further strengthened by
Goldstein and Gigerenzer’s simulation of a “less-is-more”
effect on the city task. The cities task requires participants
to decide, given two alternatives, which city has the higher
population. The recognition heuristic states:

Abstract
“Fast & frugal” heuristics represent an appealing way of
implementing bounded rationality and decision-making under
pressure. The recognition heuristic is the simplest and most
fundamental of these heuristics. Simulation and experimental
studies have shown that this ignorance-driven heuristic
inference can prove superior to knowledge based inference
(Borges, Goldstein, Ortman & Gigerenzer, 1999; Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002) and have shown how the heuristic could
develop from ACT-R’s forgetting function (Schooler &
Hertwig, 2005). Mathematical analyses also demonstrate that,
under certain conditions, a “less-is-more effect” will always
occur (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002). The further analyses
presented in this paper show, however, that these conditions
may constitute a special case and that the less-is-more effect
in decision-making is subject to the moderating influence of
the number of options to be considered and the framing of the
question.

The Less-Is-More Effect.
An interesting and counter-intuitive finding in decisionmaking research is the discovery that, under certain
circumstances, individuals with less knowledge make more
accurate judgments than those with greater (but still
imperfect) knowledge. For example, 62% of American
students tested could correctly state that San Diego has a
higher population than San Antonio, but 100% of German
students tested could do so (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999).
The argument here is that the American students were
forced to consider multiple different, often unreliable, cues
to size in making their judgment, whereas the German
students simply needed to consider whether they had ever
heard of the city: a more reliable size cue. In this case
Recognition Validity (RV) exceeded Knowledge Validity
(KV). A further study went on to examine the performance,
over a period of time, of a recognition-based portfolio of
shares with portfolios chosen on the basis of other
knowledge. In this study, relative ignorance proved a better
tool for playing the stock-market in a bull-market situation

If one of two objects is recognized and the other is not,
then infer that the recognized object has the higher value
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999, p. 41).
The 2-alternative forced choice (2AFC) cities task is used
as a test-bed because it “is an elementary case to which
many problems of greater complexity (multiple choice, for
instance) are reducible” (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999, p.
41). The cities task is thus seen as a representative of the set

54

Accessible Environment

choice is random, the second term gives the proportion
inferences correct where only one object is recognized and
the recognition heuristic is employed and the third term
gives the proportion inferences correct where both objects
are recognized. When figures are substituted for the
variables α and β (recognition and knowledge validities,
respectively) the pattern shown in Figure 2 can be observed:

Mediator

2AFC

of decisions that involve selecting a subset of objects from a
larger set. In this task, recognition works because the
probability of recognition is influenced by a mediator
variable which itself reflects the “real” but inaccessible
criterion, as shown in Figure 1.

Unknown

100

Surrogate
Correlation

Environment

Criterion

%age Correct Inferences

Ecological
Correlation

Mind
Recognition

INFERENCE

0.5

90

0.6
80

0.7
0.8

70

0.9
1

60
50
0

Figure 1: The relationship between criteria, mediating
variable and recognition probability.

20

40

60

80

100

Number Recognized (n)

As a practical example, the mediating variable for many
magnitude related choices, such as the cities task, might be
the number of times the city has appeared in a newspaper
report. This would correlate with city size (ecological
correlation) and also influence the probability that the city
name is recognized (surrogate correlation). Goldstein and
Gigerenzer (2002) also showed how a degree of ignorance
(recognizing only one of the two cities) could lead to
superior performance on the cities task than knowledge of
both cities. Mathematically, the demonstration goes as
follows:

Figure 2: Inferences correct as a function of varying
number recognized n (x-axis) and recognition validity α
(given in the figure legend) where N = 100 and knowledge
validity β is set to .8.
As observed by Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) a “less
is more” effect, superior performance for conditions where
only one object is recognized, appears at some point on the
graph for all conditions where α > β. This can best be seen
by looking at the 100% recognition plots (right-most point)
which represent the maximum performance levels on the
basis of knowledge of all the objects. Any point on these
lines that are graphed as higher along the y-axis (percentage
inferences correct) are showing a less-is more effect. That
is, 30% of the data points formally calculated for this figure.
It is also possible to show mathematically that, where α > β,
a less-is-more effect must occur (Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
2002). Thus, the utility of recognition is demonstrated and
its incorporation into an ACT-R architecture appears to be
unquestionably consistent with the principle of rational
analysis (Anderson, 1990). One question that has not been
properly addressed, however, is how well, at a theoretical
level, the 2AFC cities task represents other (for example
multi-option) choices, whether the less-is-more effect holds
up across the board or whether the 2AFC, far from being a
case to which other tasks are reducible is, in fact, a special
case.

Let α = recognition validity, where recognition validity is
the likelihood of correct choice made by the recognition
heuristic.
Let β = knowledge validity, where knowledge validity is
the likelihood of correct choice based on knowledge of the
two options.
Let N = the set of objects from which pairs of objects are
drawn.
Let n = the number of recognized objects.
There are therefore N-n unrecognized objects and n(N-n)
pairs where only one object is recognized. There are also
(N-n)(N-n-1)/2 pairs where neither item is recognized and
n(n-1)/2 pairs where both objects are recognized. Finally,
there are N(N-1)/2 possible pairs. Given this, the expected
proportion of correct inferences, f(n) of an exhaustive
pairing of objects is:

Varying choice options and information required.

f(n)= [(N-n)(N-n-1]/[N(N-1)] .5 + [2n(N-n)]/[N(N-1)] α +
[n(n-1)]/[N(N-1)] β
(1)

The first question to be addressed is how the less-is-more
effect fares when the nature of the question is varied. For
2AFC, asking which of the two objects is smaller (the lesser
question) should be equivalent to asking which of the two
objects is larger (the greater question). So, for example,

The first term of this equation gives the proportion
inferences correct where neither object is recognized and

55

Mathematically, the expansion of equation (1) to equation
(2) has had little effect on the appearance of the less-is-more
effect given the assumptions as stated above. The less-ismore effect still occurs at approximately the same rate
(about 30% of the data-points plotted in this example) and
always occurs whenever α > β. However, it is not clear that
the assumption that β1 = β2 is justified. Analysis of the
cognitive operations that must take place for 3AFC tasks
with the greater question reveals that although the cognitive
operations for recognize 0, 1 or all of the alternatives can
easily be mapped onto situations encountered in a 2AFC
scenario, recognize 2 out of the 3 alternatives represents a
possibility not previously encountered. Specifically, if 2/3
of the options are recognized, one can only apply
knowledge after one has already used recognition to narrow
down the choices to 2. The requirement to apply both
recognition and knowledge is unavoidable and therefore
when 2/3 of the options are recognized, validity of the
judgment must be the product of recognition and knowledge
validities. When equation 2 is amended to reflect this, the
graph shown in Figure 4 is obtained.

with the cities task the question “which has the smaller
population, San Diego or San Antonio?” is equivalent to
asking, “which has the larger population, San Diego or San
Antonio?” This is because the use of recognition would
entail, for the greater question, inferring that San Diego has
the larger population (because it is recognized) and thus
choosing it. For the lesser question the same inference is
made, and on the same basis - so participants using the
heuristic should choose the unrecognized city. Thus, the
information required to make the choice is identical and the
sort of pattern shown in Figure 2 will in principle follow
from a comparison of recognition versus knowledge-based
performance. 1
Turning to multi-option problems, the task requirements
are less obviously clear-cut. Consider the 3-alternative
forced choice (3AFC) task. For this task, on a cities task
given the greater question there are 4 possible states of
affairs: Recognize 0, 1, 2 or 3 of the cities. Equation 1 can
be expanded as follows:
f(n) = [(N-n)(N-n-1)(N-n-2)] / [N(N-1)(N-2)] .333+
[3n(N-n)(N-n-1)] / [N(N-1)(N-2)] α +
[3n(n-1)(N-n)] / [N(N-1)(N-2)] β1 +
[n(n-1)(n-2)] / [N(N-1)(N-2)] β2
(2)

3AFC-Revised

%age Correct Inferences

100

Where the 1st term is proportion correct inferences by
chance, the 2nd term reflects the contribution of recognition
validity (i.e., where only one item was recognised), the 3rd
term reflects knowledge validity for choices out of 2
recognised (β1) and the 4th term indicates the contribution of
knowledge validity for choices out of 3 (β2). If it is assumed
that knowledge validity is the same regardless whether 2 or
3 options are recognized, i.e., β1 = β2 then the graph of
performance shown in Figure 3 can be drawn:

%age Correct Inferences

60

0.9
1

50
40

20

40

60

80

100

Number Recognized (n)

Figure 4. Inferences correct as a function of varying number
recognized n (x-axis) and knowledge validity β (given in the
figure legend) where N = 100, recognition validity α is set
to .8, and validity of inference for recognize 2/3 is the
product of α and β.

90
0.4
80

0.5

70

0.6

60

0.7
0.8

50

0.9

Figure 4 clearly shows the limitations of the “less-is-more
effect” once one moves beyond the bounds of a 2AFC
situation. As the figure demonstrates, although a less-ismore effect continues to occur, it does so only on 18% of
the data-points plotted here and, significantly, does not
always occur where α > β, as previously.
It is also worth reconsidering the question wording at this
point. For 2AFC the lesser and greater questions reduce to
requesting the same information but this is not true of multioption forced choice tasks.
For a 3AFC and the greater question, the following
cognitive operations are required (broken down by
situation):

1
40
30
40

0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8

70

0

100

20

0.4
80

30

3AFC

0

90

60

80

100

Number Recognized (n)

Figure 3. Inferences correct as a function of varying number
recognized n (x-axis) and knowledge validity β (given in the
figure legend) where N = 100 and recognition validity α is
set to .8.
1

Although psychological studies show that in practice choice
varies as a function of the question wording (McCloy & Beaman,
2004).
56

Recognize 0: Guess
Recognize 1: Infer the recognized object has the higher
value and choose that object accordingly.
Recognize 2: Infer the recognized objects have the higher
value and then use knowledge to choose between them.
Recognize 3: Use knowledge.

every occasion where recognition validity exceeds
knowledge validity. On average, however, performance is
lower with approximately 4% fewer correct inferences
overall than in a 3AFC when asked the greater question
(Figure 3). Thus, relative to knowledge, the utility of
recognition is reinstated under these circumstances but
expected performance overall drops slightly because this
task is more open to the operation of random factors than is
the same task when the greater question is posed.

In contrast, for a 3AFC task and the lesser questions the
following cognitive operations are required:
Recognize 0: Guess
Recognize 1: Infer the recognized object has the higher
value and then guess one of the remaining 2 objects.
Recognize 2: Infer the recognized objects have the higher
value and choose the remaining object.
Recognize 3: Use knowledge.

n-AFC: The General Case.
To summarize the analysis so far: The usefulness of
recognition as a cue to inference is supported but its
limitations are also demonstrated. We have shown how the
recognition heuristic might generalize beyond the 2AFC on
which its empirical support depends (Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 1999, 2002). In doing so, we have also shown
that the exact nature of the questions asked and the options
given modifies the expected utility of the heuristic in an
unanticipated and counter-intuitive manner. Specifically, the
2AFC task is revealed to be a special case where the nature
of the question asked does not influence the information
required. If the recognition heuristic had been directly
applied to a 3AFC task using the greater question, which
has so far been employed in all but one of the empirical
psychological investigations of recognition-driven inference
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
1999, 2002, McCloy & Beaman, 2004, Oppenheimer,
2003), the support derived from the counter-intuitive “lessis-more” effect would have been much weaker. In the
situations simulated here it is only when the nature of the
question posed is altered that the effect re-emerges to any
great degree.
One potential concern is that the 3AFC situation that is the
subject of the current set of mathematical models might be
the “special case” rather than the 2AFC situation from
which it is derived. This concern can be allayed, however,
by expanding the situation out to n-AFC situations and
examining the general cognitive demands posed. For
reasons of space and of readability, this can easily be carried
out in a non-mathematical way simply showing how the
requirements to consult knowledge differ for n-AFC tasks as
a function of the question posed. For n-AFC situations
posing the lesser question, the operations required and their
associated validity are shown in Table 1. As can be seen
from this table, recognition can be used to eliminate a
number of possible alternatives from the consideration set
but having done so there is little role for knowledge to play.
Under such circumstances, it is hardly surprising that a lessis-more effect frequently holds as recognition is simply
applicable in more circumstances than knowledge. Equally,
given that once recognition has been deployed choice
amongst the remaining alternatives is dependent upon
random factors, it is not surprising that overall performance
is lower with the lesser question than with the greater
question.

As recognize 0 and recognize 3 situations do not differ in
their knowledge requirements, the critical contrasts are
between the recognize 1 and 2 conditions. With both
questions, recognition can be used to guide choice unaided
for only one of these two situations, and which situation can
be resolved via recognition alone differs according to the
question posed. Furthermore, whereas for the greater
question choice in the recognize 2 situation must be made
guided by recognition and knowledge validity, for the lesser
question, there is no extra demand on knowledge validity.
Instead, in the recognize 2 condition when set the lesser
question, choice is made by a combination of recognition
validity and guesswork as there is no more knowledge
available to aid choice. Figure 5 gives the graph of a 3AFC
situation if asked the lesser question.
3AFC lesser question

%age correct inferences

100
90

0.4

80

0.5
0.6

70

0.7

60

0.8

50

0.9

40

1

30
0

20

40

60

80

100

Number Recognized (n)

Figure 5. Inferences correct as a function of varying number
recognized n (x-axis) and knowledge validity β (given in the
figure legend) where N = 100 and recognition validity α is
set to .8.
The pattern of performance shown in Figure 5 is closer to
that obtained with a 2AFC question (Figure 2) than with the
greater question on a 3AFC task (as shown in Figure 3). The
less-is-more effect is reinstated and occurs once more on
57

by Goldstein and Gigerenzer (1999). 2AFC is demonstrably
a special case by virtue of its relative immunity to
knowledge and chance based influences in more complex
tasks, and its symmetry between greater and lesser choices.
Neither of these features are replicated in more complex,
multi-option decisions. Whilst not denying the utility of the
recognition heuristic under 2AFC situations, the results of
this study show that the extent to which the heuristic can be
said to be “ecologically rational” in tasks expanded beyond
the basic blocks-world situation in which it was developed
is limited.

Table 1: Operations and operation validity for each of the
possible situations encountered in an n-AFC task when
asked the lesser question.
Recognise
0
1
2
….
n-1
n

Operation & Operation Validity
Chance (1/n)
Eliminate recognized (α) & chance (1/n-1)
Eliminate recognized (α) & chance (1/n-2)
Eliminate recognized (α)
Choose amongst recognized (β)

An equivalent table for n-AFC tasks when the greater
question is posed in shown in Table 2.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Leverhulme
Trust, grant no. F/00 239/U awarded to the first two authors.
We are grateful to Kate Goddard for alerting us to the
possible asymmetry of the greater and lesser questions in
3AFC situations.

Table 2: Operations and operation validity for each of the
possible situations encountered in an n-AFC task when
asked the greater question.
Recognise
Operation & Operation Validity
0
Chance (1/n)
1
Choose recognized (α)
2
Choose recognized items (α) & select between
recognized items (β)
….
n-1
Choose recognized items (α) & select between
recognized items (β)
N
Choose amongst recognized (β)

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Borges, B, Goldstein, D. G., Ortmann, A., & Gigerenzer, G.
(1999). Can ignorance beat the stock market? In G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd and the ABC Research Group.
Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Boyd, M. (2001). On ignorance, intuition and investing: A
bear market test of the recognition heuristic. Journal of
Psychology and Financial Markets, 2, 150-156.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Goldstein, D. G. & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The recognition
heuristic: How ignorance makes us smart. In G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd and the ABC Research Group.
Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Goldstein, D. G. & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of
ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109, 75-90.
McCloy, R. & Beaman, C. P. (2004). The recognition
heuristic: Fast and frugal but not as simple as it seems. In:
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp 933-937). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Newell, B. R. & Schanks, D. R. (2004). On the role of
recognition in decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30, 923935.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so
frugal!): Rethinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition,
90, B1-B9.
Schooler, L. J. & Hertwig, R. (2005). How forgetting aids
heuristic inference. Psychological Review, 112, 610-628.

Table 2 shows how, when asked the greater question, the
utility of recognition is bound, in all but one case, to the
validity of knowledge. The one case where recognition
utility is not bound to knowledge is where only one item is
recognized. Thus, recognition is a powerful cue in 2AFC
choices. In all other cases recognition may aid heuristic
inference but performance ultimately is dependent upon the
joint effects of recognition and knowledge validity. Thus, it
appears that the role of recognition per se is overstated.

Conclusions.
The results of this set of simulations demonstrate that the
rational application of a recognition heuristic is, as stated
previously (e.g., McCloy & Beaman, 2004) not as
straightforward as it might at first appear. The relative
simplicity of a blocks-world style “drosophila” environment
such as the cities task (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996) fails
to scale up to an n-AFC. Beyond 2AFC the utility of
recognition alone is limited by the need to also consult the
knowledge base for 50% of the decisions that may be made
using the recognition heuristic within this environment (the
“greater” questions). For the remaining 50% of choices (the
“lesser” questions) the counter-intuitive less-is-more effect
remains in force but overall the proportion of accurate
inferences are reduced because for the majority of choices
the recognition validity is used in conjunction with other
factors that have only chance level validity (e.g.,
guesswork).
Thus, a recognition-based choice heuristic developed
within a 2AFC environment fails to show that multi-option
choices are reducible to binary choices in the way predicted
58

