UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A comparison of children and adults’ judgements and decisions based on verbal
uncertainty statements

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4xz4b0cc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gourdan, Amelie
Villejoubert, Gaelle

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A comparison of children and adults’ judgements
and decisions based on verbal uncertainty statements
Amélie Gourdon (AXG800@bham.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Birmingham
Edgbaston
Birmingham, B15 2TT UK

Gaëlle Villejoubert (gaelle.villejoubert@univ-tlse2.fr)
Laboratoire CLLE-LTC (CNRS, UTM, EPHE), Université de Toulouse Le Mirail
5, allées Antonio Machado
31058 Toulouse cedex 9 FRANCE

Abstract
Children distinguish less well than adolescents the numerical
meaning conveyed by verbal probabilities (e.g., Mullet &
Rivet, 1991). Little is known, however, about children’s
ability to grasp the directionality of verbal probabilities
(Teigen & Brun, 1995). We expected children to only be
influenced by directionality and congruence of statement
framing with their goal. Thirty children and 29 adults made
probability judgements and decisions in a treasure hunt
context. Results revealed that children are sensitive to the
numerical meaning of verbal probabilities in decisions, and
also in probability judgements related to goal-incongruent
statement framings. The different demands implied by
judging probabilities and decision-making will be discussed,
as well as the independence of directionality and numerical
value in adults’ interpretation of verbal probabilities.
Keywords: verbal uncertainty;
decision making; directionality.

probability

judgement;

Imagine that an 8 year-old boy wants to invite a friend to go
to the park with him during the week-end. Before inviting
him he asks his parents whether it will rain. Should they
answer (1) or (2)?
(1) There is a 20% chance that it would rain.
(2) There is a little chance that it would rain.
According to preference paradox (e.g., Erev & Cohen,
1990), they will probably prefer to use the verbal probability
(There is a little chance) to communicate uncertainty.
Furthermore an 8 year-old child has not been taught about
numerical probabilities (percentages and frequencies).
Corpora of French language used in primary school
handbooks (Lété, Sprenger-Charolles & Colé, 2004)
revealed that children are confronted with uncertainty words
as early as first grade: for example, possible occurs as often
as neighbor in first grade handbooks. Yet to our knowledge
very few studies investigated verbal probabilities
comprehension in childhood (but, for an exception, see
Mullet & Rivet, 1991; Watson & Moritz, 2003).
Besides understanding what the parents mean by There is
a little chance, the boy will also have to decide if he should
invite his friend to go to the park on the basis of this
statement. In fact children, like adults, have to make
decisions on a daily basis. To do so they can rely either on
experience or on information that is communicated to them.

Since adults are more likely to communicate uncertainty to
children using verbal probabilities, the study of children's
decision-making activities would also benefit from
knowledge of how they understand verbal probabilities and
make decisions on their basis. Finally, verbal probabilities
are not used in isolation but inserted in general statements of
uncertainty. Their interpretation can therefore depend on the
different pieces of information carried by context (e.g.,
Weber & Hilton, 1990). The study we report here aims to
bring a new look on comprehension of verbal probabilities
and on their use in decision-making, in childhood and
adulthood. Specifically it will examine how children and
adults take into account the multidimensionality of this type
of uncertainty expressions when making decisions.
Verbal probabilities express a degree of certainty,
possibility or obligation of an event by a modal adjective
(e.g., likely, uncertain) or a verb (e.g., may). They are
embedded in utterances expressing the probability of an
event as in It is likely that x will occur. This modal term can
be combined with a modifier (e.g., few, strongly) which will
increase or decrease the degree of certainty expressed by the
verbal probability, as in It is highly likely that x is true.
Thus, the first dimension of verbal probabilities is the
numerical value defining, albeit vaguely, the chances to see
an event occur or be true.
Early work on verbal probabilities examined how they
translated into numerical probabilities (e.g., Mosteller, &
Youtz, 1990). This line of work developed in the
characterization of their distribution of probabilistic
meaning (e.g., Wallsten, Budescu, Rapoport, Zwick, &
Forsyth, 1986). More recently, a new line of work was
initiated with the introduction of the concept of
directionality (Teigen & Brun, 1995). The directionality of a
probability expression is dichotomous (i.e., it’s either
positive or negative) and focuses the listener’s attention on
the occurrence or truth of the event (if positive) or on its
non-occurrence or falsehood (if negative).
Through focusing, directionality leads to framing effects
in decisions based on verbal probabilities (Teigen & Brun,
1999): for the same estimated numerical probability and the
same positive event (e.g., a 30-35 % chance that a headache
treatment will be helpful), a positive probability expression

1121

(e.g., There is some possibility) leads participants to decide
more often to act (e.g., follow the treatment) than a negative
one (e.g., It is quite uncertain). Thereby the directionality
concept has defined what we will call the semanticpragmatic dimension of verbal probabilities.
Teigen and Brun’s (1999) results show that using verbal
expressions to communicate uncertainty not only tells about
a degree of uncertainty, but also about what is preponderant
in the speaker’s mind, that is whether his attention is
directed to the occurrence or non-occurrence of the
outcome. Therefore, a verbal probability conveys both
information about numerical level of probabilities and
information about directionality.
As evoked earlier, verbal probabilities are inserted in
utterances: they always communicate uncertainty about an
uncertain event. As such, the communication of uncertainty
can be framed in different ways (Villejoubert, Almond, &
Alison, 2009). In claim or statement framing, the same
uncertain event (i.e., with a given probability of occurrence)
can be described in a positive frame congruent with
listeners’ goals (e.g., There is a good chance that you will
pass your exam) or in a negative frame, namely a frame that
is incongruent with their goals (e.g., It is unlikely that you
will fail your exam).
We therefore propose to study the interpretation of verbal
probabilities in a wider context and examine the impact of
statement framing. Thus, the first aim of the present study
will be examine the effect of three dimensions on
individuals’ probability judgements and decisions: the
numerical value conveyed by the verbal probability (low vs.
high), its directionality (positive vs. negative), and the
statement framing (congruent vs. incongruent with the
listener’s goal).
To our knowledge no study has yet investigated
systematically these three dimensions on both likelihood
judgements and decision-making, in adulthood and in
childhood. Although past research has examined simple
interactions of these variables. Teigen and Brun (1999)
found that the numerical value modulates the directionality
effect: both positive and negative verbal probabilities lead
more often to a positive behavioral prediction when the
numerical value is high rather than low. The numerical
value can itself be modulated by the event value: a positive
verbal probability is interpreted as having a lower numerical
value if it announces a severe event than if it announces a
mild one (e.g., Bonnefon & Villejoubert, 2006). Finally,
Villejoubert et al. (2009) showed that probability words
chosen to express the numerical uncertainty of a statement
conveyed higher levels of uncertainty when it was inferred
from a positively framed statement (e.g., there is a 70%
probability that X is true) rather than from a negatively
framed one (e.g., there is a 30% probability that X is not
true). To our knowledge, however, the potential interaction
between directionality and statement framing has not been
investigated yet.

Very few studies investigated verbal probabilities
comprehension in childhood (Mullet & Rivet, 1991; Watson
& Moritz, 2003). Furthermore these studies did not take into
account the concept of directionality. However these two
studies found that children distinguish less well the different
levels of numerical value carried by verbal probabilities
compared to adolescents. Mullet and Rivet (1991)
manipulated statement framing (pass vs. fail) and showed
that the frame interacts with the numerical dimension of
verbal probabilities. In fact children could integrate the
statement framing when evaluating uncertainty and reverse
their estimates accordingly. However the authors’ design
did not distinguish between the directionality and the
numerical value, so it is possible that directionality also
independently interacts with the event value and/or
numerical value. Finally, an insight about how children
process directionality can be found in modifier studies.
Indeed, according to Moxey and Sanford (2000),
directionality can be considered as an argumentative
function of language (e.g., Anscombre & Ducrot, 1983).
Champaud and Bassano (1987) observed a sensitivity of 6years-old to the argumentative function of some modifiers
(especially negative ones). Thus it is plausible to assume
that children will be sensitive to the directionality of verbal
probabilities although this assumption remains to be
empirically verified.
To sum up, whereas previous studies found adults were
sensitive to each dimension of uncertainty expressions and
that each of these dimensions may interact independently
with one another, children studies found a sensitivity to the
numerical value and the statement framing but did not test
whether children would be sensitive to the directionality of
verbal probabilities. All together these results suggest that
when judging uncertainty expressions and making decision
on their basis, adults should use the directionality, the
numerical value and the statement framing, while children
should be sensitive to framing and may also be sensitive to
directionality but should have more difficulties in
differentiating between different levels of numerical
meaning.

Method
Participants
Fifty-nine people took part in this study. Twenty-nine of
these participants (26 women and 3 men) were studying
different subjects in the University of Toulouse and
volunteered to participate (mean age = 22.6 years,
SD = 3.5). The remaining participants were children (13
girls and 17 boys) enrolled in the French third grade in a
primary school near Toulouse (mean age= 8.7 years,
SD = 0.3); consent was sought from both their parents and
the children themselves. Participants were not paid and did
not receive incentives to participate. The experiment was
conducted in French and they were all French native
speakers.

1122

Material and procedure
Probability expressions were manipulated in a 2×2×2
within-subjects design. Eight probability expressions were
used, corresponding to the eight combinations (see Table 1)
of the levels of directionality (positive vs. negative),
numerical value (low vs. high), and statement framing
(congruent vs. incongruent with the task goal). Modal terms
used in these expressions were chosen according to their
frequencies in French primary school handbooks (Lété,
Sprenger-Charolles & Colé, 2004); final choices were made
in reference to previous studies (Honda & Yamagishi, 2006;
Juanchich, 2007), so that the numerical value could be
assumed to be equivalent within each pair of the different
combinations between the directionality and the statement
framing factors. Age was a between-subject factor and the
experiment was based on a 2×2×2×2 mixed-design.
We used a treasure hunt scenario to implement this
design. First, participants read the following introductory
text (translated from French):
“Here is a treasure island. On this island there are not
only one but several chests. In some chests, there is part
of the treasure: each one of these chests is filled with the
same amount of treasure. In the other chests, there is no
treasure but a trap: if you open these trap chests, all the
chests will be locked and you will not be able to take the
treasure. Fortunately hints are available to help you find
the good chests. For each chest you thus will have to
read the hint and to say if you think that the chest
contains part of the treasure. You will also have to say
what you would really do if the chest were in front of
you. Do not forget that you should open only the chests
filled with a treasure if you want to win the treasure.”
The “hints” corresponded to the eight probability
expressions mentioned earlier. Each hint was judged two
times, to assess both probability judgements and decisionmaking on the basis of probability expressions. Thus the
first question (Do you think that the chest contain the
treasure?) assessed the probability judgement on a nonlabeled 11-point scale; the second one (What would you do
if the chest was in front of you right now?) assessed the
decision-making under uncertainty using a choice task since
deciding to open the chest being considered a choice leading
to an uncertain and possibly risky outcome. The order of the
two questions was not counterbalanced following
Schlottmann and Tring (2005).

To make sure that participants were familiarized with the
task and combinations of factors, we made them first
practice in a familiarization phase. This phase and the
experimental one used exactly the same items: four
anchoring items were given first in the two phases and then
the eight experimental items were given in different pseudorandom orders for each phase. In addition, the
familiarization phase allowed participants to go back to
change their responses, contrary to the experimental one.
However, no feedback about the performance was given to
participants after the familiarization. Participants were
tested individually.

Results
Probability judgement
Means for each combination of the four factors are given in
Table 2. A 2×2×2×2 mixed ANOVA revealed a main effect
of framing (F(1,55) = 12.93, p < .01, η²p = .19), and no
main effect of the directionality (F(1,55) = 1.82, ns),
numerical value (F(1,55) = 1.73, ns) or age (F(1,55) = 1.48,
ns). A reliable two-way interaction was observed between
the
statement
framing
and
the
directionality
(F(1,55) = 32.53, p < .001, η²p = .37), between the
statement framing and the numerical value (F(1,55) = 43.3,
p < .001, η²p = .44), and between the statement framing and
the age (F(1,55) = 11.69, p < .01, η²p = .18).
A reliable three-way interaction was also observed
between the statement framing, the numerical value and the
age (F(1,55) = 14.9, p < .001, η²p = .21).
More local analyses were conducted within each
combination of age and statement framing, using 2×2
repeated ANOVA. Results showed that when the statement
framing was congruent with the task goal, adults judged the
likelihood of reaching the task goal (finding the treasure) as
higher if expressed by a positive verbal probability than if
expressed by a negative one (F(1,26) = 20.62, p < .001,
η²p = .44). Also they judged this likelihood as higher when
the numerical value was high than when it was low
(F(1,26) = 51.93, p < .001, η²p = .67).
Children on the other hand judged this likelihood
significantly higher when the verbal probability was positive
than when it was negative (F(1,29) = 32.91, p < .001,
η²p = .53). No reliable effect of the numerical value was
observed in children (F(1,29) = 1.75, ns).

Table 1: probability expressions (translated from French) combining the different levels of directionality, numerical value
(NV) and statement framing
directionality statement framing
low NV
high NV
…that the treasure is in the chest
congruent
There is a little chance…
It is very possible…
positive
incongruent
There is a little possibility…
It is almost sure…
…that the treasure is not in the chest
congruent
It is very little certainty… It is not absolutely sure…
…that the treasure is in the chest
negative
incongruent
It is almost impossible
It is not very certain… …that the treasure is not in the chest

1123

incongruent 52.33 (32.56) 44.67 (23.96)
congruent

44.81 (17.95) 71.3 (19.59)

incongruent 58.7 (20.69) 28.89 (24.51)
congruent

29.26 (20.97) 57.41 (18.78)

incongruent 67.78 (22.63) 45.37 (19.8)

When the statement framing was incongruent with the
task goal, adults judged the likelihood of reaching the task
goal as lower if expressed by a positive verbal probability
than if expressed by a negative one (F(1,28) = 7.76,
p < .01, η²p = .28). They also judged it as lower when the
numerical value was low than when it was high
(F(1,28) = 41.18, p < .001, η²p = .6).
Children in this case judged this likelihood significantly
lower when the numerical value was high than when it
was low (F(1,29) = 7.77, p < .01, η²p = .21). No reliable
effect of the directionality was observed this time
(F(1,29) = 3.78, ns).
No reliable interaction had been observed between the
directionality and the numerical value, regardless of the
event value and of the age group.

low NV high NV
.58

.93

incongruent

.37

.13

congruent

.20

.51

incongruent

.58

.51

congruent

.34

.82

incongruent

.65

.13

congruent

.13

.37

incongruent

.70

.55

respectively). They also both took more often a risky
decision when the numerical value was high than when it
was low (χ²W(1) = 14.19, p < .001 and χ²W(1) = 18.52,
p < .001 respectively).
When the statement framing was incongruent with the
goal task, both adults and children took more often a risky
decision when the verbal probability was negative than
when it was positive (χ²W(1) = 12.03, p < .01 and
χ²W(1) = 10.76, p < .01 respectively). They also both took
more often a risky decision when the numerical value was
low than when it was high (χ²W(1) = 11.87, p < .01 and
χ²W(1) = 6.92, p < .01 respectively).
No reliable interaction had been observed between the
directionality and the numerical value, regardless of the
event value and of the age group.

Decision making
Proportions of risky choices (for opening the chest) for
each combination of the four factors are given in Table 3.
The main and combined effects of the four factors on
these proportions were tested by a Wald chi-square.
The Wald chi-square test revealed no reliable effect of
the statement framing (χ²W(1) = 1.27, ns), of the
directionality (χ²W(1) = 2.37, ns), of the numerical value
(χ²W(1) = 1.03, ns), or of the age (χ²W(1) < 1, ns).
A reliable two-way interaction was observed between the
statement framing and the directionality (χ²W(1) = 40.79,
p < .001), between the statement framing and the
numerical value (χ²W(1) = 34.25, p < .001), and between
the statement framing and the age (χ²W(1) = 6.96, p < .01).
A reliable three-way interaction was also observed
between the statement framing, the numerical value and
the directionality (χ²W(1) = 5.17, p < .05).
More local analyses were conducted within each
combination of age and event value. When the statement
framing was congruent with the task goal, both adults and
children took a risky decision more often if the verbal
probability was positive than if it was negative
(χ²W(1) = 16.37, p < .001 and χ²W(1) = 19.56, p < .001

congruent

negative

55.5 (27.33) 54.83 (28.63)

event

positive

31 (24.08)

dir

negative

69.83 (23.87) 75.33 (23.56)

incongruent 46.33 (27.98)
congruent

high NV

adults

positive

low NV

children

positive

congruent

negative

event

negative

children
adults

dir

positive

Table 3: proportions of risky decisions (open the chest),
as function of the directionality (dir), the numerical value
(NV), the statement framing (event) and the age

Table 2: mean probability judgements (SD) according
to the directionality (dir), the numerical value (NV), the
statement framing (event) and the age

Discussion
This study aimed to investigate probability judgement and
decision-making under verbal uncertainty in childhood
and adulthood. We expected adults to take into account
the three dimensions of uncertainty expressions
(directionality, numerical value, statement framing)
whereas we expected children to take into account only
the directionality and the statement framing.
In accordance with this hypothesis, our results revealed
that both children and adults take into account the
statement framing in their judgement and decisionmaking: patterns of responses observed when the
statement was congruent with the task goal were reversed
when it was not congruent with it. While our results
indicated that adults systematically took the directionality
into account, both in judgement and decision-making,
they are conform less to our expectations in childhood:
children took it systematically into account in decisionmaking, but in judgement they only considered it when
the statement framing was congruent. Finally where we
expected some age-differences, we found also an unclear
pattern: adults always took into account the numerical

1124

value, in judgement and decision-making, which we
expected; but children also took it systematically into
account in decision-making, neglecting it in judgement
only in the case of a positive event.
Thus we can consider that children take into account the
numerical value of verbal probabilities most of the time,
which is surprising regarding the previous studies of
verbal probabilities’ comprehension by children (Mullet
& Rivet, 1991; Watson & Moritz, 2003). However we
highlighted that these studies did not consider the
directionality in their analyses, so that their results could
be due to a confound variable. Once the directionality is
considered as another variable, it seems that children, as
adults, are sensitive to the numerical value.
Another main difference with the previous studies may
explain our unexpected results. Whereas we investigated
both judgement and decision-making, the previous studies
only observed the probability judgement. And while
children in our study take systematically into account the
numerical value when making decision, when judging
probability they considered it only in case of incongruent
statement framings. If judging probabilities remains only
an evaluation process, making decisions carries more
consequences. Specifically in our study making one
unique bad choice would make people lose the entire
game whereas missing one good choice would only
reduce the scale of the outcome. This prospective could
have prompted children to be more accurate in their
choices. Moreover this could also explain why they were
sensitive to the numerical value even in judging
expressions with an incongruent statement framing: the
announced negative outcome would then have raised their
awareness of the consequences, their judgement being
therefore contaminated by their anticipation of what they
should do.
This explanation is consistent with some recent
developments in probabilistic abilities studies. Starting
with Piaget and Inhelder (1951), who stated that children
cannot use probabilities until 7 years old, becoming really
efficient after 10 years old, it had long been considered
that children were unable to reason in probabilistic terms.
But although some authors confirmed children’s
difficulties to differentiate between certitude and
possibility until early adolescence (e.g., Fischbein, Nello,
& Marino, 1991), others showed (e.g., Girotto &
Gonzalez, 2008) that children can use probabilities to
make decisions. So children seem able to take
probabilities into account to do daily tasks even if they are
not able to reason formally about them. As we evoked
above, this could be because they become aware of
consequences when it comes to decisions. It could be also
-and it could also be the case in our study- due to some
difficulties expressing their judgement in the format task,
even if this judgement is accurate enough to make
appropriate decisions. Here we have to remember that
children are not taught about probabilities before the very
end of primary school. Hence their representation of

probabilities has not been shaped yet according to formal
rules.
A methodological explanation, however, remains to be
discussed. We decided not to counterbalance the two tasks
in reference to previous studies (Schlottmann & Tring,
2005). However, because we observed age-differences in
the first task but not in the second one, the issue of a
potential order effect has to be considered. Nevertheless if
the apparition of an effect of the numerical value was due
to some familiarization with the material, we would
expect the numerical value to have had first an effect with
the congruent statement framing cases because they were
affirmative. Indeed negation is considered as more costly
to process (see Kaup 2006, for a review), therefore we can
assume that it is treated with more difficulty by children.
Furthermore such a familiarization effect should have
appeared only in the second task, given that combinations
of directionality, numerical value and statement framing
was given pseudo-randomly: if a familiarization with the
material occurred during the judgement task, making
children more accurate at the end of it, this could not be
observable by a specific pattern such as the one we found.
The adults’ results, expected by our hypothesis, are also
interesting in the context of verbal probabilities’ theories.
Whereas the semantic-pragmatic view considers the
directionality as important a feature as the numerical
value, what we will call the formalist view considers that
the directionality is a feature only depending on the
numerical value (Budescu, Karelitz & Wallsten, 2003).
Thus according to this view positive verbal probabilities
express only high levels of probability, and negative ones
only low levels. By asking people to judge what we
thought to be incongruent verbal probabilities (positive
ones carrying a low numerical value and negative ones
carrying a high numerical value), we found that adults can
judge some positive verbal probabilities as meaning a low
level of probability, and some negative ones as meaning a
high level of probability. Thus directionality appears to us
as an independent feature of verbal probabilities.
Such a claim could be confirmed by adding pragmatic
variables to the interpretation of verbal probabilities.
According to the Relevance Principle (Sperber & Wilson,
1986), the directionality could be interpreted as a
deliberated choice of the speaker, indicating that there has
to be a reason why he chose this directionality rather than
the other. Thus a benevolent speaker, who should be
considered as willing to help the listener, should prompt a
response driven by the directionality. Conversely a
malevolent speaker, who should be considered as willing
to trick the listener, should prompt a response driven by
the numerical value. Another distinction between
epistemic and physical uncertainty (e.g., Robinson,
Rowley, Beck, Carroll & Apperly, 2006) in this same
paradigm should prompt more reliance on the
directionality when the uncertainty is epistemic (i.e. when
the listener is the only one to not know the outcome) than
when it is physical (i.e. nobody knows the outcome). Such

1125

results would demonstrate the pragmatic dimension of the
directionality.
Finally further developmental investigation will have to
be conducted to understand the factors which will help
taking into account the numerical value systematically.
Younger children in this perspective should only show
sensitivity to the directionality, whereas older children
should start to use the numerical value in every case.
Especially once taught formally about probabilities, they
should become able to express their probability
judgements in a way similar to adults.
As already observed with probabilities themselves,
children can make rational choices based on verbal
probabilities, though they cannot express judgements in a
formal way. Adults, while making rational choices and
expressing formal judgements, showed patterns sustaining
the semantic-pragmatic view and the independence of the
directionality regarding the numerical value of verbal
probabilities.

References
Anscombre, J., & Ducrot, O. (1983). L'argumentation
dans la langue. Bruxelles, Belgique: Pierre Mardaga.
Bonnefon, J.F., & Villejoubert, G. (2006). Tactful, or
doubtful? Expectations of politeness explain the
severity bias in the interpretation of probability phrases.
Psychological Science, 17, 747-751.
Budescu, D. V., Karelitz, T. M., & Wallsten, T. S. (2003).
Predicting the directionality of probability words from
their membership functions. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 16, 159-180.
Champaud, C., & Bassano, D. (1987). Argumentative and
informative functions of french intensity modifiers
"presque" (almost), ''à peine" (just, barely) and "à peu
près" (about): An experimental study of children and
adults. European Bulletin of Cognitive Psychology, 7,
605-631.
Erev, I., & Cohen, B. L. (1990). Verbal versus numerical
probabilities: Efficiency, biases, and the preference
paradox. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 45, 1-18.
Fischbein, E., Nello, M.S., & Marino, M.S. (1991).
Factors affecting probabilistic judgements in children
and adolescents. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
22, 523-549.
Girotto, V., & Gonzalez, M. (2008). Children’s
understanding of posterior probability. Cognition, 106,
325-344.
Honda, H., & Yamagishi, K. (2006). Directional verbal
probabilities : Inconsistencies between preferential
judgments and numerical meanings. Experimental
Psychology, 53, 161-170.
Juanchich, M. (2007). [Pilot study of adults‘ verbal
probabilities’ numerical judgement]. Unpublished raw
data.
Kaup, B. (2006). What psycholinguistic negation research
tells us about the nature of the working memory

representations utilized in language comprehension. In
H. Pishwa (Ed.), Language and memory: Aspects of
knowledge representation (pp. 313-357). Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Lété, B., Sprenger-Charolles, L., & Colé, P. (2004).
Manulex [Data file]. Disponible sur le site internet du
laboratoire Études des Mécanismes Cognitifs:
http://unpc.univ-lyon2.fr/lete/manulex/Manulex.htm.
Moxey, L. M., & Sanford, A. J. (2000). Communicating
quantities: A review of psycholinguistic evidence of
how expressions determine perspectives. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 237-255.
Mullet, E., & Rivet, I. (1991). Comprehension of verbal
probability expressions in children and adolescents.
Language & Communication, 11, 217-225.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1951). La genèse de l’idée de
hasard chez l’enfant. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.
Robinson, E., Rowley, M., Beck, S., Carroll, D., &
Apperly, I. (2006). Children's sensitivity to their own
relative ignorance: Handling of possibilities under
epistemic and physical uncertainty. Child Development,
77, 1642-1655.
Sanford, A. J., Fay, N., Stewart, A., & Moxey, L. (2002).
Perspective in statements of quantity, with implications
for consumer psychology. Psychological Science, 13,
130-134.
Schlottmann, A., & Tring, J. (2005). How children reason
about gains and losses: Framing effects in judgement
and choice. Swiss Journal of Psychology, 64, 153-171.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance :
Communication and cognition. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1995). Yes, but it is uncertain:
Direction and communicative intention of verbal
probabilistic terms. Acta Psychologica, 88, 233-258.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1999). The directionality of
verbal probability expressions: Effects on decisions,
predictions, and probabilistic reasoning. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 80, 155-190.
Villejoubert G., Almond L. & Alison L. (2009).
Interpreting claims in offender profiles: The role of
probability phrases, base rates and perceived
dangerousness. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 23, 3654.
Wallsten, T., Budescu, D., Rapoport, A., Zwick, R., &
Forsyth, B. (1986). Measuring the vague meanings of
probability terms. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 115, 348-365.
Watson, J., & Moritz, J. (2003). The development of
comprehension of chance language: Evaluation and
interpretation. School Science and Mathematics, 103,
65-81.
Weber, E. U., & Hilton, D. J. (1990). Contextual Effects
in the interpretations of probability words: Perceived
base rate and severity of events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 16, 781-789.

1126

