UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cross-Cultural Study of Hindsight Bias and Conditional Probabilistic Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5dk575r0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Adachi, Kuniko
Soo Do, Kyung
Kawasaki, Yayoi
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hyperintentionality in schizophrenia: An fMRI study
Bruno G. Bara (bruno.bara@psych.unito.it)
Center for Cognitive Science, Neuroscience Institute of Turin, University of Turin,
via Po 14, 10123 Turin, Italy

Angela Ciaramidaro (angela.ciaramidaro@psych.unito.it)
Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, University of Turin,

Mauro Adenzato (adenzato@psych.unito.it)
Center for Cognitive Science, Neuroscience Institute of Turin, University of Turin,

Nenad Vasic (nenad.vasic@uni-ulm.de)
Department of Psychiatry, University of Ulm,

Rita B. Ardito (ardito@psych.unito.it)
Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, University of Turin,

Susanne Erk (serk@uni-bonn.de)
Department of Psychiatry, Division of Medical Psychology, University of Bonn,

Henrik Walter (henrik.walter@ukb.uni-bonn.de)
Department of Psychiatry, Division of Medical Psychology, University of Bonn,

temporo-parietal regions (TPJ) (Ciaramidaro et al. ,2007;
Frith, 2004; Saxe, 2006), which we will call th ToM
network. ToM deficits are prominent in autism (BaronCohen, 1995) but have also been found to be impaired in
patients with schizophrenia (Brune, 2005). Frith (1992)
proposed that certain psychotic symptoms associated with
schizophrenia reflect a deficit in the ability of mentalizing
and claims that this is the result of a failure of patients to
monitor their own and others’ mental states and
behaviour. It has been argued paranoid patients may be
characterized by hyperintentionality. Abu-Akel and
Bailey (2000) speak about “hyper ToM: Whereas healthy
persons are able to reflect on the appropriateness and
correctness of these more or less automatic attributions,
patients with paranoid schizophrenia might over-attribute
significance and intentions to events, person and objects.
To date, only few studies have investigated ToM tasks in
patients with schizophrenia using cartoons (Brüne et al.,
2008; Brunet et al., 2003), and empathy and forgiveness
judgments (Lee et al., 2006). These studies yielded
inconsistent results with hypo- (Brunet et al., 2003; Lee et
al., 2006) as well as hyperactivation (Brüne et al., 2008)
of nodes of the ToM network, in particular in the MPFC.
Here we investigate brain activation in a homogeneous
group with paranoid schizophrenia for non-social and
social ToM tasks with a validated experimental setting
(Walter et al., 2004; Ciaramidaro et al., 2007) using three
different types of intention (private intentions, prospective
social intention, communicative intentions) and a physical
causation control condition. We hypothesize a
dysfunction in the mentalizing network in terms of

Abstract
In this fMRI study, we investigated Theory of Mind (ToM)
in patients with paranoid schizophrenia. We hypothesized
that the network supporting the representation of intentions
is dysfunctional in patients with schizophrenia dependent
on the type of intention involved. We used a paradigm
including a control condition (physical causation) and three
intention conditions (private intention, prospective social
intention and communicative intentions) differing in the
degree of social interaction. Patients showed significantly
less activation in three regions typically activated in ToM
tasks, i.e. paracingulate cortex and bilateral temporoparietal junctions. However, this dysfunction was
dependent on the type of intention represented, i.e. was
present only for social but not for non-social intentions.
Moreover, part of the reduced activation was related to the
fact that there was no signal drop in these regions for the
physical causality condition as usually found in controls.
This may be due to the tendency of schizophrenic patients
to attribute intentionality to physical objects.
Keywords: Schizophrenia, Theory of Mind, Social
interaction, Communication, Intention, fMRI.

Introduction

Theory of Mind (ToM) is the cognitive ability to
understand others as intentional agents by inferring and
thereby representing their mental states (Frith 2004;
Premack & Woodruff, 1978). Functional imaging studies
in healthy controls have shown four key regions involved
in ToM: The medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), the
posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus and bilateral

2855

reduced brain activations in the intentional conditions, in
particular for communicative intentions (CInt), because
the schizophrenic patients’ attitude of “over-attributing”
intentions seems to be related to violations of pragmatic
rules in their use of language and incorrect inferences of
communicative intentions (Brüne, 2005).

glasses. Stimuli were presented with
software (Neurobehavioral Systems).

Presentation

Behavioral Data Analysis
Participant reaction times and response accuracy were
measured during scanning. Data were analyzed in a oneway ANOVA with subsequent comparisons between
means, using Bonferroni’s post hoc test.

Methods
Subjects

fMRI data acquisition and analysis

We studied 12 right-handed patients with paranoid
schizophrenia according to ICD-10 (F 20.0)/DSM-IV (6
females, mean age 29.41, PANNS total 73.75) recruited
from among the inpatients treated at the Department of
Psychiatry at the University of Ulm, as well as a matched
control group with mean age 24.75 years (SD 2.63). The
University of Ulm’s ethics committee approved the study.

fMRI data were acquired using a 1.5 Tesla Siemens
Magnetom Symphony whole-body MRI System equipped
with a head volume coil. T2* weighted functional MR
images were obtained using echo-planar imaging in an
axial orientation. Image size was 64 x 64 pixels, with a
field of view of 192 mms. One volume covering the
whole brain consisted of 25 slices with 4mm slices
thickness and a 1mm gap. Time of repetition (TR) was
2.250 s, echo time (TE) was 40 ms. One session contained
257 volumes. Data pre-processing and statistical analysis
were conducted with SPM 2 (Statistical Parametric
Mapping, Wellcome Institute of Cognitive Neurology,
London, UK) and MATLAB 6.3 (MathWorks, Natick,
Massachusetts, USA) using standardised procedures
(Friston et al., 1995).
In a first level analysis each subject was analysed
separately. Regressors were defined for story-phase and
choice-phase for each of the four conditions separately as
box cars convolved with the canonical hemodynamic
response function implemented in SPM2. Realignment
parameters were included in the model. Contrast images
for each condition (Ph-C, PInt, PSInt and CInt) were
calculated by using the regressors for story and choice
phases together. To account for interindividual variance
and in order to generalise inferences (Holmes & Friston,
1998), we conducted a second level analysis using an
ANOVA and contrasting each of the intentional
conditions (PInt; PSInt and CInt) with the control
condition (Ph-C). Group comparisons were also computed
using an ANOVA using the same contrasts utilised in the
within-group comparisons. Results are from second level
random effect analysis (ANOVA) and we chose an
uncorrected threshold of p < 0.001 at the voxel level,
corrected for extent (p < 0.05) at the cluster level (Forman
et al., 1995).

Experimental design
In our task, participants were asked to look at short comic
strips and then choose a picture that showed the only
logical story ending. Comic strips pertained to the
following experimental categories: The first category
were intentions of single agent acting in isolation, i.e.
‘private intentions’ (PInt), for example, changing a
broken bulb in order to read a book. The second category
were intentions of a single agent acting in isolation (like
in the PInt condition) which however, intends to socially
interact (prospected social interaction, PSInt), for
example a single person preparing a romantic dinner. A
third category were ‘communicative intentions’ (CInt),
i.e. intentions involving two persons interacting, for
example a person asking for a glass of water to another
person. The CInt condition does not require a second
order ToM. As a control condition we used physical
stories depicting non intentional physical causality (PhC), for example, a ball blown by a gust of wind knocks
over and breaks several bottles. We presented comic strips
consisting of a sequence of three pictures (the storyphase); each picture was displayed for 3 seconds. The
story phase was followed by a choice-phase, during which
three possible solutions were displayed simultaneously for
7 seconds. Thus, one trial (one comic strip) lasted 16 sec
(story-phase plus choice-phase). Participants indicated
their choice by pressing one of three buttons as quickly as
possible. Only one picture represented the correct answer.
The two uncorrected pictures were constructed according
to the following principle: The first foil picture showed a
possible, but illogical ending. The second one included
the objects of the last scene of the story-phase rearranged
physically without containing a real action. Eleven comic
strips were presented for each of the four conditions,
summing up to a total of 44 trials presented in pseudo
randomized order. The experimental protocol was
administered in two sessions of 22 trials each. Before
scanning each participant received training During
scanning, participants wore luminescent crystal display

Results
Behavioral results
Analysis of reaction times in ms (for correct answers
only) showed a main effect of group: Patients were slower
than the control group for F(1,22)=9.105, P = 0.006 but
there was no interaction between reaction time and group
(F(3,66)=0.593, p = 0.62). Similar results were obtained
for response accuracy: patients made more errors than the
control group (F(1,22)=37.8, p < 0.0001) but there was no
interaction between condition and group (F(3,66)=0.39, p

2856

= 0.75).. T-tests for reaction time revealed the following
results: For Ph-C p= 0.026, for PInt p= 0.013, for PSInt
p= 0, 011 and CInt p= 0.002; T-tests for accuracy for all
four comparisons p>0.001.

patients exhibiting “hyper-ToM”leading these patients to
attribute intentions to objects, treating things like persons.
Impairment of neural mechanisms supporting ToM
The present study aimed at investigating the dysfunction
of the ToM network in paranoid schizophrenia and its
modulation by different intention types: PInt, PSInt and
CInt. Confirming our hypothesis, we found a dysfunction
of the ToM network.

Neuroimaging results
ANOVA between groups comparing contrasts of interest
in controls and patients revealed significantly elevated
activations only in the control group compared to the
patient group and not vice versa. The contrast PInt versus
Ph-C reveals no differences between the two groups in
nodes of the ToM network. In the contrast PSInt versus
Ph-C the right TPJ and MPFC were activated significantly
more in the control group and the contrast CInt versus PhC indicates significant group differences in the right and
left TPJ and the MPFC (Figure1).

Healthy Controls

Paranoid Patients
R TPJ

0.7

0.7

0.5

0.5

0.3

0.3

0.1

0.1

-0.1

-0.1

-0.3

-0.3
-0.5

-0.5

PhC PInt PSInt CInt

PhC PInt PSInt CInt

MPFC

0 .5

0.5
0 .3

0.3
0 .1

0.1
-0 .1

-0.1
-0.3

-0 .3

-0.5

-0 .5

PhC PInt PSInt CInt

L TPJ

0.4

Figure 1: Regions in which healthy controls showed
relatively more cerebral activation compared with
paranoid patients for PInt, PSInt, CInt versus control
condition (Ph-C). 2nd level ANOVA, p<0.001
uncorrected, p<0.05 at the cluster level.

PhC PInt PSInt CInt

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

-0.2

-0.2

PhC PInt PSInt CInt

PhC PInt PSInt CInt

Figure 2: Mean activation effects of the contrast CInt vs
Ph-C for right TPJ, MPFC and left TPJ. The activation
effects were extracted from the second level betweengroup ANOVA, P < 0.001 uncorrected, P < 0.05 at the
cluster level. Red: Healthy group; Yellow: Paranoid
patients. Dashed circle indicate the beta parameters for the
control condition (Ph-C).

A clearer picture emerges if the mean activation sizes per
condition and group are plotted (compare Figure 2):
Whereas the control group also exhibited parametric
activation in this region, the patient group showed
positive beta parameters for the Ph-C and for the CInt
condition and negative beta parameters that were similar
for the PInt and PSInt conditions.

Our results are consistent with findings by Brunet et al.
(2003) using a similar cartoon paradigm who also found
less activation in the right MPFC in patients with
schizophrenia. However, as we will discuss below, the
findings of Brunet et al. (2003) mixed the types of
intentions which might explain why they could not
demonstrate hypo-activation of the TPJ. Similar findings
have been described by Marjoram et al. (2006) comparing
high risk subjects with and without psychotic symptoms.
In a recent study by Brüne et al. (2008) however,
increased activation of dorsomedial areas, left TPJ and
right temporal cortex were found in patients with

Discussion
Behavioural impairments
The patient group showed lower accuracy and increased
reaction times compared to the control group. However,
reduced performance was observed in all four conditions,
i.e. also the control condition (Ph-C). Brunet et al. (2003)
using a ToM task similar to ours, reported similar results,
i.e. reduced performance in ToM as well as the control
task. We assume these findings as a consequence of the

2857

schizophrenia compared to controls. Furthermore, the task
used by these authors did not show a robust activation of
the ToM network in healthy controls, who showed no
activation of the MPFC, perhaps due to the fact that
activation and control task were quite similar. One
strength of our paradigm is that it allows to investigate
group differences for different types of intentions. For the
PInt condition, representing the most simple ToM
condition, we found no group differences. Instead, during
PSInt, significant group differences in the right TPJ and
the MPFC were revealed. Although both intentions (PInt
and PSInt) share a common element, namely a single
agent acting in isolation, only PSInt requires the
representation of a social goal. Also in CInt, there was an
additional group difference in activation in the left TPJ
(together with the right TPJ and the MPFC). How can we
understand these groups differences which are restricted
to social intentions only? Our results show that as soon as
social interaction is involved (present or foreseen) neural
differences in activation become apparent. This is true for
the most basic structure of the ToM network, namely the
right TPJ (Saxe & Wexler, 2005). Significant group
differences are also found in the MPFC. It has been
argued that the MPFC serves the purpose of decoupling
mental states from their environment (Brüne, 2005;
Brunet-Gouet & Decety, 2006). This function helps
subjects to distinguish between what is happening in the
outer world and what in the inner world. Patients with
schizophrenia show an aberrant pattern of activation for
social intentions, probably because they are not able of
decoupling and have problems distinguishing between
intentions of others interacting and their own, resulting in
misattributions. In the CInt condition group differences
were most pronounced and incorporated additionally the
left TPJ. The left TPJ has been shown to be specifically
activated for communicative intentions (Ciaramidaro et
al., 2007).
Interestingly, our data reveal further information related
to the control condition (Ph-C). Looking at the beta
parameters in Figure 2, it is obvious that the lack of
activation in the MPFC anf TPJ for the contrast CInt vs.
Ph-C is not only due to decreased activation in these
regions in the CInt condition, but also to relatively
increased beta values in the Ph-C condition. In accordance
with the above mentioned hypothesis that paranoid
schizophrenic patients may have a hyperactive intention
detector, we can explain our results as follows: Paranoid
patients do not deactivate their intention detector when
they are solving stories involving physical causality but
these patients are always in an ‘online’ modus of ToM.
This would also be the case in contexts without
intentional agents, where no ToM is required. Blakemore
et al. (2003) reported that patients with delusions of
persecution attributed intentional behaviour to moving
shapes in conditions where controls saw no intentionality.
These authors propose that patients with schizophrenia
perceive agency where others see none. The same process

took place when our patient group observed Ph-C stories.
An exaggerated sense of agency seems to characterize
patients with delusions of persecution, and this tendency
to perceive agency where there is none may be a more
general feature of schizophrenia (Frith, 2005).
We provide evidence that the dysfunction in the
intentional network is partially mediated by an intention
detector which became hyper-active in the paranoid
interpretation of the physical world. Hence, we agree with
the idea of “hyper ToM” as proposed by Abu-Akel and
Bailey (2000): “An attitude to associate with quantitative
overgeneration of hypotheses or overattribution of mental
states” also when ToM is not demanded.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Regione Piemonte (Bando
regionale per la ricerca scientifica 2004, cod. A239) and
by University of Turin, Ricerca scientifica finanziata 2008
(Correlati cognitivi e neurali della cognizione sociale).

References
Baron-Cohen S. (1995) Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism
and Theory of Mind: Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Blakemore SJ, Boyer P, Pachot-Clouard M, Meltzoff A,
Segebarth C, Decety J. (2003) The detection of
contingency and animacy from simple animations in the
human brain. Cerebral Cortex, 13, 837-44
Brüne M. (2005) "Theory of mind" in schizophrenia: a
review of the literature. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 31, 21-42
Brüne M, Lissek S, Fuchs N, Witthaus H, Peters S, et al.
(2008) An fMRI study of theory of mind in schizophrenic
patients with "passivity" symptoms. Neuropsychologia, 7,
1992-2001
Brunet-Gouet E, Decety J. (2006) Social brain dysfunctions
in schizophrenia: a review of neuroimaging studies.
Psychiatry Research, 148,75-92
Brunet E, Sarfati Y, Hardy-Bayle MC, Decety J. (2003)
Abnormalities of brain function during a nonverbal theory
of mind task in schizophrenia. Neuropsychologia, 41,
1574-82
Ciaramidaro A, Adenzato M, Enrici I, Erk S, Pia L, et al.
(2007) The intentional network: how the brain reads
varieties of intentions. Neuropsychologia, 45, 3105-13
Frith C. (2005) The self in action: lessons from delusions of
control. Consciousness and Cognition, 14, 752-70
Frith CD. (2004) Schizophrenia and theory of mind.
Psychological Medecine, 34, 385-9
Frith CD, (1992) The Cognitive Neuropsychology of
Schizophrenia. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd., Hove.
Lee KH, Brown WH, Egleston PN, Green RD, Farrow TF,
et al. 2006. A functional magnetic resonance imaging
study of social cognition in schizophrenia during an acute
episode and after recovery. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 163, 1926-33
Leslie AM. (1987) Pretence and representation: The origins
of ‘theory of mind' Psychological Review, 94, 412–26

2858

Marjoram D, Job DE, Whalley HC, Gountouna VE,
McIntosh AM, et al. (2006) A visual joke fMRI
investigation into Theory of Mind and enhanced risk of
schizophrenia. Neuroimage, 31, 1850-8
Premack D, Woodruff G. (1978) Does the chimpanzee have
a theory of mind? Behaviour & Brain Science, 1, 515-26
Saxe R. 2006. Uniquely human social cognition. Current
Opinion of Neurobiology, 16, 235-9

Saxe R, Wexler A. (2005) Making sense of another mind:
the role of the right temporo-parietal junction.
Neuropsychologia, 43, 1391-9
Walter H, Adenzato M, Ciaramidaro A, Enrici I, Pia L, Bara
BG. 2004. Understanding intentions in social interaction:
the role of the anterior paracingulate cortex. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 1854-63

2859

