UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cyclic Sequential Sampling Model of Bistable Auditory Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2gx63782

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Habibi, Assal
Lee, MIchael

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cyclic Sequential Sampling Model of Bistable Auditory Perception
Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Assal Habibi (habibia@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 3151 Social Sciences Plaza A
University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697-5100

Abstract
We develop a cyclic sequential sampling model of
bistable perception, based on the pioneering work of
Vickers (1972). The model has two key parameters:
a drift rate that measures the information in favor of
one percept over the other; and a boundary separation
that measures the evidence required by an observer to
establish a percept. We implement the model within a
graphical Bayesian framework, and apply it to data from
several participants measuring their bistable perception
for ambiguous auditory stimuli. We show that the model
fits the distribution of latencies between perceptual
reversals well, that the inferred drift rate parameter
changes systematically as the auditory stimulus is
manipulated to favor one percept over the other, and
that the boundary separation parameter changes over
participants to measure individual differences in their
bistable perception.
Keywords: Bistable perception, bistable audition,
sequential sampling models, response time modeling,
diffusion model

Introduction
Bistable perception is an intriguing and important psychological phenomenon, in which a single stimulus supports two different interpretations. The key characteristic
of perceptual bistability is stimulus ambiguity. In order
for bistability to occur there must be more than one plausible alternative inherent in the stimulus presented to the
perceptual system.
In vision, bistable perception can be achieved through
ambiguous depth cues, as in the Necker cube (Necker,
1832) which is a two-dimensional representation of a
three-dimensional cube, or through binocular rivalry
(Helmholtz, 1925), where each eye is presented with
a different and incompatible image. In both cases observers experience clear switches in perception, in the
absence of any change in stimuli.
Traditional accounts of bistable phenomena propose
that the basis of alternation in perception is a peripheral or sensory process, where the perceptual dominance
of one stimulus is the result of activation of subset of
neurons encoding that stimulus while simultaneously inhibiting those that perceive the alternative stimulus. Over
time, fatigue or satiation in the system pushes the subjective state to reverse (Koehler & Wallach, 1944). More recent models suggest an alternative view of bistable phe-

nomena under which alternation is a sign of responses to
active, programmed events initiated by brain areas that
integrate sensory and non-sensory information to guide
behavior (Leopold & Logothetis, 1999).
Under this more recent view, bistable perception can
be considered a result of the exploration of the sensory environments, and so reflects a fundamental aspect
of cognition supporting flexible decision making (Kim,
Grabowecky, & Suzuki, 2006). In addition, there is considerable research interest in bistable perception from the
perspective of investigating correlates of conscious perception, since changes in perceptual awareness can be
experienced in the absence of changes in stimulus.
According to Leopold and Logothetis (1999), the key
characteristics of bistability are exclusivity, randomness
and inevitability. Exclusivity refers to the existence of
two possible yet mutually exclusive alternative interpretations of the sensory input. Randomness characterizes
the statistical distribution of the time spent in each percept. Inevitability refers to the finite duration of perceptual dominance. That is, even when the intention is to
hold onto one interpretation, observers only have limited
volitional control on perceptual alternation.
As a concrete example of these properties, the alternation of bistable perception for the Necker cube is typically estimated to be equally distributed between the two
percepts, and the rate of reversals is estimated to level off
to an average of 16–20 times per minute after a period of
initial learning.

Auditory Bistability
In this paper, our focus in on modeling data from an auditory perception task that induces a bistability. Although
audition is less studied than vision, it is a basic and important question for cognitive science to understanding
how people perceive ambiguous auditory stimuli. In language, for example, listeners must segment words and
phrases from the ongoing speech stream in order to make
sense of the incoming signal. In music, comprehending
melodic structure involves segmenting tone sequences
into smaller coherent chunks in order to discern larger
patterns.
The bistable phenomenon we use involves a series of
low tones (L), high tones (H) and silences (-) being presented one after the other with a fixed interstimulus interval (i.e., L-H-L-H-L-H). When the frequency difference

2669

High-Low

a

v

Low-High
δ
Time
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the cyclic sequential sampling model.
between L and H, denoted ∆ f , is small and repetition rate
is slow, listeners typically report a single LHL “galloping” pattern. When ∆ f is large enough and the repetition
rate is sufficiently fast, listeners report hearing two separate streams of tones, each in a metronome-like rhythm
(i.e., L-L-L-L- and H-H-H-H-). At intermediate ∆ f , the
stimulus is ambiguous and perception can alternate between interpretations of one and two streams following
the initial buildup (Pressnitzer & Hupé, 2006). The perception can alternate between interpretations LH and HL
(Bregman & Campbell, 1971). A number of recent studies (e.g., Cusack, 2005; Gutschalk et al., 2005; Snyder,
Alain, & Picton, 2006; Winkler, Takegata, & Sussman,
2005) have similarly exploited the bistability of auditory
perception in investigating the neural correlates of auditory perceptual organization.

Overview
Our model of perceptual bistability uses the sequential sampling framework developed in mathematical psychology. The basic idea is to assume people accrue
information from a stimulus by ongoing observation,
and, even when a percept is established, continually reevaluate the incoming information in terms of competing
possible perceptual interpretations. For ambiguous stimuli, this process of re-evaluation will eventually favor the
rival interpretation, at which point a perceptual reversal
occurs. We develop a formal quantitative model implementing these ideas, and evaluate it against data from a
number of auditory L-H-L-H- sequences, in which the
lengths of the inter-stimulus silence intervals are systematically manipulated to bias in favor of one percept over
the other.
The structure of the paper is as follows: In the next
section we describe cyclic sequential sampling models,
as they can be applied to modeling bistable perceptual
decision-making, and provide the formal details of our
model. We then describe the experimental procedures
used to gather test data, and apply our the model to the
data. We discuss the ability of the model to fit the data,

and infer meaningful parameter values. We conclude
with a discussion of the usefulness of the modeling approach in measuring and understanding bistable perception.

A Cyclic Sequential Sampling Model
Sequential sampling models are successful and widelyused accounts of human decision-making. In these models, the decision-maker is assumed to sample information
from a stimulus, until some critical level of total evidence
has been obtained internally, and an overt behavioral response is triggered. In this way, sequential sampling
models provide a detailed account of the time course of
decision-making, and make predictions about a range of
experimentally observable measures, including decision
accuracy, response time, and response confidence (e.g.,
Busemeyer & Rapoport, 1988; Ratcliff, 1978; Vickers,
1979)
Our cyclic sequential sampling model is a modification of the standard approach, suited to a bistable perception task rather than a general two-choice decision task,
and is directly inspired by the model proposed by Vickers
(1972). A schematic representation is shown in Figure 1,
which shows four different possible sample paths moving from left to right. Each of paths moves according to
evidence sampled from a stimulus that can be perceived
in two states. The two boundaries, shown by the solid
lines, correspond to these states. We label these ‘highlow’ and ‘low-high’, corresponding to the auditory bistability stimuli that are the focus of this study.
Unlike a standard sequential sampling model, each
sampled paths only terminates when it reaches the upper boundary. This is because the participant currently
maintains one of the two bistable perceptions, and an
overt response is only triggered when sufficient evidence
is gathered for the alternative perception. In Figure 1,
the participant begins with the ‘low-high’ percept corresponding to the lower boundary, and registers a changein-percept response to ‘high-low’ only when the upper
boundary is reached. The arrivals of the sample paths

2670

i participants
ai

δi
j conditions
vj

θij

k trials
xijk

µijk

λijk

tijk

bijk

Figure 2: Graphical model implementation.

give rise to the distribution of perceptual reversal times
shown by the histogram above the upper boundary.
Notice that if a sample path reaches the lower boundary corresponding to the current percept, it is reset to the
starting evidence value between the two boundaries, and
the evidence accumulation process continues. This was a
basic insight provided by Vickers (1972), and is why the
model is called a cyclic variant of the sequential sampling approach.
As shown in Figure 1, there are three parameters in the
model. The drift rate v is the mean of the Gaussian distribution from which evidence values are sampled, and
corresponds to the relative level of evidence the stimulus
provides for one perceptual interpretation over the other.
The boundary separation a is the difference between the
two decision boundaries, and corresponds to the level of
evidence a participant needs to reach a perceptual interpretation. Finally, the offset δ captures the component
of perceptual reversal time observed experimentally that
is not due to the workings of the internal decision process, but rather to other factors such as movement time
to record a response.

Implementation as a Graphical Model
We implement our cyclic sequential sampling model using the formalism provided by graphical modeling (see
Lee, 2008; Shiffrin, Lee, Kim, & Wagenmakers, 2008,
for recent tutorials aimed at cognitive scientists), implemented in WinBUGS (Lunn, Thomas, Best, & Spiegelhalter, 2000). This allows us to perform fully Bayesian
inference on our model using experimental data.
The graphical model is shown in Figure 2. Each node
in the graph corresponds to a variable, and their dependencies are captured by the graph structure, with children

depending only on their parents. Following Lee (2008),
circular and square nodes denote continuous and discrete
variables; unfilled and filled nodes denote unobserved
(i.e., latent parameters) and observed (i.e., data) variables; encompassing plates represent independent replications of a part of the graph within the model, corresponding to numbers of participants doing numbers of
experimental conditions; and double-bordered nodes are
deterministic functions of other nodes.
Our graphical model implementation only approximates the response time distributions described by the
cyclic decision model. The basis of the approximation
comes from observing that the response time distribution
at each boundary is a mixture of response time distributions over paths that reached the boundary after 0 , 1, .. .
resets. We assume each of these mixture components
has a Gaussian distribution, which makes the model very
tractable.
Formally, in the graphical model there is boundary
separation ai and offset δi for the ith participant, and
the drift rate v j for the jth condition. A standard result (e.g., Wagenmakers, van der Maas, & Grasman,
2007) is that the probability of reaching the upper boundary for the ith participant in the jth condition is θi j =
1/ (1 + exp(ai v j )). The number of resets needed before
the boundary is reached on the kth trial is therefore sampled as xi jk ∼ Geometric (θi j ) for the upper boundary and
xi jk ∼ Geometric (1 − θi j ) for the lower boundary. In the
graphical model, the appropriate boundary is given by an
indicator variable bi jk for the ithe participant in the jth
condition at the kth trial, which is a known part of the
experimental data.
For the Gaussian approximation, we rely on recent analytic results (Wagenmakers et al., 2007) giving the mean

2671

Density

Time

Figure 3: Approximation to the response time distribution by a mixture of progressively less weighted, increasing
mean and increasing variance Gaussians.

Experiment

and variance for the distribution of time taken to reach a
boundary from the starting point half way between. The
mean is given by

Participants
The pilot data collected to develop and evaluate our
model were collected from four naive participants.

ai (1 − exp(−ai v j ))
,
2v j (1 + exp(−ai v j ))

Stimuli

and the variance by
2v3j (exp (ai v j ) + 1)2
ai (2ai v j exp (−ai v j ) + exp (−2ai v j ) − 1)

.

Accordingly, we assume a reversal time coming from xi jk
resets, and after a fixed offset δi , has mean
µi jk = δi + xi jk

ai (1 − exp(−ai v j ))
,
2v j (1 + exp(−ai v j ))

and variance
λi jk = xi jk

2v3j (exp (ai v j ) + 1)2
ai (2ai v j exp (−ai v j ) + exp (−2ai v j ) − 1)

.

So, finally, our graphical model assumes the observed
reversal time ti jk on the kth reversal of the ith participant in the jth condition, is distributed as ti jk ∼
Gaussian µi jk , λi jk .
We emphasize this does not correspond to assuming the total reversal time distribution has a Gaussian
form, because we are mixing a series of Gaussians, and
this mixture has an appropriate negatively skewed shape.
This approach to approximation is shown in Figure 3,
using the drift rate v = 0.06 and boundary separation
a = 1 as a concrete example. This gives a probability
of θ = .515. The broken lines correspond to the Gaussian distributions for k = 1, 2, 3 and 4 resets (using the
same color coding as Figure 1), which covers more than
97% of the total probability according to the Geometric distribution. The means and variances of these Gaussians are given by the approximations in the graphical
model, and the relative probability of each Gaussian in
determining the overall mixture is given by the Geometric distribution. The solid black line is the weighted sum
of the Gaussian components, and has the characteristic
negative skew of a response time distribution.

Stimuli were 60 s sequences, of three types, in which
tones alternated in amplitude. The first type was unbiased, with 250ms gaps between both tones. The second and third types were biased—towards HL and LH
respectively—by alternating between 150ms and 350ms
gaps, with the shorter gap corresponding to a bias towards that percept.
The low tone was a 440 Hz pure tone and the high tone
was a 660 Hz pure tone (10 ms rise/fall) with a duration
of 250 ms. A total of 60 trials were presented to each
participant, in a counter-balanced order. Stimuli were
generated in MATLAB, at CD quality (44.1 kHz sample rate) and were presented via earphones to both ears.
Sound levels were not measured, but were verified to be
easily audible to all participants.

Procedure
The participants were familiarized with the experiment
by hearing one example sequence. The experimental sequences were then presented in random order. The observer was asked to indicate their perceived grouping by
pressing the corresponding button (HL versus LH) on the
screen using a mouse. All the instructions were given
verbally in English.

Modeling Analysis
Our modeling results are based on 10,000 posterior samples, collected after a burn-in of 10,000 samples, and using multiple MCMC chains to assess convergence. Figure 4 show the ability of the model to fit the data. Each
panel corresponds to an individual participant, experiencing a specific type of reversal (i.e., either HL changing to LH, or vice versa), in a specific experimental condition (i.e., the three types of stimuli). The panels are
arranged in groups of four, corresponding to the four

2672

HL Biased

LH Biased

Density

HL to LH

LH to HL

Unbiased

AH

EH

MS

RC

0 10 20 30 40

Time (secs)

Figure 4: Posterior predictive fit of model to all data.

participants, and in major rows corresponding to reversal type, and columns corresponding to stimulus type.
Within each panel, the histograms represent the observed response times, and the solid line shows the
posterior predictive distribution of the model. The response times are longer when the stimulus is biased
against a percept, shorter when it is biased towards the
percept, and intermediate when there is no bias. The
model clearly captures these patterns. Different participants also have consistently different distributions across
the conditions—such as EH having longer inter-reversal
times—and the model also captures these patterns.
It is important to note that the posterior prediction
used in Figure 4 is not a maximized fit, as typically seen
in tests of sequential sampling models (e.g., Ratcliff &
Smith, 2004), but rather an averaged fit, taken over the
entire posterior parameter space, and so automatically
takes into account model complexity. This means the
ability of the model to fit all of the raw data well, as seen
in Figure 4, provides strong evidence that it has a basic
level of descriptive adequacy.
Figure 5 show the marginal posterior distributions for
the drift rate and boundary separation and parameters.
There is systematic variation in the drift rates over conditions, with the unbiased condition drift rate posterior
being centered on zero, while the biased conditions show
drift rates above and below zero, as expected. There is
essentially no overlap between the distributions, and it
is clear that the experimental bias manipulation had the
theoretically expected effect on drift rates. There is also
evidence of individual differences in the inferred boundary separation parameters, with, for example, participant

EH being inferred as requiring greater levels of evidence
before a perceptual reversal decision is made. Taken together, these parameter inferences demonstrative a selective influence property (e.g., Voss, Rothermund, & Voss,
2004) for our model, meaning that drift rate changes
when the stimulus changes, and boundary rates change
across participants.

Discussion
Our initial modeling results suggest that the cyclic sequential sampling approach can provide a good descriptive account of the distribution of inter-reversal times in
bistable perception, and can infer meaningful parameter values. This means the model promises to provide a
mechanism for furthering our understanding and ability
to measure bistable perceptual phenomena.
The two key parameters in the model are the drift rate
and boundary separation. The drift rate is a property
of the stimulus, and measures the evidence the stimulus provides for each possible ambiguous interpretation.
Our model allows this measure to be taken from behavioral data, and introduces the possibility of developing
theoretical accounts of how physical properties of the
stimulus (e.g., the inter-stimulus intervals) relate to its
psychological properties (i.e., its evidence for a percept).
The boundary separation is a property of the observer,
and measures the level of evidence required to alternate
between percepts. The ability of our model to infer these
values introduces the possibility of exploring individual
differences in bistable perception.
More generally, the initial success of our model supports using sequential sampling models as theoretical ac-

2673

−0.5

−0.25

AH
EH
MS
RC

Density

Density

Unbiased
LH Biased
HL Biased

0

0.25

0.5

2

Drift rate (v)

3

4

5

Boundary Separation (a)

Figure 5: Posterior distributions for the drift rate and boundary separation parameters.

counts of the time course of perceptual organization. A
particularly interesting finding is that the little-explored
cyclic sequential sampling mechanism seems to work
well. This mechanism assumes that decision-making
continually resets itself, to continue searching for an alternative understanding of available information, and so
formalizes a simple model of world change. It would
be interesting to explore whether cyclic sequential sampling models can be applied beyond the niche of bistable
perception, to more general and ubiquitous decisionmaking tasks in which the external environment continually changes and needs reinterpretation.

References
Bregman, A. S., & Campbell, J. (1971). Primary auditory stream segregation and perception of order in
rapid sequences of tones. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 89, 244-249.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Rapoport, A. (1988). Psychological
models of deferred decision making. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 32(2), 91–134.
Cusack, R. (2005). The intraparietal sulcus and perceptual organization. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 641-651.
Gutschalk, A., Micheyl, C., Melcher, J. R., Rupp, A.,
Scherg, M., & Oxenham, A. J. (2005). Neuromagnetic correlates of streaming in human auditory cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 53825388.
Helmholtz, H. V. (1925). Treatise on physiological optics
(Vol. 1). Dover.
Kim, Y. J., Grabowecky, M., & Suzuki, S. (2006).
Stochastic resonance in binocular rivalry. Vision
Research, 46, 392–406.
Koehler, W., & Wallach, H. (1944). Figural after-effects:
An investigation of visual processes. Journal of
the American Philosophical Society, 88, 269–357.
Lee, M. D. (2008). Three case studies in the Bayesian
analysis of cognitive models. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(1), 1–15.
Leopold, D. A., & Logothetis, N. K. (1999). Multistable phenomena: Changing views in perception.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 3(7), 254–264.

Lunn, D. J., Thomas, A., Best, N., & Spiegelhalter,
D. (2000). WinBUGS: A Bayesian modelling
framework: Concepts, structure, and extensibility.
Statistics and Computing , 10, 325–337.
Necker, L. A. (1832). Observations on some remarkable phenomena seen in Switzerland; and an optical phenomenon which occurs on viewing of a
crystal or geometric solid. Philosophy Magazine,
3, 329-337.
Pressnitzer, D., & Hupé, J. (2006). Temporal dynamics
of auditory and visual bistability reveal common
principles of perceptual organization. Current Biology, 16(13), 1351–1357.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59–108.
Ratcliff, R., & Smith, P. L. (2004). A comparison of sequential sampling models for two–choice reaction
time. Psychological Review, 111, 333–367.
Shiffrin, R. M., Lee, M. D., Kim, W.-J., & Wagenmakers,
E.-J. (2008). A survey of model evaluation approaches with a tutorial on hierarchical Bayesian
methods. Cognitive Science, 32(8), 1248–1284.
Snyder, J. S., Alain, C., & Picton, T. W. (2006). Effects
of attention on neuroelectric correlates of auditory
stream segregation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1–13.
Vickers, D. (1972). A cyclic decision model of perceptual alternation. Perception, 1(1), 31–48.
Vickers, D. (1979). Decision processes in visual perception. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Voss, A., Rothermund, K., & Voss, J. (2004). Interpreting the parameters of the diffusion model: An
empirical validation. Memory & Cognition, 32,
1206–1220.
Wagenmakers, E.-J., van der Maas, H. J. L., & Grasman,
R. P. P. P. (2007). An EZ–diffusion model for
response time and accuracy. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 14, 3–22.
Winkler, I., Takegata, R., & Sussman, E. (2005). Eventrelated brain potentials reveal multiple stages in
the perceptual organization of sound. Brain Research, 25, 291–299.

2674

