UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Dynamic Approach to Semantic Computation: Evidence from Event-Related Potentials and
Connectionist Attractor Networks
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8n65g4hx
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Amsel, Ben D.
Cree, George S.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

       A Dynamic Approach to Semantic Computation: Evidence from
       Event-Related Potentials and Connectionist Attractor Networks
                                                   Ben D. Amsel
                                           University of Toronto Scarborough
                                                  George S. Cree
                                           University of Toronto Scarborough
Abstract: What factors determine speed of word meaning computation, and what is the time course of each
factors influence? Implicated factors include correlations among, and distinctiveness of, semantic features, semantic
richness, and the structural organization of features into cortical regions (by modality and/or object domain). Event-
related potentials and connectionist attractor networks are well suited for this problem because they provide near-
continuous measurement during word meaning computation. We explored the dynamics of a recurrent attractor
network trained with verbal feature-based representations of concepts and show how feature-based statistical structure
(e.g., correlations among features) affects concept settling dynamically through time. We also analyzed ERPs during a
mental image-generation task using the identical items, incorporating measures of feature-based statistical structure,
semantic richness (e.g., imageability), and modality-specific knowledge types (e.g., number of visual features). Using
polynomial mixed-effects models, we demonstrate overlapping dynamic spatiotemporal effects of these measures, and
discuss implications for theories of knowledge representation.
                                                           2034

