UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A First-Person Perspective on a Parent-Child Social Interaction During Object Play

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2qf8k7h3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Pereira, Alfredo F.
Shen, Hongwei
Smith, Linda B.
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A First-Person Perspective on a Parent-Child Social Interaction During Object Play
Alfredo F. Pereira, Chen Yu, Linda B. Smith, Hongwei Shen (afpereir@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and Department of Cognitive Science
1101 E 10th St, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
knowledge that constrains attention and learning (Bloom,
2000).
We also view this situation as a context in which there is
considerable complexity, but we view the solution to that
complexity in terms of the coupled sensory-motor dynamics
of the participants. This joint activity happens in the
moment and is itself a source of constraints on cognitive
development (rather than mere noise to be overcome).
Accordingly, our research goal is to examine the natural
dynamic structure of real time experience as it evolves in
developing children’s active engagement with physical
objects and with social partners.

Abstract
We studied parent-child social interactions in a naturalistic
tabletop setting. Our approach was to analyze the real-time
sensorimotor dynamics of the social partners as they engage in
joint object play. From the child’s point of view, what she
perceives critically depends on her own and her social partner’s
actions, as well as on her actions on objects. These
interdependencies may scaffold learning if the perception-action
loops, both within a child and between the child and his social
partner, can simplify the environment by filtering irrelevant
information, for example while learning about objects.
In light of this general hypothesis, we report new findings.
These seek to describe the visual learning environment from a
young child’s point of view and measure the visual information
a child perceives in a real-time interaction with a parent. The
main results are (1) what the child perceives most often depends
on her own actions and her social partner’s actions; (2) there are
distinct interaction patterns in naturalistic child-parent
interactions; these can influence the child’s visual perception in
different ways; (3) The actions generated by both social partners
provide more constrained and clean input to the child,
presumably facilitating learning.

Studying the Sensorimotor Activity of a
Parent-Child Dyad
The experimental method we developed, allows researchers
to measure, in a laboratory setting, the sensorimotor activity
generated by two social partners (Smith, Yu and Pereira,
sub.; Yu, Smith, Christensen and Pereira, 2007; Yu, Smith
and Pereira, 2008). Our initial goal was to retain the
richness of a naturalistic social interaction but exploit the
controlled laboratory environment to make large-scale
automatic data collection and analysis feasible. The task
given to parents was straightforward, play with their child
across a small table with toys; a common experience in the
lives of children included in this study. Other than sitting at
a table and playing with a small set of objects, no more
restrictions were placed in the interaction.

Keywords: embodied cognition; learning; computational
modeling; perception-action.

Introduction
Consider a small moment in the everyday life of a toddler,
one so common as to pass as uneventful: sitting in a living
room, playing with toys and with an adult. To the casual
observer, watching from the outside as these social partners
interact, cognitive development seems quite effortless. Even
very young children can engage smoothly in a social
exchange, take turns, show bouts of clear joint attention, and
switch attention between objects they manipulate and a
social partner. Developmental psychologists have long
documented that scenes such as this one are not cognitively
simple. For example, linking a word to a referent requires
the child to succeed at a multitude of tasks: parsing of
objects in a scene, motor plans to manipulate objects,
establish joint attention, shifts of attention between objects
and the social partner, correctly segment and identify the
object name from the adult’s speech, etc. More importantly,
the variability and noise in the scene can be substantial in
real world contexts. For example, there could be multiple
objects on the floor being seen and talked about, multiple
possibilities for action, and no synchrony between the
adult’s speech and the child’s object perception (Baldwin,
1993; Bloom, 2000). Properties of natural interactions such
as these, have led many researchers to propose that the child
brings into the moment, social, linguistic and conceptual

Apparatus: Multimodal Sensing system

Figure 1: Experimental setup used. The child wears a
headband with a small camera and a motion sensor. An
additional camera was placed right above the table and
provided an unblocked birds-eye view of the interaction.

839

an object that have light reflections on them as well (this
problem can be fixed in step three). The second step focuses
on the remaining non-background pixels and breaks them up
into several blobs using a fast and simple segmentation
algorithm (Comaniciu and P. Meer, 1997). The third step
assigns each blob into an object category. In this object
detection task, we used Gaussian mixture models to pretrain a model for each individual object (Moghaddam and
Pentland, 1997). As a result of the above steps, we extract
useful information from image sequences, such as what
objects are in the visual field at each moment, what are the
sizes of those objects, and whether a hand is holding an
object (from the top-down view), which will be used in the
following data analyses. An object is labeled as held by a
participant if the object blob is overlapped with a hand blob
for more than 10 frames. We asked two human coders to
annotate a small proportion of the data (~1200 frames) and
compared the results with image processing results with
91% of agreement.

Room Setup A large 6.5m x 3.3m room was split in two.
On one side we placed all the recording equipment and an
experimenter could sit at a computer to control the
experiment. On the other side we created an interaction
environment for the parent and child. White, movable
curtains, from floor to ceiling, mounted on a ceiling track,
surrounded a 3.3m  3.1m space. At the center of that area
we placed a small 61cm  91cm  64cm white table. Both
participants wore white clothing. A consequence of this
setup was that, from the perspective of an head mounted
cameras, any pixel not similar to white could only come
from an object, a hand or a head of one of the participants.
Head-Mounted Camera A small and lightweight camera
was mounted on a soft elastic sports headband. The
recording rate for the head-mounted camera was 10 frames
per second. The resolution of image frame is 320x240. The
lens focal length is f3.7mm and the CCD’s size is 6.35mm x
6.35mm yielding a field of view of 81 degrees in the
horizontal and in the vertical direction. The camera mount
piece allowed the camera to rotate on the horizontal axis
perpendicular to the camera’s line of sight. We used this to
adjust the angle between the camera line of sight and the
participant’s head orientation. Using a similar context of
tabletop play, Yoshida and Smith (2008) showed that the
head-mounted camera is a good approximation of the
contents of the child’s visual field. In fact, 90% of head
camera video frames in their study corresponded with
independently coded eye positions, which was largely due to
both the restricted geometry of the tabletop play and the
typical behavior of young children in this kind of
interaction.
Bird-Eye View Camera To provide for an unblocked,
static view of the activity on the table we placed a highresolution camera above it. The high quality of this data
stream also meant it was possible to improve the quality of
the visual segmentation for the video from a head-mounted
camera using information fusion. Also, to calculate what
objects were held by each participant.
Head motion tracking In addition to the camera mounted
in the headband we also mounted a Polhemus motiontracking sensor to record the child’s head position and
orientation.

Figure 2: The overview of data processing using computer
vision techniques. Top: we first remove background pixels
from an image and then spot objects and hands in the image
based on pre-trained object models. Bottom: the processing
results from the bird-eye view camera.

Data Processing Pipeline: Image Segmentation and
Object Detection
The first goal of data processing pipeline was to
automatically extract visual information, such as the
locations and sizes of objects, hands, and faces, from
sensory data in two cameras. These are based on computer
vision techniques, and include three major steps (see Figure
2). Given raw images, the first step is to separate
background pixels and object pixels. Since we designed the
experimental setup (as described above) by covering the
walls, the floor and the tabletop with white fabrics and
asking participants to wear white cloth, we simply treat
close-to-white pixels in an image as background.
Occasionally, this approach also removes small portions of

Experimental Study: Object Play Embedded in
a Social Interaction With a Mature Partner
Participants Fifteen dyads of parent and child participated
in this study. Five children were boys. The target age period
for this study was 18 to 24 months, a period of large
developmental changes in early word learning and visual
object recognition (Smith and Pereira, in press). Children’s
mean age was 21.3 month, ranging from 19.1 to 23.4. All
families were from the Bloomington, IN area, white and
middle class. Six additional dyads were not included in the

840

is also of a minimum size. We chose a stringent rule: an
object is dominant if its ratio inside all object pixels is
greater than 0.7 and its total image size is greater than 6000
pixels (7.8% of the image frame). This is a conservative
choice of parameters and most likely represents a lower
bound on visual salience since this measure just takes in
consideration the raw visual size in the image frame.
Our hypothesis was that the child’s view might provide a
unique window onto the world by filtering irrelevant
information (through movement of the body close to the
object, or by bringing the object closer), enabling the child
to focus on one object (or one event) at a single moment. As
shown in Figure 3, in almost 60% of frames, there is one
dominating object in the child’s view that is much larger
than other objects (even when using a conservative rule for
what counts as dominating). This result suggests that the
child’s view may provide a constrained and cleaner input,
therefore facilitating learning processes by removing the
need to internally handle and filter irrelevant data. If one
object (or event) dominates at time, then the focus of
learning at the moment is externally decided by the child’s
bodily selection.

final analysis because the child refused to wear the
equipment.
Stimuli Parents were given four sets of toys (three toys for
each set) in a free-play task. The toys were either rigid
plastic objects or plush toys. Most of them had simple
shapes and either a single color or an overall main color.
Some combinations of objects were selected to elicit actions
that were especially evident to an adult asked to play with
them.
Procedure The procedure needed three experimenters in
total. Two of them had specific roles when interacting with
parent and child: experimenter (A) focused on providing
instructions to the parent and placing the equipment on the
child, while another experimenter (B), kept the child
distracted continuously until parent and child were ready to
start the study. Parents were told in vague terms that the
study’s goal was to investigate how parent and children
interact with the each other. The task was to take three toys
from a drawer next to them and play for a fixed period of
time. After an indication from the experimenters, they
should simply switch to the next set of toys.
When the child seemed well distracted, experimenter (A)
placed the headband with the camera and motion sensor in
the child’s head. This was done quickly and in a single
movement that placed camera as close as possible of the
child’s eyes. Experimenter (B) kept playing and introduced
novel toys to keep the child’s interest away from the
headband.
Calibration of Head-Mounted Camera To calibrate the
horizontal camera position in the forehead and the angle of
the camera relative to the head, the experimenter asked the
child to look into one of the objects on the table, placed
close to the child. Experimenter (C) controlling the
recording in another room confirmed if the object was at the
center of the image and if not small adjustments were made
on the head-mounted camera gear.
Trial onset and offset At this point both experimenters left
the room. Parents were told to listen to a specific sound and
when alerted by it, start a new trial. This marked trial onset.
There were a total of four 90-second trials. The entire study,
including initial setup, lasted about 15 minutes.

Figure 3: Average proportion of time inside each trial,
across all trials where: there is a dominating object; there
are no object in the child’s view; there are 1,2 or 3 objects in
the child’s view (the last four categories sum to one). Note
that although there are always three objects on the table, in
only less than 20% of time, all of the three objects are in the
child’s visual field while most often there are only 1 or 2
objects (more than 55% in total) in their visual field.
Further, in more than 55% of time, there is always a
dominating object in the child’s visual field at a moment.

Data Analysis and Results: Visual Perception
In this section, we report our results of the child’s visual
perception, exploring how the child’s own actions and the
parent’s activities may change what the child perceives. We
used in total 56 trials from 15 dyads (with 10% of trials
from those subjects excluded, due to technical problems
such as the quality of data recording). All of the following
measures and analyses are trial-based and correspond to
averaging sensory data within a trial.

Changes in Dominating Object
The dominating object may change from moment to
moment, and also the locations, appearances and the sizes of
other objects in the visual field change as well. Thus, we
first calculated the number of times that the dominating
object changed. From the child’s viewpoint, there are on
average 15 such object switches in a single trial, suggesting
that young children often move their head and body and in

The Salience of the Visually Dominating Object
We defined the dominating object within a frame as the
object that takes the largest proportion in the visual field and

841

so doing switch attended objects, attending at each moment
to just one object.
In summary, the main result so far is that the child’s view
is far more selective than the available information in the
environment (the third-person static view) with respect to
(1) the spatial distributions of objects; (2) the salience of
individual objects; and (3) the temporal dynamics of the
dominating objects.

We then calculated the proportion of time for each event
type (c0, c1, c>1 and p0, p1, p>1) within each trial. By doing so
we represented each trial as a 6-dimensional vector, defined
by the proportion of time of number of objects held by the
child and the parent. Next, we used a hierarchical
agglomerative clustering method (Jain and Dubes, 1988) to
group 56 interaction trials based on joint hand-state
representations described above.
Four primary interaction patterns were found that cover
more than 85% (48/56) of all the trials (i.e. they are included
in one of the groupings found by the clustering step). These
four interaction patterns can be characterized as: 1) childlead interaction with high activity wherein the child’s hands
are actively holding and manipulating objects most of the
time; 2) bi-directional interaction wherein both the child and
the parent are holding objects; 3) parent-lead interaction in
which the parent is frequently holding an object; and 4)
child-lead interaction with low activity of the participants;
both participants are not very active but the child’s hands
are holding objects more than the parent does. For example,
in the trials categorized as the child-lead interaction with
high activity, the child is holding only one object more than
64% of time (c1) while the parent does that only 36% of
time (p1). In the bi-directional interaction, both the child and
the parent spent a significant amount of time on holding one
of the three objects on the table (c1 = 45% and p1 = 40%).
Our following data analysis will focus on how both the
child’s own actions and the parent’s actions may influence
the child’s visual perception in the context of these different
interaction patterns.

Data Analysis and Results: Hand Actions and
Visual Perception
Our next analyses considered factors organizing the child’s
view. At any moment, gaze and head movements may cause
changes in the child’s visual field. We have directly
measured this using a motion tracking system to record head
movements in the same setup as the main experiment. The
results from that study show that young children rarely
move their head toward (closer to) the objects and therefore
head movements wouldn’t cause the changes of object sizes;
that is changes in the dominating object (Pereira, Smith and
Yu, 2008). In addition, gaze shifting in this current
experiment setup may change the location of an object but
not its size in the child’s visual field. These results suggest
that selectivity, in this setting, happens not through head
movements but through hand movements that may bring
objects into view. Both the child’s own hand movements
and the parent’s hand movements are potentially relevant
since we already know that both participants’ hands are
frequently appearing in the child’s visual field (Yu et al.,
2007). In light of this, we measure how hand actions by
both the child and the parent select the objects in view for
the child.

Categorizing Parent-Child Interaction Based on
who is Holding Objects
In naturalistic interactions, there is variation in the nature of
the exchange from person to person across dyads, and from
moment to moment even with the same dyad. Some dyads
are more actively engaged with the object play task and with
potential to-be-learned objects, and others may be less
active. For example, how well toddlers and parents
coordinate their actions - the smoothness of their “bodyprosody” - is correlated with object name learning (Pereira,
Smith and Yu, 2008).
Thus, we sought to quantify the quality of dynamic
interaction within and across dyads concentrating on how
they use their hands to reach, touch, move and manipulate
to-be-learned objects, and then used this to quantify the
interaction.
We first calculated six individual measures based on what
the child and the parent were holding in each moment
(sampled at 10Hz): 1) c0: the child is not holding any object.
2) c1: the child is holding one single object. 3) c>1: the child
is holding more than one objects; 4) p0: the parent is not
holding any object; 5) p1: the parent is holding one single
object; 6) p>1: the parent is holding more than one objects.

Figure 4: Proportion of trials in each of the four primary
interaction patterns identified by the clustering step. A
descriptive of each pattern is given below each bar by
showing the mean value inside the group for each of the six
individual measures (c0, c1, c>1 and p0, p1, p>1).

How Often Were the Participants Holding Objects?

842

As shown in Figure 5 (left), in three out of the four defined
interaction patterns, either the child’s hands or the parent’s
hands are holding at least one object more than 70% of time.
Critically, hand actions (and other body parts, such as the
orientation of the trunk) may signal social cues to the other
social partner indicating the object of interest in real time.
From this perspective, among these four patterns, the childlead interaction with high activity and the parent-lead
interaction potentially might be seen as creating a better
learning environment, wherein the percentage of time that
either the child or the parent (at least one of them) is holding
an object -- and thus clearly signaling interest in it -- is
higher than in the other two interaction patterns.
A relevant result with respect to this idea is that the
average percentage of time an object is held in the
interaction pattern labeled “child-lead interaction with low
activity by both participants” is much lower than in the
other three interaction patterns.
As shown in Figure 5 (right panel), the child and parent
are holding different objects 28% of time in the parent-lead
interaction; this difference in manual selection happens
much less frequently in the other three interaction patterns.
If hands signal the focus of the attention of the participant,
then the child and parent in the parent-lead interaction
pattern are often not sharing attention. One possibility is that
when the parent attempts to lead the interaction by attracting
the child’s attention to the object held by the parent, the
child does not follow the parent’s lead immediately but
instead explores other objects that the child himself is
interested at the moment. Taken together, our results
suggest that hands play an important role in selecting the
attended information with the child’s own manual activities
perhaps being most important. In particular, the child-lead
interaction with high activity may provide the cleanest data
for the child.

– the child’s and the parent’s – in visual selection, and also
raise the question of whether actions by the two participants
play different roles for different children, or in different
moments of learning.

Figure 5: Left: the percentage of time that either the child or
the parent (at least one of them) is holding an object in each
of the interaction pattern. Right: the percentage of time that
both participants hold objects and that the objects
individually held are different, in each of the interaction
patterns.

How Does the Child Perceives Held Objects?
Since both participants’ hands are holding objects virtually
all the time, we examined how the child perceives an object
when the child versus the parent holds it. The first main
result is that objects that are held – by either participant –
are significantly larger in the child’s view (and thus more
likely to be dominating the view as defined above).
As shown in Figure 6, objects in hands consistently take a
considerable proportion of the child’s visual field,
calculated as proportion of the field occupied by objects
(more than 50%). This is true for all of the four interaction
patterns. Even in the child-lead interaction with (relatively)
low activity of both participants, objects in hands dominate
the visual field in relative terms compared to other objects.
The second main result concerns the differences between
the child-lead interaction with high activity and the parentlead interaction: the child’s hands play a more important
role in influencing the child’s own visual field in the first
case while the parent’s hands are more important in the
second case. These results indicate the importance of action

Figure 6: The average size of objects held by the child
and/or the parent in the child’s visual field (as a proportion
of the image frame). There are three conditions: 1) the
objects only held by the child; 2) the objects only held by
the parent; and 3) the objects held by either the child’s or
the parent’s hands. In all the above cases, we measure the
relative proportion of objects in hands compared with other
objects in view.

843

General Discussion

Acknowledgements

Viewed from a third-person perspective, the world is a
cluttered, noisy, and variable place with many overlapping
objects. From this point of view, the learning task seems
severe – objects must be segregated one from another, and a
speaker’s intended referent will be ambiguous. However,
the third-person view is not the view that matters for
children; the view that matters is their own, the first person
view. The visual data collected from a camera placed on a
child’s forehead suggest that the child’s visual field is
filtered and narrowed, principally by both the child’s own
hand actions but also in some cases by the caregiver’s
actions. Young children solve the problem of noisy and
ambiguous data for learning about objects by using the
external actions of their own body to select information.
This information reduction through their bodily actions
most certainly reduces ambiguity and by doing so provide
an adaptive strategy to bootstrap learning
The present results also make three points that have not
received sufficient attention in the literature. The first
concerns the activity of the child in selecting visual
information. Considerable research has focused on the
social context and how parents select information by
guiding the child’s attention. But the present results make
clear that the child’s own activity is also critical and any
effect of social scaffolding from the mature partner/ parent
will depend on the child’s own interests and activities,
which may or may not be well coupled to the parents.
Second, the results point to manual activities as a major
factor in selecting and reducing the visual information.
Hands that grab objects and bring them closer to the eyes
make those objects large in the visual field and also block
the view of other objects, consequences that may benefit
many aspects of object recognition (including segregating
objects, integrating views, and binding properties) and
object name learning. Finally, the results indicate important
issues for future work. There may be significant individual
differences in how social partners’ activities support
embodied attention and learning. It could be that some
patterns of interaction lead to better learning (e.g., child lead
with high activity) than others. Alternatively, it may be that
there are different learning styles, each potentially as
effective, that engage different mechanisms.
Young children are fast learners and they are so through
their embodied interactions with people and objects in a
cluttered world. In the present study, we suggest the
importance of embodied solutions – how the young child
and his social partner may use their bodily actions to create
and dramatically shape regularities in a learning
environment.

This work was supported in part by National Science
Foundation Grant BCS0544995, and by NIH grant R21
EY017843. A.F.P. was also supported by the Portuguese
Fulbright Commission and the Calouste Gulbenkian
Foundation. The authors wish to thank Char Wozniak,
Amara Stuehling, Jillian Stansell, Saheun Kim, Heather
Elson and Melissa Elson for data collection.

References
Baldwin, D. (1993). Early referential understanding:
Infant’s ability to recognize referential acts for what they
are. Developmental psychology, 29, 832-843.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
D. Comaniciu and P. Meer, “Robust analysis of feature
spaces: color image segmentation,”Proc. of IEEE Conf.
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 750755, 1997.
Jain, A.K., and Dubes, R.C.,1988, Algorithms for Clustering
Data, Prentice Hall: New Jersey.
Moghaddam, B., & Pentland, A. (1997). Probabilistic visual
learning for object recognition. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 19(7), 696710.
Pereira, A. F., Smith, L. B., Yu, C. (2008). Social
Coordination in Toddler's Word Learning: Interacting
Systems of Perception and Action. Connection Science,
20(2).
Smith, L. B., & Pereira, A. F. (in press). Shape, action,
symbolic play, and words: Overlapping loops of cause
and consequence in developmental process. in S. Johnson
(Ed.), A neo-constructivist approach to early
development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, L.B., Yu, C. & Pereira, A. F. (under review). Not
Your Mother’s View: The Dynamics of Toddler Visual
Experience. Psychological Science.
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L.B. (2008). Hands in view: Using a
head camera to study active vision in toddlers. Infancy.
Yu, C., Smith, L. B., & Pereira, A. (2008). Grounding Word
Learning in Multimodal Sensorimotor Interaction.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Washington, DC, USA.
Yu, C., Smith, L. B., Christensen, M., & Pereira, A. F.,
(2007). Two Views of the World: Active Vision in RealWorld Interaction. In McNamara & Trafton (Eds.),
Proceeding 29nd annual conference of cognitive science
society (p 731-736). Mahwah.NJ: ErIBaum

844

